=== CASE 9736927 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:12.551117+00 ===

FRIEDMAN, Judge,
dissenting.
I must dissent. Unlike the majority, I believe that Workmen’s Compensation referees have both the authority and the expertise to settle fee disputes between two attorneys who have represented a claimant in the same matter.
Previously, we have held that section 440 of The Pennsylvania Workmen’s Compensation Act (Act), 77 P.S. § 996, authorizes referees to determine what constitutes a reasonable fee for purposes of settling fee disputes between claimant and employer. Eugenie v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (Sheltered Employment Service), 140 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 51, 592 A.2d 358 (1991).
We have also held that section 442 of the Act, 77 P.S. § 998, authorizes referees to hear evidence on what constitutes a reasonable fee for purposes of settling fee disputes between claimant and attorney. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal *67Board (Gilroy) v. General Machine Products Co., 24 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 95, 353 A.2d 911 (1976).
The reasonableness of a fee depends on the amount and difficulty of the work performed. R.M. Friction Materials Company v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board, 52 Pa. Commonwealth 279, 415 A.2d 965 (1980). Where the referee has not made a finding of reasonableness, the case will be remanded to the referee for specific findings on the amount and difficulty of the work performed. Donald Spangler t/a Scott & Thomas v. Workmen’s Compensation Appeal Board (Ford), 145 Pa.Commonwealth Ct. 56, 602 A.2d 446 (1992).
Given that Workmen’s Compensation referees are vested by statute with the authority to settle fee disputes between claimant and employer and between claimant and attorney, I see no reason why the referee would lack the power to settle fee disputes between multiple attorneys representing the same claimant in an action. The Workmen’s Compensation Act is unique in that it directly involves itself in fee dispute resolution. It would be inconsistent with this policy if the referee could not settle a fee dispute between two attorneys.
In addition, referees are particularly well-suited to adjudicate fee disputes between attorneys. Workmen’s Compensation referees are keenly aware of the equities in the cases they hear. They are familiar with the facts and issues of their cases and they observe firsthand the respective efforts of the attorneys involved. This expertise should not be wasted. According to the majority, Attorney Pitt’s claim is properly a common law claim for breach of contract, a claim on principles of quantum meruit, or an equitable claim for damages under a theory of unjust enrichment. I believe that because of their intimate awareness of the attorney’s efforts on a client’s behalf, Workmen’s Compensation referees are better able than any other body to apply the principles of quantum meruit and adjudicate an equitable claim of damages under a theory of unjust enrichment or a legal claim of damages under a theory of breach of contract.
*68The majority also suggests that Attorney Pitt’s claim should be submitted to the Bar Association’s fee dispute committee. I disagree because I firmly believe that referees are legislatively endowed with the power to adjudicate fee disputes in workmen’s compensation matters and that they should not be divested of this authority in instances where one claimant was represented by multiple attorneys. The mere fact that two attorneys were involved in this case does not lessen the referee’s legislatively recognized ability to adjudicate such disputes, nor does it magically confer greater expertise upon the Bar Association’s fee dispute committee.
Moreover, to submit this claim to any forum other than the Workmen’s Compensation referee requires that evidence be presented anew and, therefore, is a waste of judicial resources.
I also disagree with the majority that Attorney Pitt’s appeal should be quashed on grounds that it was untimely. Section 423 of the Act, 77 P.S. § 853, requires that appeals to the WCAB be taken within twenty days of the date the referee’s decision is circulated. However, the same section provides that the WCAB may, “upon cause shown,” extend the time within which appeals must be taken. The fact that the referee never sent a copy of his decision to Attorney Pitt was, in my opinion, sufficient cause for the WCAB to extend the time within which Attorney Pitt could appeal the decision.
I would vacate and remand this case for the referee to make specific findings of fact distinguishing the amount and difficulty of work by the attorneys involved, and based on those findings, to award a reasonable fee, limited to a total of twenty percent of Claimant’s award, to each attorney involved.
SMITH, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2207988 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:25.435113+00 ===

430 N.W.2d 542 (1988)
230 Neb. 218
Raymond Lee FOX, Appellant,
v.
Helen Jane FOX, Appellee.
No. 87-901.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
October 21, 1988.
Rodney J. Palmer, of Palmer & Kozisek, Ainsworth, for appellant.
G.J. Beal, of Gregory J. Beal & Associates, P.C., Ogallala, for appellee.
HASTINGS, C.J., BOSLAUGH, WHITE, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, and GRANT, JJ., and COLWELL, District Judge, Retired.
PER CURIAM.
The petitioner, Raymond Lee Fox, appeals from the order of the district court placing the care, custody, and control of the children of the parties, Mary Elizabeth Fox, Casey Glen Fox, and Samantha Gaythel Fox, in and with the respondent, Helen Jane Fox. Petitioner also complains about two evidentiary rulings of the trial court. As required in cases of this nature, we have reviewed the record de novo to determine whether the district court abused its discretion. Grindle v. Grindle, 226 Neb. 807, 415 N.W.2d 150 (1987).
We find no abuse of discretion either in the court's order as to custody of the children or in the court's evidentiary rulings. The judgment of the district court is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2207991 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:25.447396+00 ===

99 Md. App. 171 (1994)
636 A.2d 32
KEVIN E. KENNELLY, ET UX.
v.
SCOTT E. BURGESS, ET AL.
No. 539, September Term, 1993.
Court of Special Appeals of Maryland.
January 27, 1994.
Leo Wm. Dunn, Jr. (Dunn & Emig, P.A., on the brief), Greenbelt, for appellants.
David A. Levin (Daniel C. Costello and Wharton, Levin, Ehrmantraut, Klein & Nash, P.A., on the brief), Annapolis, for appellees.
Argued before ALPERT, BLOOM and HARRELL, JJ.
HARRELL, Judge.
Kevin E. Kennelly and his wife, Lynette Kennelly, appellants, sued Scott E. Burgess, M.D., and his medical enterprise, Scott E. Burgess, P.A., appellees, for medical malpractice arising from a surgical procedure performed by Dr. Burgess on Mr. Kennelly. On 21 October 1991, appellants' claim was heard before a Health Claims Arbitration Panel. The panel found in favor of Dr. Burgess. Appellants rejected the panel's decision and subsequently filed suit in the circuit court. A jury in the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County (Lerner, J. presiding) returned a verdict in favor of Dr. Burgess. Thereafter, the Kennellys noted a timely appeal to this court.
ISSUES
On appeal, three issues are raised[1]:
I. In a medical malpractice case, it is reversible error to instruct the jury that an unsuccessful result following medical treatment is not evidence of negligence where expert medical testimony relies on such a result to support its opinions regarding negligence.
II. It is reversible error for the trial court to fail to instruct the jury that an expert witness, because he is an expert witness, can aver negligence from the results of the medical procedure.
III. It is error to permit an economist to use net income, adjusted for the effect of taxes, rather than gross income in computing lost wages, either accrued or prospective.
Based on our review of the experts' testimony at trial and the applicable law, we hold that the trial court's charge to the jury did not constitute reversible error. Because we find no error in the trial court's instructions, the verdict will stand. Therefore, we need not address appellants' third assertion on appeal.
FACTS
On 11 May 1988, Dr. Burgess, an otolaryngologist (specialist in the treatment of the ear, nose, and throat), admitted Kevin Kennelly into North Arundel Hospital to perform that day a surgical procedure to relieve Kennelly's medical condition, which Burgess had diagnosed as chronic sinusitis. The intended surgery was described as a bilateral intranasal ethmoidectomy. In this procedure, the surgeon removes the mucuous membranes of the ethmoid sinuses, via the left and right passages of the nose. The ethmoid sinuses run up to the roof of the nose, called the fovea ethmoidalis. The fovea ethmoidalis, a delicate bone tissue, is attached to the dura, the protective coating of the brain. This bone tissue, which experts who testified in the case sub judice characterized as "eggshell" or "paper" thin in its normal, healthy state, is essentially the only barrier between the ethmoid sinus cavity and the brain.
There are two methods by which otolaryngologists may perform a bilateral intranasal ethmoidectomy, the conventional or classical technique and the endoscopic method. When the conventional or classical method is employed, the surgeon mechanically spreads the nasal opening and, utilizing only a head-mounted light to illuminate as much of the nasal cavity as can be visualized or his sense of touch where he cannot see what he is doing, removes the diseased tissue with an instrument called a Blakeslee forceps. When the newer, endoscopic method is employed, the surgeon inserts an instrument called an endoscope up into the nasal cavity. The endoscope is an optical instrument that allows the surgeon to illuminate and visualize on a video monitor in the operating room areas of the nasal cavity not as readily observable via the conventional method. The surgeon then removes the diseased tissue under direct observation. Dr. Burgess performed Mr. Kennelly's surgery using the conventional or classical technique.
On the morning of the surgery, Dr. Burgess informed Mrs. Kennelly that he expected the surgery to last approximately one hour to one hour and one-half. He reassured her that he had performed this surgery on several occasions. Approximately two and one-half hours after Mr. Kennelly was taken into surgery, Mrs. Kennelly spoke to Dr. Burgess. He informed her that "all went well except that there was a lot of excess bleeding."
On the following day, 12 May 1988, however, it became apparent that all had not gone well with Kennelly's surgery. The hospital contacted Mrs. Kennelly at home to inform her that her husband was not recovering properly. When she arrived at the hospital, Mrs. Kennelly observed that her husband "was highly agitated, he had no orientation whatsoever as to where he was, he didn't know our daughter's name, he didn't know where we lived. The only person or thing that he knew was me."
On that day, several tests were performed to detect the cause of Mr. Kennelly's condition. A CAT scan revealed an abnormality in Mr. Kennelly's brain and bleeding that extended into the intracranial cavity. The pathologist's report stated that portions of bone and brain were found in the specimens routinely taken during and examined following surgery.
Dr. Burgess called in Dr. David Tolner, a neurosurgeon, to review Mr. Kennelly's situation. After reviewing the CAT scan and examining the patient, Dr. Tolner opined that Kennelly had suffered a stroke during the operation. He was also concerned about surgical "penetration into the cranial cavity," causing spinal fluid leakage into the sinuses of the nose. On the same day, he made arrangements to have Kennelly transported to Johns Hopkins Hospital to be seen by another neurosurgeon specialist, Dr. Haring Nauta.
An angiogram ordered by Dr. Nauta detected an irregularity in an artery located in the brain. A second angiogram confirmed the existence of an aneurysm. Dr. Nauta then performed a bifrontal craniotomy, during which he clipped the aneurysm and repaired the damaged artery. In addition, Dr. Nauta lifted and realigned portions of the brain that had herniated through the fovea ethmoidalis into the ethmoid sinus. He also repaired a cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) leak.
Following the operation, Dr. Nauta informed both Dr. Burgess and appellants that he had found "a definite penetration of the brain." He further opined that Mr. Kennelly sustained organic brain damage and that the condition was permanent. Dr. Nauta believed that the damage would prevent Mr. Kennelly from returning to work as a business executive.
In accordance with the Health Claims Arbitration Act, Md.Cts. & Jud.Proc.Code Ann. § 3-2A-04 (1989), appellants filed a claim against appellees with the Health Claims Arbitration Panel, alleging that Dr. Burgess negligently violated the acceptable standard of surgical care in his performance of the ethmoidectomy. On 13 November 1991, the Panel issued its ruling in favor of Dr. Burgess.
On 10 December 1991, appellants filed an action to nullify the Panel's ruling against them in the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County. A classic "battle of medical experts" ensued at the trial, which began on 30 September 1992. The segments of the medical experts' testimony relevant to this appeal are recounted below.
Dr. Nauta testified that, when he performed the bifrontal craniotomy, he also made an examination of the floor of the skull cavity and saw two neatly nibbled defects in the bone. According to Dr. Nauta, there were identical holes on both the right and left sides that measured approximately one centimeter.
When questioned by appellants' counsel about his observations of the ethmoid roof (fovea ethmoidalis) during the operation, Dr. Nauta testified to the following:
Q: Doctor, observing the holes that you saw on the ethmoid roof, do you have an opinion, with a reasonable medical probability, as to whether or not those particular holes could have ... were probably caused by an operating instrument?
A: Well, I ... I think they clearly were, because they were tiny little scallopings with the bone being thick enough that I didn't ... didn't think it had just eroded itself in that manner.
Q: Your word ... you used the word "nibbled," in other words ...
A: Well, the diameter of the scallop in the curvature is the same in each case as if the same instrument had nibbled it in each little ... little bite. So, there was a little edge all along, a serrated edge, if you will.
Dr. Ferdinand Rodriguez, an associate pathologist at North Arundel Hospital, testified that when he examined tissue specimens taken by Dr. Burgess from Mr. Kennelly's ethmoid sinus area, he found "ethmoid mucosal tissue, ... bone, ... and pieces of brain." He testified that the ethmoid mucosal tissue he examined displayed "mild, chronic inflammation." Dr. Rodriguez specified that the brain tissue found contained both grey matter from the superficial part of the brain, and white matter from the deeper portion of the brain containing the brain fibers.
Dr. Rodriguez further testified that he found both hard and soft bone fragments. Appellants' counsel then questioned him regarding the existence of any bone inflammation:
Q: Now, relative to the bone, itself, that you examined, did you find any evidence of any inflammatory process concerning the bone?
A: The bone was not involved in any inflammatory process.
Q: In other words, I understand the bone, itself, was free of any type of disease.
A: Yes, that's right.
Dr. Rodriguez further stated that there was no way for him to ascertain whether the bone fragments he examined were, in fact, portions of the fovea ethmoidalis. Indeed, he acknowledged that the bone may have been septation fragments.[2]
Dr. James Stankiewicz, a physician engaged by appellants to opine as to Kennelly's treatment, was qualified by the court as an expert in otolaryngology. Dr. Stankiewicz stated that, prior to his testimony at trial, he reviewed "records from the North Arundel Hospital, a few of the records from Johns Hopkins Hospital, the neurosurgical information and the hospitalization," as well as the deposition testimony of Dr. Burgess and his standard of care experts.
Relying specifically on some of the records he reviewed, Dr. Stankiewicz explained to the jury the factors he believed to be indicative of Dr. Burgess's negligence. He testified that his review of a CAT scan of Mr. Kennelly's brain, taken prior to the ethmoidectomy, did not depict the existence of extensive disease. He stated that he saw "a little bit of disease" in some regions of the ethmoid sinus, but otherwise failed to detect "a lot of disease" in the picture.
Furthermore, upon examination of Dr. Burgess's operative report, Dr. Stankiewicz stated that, unlike the procedure used by Dr. Burgess, it was his practice to "remove the middle turbinate at the beginning of the procedure [ethmoidectomy] to get better visualization." The middle turbinate is one of three pieces of bone attached to the inner surface of the wall of the nose. The middle turbinate separates the inferior and superior passageways within the nasal cavity from the middle passageway. According to Dr. Stankiewicz, a failure to remove the middle turbinate increases the difficulty of the procedure, because it "decreases visualization," causing a "mechanical obstruction that you have to look around in order to ... to get at an area."
Later during his testimony, Dr. Stankiewicz referred to several CAT scans taken following the surgery on 12 May 1988. In particular, he highlighted one CAT scan that depicted two distinct defects in Mr. Kennelly's fovea ethmoidalis and cribiform plate. He also stated the scan showed an area "filled with postoperative change, it could be blood clot, which is probably what it is down in this area, and it's hard to tell here what's going through those defects." Dr. Stankiewicz attributed the defects depicted in the CAT scan to "intraoperative injury."
Finally, before rendering his opinion on direct examination by appellants' counsel, Dr. Stankiewicz focused on the bleeding associated with the ethmoidectomy in question. He concluded that the loss of 1,200 cc's of blood was "way beyond what you would expect, in a case with disease such as he [Mr. Kennelly] had, which was moderate disease."
As framed in a question posed by appellants' counsel, Dr. Stankiewicz, "based on the investigations" that he made, concluded that Dr. Burgess's conduct during Mr. Kennelly's ethmoidectomy fell below the standard of care required of a reasonably competent otolaryngologist performing the procedure in question. Dr. Stankiewicz precisely defined how Dr. Burgess failed to meet the standard by stating the following:
My opinion is that at the time of the surgery on Kevin Kennelly that Doctor Burgess went through the fovea ethmoidalis, cribriform plate area and entered into the brain, and this is not within the standard of care for that surgery.
Thus, Dr. Stankiewicz deduced that in performing the ethmoidectomy on Mr. Kennelly, Dr. Burgess penetrated through the fovea ethmoidalis, the roof of the ethmoid sinus, and inserted forceps directly into the brain, where it was resting in its normal position.
On cross-examination, Dr. Stankiewicz acknowledged differences between the method by which he currently performed an ethmoidectomy and the method by which Dr. Burgess performed Mr. Kennelly's ethmoidectomy in 1988. Dr. Stankiewicz admitted that, in 1988, "there were different schools of thought" concerning whether it was necessary to remove the middle turbinate.
In this regard, appellees' counsel also pointed out Dr. Stankiewicz's prior testimony before the Panel concerning operating in the roof of the ethmoid without removing the middle turbinate:
Q: Question: "So, if you didn't remove it initially, and then were working in the roof of the ethmoid, it is difficult to see and most of the procedure in that area is done by feel. Is that right?"
A: That's right.
Q: Answer: "That's right." Question: "And that gets you into the area of judgment as to where you were and exactly what you were removing. Is that right?"
A: That's right.
Appellees' counsel then shifted the focus of cross-examination to how Dr. Stankiewicz arrived at his conclusion that Dr. Burgess's performance during the operation in question fell below the standard of care:
Q: And you now know that this is a drawing done by Dr. Nauta of his findings right after he did the surgery.
A: All right.
Q: Is that right?
A: Yes.
* * * * * *
Q: And that these boxes represent the area where he found the defect?
A: Yes.
Q: Is that your understanding of where they were?
A: If you look at the x-ray back there which I showed you earlier, that pretty much correlates.
* * * * * *
Q: Now, in ... if I understand you correctly, when you're talking about your view of the standard of care, you can remove, and I don't mean this in a derogatory sense, but in doing this procedure, there can come a time when this roof part can come... be removed by the operator.
A: That can happen in the process of doing the procedure.
Q: All right. And when that happens in and of itself, that is not a deviation from the standard of care as you understand it to be.
* * * * * *
A: I said it is not provided you recognize it and stop.
Q: Is it your view ... well, let me ask you; has that occurred to you from time-to-time?
A: Sure.
Q: Have you always recognized the leaks?
A: Yes.
* * * * * *
Q: So, it's your view, ..., that in every case where you had intruded into the bone and hit ... pulled out the bone, you recognized it, knew about it, and dealt with it.
A: In the situation where I was in there and I was removing disease and I pulled bone out, and I could see it, yes I recognized it.... [w]hen I'm in operating, if I can see it, then I stop.
Q: Well, I understand that. If you can see it, you would stop. But it ... that's doing it endoscopically. Is that right?
A: Yes.
Q: But you might not see it if you were doing a regular, I don't want to use classical, but an intranasal ethmoidectomy without the endoscope.
A: There's probably a good bet that you wouldn't see it.
* * * * * *
Q: And if, in fact, you removed the bone in that area as I understand it, the dura [protective lining of the brain] sticks to the bone.
A: The dura in that area can be fairly adherent to the bone.
Q: Meaning sticks to as I 
A: Meaning sticks to.
Q: So, that when you take the bone, the dura may very well come with it.
A: There's a good chance you may get some dura. Sometimes not but it may occur.
Q: And, if that occurs, again using the type of operation that Doctor Burgess was doing, you may not know it and you would get a leak or it might leak at that time or it might leak later. Is that right?
A: Yes.
* * * * * *
Q: And would it be fair to say if that occurred, in your view, using the procedure that he was using, it would not be a deviation from the standard of care if, in fact, once he found out there was a leak, he went in and treated it?
* * * * * *
Q: All right. So, in your view then, it would be a grey area. Is that right?
A: That's right. It's a ... it depends on what the outcome is with the patient.
Q: All right. So, if you could fix it without too much problem for the patient, it wouldn't be a deviation from the standard of care but if you have to do a big operative procedure, then it would be a deviation from your point of view?
A: I think from that standpoint, that's fair.
During a brief re-direct examination, Dr. Stankiewicz referred to Dr. Tolner's report concerning the breakdown of Mr. Kennelly's white and red blood cell count. He stated that the dramatic increase in white cells following the ethmoidectomy indicate "inflammation ... and ... and some injury somewhere and some potential of infection."
Appellees' counsel, on re-cross examination, questioned Dr. Stankiewicz concerning the position of the brain when a portion of the fovea ethmoidalis is removed:
Q: Doctor, if we were to assume that the defects were where they are shown on Doctor Nauta's note and as I understand it the brain is sitting right on top of there, is that right?
A: On top of the 
Q: Roof of the ethmoid.
A:  roof of the ethmoid, yes.
* * * * * *
Q: And if a portion of the roof is removed, then you would agree that the brain can come down into the ethmoid sinus cavity itself. Is that right?
A: Depends on how much. If you've got a small opening, it isn't going to come down. But if you've got a large opening, then yes, that can happen.
Q: The fact of the matter is that in this case, one possible scenario is that that's, in fact, what happened; the brain, using your word, pooched down in there and the operator actually can be inside the ethmoid sinus cavity itself remove ... and actually strike it. Is that right?
A: Well, despite the fact that you want to ... you would want to know that and keep an eye on how far you are because you can judge a lot of those distances, that can occur.
Q: That has occurred. Isn't that true?
A: I don't know specifically that that has occurred but it certainly can occur.
Q: All right. And you don't know one way or the other whether that, in fact, occurred in this case.
A: To be honest with you, I don't know exactly the size of the defect and whether it made the brain more accessible or not.
Dr. Burgess presented the testimony of two otolaryngologists to refute the statements made by Dr. Stankiewicz attributing negligence to Dr. Burgess. Each testified that, in his opinion, Dr. Burgess' performance during Mr. Kennelly's operation conformed to the appropriate standard of care required for a bilateral intranasal ethmoidectomy performed without the use of an endoscope.
First, Dr. Douglas E. Mattox, also recognized by Dr. Stankiewicz as a leader in the field of otolaryngology, was so qualified as a medical expert by the court. Based on his review of Mr. Kennelly's history of chronic sinus problems, Dr. Mattox believed that Dr. Burgess employed the "reasonable and necessary operative procedure" on Mr. Kennelly. Dr. Mattox also explained to the jury the effect that chronic sinus disease can have on the bones in the area of the sinuses of the skull:
A: Well, it's ... different in every case, but certainly, chronic infection can lead to some softening of the bone or some thinning of the bone, or if it's reactive, even some thickening of the bone.
Q: Were you able to determine one way or another, based on your review of these X-rays, as to what effect, if any, the chronic sinus disease that you observed in Mr. Kennelly had with respect to the bones and the sinuses?
A: Not in great detail. The CT Scans, of course, . .. take a volume of tissue and condense it into a single picture, and so I did not see, for instance, a big hole in the bone between the sinus and the intracranial cavity. The bone is so thin anyway that I cannot determine from the ... from the scans if it's thinned more than normal because much of this bone is paper thin to start with.
Q: With respect to the bone in the area that we're concerned with in this case, can you tell the members of the jury, based on your experience, the average thickness that one would find in that area?
A: One millimeter or less.
Q: And a millimeter is, if you were going to make an analogy to something ...
* * * * * *
A: Thickness of your thumbnail.
As Dr. Stankiewicz had acknowledged during his cross-examination, Dr. Mattox stated that when operating in the ethmoid sinus area using a head-mounted light and the Blakeslee forceps, that "to a certain extent, you have to rely on your judgment of the angles that you're working and by feel."
During the ensuing dialogue with appellees' attorney, Dr. Mattox expressed his opinion regarding whether Dr. Burgess had met the requisite standard of care when performing the ethmoidectomy on Mr. Kennelly:
Q: Doctor, ... based on your review of these materials that you told the jury about, all of the operative materials, everything, can you express an opinion as to whether or ... to a reasonable degree of medical probability as to whether or not during the performance of the surgery on May 11, 1988, the intranasal ethmoidectomy, Dr. Scott Burgess acted as a reasonably competent otolaryngologist with respect to the procedure that he did?
A: I do.
Q: And what's your opinion?
A: I believe that he did so act.
Q: The case that we're here on is because apparently, during the course of this procedure, something happened. Can you tell the jury why you think, even though that occurred, Dr. Burgess acted as a reasonably competent doctor when he did the surgery?
A: Well, I believe that ... that the procedure was indicated and that he had the patient's overall best interest at heart, and I believe that he identified certain landmarks that you can identify in the nose, the nasal septum which the ... center portion of the nose, the middle turbinate, the ethmoid bulla, that he used appropriate equipment, that he used appropriate illumination, and that he performed the procedure as ... as a reasonable person would.
* * * * * *
[REFERRING TO THE COMPLICATIONS IN KENNELLY'S SURGERY]
Q: Doctor, do you have an opinion that you can express to a reasonable degree of medical probability as to how the incident occurred?
* * * * * *
A: I believe that the bone in this area was very thin and although Dr. Burgess was following the landmarks that he had, he removed some of that bone, and then once the bone is gone, there's ... there's no protection to anything inside.
Q: Now Doctor, do you have to actually penetrate the... area inside the brain or ... well, do you?
A: Well, it's ... there are two potential mechanisms. Either you physically go inside the cranial cavity with the forceps, ... or as the bone has been removed, the brain is allowed to . .. to fall down into the sinus cavity where ... where some fragments were removed.
In Dr. Mattox's opinion, therefore, Dr. Burgess's conduct during the ethmoidectomy did not fall below the standard of care, because, under the circumstances, it was not unreasonable for him unknowingly to remove portions of the fovea ethmoidalis.
In contrast to the opinion provided by Dr. Stankiewicz, Dr. Mattox stated that it was not unusual for a patient suffering from chronic sinus inflammation to lose a thousand cc's of blood when undergoing a bilateral intranasal ethmoidectomy on each side of the nose. In this regard, Dr. Mattox also expressed his opinion to a reasonable degree of medical probability that the bleeding described by Dr. Burgess during Mr. Kennelly's operation did not, as appellants contended, derive from an injury to the right cerebral artery in the brain. According to Dr. Mattox, such an injury could not have been controlled by medical sponge packing, and would have caused a "lethal event right on the operating table."
Dr. Bruce Jafek, also recognized by Dr. Stankiewicz as a leader in the field of otolaryngology, was also qualified by the court as a medical expert and testified on behalf of appellees. Like Dr. Mattox, Dr. Jafek stated that, in his opinion, Dr. Burgess's conduct during the operation in question had not deviated from the requisite standard of care. In this regard, Dr. Jafek stated:
A: Yes, in my opinion, he acted as a reasonably competent otolaryngologist during the performance of that surgery.
Q: And why do you hold that opinion, Doctor?
A: He had properly evaluated Mr. Burgess [sic] in terms of history. He had properly tried additional course of antibiotics. He had properly obtained the appropriate X-rays to evaluate the extent of pathology. He found that, he obtained surgical consent, and he went ahead and conducted the operation.
* * * * * *
Q: Dr. Jafek, where we left off, according to my note, was we were talking about whether or not this was the type of complication that could occur even in the hands of the most skilled surgeon.
A: Yes, sir.
Q: And did you have an opinion in that regard?
A: Yes, sir. This can occur in the hands of the most skilled surgeon.
Appellees' counsel then questioned Dr. Jafek concerning his interpretation of the standard of care in medical malpractice cases in relation to the interpretation provided by appellants' standard of care expert, Dr. Stankiewicz:
Q: Now my question is, do you have an opinion that you can tell this jury as to whether or not the standard of care for a reasonable competent physician is determined by what the doctor does as opposed to what the outcome is for the patient?
A: Well, I think that that's an unusual description of a standard of care. If we were to dictate a standard of care by outcome, anytime that you had a... a bad outcome, that would mean that you didn't adhere to the standard of care.... The standard of care, as I understand it, is what a reasonably prudent doctor would have done under similar circumstances, and that's my understanding of what Dr. Burgess did in this case.
Like Dr. Mattox, Dr. Jafek emphasized that, in his opinion, the bleeding which occurred during Mr. Kennelly's operation was neither excessive nor arose from an injury to the right cerebral artery. Dr. Jafek also demonstrated to the jury, using the human skull, the normal thinness of the fovea ethmoidalis.
Next, Dr. Jafek stated his opinion, based on Dr. Nauta's operative notes, concerning what happened to Mr. Kennelly's brain during the ethmoidectomy:
Q: Are you able to express an opinion to a reasonable degree of medical probability as to whether or not an instrument such as a Blakeslee forceps entered into the cavity where the brain is, or if the roof of the ethmoid was removed and the brain dropped down?
* * * * * *
A: Yeah, it would be my opinion to be more likely that the ... with the removal of the roof of the ethmoid that the brain was down. It is not my opinion that the instrument was inserted up into the brain cavity.
[EXPLAINING DR. NAUTA'S OPERATIVE NOTES]
Q: With the brain herniating down into it?
A: Yes.
Q: Now what does that mean?
A: Well, herniating, or course, is extending down, dropping down in, possibly extending, herniating, moving. It's in an unusual location for the brain.
Q: And then he describes that he went to the other side and he found a symmetrical opening herniating down on the opposite side.
A: It sounds like the brain was down on both sides into the ethmoid cavity.
Finally, Dr. Jafek, although not a pathologist, examined the slides taken by Dr. Rodriguez of the specimens taken from Mr. Kennelly by Dr. Burgess during the surgery, over the objection of appellants' counsel, and concluded that the "little bony fragments" detected in the specimens contained "some acute and chronic inflammatory cells which you can't see at this magnification." According to Dr. Jafek, the bone fragments were specimens "which you would normally expect ... in this kind of operation."
Dr. Jafek could not establish to a reasonable degree of medical probability, however, based on his examinations of the CAT scans and Dr. Nauta's notes, whether Mr. Kennelly's fovea ethmoidalis was thin or eroded. He could only conclude that some defect in the fovea ethmoidalis, caused either naturally or by a subsequent removal by Dr. Burgess, allowed Mr. Kennelly's brain to herniate into the cavity of the ethmoid sinus area. This herniation, in turn, resulted in Dr. Burgess's penetration of those portions of Mr. Kennelly's brain that had settled into the sinus. According to Dr. Jafek, none of the actions taken by Dr. Burgess that may have caused, or in fact did cause, the resulting penetration of the brain fell below the requisite standard of care for an otolaryngologist performing a bilateral intranasal ethmoidectomy via the technique utilized in the case sub judice.
Dr. Burgess testified on his own behalf concerning what happened during Mr. Kennelly's operation. Dr. Burgess stated that, after the patient was anesthetized, he entered the nasal cavity and moved, rather than removed, the middle turbinate. Dr. Burgess explained that he did not remove the middle turbinate because he had not been taught to perform the procedure in that manner. On the contrary, he stated that, in his experience, "the majority of people [surgeons] do not remove the middle turbinate," because they use it as a surgical landmark.
Dr. Burgess then testified that he proceeded to remove the inflamed mucosa and septated bony partitions with the Blakeslee forceps. He further stated that based on Mr. Kennelly's preoperative CAT scans and physical examination, he knew that the disease existed up to the roof of the ethmoid sinus. Like the other three otolaryngologists who testified, Dr. Burgess explained that when using a head-mounted light and the Blakeslee forceps, rather than an endoscope, the procedure is partially dependent on the doctor's sense of touch. According to Dr. Burgess, he did not feel or observe anything out of the ordinary when performing Mr. Kennelly's intranasal ethmoidectomy.
Dr. Burgess also explained that during a normal bilateral ethmoidectomy, a patient would lose approximately 400 to 500 cc's of blood on each side. Therefore, the customary blood loss, according to Dr. Burgess, would be between 800-1,000 cc's. He testified that he considered, in retrospect, that the 1,000 to 1,200 cc's of blood lost by Mr. Kennelly was "unusual", but only to the extent that "it was a little more" bleeding than he anticipated. Dr. Burgess also disputed a reference in Dr. Tolner's report that when he referred Mr. Kennelly to Dr. Tolner for observation, he told Dr. Tolner that he "aggressively packed" the nasal cavity to halt "copious" bleeding.
Dr. Burgess also stated his opinion concerning what happened during Mr. Kennelly's surgery:
My opinion is that probably because of all the chronic inflammation in the area, that the chronic inflammation causes a thinning of the bone and ... and this bone which is ordinarily, you know, egg-shell thin, was thinned even further and ... and when you grab the mucosa with the Blakeslee forceps, it's possible to ... as you grasp the mucosa and pull the mucosa out, it's possible that this very ... very, very thin bone will come with it. Another possibility is that this bone is so soft and ... and spongy in consistency that when you relied on your sense of feel to ... to feel the rigidity of the bone to let you know that there's the ethmoid roof there, you ... you don't encounter any resistance so it doesn't give you notification of that. So you can remove a portion of it and it doesn't have any different feel than ... than the mucosa of the sinus disease. And indeed, when you remove the Blakeslee forceps, you see the diseased sinus mucosa, so you know you're in ... you're doing the procedure as you indicated.
On cross-examination, among other disputes, appellants' counsel challenged Dr. Burgess's contentions that Mr. Kennelly's ethmoid bone, or fovea ethmoidalis, was "very thin" or spongy due to inflammation. Appellants' counsel questioned him concerning the pathology report prepared by Dr. Rodriguez that had been admitted into evidence, as well as the testimony of Dr. Rodriguez. Specifically, appellants' counsel questioned appellee concerning Dr. Rodriguez's testimony that the bone specimens he examined were "free of any type of inflammatory process."[3] Burgess, however, stated that he did not recall making such a statement. Appellants' counsel abandoned that line of questioning.
Following the testimony of Dr. Burgess, the trial court provided instructions to the jury, including, but not limited to the following ones, which are germane to this appeal:
A witness who has special training or experience in a given field is permitted to express opinions based on observed or assumed facts to aid you in deciding the issues in the case. In weighing the opinions of an expert, you should consider the expert's experience, training and skills, and the expert's knowledge of the subject matter about which he's expressing an opinion....
General rules of negligence apply to malpractice cases as well as to ordinary claims of negligence . .. You are instructed that the standard of care which a physician is required to adhere to in the practice of his profession is only that ... that of a reasonably competent physician under the same or similar circumstances, that is to say the physician is not required by law to exercise any care and skill of a special character which exceeds that ordinarily and customarily employed by a physician in his field. An unsuccessful result following medical treatment is not evidence of negligence. Kevin and Lynette Kennelly carry the burden to prove negligence.
Therefore, if you should find ..., if ... should you find that Dr. Burgess used ordinary and reasonable care with respect to the care and treatment of Kevin Kennelly and did not depart from the accepted standards and practices in connection with that care and treatment, then you must return a verdict in favor of Dr. Burgess.
In considering the question of whether the alleged medical malpractice negligence of the Defendant was the cause of the injuries of which the Plaintiff now complains, you must form your judgment only on the basis of expert medical testimony which speaks in terms of reasonable probability or reasonable certainty. In a medical malpractice case, medical facts are for medical experts. However, your verdict may not be based on expert testimony which admits a mere possibility of negligence, or a mere possibility that such negligence caused the injuries complained of.
(emphasis added).
Appellants' counsel objected to the court's presentation of one instruction and the court's failure to give another:
COURT: All right. Any exceptions or additions by the Plaintiff?
COUNSEL: Yes, your Honor, the ... the Plaintiffs object to instruction ... That particular instruction says that an unfair result merely ...
COURT: Okay.
COUNSEL: [A] result on a medical incident ...
COURT: Okay.
COUNSEL: [C]annot be ... you can't infer any negligence from that, and I also, Your Honor, object for the Court's failure to give a proposed instruction ... which specifically said an expert witness, because he is an expert, can infer negligence from the result of the medical practice, and I was relying on Meda versus Brown.
COURT: Right. Anything else?
COUNSEL: No, your Honor.
The trial court overruled appellants' objections and after closing arguments by both sides, submitted the case to the jury for its consideration. The jury returned a verdict in favor of Dr. Burgess and Scott E. Burgess, P.A. On 6 October 1992, the Kennellys noted a timely appeal to this court.
DISCUSSION
I.
In reviewing the jury instructions given by a trial judge, we must look at the complete charge as a whole, and not selectively examine individual statements, which, out of context, may appear misleading or improper. Mayor & City Council of Baltimore v. Kelso Corp., 46 Md. App. 285, 294, 416 A.2d 1339 (1980). Moreover, a charge to the jury will not be condemned because an isolated part seems to be unjust to one side or because of the way in which it is expressed. Kauffman v. Love, 252 Md. 251, 253-54, 249 A.2d 700 (1969).
In Lane v. Calvert, 215 Md. 457, 138 A.2d 902 (1957), the Court of Appeals stated in the context of a medical malpractice case that "[i]t is well established by the case law in this State that the mere fact that an unsuccessful result follows medical treatment is not of itself evidence of negligence."[4]Lane, 215 Md. at 462-63, 138 A.2d 902. Appellants vigorously dispute the jury instruction provided by the trial court that contained the same language. According to appellants, this instruction constituted reversible error because the Kennellys' otolaryngology expert, Dr. Stankiewicz, relied, in part, on the obvious "unsuccessful results" of Mr. Kennelly's surgery to arrive at his opinion that Dr. Burgess's conduct deviated from the appropriate standard of care.
The Kennellys argue that the testimony of Dr. Stankiewicz created an inference of negligence that made the "unsuccessful result" instruction inappropriate. According to appellants, "[t]he giving of the instruction in the case at bar that an unsuccessful result following medical treatment is not evidence of negligence directly and negatively affect[ed] the inference of negligence" because "the unsuccessful result plays heavily in cause and effect."
Appellants rely primarily on the reasoning employed by the Court of Appeals in Meda v. Brown, 318 Md. 418, 569 A.2d 202 (1990), to support their position. In Meda, a patient suffered unexplained nerve damage in her arm after undergoing a bilateral breast biopsy and, as a result, sued her anesthesiologist.[5] At trial, the plaintiff's two medical experts "could not identify with particularity the specific act of negligence and precise mechanism of injury." Meda, 318 Md. at 427, 569 A.2d 202. There was no indication that the plaintiff's medical experts relied on anything but the injury following the operation and the well-known susceptibility of the ulnar nerve to compression injury during surgery to infer that the anesthesiologist was negligent. Both experts testified, however, that it was their opinion within a reasonable medical probability that the plaintiff's injury occurred in the operating room, and whatever the precise cause, the resulting injury established a deviation from the standard of care. Id. There was no indication that the defendant provided any contrary expert medical testimony.
Following the parties' presentation of evidence, no instruction on res ipsa loquitur or the required criteria for the application of that concept was given. A jury awarded the plaintiff $600,000.00, but the trial court entered a judgment notwithstanding the verdict, concluding that "dependence upon an inference necessarily means that the concept of res ipsa loquitur is invoked." Id. at 422, 569 A.2d 202.
The Court of Appeals, on certiorari from our reversal of the trial judge's decision,[6] considered the following issues: 1) whether the concept of res ipsa loquitur had been invoked properly; and 2) whether the trial court properly admitted the testimony of plaintiff's medical experts despite their inability to identify with particularity the specific act of negligence and precise mechanism of injury. Meda, 318 Md. at 418, 569 A.2d 202.
Following a lengthy explanation of the concept of res ipsa loquitur, the court held that the doctrine did not apply.[7] The court distinguished between the appropriate application of res ipsa loquitur and the medical malpractice case then before it when it stated the following:
[t]he closest that this case comes to reliance upon res ipsa loquitur is in the inferential reasoning process used by the plaintiff's experts in arriving at their conclusions that Dr. Meda was negligent. As we shall see, neither ... [of the plaintiff's experts] could testify as to the precise act of negligence that caused injury to Mrs. Brown's ulnar nerve. Each doctor, based upon his knowledge of the facts and upon his expertise, concluded that Mrs. Brown's injury was one that ordinarily would not have occurred in the absence of negligence on the part of the anesthesiologist. This inferential reasoning process has a familiar ring to it. It is a major part of the concept of res ipsa loquitur. It is not, however, res ipsa loquitur. (emphasis added).
Meda, 318 Md. at 425, 569 A.2d 202.
In Meda, the court specifically distinguished between the inferences properly drawn by the jury and those drawn by medical experts in the context of a medical malpractice case. While the court stated that the medical experts may employ inferential reasoning based, in part, on circumstantial evidence to arrive at their conclusions, it did not decide whether such reasoning gave rise to an overall inference of negligence similar to res ipsa loquitur. Rather, the court confined its holding to the admissibility of such medical expert testimony.
In Meda, neither of the plaintiff's experts could testify to a reasonable medical probability concerning the precise manner of the anesthesiologist's negligence. Their testimony was limited to the conclusion that the damage to plaintiff's "ulnar nerve occurred in the operating room ... as a result of one of these causes[8], and that to permit that to happen was not in keeping with the standard of care required of the anesthesiologist." Meda, 318 Md. at 427, 569 A.2d 202.
The defendants in Meda argued that the trial judge erred in permitting the plaintiff's experts to testify because their opinions were based on a combination of direct and circumstantial evidence that failed to prove the specific act of negligence beyond mere speculation or conjecture. Id. The Court of Appeals disagreed, however, and held the testimony admissible because the circumstantial evidence upon which the plaintiff's experts relied "had support in the record," and "the reasoning they employed was based upon logic rather than speculation or conjecture." Thus, the Court affirmed the Court of Special Appeals' decision, "not on the basis of the applicability of res ipsa loquitur, but because the testimony was sufficient to support the inferential conclusions of negligence drawn by the plaintiff's expert." Meda, 318 Md. at 420, 569 A.2d 202.
Appellants contend that the holding in Meda is dispositive. The case sub judice, however, is both factually and problematically distinguishable from Meda.[9] In contrast to the medical experts in Meda, Dr. Stankiewicz described a specific act of negligence when he stated, "My opinion is that at the time of surgery on Kevin Kennelly, that Dr. Burgess went through the fovea ethmoidalis, cribriform plate area and entered into the brain, and this is not within the standard of care for that surgery." His explanation of the methods employed by Dr. Burgess described in detail how he believed Dr. Burgess performed the ethmoidectomy which lead to Mr. Kennelly's injuries.
Moreover, unlike the medical experts who testified in Meda, Dr. Stankiewicz's opinion was based on several sources of medical data, including: the results of CAT scans, the operative report from the ethmoidectomy, and the reports provided by the treating or examining physicians. In fact, prior to the recitation of his opinion to the jury, appellants' counsel led Dr. Stankiewicz through an extensive review of specific medical records. In particular, he relied on the examinations of CAT scans affirming the existence of defects in the fovea ethmoidalis, as found by Dr. Nauta when he operated to repair what damage he could, to conclude that the defects were cause by "intraoperative injury." These were the same holes at the floor of the skull that Dr. Nauta earlier had described as "nibbled" or "scalloped" as by an operative instrument.
Due to a complete lack of medical indicators as to how the plaintiff's injury occurred, the medical experts who testified in Meda had to rely solely on their knowledge of the general susceptibility of the ulnar nerve to compression injury and the general time frame of the injury's occurrence to infer that the injury occurred in the operating room. In contrast, the reasoning process employed by Dr. Stankiewicz that led to his conclusion was marshalled from an array of concrete medical facts. It was unnecessary for him to rely solely on Mr. Kennelly's concluding injuries and resultant mental impairments following the ethmoidectomy in order to opine Dr. Burgess committed malpractice. Indeed, the trial transcripts demonstrate that he did not. But for Dr. Burgess's operative notes, and the tests and examinations following the performance of the ethmoidectomy, it would have been impossible for Dr. Stankiewicz to describe, as he did, the specific act of negligence by Dr. Burgess.
Thus, the information provided in the medical reports pertaining to the pathology specimens, the existence of chiseled defects in the fovea ethmoidalis, and the bleeding and white blood cell count following surgery, as well as Dr. Burgess's practice of leaving the middle turbinate intact during the performance of the ethmoidectomy, provided Dr. Stankiewicz with the evidence to conclude as he did. From the results of those tests and examinations, and not the mere result of the ethmoidectomy itself, Dr. Stankiewicz concluded that Dr. Burgess was negligent.
Appellants also rely on the companion case to Meda, Orkin v. Holy Cross Hospital, 318 Md. 429, 431, 569 A.2d 207 (1990), to support their position that an inference of negligence was created by Dr. Stankiewicz's testimony. Orkin also involved a plaintiff whose ulnar nerve was injured when she entered the hospital for repair of a perforated ulcer. The plaintiff in Orkin, like the plaintiff in Meda, could not ascribe a particular negligent act to any defendant. Consequently, the defendants anesthesiologist and hospital moved for summary judgment, which the trial court granted.
The Court of Appeals vacated the judgment and remanded the case, stating that the plaintiff's intention to present medical expert testimony would enable her to establish a prima facie case of negligence possibly sufficient to take the case to the jury. Orkin, 318 Md. at 433-34, 569 A.2d 207. The Court specifically stated that res ipsa loquitur did not apply. Id. at 433, 569 A.2d 207. Nevertheless, it further refined the distinction in scope between the two types of inferences addressed in Meda when it stated:
As was the case in Meda v. Brown, supra, it is important to distinguish between: 1) the inference of negligence that may properly be drawn by an expert, but could not properly be drawn by a lay juror, and 2) the inference of negligence that may properly be drawn by a lay juror from the facts, unaided by expert testimony. Of the first, it might be said that "the thing speaks for itself," at least in terms of what the facts say to the expert. But that may be said of inferences in general, and yet it is not res ipsa loquitur as we know that concept in the law of negligence. In the strictest sense, res ipsa loquitur is limited to those instances where, certain criteria having been met, the trier of fact may draw an inference of negligence from the facts alone.
Orkin, 318 Md. at 431, 569 A.2d 207 (emphasis added).
In the case sub judice, it can hardly be said that "the thing speaks for itself' in terms of what the facts indicated to the experts. To the contrary, Drs. Mattox and Jafek adamantly disagreed with Dr. Stankiewicz concerning significance of the known facts with respect to Dr. Burgess's alleged deviation from the applicable standard of care. Drs. Mattox and Jafek concluded to a reasonable medical probability that Dr. Burgess never penetrated the cavity of the brain resting in its normal position. Therefore, according to Drs. Mattox and Jafek, the conduct of Dr. Burgess did not fall below the requisite standard of care for the procedure involved. In contrast, Dr. Stankiewicz, relying on the same pool of medical data available to Drs. Mattox and Jafek, concluded to a reasonable medical probability that Dr. Burgess, in fact, had penetrated the brain while it was resting in its normal position in the skull, thereby committing medical malpractice. The existence of contradictory testimony between medical experts, therefore, eliminated any direct application of either Meda or Orkin.
We decline to extend the holdings in Meda and Orkin to encompass the position advanced by appellants. The obvious factual differences between the aforementioned precedent and the case sub judice obviate any need to elaborate further on the inferential reasoning process employed by medical experts and its relationship, if any, to the creation of an inference of negligence similar to res ipsa loquitur.
This apparent confusion in conceptualizing when an inference of negligence properly arises also manifests itself in appellants' reliance on precedent addressing the appropriate application of the "mere happening" instruction. We have held the "unsuccessful result" instruction analogous to the instruction frequently given in negligence cases that "the mere happening of the accident or event complained of does not create any presumption of negligence." Hitch v. Hall, 42 Md. App. 260, 268, 399 A.2d 953 (1979) (stating "[w]e see no substantial difference between this statement ["unsuccessful result"] and the instructions given by the trial judge ["mere happening"].").
Recently, the Court of Appeals considered whether it is reversible error to instruct the jury that the mere happening of an accident creates no presumption of negligence on the part of the defendant where the manner in which the accident happened does indeed create a rebuttable presumption of negligence. Ristaino v. Flannery, 317 Md. 452, 454, 564 A.2d 790 (1989). In Ristaino, plaintiff passengers in a car heading eastbound sued a westbound driver to recover for injuries sustained when the westbound driver crossed the center line and struck the vehicle containing the plaintiffs. Id. at 454-55, 564 A.2d 790.
During its instructions, the trial court charged the jury:
"the mere happening of an accident complained of creates no presumption of negligence on the part of the [d]efendant," that "skidding of and in itself is not alone by itself evidence of negligence," and that "[a] driver who violates the rule of the road ... is prima facie guilty of negligence where the violation directly and proximately causes a collision."
Ristaino, 317 Md. at 455, 564 A.2d 790.
The plaintiffs objected to the mere happening instruction. They argued that the crossing of the center line by defendant's vehicle amounted to prima facie evidence of negligence sufficient to shift the "burden of going forward ... to the [d]efendant." Id.
The Court contemplated three possible scenarios in which a plaintiff presents evidence of a primary fact and, from that fact, seeks to take advantage of an inference of negligence: 1) if the negligence is not contested by the defendant, the "mere happening" instruction is inappropriate; 2) if the primary fact is in dispute, then the "mere happening" instruction is appropriate "so long as it is made clear that it is the mere happening of the accident as described in the evidence most favorable to the defendant that does not give rise to a presumption of negligence;" or 3) if the primary fact is uncontradicted but the defendant sufficiently controverts the inference of negligence, the giving of a bare "mere happening" instruction is inappropriate. Ristaino, 317 Md. at 460-61, 564 A.2d 790.
The Ristaino Court placed the factual situation before it in the third scenario. Although the primary fact, i.e., the defendant's violation of the motor vehicle law by crossing the center line, was uncontradicted, the defendant sufficiently controverted the inference of negligence to generate a jury issue. Ristaino, 317 Md. at 461, 564 A.2d 790. The instruction at issue was inappropriate, therefore, because the plaintiff had properly invoked the inference of negligence.
Appellants contend that the factual scenario related to Mr. Kennelly's surgery also warrants placing the case sub judice in the third scenario. In particular, they argue that they presented evidence of a primary fact, i.e., Mr. Kennelly's operation performed by Dr. Burgess resulted in holes in the fovea ethmoidalis and extraction of brain matter, which is uncontradicted and uncontroverted. According to appellants, this fact alone, considered by Dr. Stankiewicz, supported an inference or presumption of negligence.
Appellants misinterpret the proper characterization of the primary fact in Ristaino which, in turn, causes them to miscategorize their factual scenario as falling under the third subset. In Ristaino, the primary fact was crossing the center line and driving on the wrong side of the road. That, of itself, suggests negligence. As stated by the Ristaino court, it is a definitively accepted principle that such a violation of a rule of the road creates an inference of negligence. Ristaino, 317 Md. at 457-58, 564 A.2d 790.
In the case sub judice, the existence of holes in the fovea ethmoidalis and the extraction of brain matter did not, of themselves, suggest negligence. Any inference would depend on what caused those holes and the extraction, and the evidence as to that was in dispute. The primary facts at issue were what actions taken by Dr. Burgess and what pre-existing condition of Mr. Kennelly's fovea ethmoidalis, if any, caused Mr. Kennelly's injury. Specifically in dispute were the extent of Dr. Burgess's penetration and the position of the brain during the procedure. If the brain was in its normal position and he penetrated it, all standard of care experts agreed that Dr. Burgess committed medical malpractice. If, however, the brain herniated into the ethmoid sinus area following an initial removal of the diseased mucuosa and fovea ethmoidalis, Drs. Mattox and Jafek agreed that this would not constitute a deviation from the standard of care. In this regard, Dr. Stankiewicz stated as well that "it would be a grey area" depending on "what the outcome is with the patient." Dr. Stankiewicz also conceded that, when the "classical" versus the endoscopic technique is employed, it is possible for a competent surgeon to be unable to detect any indicia that the fovea ethmoidalis had been removed, thus putting the surgeon on notice of the potential for complications.
The factual dispute between the parties concerning the manner of injury creates a situation inconsistent with the scenario determined by the Court to have been presented by the facts in Ristaino. In contrast to Ristaino, no overriding principle in medical malpractice cases exists which pronounces that if an individual undergoes sinus surgery and receives brain damage, an inference of negligence necessarily arises. In fact, the Lane Court stated to the contrary when it noted, "There is a presumption that the doctor has performed his medical duties with the requisite skill and care." Lane, 215 Md. at 462, 138 A.2d 902.
The facts of the case sub judice are better suited to the second scenario contemplated in Ristaino, which applies in cases where "the primary facts are in dispute and, consequently, the availability of an inference or presumption of negligence is also in dispute." Ristaino, 317 Md. at 460-61, 564 A.2d 790. The Ristaino Court recognized that the "mere happening" instruction is normally appropriate under circumstances that entail the second scenario, "so long as it is made clear that it is the mere happening of the accident as described in the evidence most favorable to the defendant that does not give rise to the presumption of negligence." Id. at 461, 564 A.2d 790. In support of this position, the Court cited Kelly v. Huber Baking Co., 145 Md. 321, 125 A. 782 (1924), in which it reviewed a "mere happening" instruction given in a case where a factual conflict existed over which vehicle crossed the center line. Id. The defendant's requested "mere happening" instruction granted in Kelly read as follows:
The Court instructs the jury that the mere happening of the accident complained of raises no presumption of negligence on the part of a servant of the defendant operating the automobile referred to in the evidence, but the burden is upon the plaintiff to establish by a preponderance of affirmative evidence that negligence on the part of said servant caused said accident, and if the minds of the jury are left by the evidence in a state of even balance as to the existence of such negligence, then the verdict of the jury must be for the defendant.
Ristaino, 317 Md. at 461, n. 2, 564 A.2d 790 quoting Record of Kelly, at 4-5.
The trial court's instructions to the jury concerning the results of Mr. Kennelly's surgery and appellants' burden of proof were comparable to those given in Kelly. The relevant charge provided by Judge Lerner in the instant case was no less specific than that approved by the Court of Appeals in Kelly as an instruction that "`state[d] general principles of law applicable to the facts of the case in a form which has been repeatedly approved by this Court, and [was] properly granted.'" Ristaino, 317 Md. at 461, 564 A.2d 790, quoting Kelly, 145 Md. at 329, 125 A. 782.
The total charge given by the trial court sufficiently alerted the jury that it was permitted to consider all of Dr. Stankiewicz's testimony. The "unsuccessful result" instruction prohibited the jury solely from equating brain damage with negligence. The instructions correctly also advised the jury that the medical facts presented, both "observed" and "assumed", were for medical experts, including Dr. Stankiewicz, to interpret. Dr. Stankiewicz relied on recorded facts observed by treating and examining physicians and assumed facts, based on a combination of the observed facts and his medical background and experience, to conclude Dr. Burgess had been negligent.
We are not willing, as appellants apparently desire, to wed the inferential explanations provided in Meda and Orkin with those espoused in Ristaino and, as a consequence, find error in the "unsuccessful result" instruction given by the trial court. Therefore, in sum, we note that the evidence adduced at trial was generally no different than that presented in typical medical malpractice cases, meaning that both parties produced medical experts to testify to a reasonable medical probability in their favor. The medical experts who testified at trial, including Dr. Stankiewicz, relied on detailed medical data to arrive at their respective opinions concerning the precise mechanism of Mr. Kennelly's injury. These factors distinguish the case sub judice from the factual situations existing in Meda and Orkin in which no detailed contradictory expert testimony was presented. Moreover, the conflicts in opinion as to causation between the experts eliminated the creation of any inference of negligence similar to that which resulted in the holding of the Court in Ristaino.
According to appellants, the "unsuccessful result" instruction given by the judge told the jury that Dr. Stankiewicz's testimony was meaningless. Based on the foregoing review of the relevant precedent, the evidence presented at trial, and the totality of instructions given by the trial court, we disagree. Consequently, we hold that the trial court's "unsuccessful result" instruction did not prejudice the jury's consideration of Dr. Stankiewicz's medical conclusion so as to constitute reversible error.
II.
Appellants also argue that if the trial court instructed the jury that unsuccessful results following medical treatment were not evidence of negligence, but there exists expert testimony that was based on those unsuccessful results, then the trial court was required to instruct the jury that "an expert can infer negligence from the result of the medical practice."
A party is generally entitled to have its theory of the case presented to the jury if: "(1) the instruction ... correctly state[s] the law, and (2) that law [is] applicable in light of the evidence before the jury." Sargeant Co. v. Pickett, 285 Md. 186, 194, 401 A.2d 651 (1979); Edmonds v. Murphy, 83 Md. App. 133, 176, 573 A.2d 853 (1990), cert. granted, 321 Md. 46, 580 A.2d 1066, aff'd, 325 Md. 342, 601 A.2d 102 (1991). This precedent notwithstanding, there is no obligation on the part of the trial judge to give a particular instruction if the instructions actually given fairly cover the issues raised in the proffered instruction. Mitchell v. Montgomery County, 88 Md. App. 542, 562, 596 A.2d 93 (1991).
In the instant case, the Kennellys argue that the trial court's failure to give the requested instruction left the jurors "in a vacuum," because "they were not told the legal effect of Dr. Stankiewicz's testimony." They accurately state that the requested instruction is a correct statement of the law in Maryland. Indeed, the Court of Appeals in Meda held that medical experts may establish negligence "by proof of circumstances from which its existence may be inferred." Meda, 318 Md. at 427-28, 564 A.2d 790. Where appellants' claim fails, however, is the applicability of the proposition contained in Meda to the case sub judice based on the evidence adduced at trial.
In the previous section, we explained that the record does not reflect that appellants' standard of care expert, Dr. Stankiewicz, relied on the outcome of Mr. Kennelly's ethmoidectomy to reach his opinion. Thus, while the requested instruction may have been a correct statement of the law, it was not applicable in light of the evidence before the jury.
Moreover, the Kennellys contend that Dr. Stankiewicz did not infer his opinion from the fact of brain damage alone; instead, he inferred his opinion from a combination of individual "negligent acts" or "bad results." According to appellants, these "individual" bad results included: penetrating the roof of the ethmoid and the dura, causing a cerebral spinal fluid leak, severing an artery, and extracting brain tissues.
These "individual unsuccessful results" were not results at all. Rather, they constituted elements of the medical treatment itself. The only undisputed unsuccessful results following the medical treatment provided by Dr. Burgess were the CSF leak and organic brain damage, and we shall not permit appellants to enlarge the scope of those results to include actions possibly taken by Dr. Burgess during the surgery. Despite appellants' contentions to the contrary, the specific acts of negligence described in the opinion of its standard of care expert do not constitute "unsuccessful results" of surgery.[10]
Thus, because Dr. Stankiewicz relied on medical data to arrive at his conclusion, the trial court was not required to give the jury the instruction requested by appellants' counsel. Consequently, we hold that the trial court's charge to the jury did not prejudice the Kennellys.
As we noted at the outset, because of our disposition of appellants' first two issues addressed to liability, we need not, and do not, reach their third issue which dealt solely with an alleged evidentiary failing in the damages aspect of the trial.
JUDGMENT AFFIRMED; COSTS TO BE PAID BY APPELLANTS.
NOTES
[1]  At oral argument, appellees' counsel withdrew a previously filed Motion to Strike Appellants' Reply Brief.
[2]  Dr. Rodriguez did not explain what a septation was. According to Dr. Mattox, an expert called by appellees, septations of bone are "bony walls within the ethmoid sinus" which are removed during the ethmoidectomy procedure because they obstruct the ethmoid cavity. No expert at trial definitively identified the bone fragments analyzed by Dr. Rodriguez and later reviewed by other expert witnesses as belonging to the fovea ethmoidalis.
[3]  The existence of inflammatory process in the area of the fovea ethmoidalis constituted an important component of appellees' case. While the testifying pathologist, Dr. Rodriguez, maintained that the bones he examined appeared free of any inflammation, he could not define their point of origin. Dr. Jafek, although not an expert in pathology, was permitted by the court to examine the pathology slides and express his opinion that the bony fragments were inflamed, but that it was not evident at the magnification presented. Despite appellants' trial objection to this portion of Dr. Jafek's testimony, they did not argue it as an issue on appeal. We decline to consider this issue in detail because such an evaluation of contradictory medical testimony would invade the province of the jury as the finder of fact.
[4]  In Lane, the plaintiff failed to ask its medical expert key standard of care questions and apparently attempted to rely on the mere bad result as sufficient evidence of negligence to remedy the inadequacy of expert proof.
[5]  In Meda, the plaintiff sued the anesthesiologist in the Circuit Court for Baltimore City after the anesthesiologist rejected the Health Claims Arbitration Panel's decision in favor of the plaintiff. According to the facts, the plaintiff sued the anesthesiologist for his failure to position the plaintiff's arm properly prior to surgery so as to avoid susceptibility to compression of the ulnar nerve which runs from the shoulder to the hand. Meda, 318 Md. at 426, 569 A.2d 202.
[6]  This court addressed the issue presented based on the relevant facts and held the following:
We think the general knowledge and experience of ordinary jurors, particularly when supported by expert medical testimony that such injuries are not risks ordinarily inherent to the surgical procedure in question, is such that the jurors may infer negligence from an unusual injury to a healthy part of the patient's body remote from the area of the operation.
Brown v. Meda, 74 Md. App. 331, 345, 537 A.2d 635 (1988).
Thus, we essentially placed the plaintiff's injury into the category of "obvious injury" in order to apply res ipsa loquitur.
[7]  The court refused to classify the circumstances as an "obvious injury" case alleviating the need for medical expert testimony. In this regard, the court stated, "If this plaintiff had offered no expert testimony, but had simply shown the onset of an ulnar nerve injury ..., the jury would not have been permitted to infer negligence from the facts alone." Meda, 318 Md. at 428, 569 A.2d 202.
[8]  In particular, one of the plaintiff's experts in Meda offered numerous possibilities for the precise cause of the injury, but based on the available evidence, could not state to a reasonable medical probability what happened.
[9]  We note an inconsistency in the argument advanced by appellants. While they alleged in their brief that the "unsuccessful result" instruction should not have been given, they also argued in their reply brief that "Dr. Stankiewicz did not infer negligence from the result."
[10]  Like their argument based on Ristaino, again appellants confuse the proper cause and effect of the surgical procedure. Essentially, appellants have argued that the causes, i.e., the alleged failure by Dr. Burgess to follow landmarks and refrain from penetrating the fovea ethmoidalis, dura, and the brain, are also the effects, or "unsuccessful results" of surgery. This reasoning is clearly circular, and therefore, incorrect.

=== CASE 9736928 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:18.117311+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE HUTCHINSON delivered the opinion of the court: Following a jury trial, defendant, Shaka Ali Fikara, a/k/a Eddie Robinson, was found guilty of two counts of aggravated criminal sexual assault (720 ILCS 5/12 — 14(b)(1) (West 1992)) and sentenced to consecutive extended terms of 40 years’ imprisonment on each count. On direct appeal, this court affirmed defendant’s convictions and sentence. See People v. Fikara, No. 2-95-1463 (1997) (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). On March 20, 1998, defendant filed a pro se petition seeking relief pursuant to the Post-Conviction Hearing Act (the Act) (725 ILCS 5/122 — 1 et seq. (West 1998)). Defendant’s postconviction petition survived the trial court’s initial review, and the trial court appointed counsel to represent defendant. On October 12, 2000, defendant filed a supplemental petition arguing that his extended-term sentences violated the principles articulated in Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 147 L. Ed. 2d 435, 120 S. Ct. 2348 (2000). On July 27, 2001, the trial court granted the State’s motion to dismiss all issues raised in the postconviction petition with the exception of the Apprendi issue. The trial court found that defendant’s Apprendi issue had merit, vacated defendant’s sentence, and scheduled a new sentencing hearing. On October 25, 2001, after a new sentencing hearing, the trial court resentenced defendant to consecutive extended terms of 40 years’ imprisonment on each count. Defendant then filed the instant appeal pro se, seeking review of the propriety of the sentencing order entered after the trial court granted the post-conviction petition in part. The defendant also appeals the trial court’s order disposing of his postconviction petition, arguing that the trial court erred in dismissing his non -Apprendi claims. We affirm. This court’s earlier order on the direct appeal adequately summarized the factual background of this case, and we will set forth only those facts relevant to the contentions raised in this appeal. At defendant’s trial, the victim, an 11-year-old girl, testified that defendant had committed acts of a sexual nature against her on at least two different occasions. The victim’s baby-sitter, Kerry Bibens, testified that, on June 15, 1992, she observed the victim, wearing only a T-shirt, lying on her back on her bed with her knees up and spread apart. Bibens also observed defendant standing next to the bed, facing the victim, with his pants down to his knees. The victim’s sister, E.B., testified that, on another occasion, she witnessed defendant lying on top of the victim on a couch and that his “bottom” was moving. E.B. testified that neither defendant nor the victim was wearing pants. A jury convicted defendant of two counts of aggravated criminal sexual assault. 720 ILCS 5/12 — 14(b)(1) (West 1992). In his postconviction petition, defendant alleged, inter alia, four different constitutional violations. First, defendant alleged that he was deprived of a fair trial when the trial court permitted the victim and E.B. to testify without first conducting a competency hearing. Defendant alleged that both the victim and E.B. suffered from mental impairments and were taking psychotropic medication at the time of their trial testimony. Second, defendant alleged that both his trial and appellate counsel were ineffective because they failed to raise the issue of the victim’s and E.B.’s competency to testify. Third, defendant alleged that his trial counsel was ineffective for failing to introduce evidence that allegedly indicated that defendant did not suffer from the sexually transmitted disease known as chlamydia. Because the victim did suffer from chlamydia, defendant alleged that the evidence would have supported his claim of innocence. Fourth, defendant alleged that his right to a fair trial was violated when the State was permitted to introduce evidence of other, uncharged acts of sexual contact between defendant and the victim. In his supplemental petition, defendant alleged that his extended-term sentences violated Apprendi because they were predicated upon the trial court’s conclusion that defendant’s conduct resulted in serious harm to the victim and that extended terms were necessary to protect the public and deter others from committing similar conduct. Defendant argued that, under Apprendi, this enhancing factor had to be proved to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt. On July 27, 2001, the trial court entered a written order disposing entirely of defendant’s postconviction petition. First, the trial court dismissed the four non-Apprendi allegations contained in defendant’s petition. The trial court found that the mere ingestion of psychotropic medication, in and of itself, did not render a witness incompetent to testify. The trial court explained that the issue of the competency of a witness did not present the gist of a meritorious constitutional claim that could form the basis for postconviction relief. The trial court further found that trial and appellate counsel were not ineffective for failing to raise the competency issue because the report of proceedings from the victim’s and E.B.’s testimony did not create a bona fide doubt as to their competency. Regarding the issues surrounding defendant’s medical records and chlamydia, the trial court noted that this court had previously held on direct appeal that defendant had not proved that he was prejudiced by his trial counsel’s failure to introduce evidence that defendant allegedly did not have chlamydia. See Fikara, slip op. at 19. Similarly, the trial court noted that this court had also found no abuse of discretion in the admission of the other-crimes evidence. Fikara, slip op. at 8. As to the Apprendi issue raised in defendant’s supplemental petition, the trial court found that defendant’s extended-term sentence was predicated in part upon factors, besides his criminal history, that were not determined by a jury beyond a reasonable doubt. Therefore, the trial court ruled that fundamental fairness required that defendant’s petition be granted in part and that his sentence should be vacated and “a new sentencing hearing held in accordance with the standards of Apprendi addressing only non-Apprendi factors.” As noted above, following a new sentencing hearing, the trial court resentenced defendant to two consecutive, extended-term sentences of 40 years. The extended-term sentences were predicated upon defendant’s prior Class X felony conviction for armed robbery in 1979. Following the denial of defendant’s postsentencing motions, defendant filed a pro se notice of appeal challenging the trial court’s new sentencing order and the trial court’s previous order disposing of his postconviction petition. On appeal, defendant contends that (1) the trial court erred in denying his request for a new trial on the basis of “newly discovered chlamydia” evidence that completely exonerates him of the charged offenses; (2) the trial court erred in its determination that trial counsel was not ineffective; (3) the trial court erred in resentencing him to an extended term without first granting a new trial as mandated by section 5 — 5—4 of the Unified Code of Corrections (the Code) (730 ILCS 5/5 — 5—4 (West 2002)); and (4) the provisions of the Code under which the trial court imposed consecutive sentences and extended terms (730 ILCS 5/5 — 5—3.2(b)(1), 5 — 8—4(a) (West 2000)) violate the state and federal constitutional guarantees against double jeopardy, ex post facto laws, and the separation of powers. Prior to addressing the merits, we first consider the State’s assertion that this court lacks jurisdiction to consider defendant’s first two contentions. These two contentions address the propriety of the trial court’s July 27, 2001, order dismissing all of the issues raised in defendant’s postconviction petition with the exception of the Apprendi issue. The State argues that, had defendant wished to appeal this dismissal order, he was required by Supreme Court Rule 606(b) (188 Ill. 2d R. 606(b)) to file a notice of appeal within 30 days after entry of the July 27, 2001, order or within 30 days after entry of an order disposing of a timely filed motion directed against the judgment. Because defendant did not file his notice of appeal until February 27, 2002, which was the day the trial court entered its resentencing order, the State argues that this notice was not effective to preserve review of the July 27, 2001, order dismissing the non-Apprendi contentions in defendant’s postconviction petition.  Section 122 — 7 of the Act provides that any “final judgment” entered upon a postconviction petition “shall be reviewed in a manner pursuant to the rules of the Supreme Court.” 725 ILCS 5/122 — 7 (West 2000). Illinois courts have held that an order that disposes entirely of a postconviction petition is immediately appealable, even if the order does not ultimately dispose of the criminal proceedings against the defendant. See People v. Scott, 194 Ill. 2d 268, 278-79 (2000) (noting that trial court’s disposition of the defendant’s post-conviction petition was immediately appealable even though trial court determined that the defendant should receive a new sentencing hearing); People v. Joyce, 1 Ill. 2d 225, 227 (1953) (holding that an order disposing of postconviction petition was immediately appealable by either the State or the defendant even though the trial court determined that the defendant should receive a new trial). Such an order, while not necessarily disposing of the criminal proceeding, nonetheless is a final disposition of the petition under the Act. Joyce, 1 Ill. 2d at 227. As correctly noted by the State, to preserve review of an order entirely disposing of a postconviction proceeding, Supreme Court Rules 651(d) and 606(b) require the party seeking review to file a notice of appeal within 30 days of the entry of the final order disposing of the petition or within 30 days of the entry of the order disposing of a timely filed motion attacking the judgment. 134 Ill. 2d R. 651(d); 188 Ill. 2d R. 606(b).  Here, the trial court’s July 27, 2001, order disposed of defendant’s postconviction petition entirely. After finding that defendant’s extended-term sentences violated Apprendi, the trial court granted the postconviction petition in part, vacated defendant’s sentence, and scheduled a new sentencing hearing. Pursuant to the State’s motion, the trial court dismissed defendant’s remaining allegations in the petition. The entry of this order resolved all issues raised in the postconviction petition and was a final disposition of the petition under the Act. As such, the order was immediately appealable, and Rule 606(b) required that a notice of appeal be filed within 30 days by any party seeking review of the order or within 30 days of the disposition of a timely filed motion attacking the judgment. See Joyce, 1 Ill. 2d at 227. Defendant failed to file either a notice of appeal or a motion directed against the order within 30 days of the entry of the July 27, 2001, order. As noted above, defendant did not file a notice of appeal until February 27, 2002, and his notice of appeal made no mention of the postconviction proceedings or the July 27, 2001, order. Defendant’s failure to timely file a notice of appeal deprives this court of jurisdiction to consider those issues relating to the dismissed allegations of his postconviction petition. Additionally, we note that defendant did not seek leave to file a late notice of appeal or argue that his trial counsel’s failure to file a timely notice of appeal constituted the ineffective assistance of counsel. See 188 Ill. 2d R. 606(c). Accordingly, we lack jurisdiction to consider the first two contentions raised by defendant on appeal. Defendant’s third contention on appeal is that, following the grant of postconviction relief, the trial court abused its discretion in resentencing him to an extended term without first granting him a new trial as mandated by section 5 — 5—4 of the Code (730 ILCS 5/5— 5 — 4 (West 2002)). Defendant argues that section 5 — 5—4 required the trial court to grant him a new trial following the vacating of his sentence due to an Apprendi violation and upon the State’s notice of its intent to again seek an extended-term sentence. Therefore, defendant requests that we vacate his sentence and remand the case for further proceedings in compliance with section 5 — 5—4 of the Code.  In Apprendi, the United States Supreme Court held that, “[o]ther than the fact of a prior conviction, any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt.” Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 490, 147 L. Ed. 2d at 455, 120 S. Ct. at 2362-63. In response to Apprendi, our legislature amended section 5 — 5—4 of the Code. See People v. Askew, 341 Ill. App. 3d 548, 578-79 (2003). That section provides, in relevant part, as follows: “If a sentence is vacated on appeal or on collateral attack due to the failure of the trier of fact at trial to determine beyond a reasonable doubt the existence of a fact (other than a prior conviction) necessary to increase the punishment for the offense beyond the statutory maximum otherwise applicable, either the defendant may be re-sentenced to a term within the range otherwise provided or, if the State files notice of its intention to again seek the extended sentence, the defendant shall be afforded a new trial.” 730 ILCS 5/5 — 5—4 (West 2002). As defendant correctly notes, the cardinal rule of statutory construction is to ascertain and give effect to the intent and meaning of the legislature. People v. Patterson, 308 Ill. App. 3d 943, 947 (1999). The language used in the statute is the primary source of legislative intent. People v. Juris, 189 Ill. App. 3d 934, 935 (1989). Where the statutory language is clear and unambiguous, the function of the court is to enforce the statute as enacted. Patterson, 308 Ill. App. 3d at 948. Any ambiguities in a penal statute, especially in the case of enhancement provisions, must be resolved in the defendant’s favor. Juris, 189 Ill. App. 3d at 935. We agree with defendant that the statutory language of section 5 — 5—4 unambiguously requires that a defendant be afforded a new trial in an instance where his sentence has been vacated on a collateral attack due to an Apprendi violation and where the State indicates its intent to again seek an extended-term sentence. 730 ILCS 5/5 — 5—4 (West 2002). Here, the trial court vacated defendant’s sentence on collateral attack because the trial court had previously imposed an extended-term sentence predicated in part upon factors that were not found by a jury beyond a reasonable doubt. According to section 5 — 5—4 of the Code, defendant would therefore be entitled to a new trial in the event that the State filed a notice of its intent to again seek an extended-term sentence. As noted above, the State did file a notice of its intent to again seek an extended-term sentence. However, the State’s notice indicated that it would seek the imposition of an extended term only on the basis of defendant’s past felony conviction, rather than the other enhancing factors relied upon by the trial court in imposing the original extended-term sentence. Because the use of a defendant’s past criminal history as an enhancing factor is a specific exception to the rule established in Apprendi, we believe that this case falls outside section 5 — 5—4’s requirement that defendant be granted a new trial. Apprendi does not require that a defendant’s past criminal history be found by a jury beyond a reasonable doubt before such history can be the basis for a sentencing enhancement. See People v. Watson, 322 Ill. App. 3d 164, 167-69 (2001). Therefore, no purpose would be served in conducting a new trial, and such an exercise is not constitutionally required. See Watson, 322 Ill. App. 3d at 168-69. We therefore read section 5 — 5—4’s requirement of a new trial to apply only in those instances where the State files a notice of its intent to seek an extended-term sentence based on enhancing factors other than a defendant’s prior conviction. While we recognize that the plain language of the statute does not specifically exempt from its new trial requirement instances where the State intends to seek an extended term based solely on a defendant’s prior conviction, we believe that this was nonetheless the legislature’s intent based on a reading of the statute in its entirety. The initial portion of section 5 — 5—4’s statutory language states that the statute applies to sentences that are vacated on collateral attack due to the failure of the jury “to determine beyond a reasonable doubt the existence of a fact (other than a prior conviction) necessary to increase the punishment for the offense beyond the statutory maximum.” (Emphasis added.) 730 ILCS 5/5— 5 — 4 (West 2002). Using such language, the legislature stated its intention that the statute apply only to those cases where the sentencing enhancement was based on a factor other than a prior conviction. Such language parallels the United States Supreme Court’s language in Apprendi, which is quoted above. We therefore do not believe that the legislature intended to grant a defendant the right to a new trial in instances where the State seeks an extended-term sentence based solely upon a defendant’s prior convictions. See Askew, 341 Ill. App. 3d at 580-81 (noting that the legislature’s amendments to the Code following Apprendi were intended in part to codify Apprendi’s exemption of prior convictions from the category of facts that must be charged in an indictment, submitted to the jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt).  Statutes are to be construed as a whole and significance and effect should be given every paragraph, sentence, phrase, and word of a statute. People v. Brown, 157 Ill. App. 3d 61, 64 (1987). A statute should be construed so that no sentence, clause, or word is rendered superfluous or meaningless. Brown, 157 Ill. App. 3d at 64. Additionally, although criminal statutes are to be construed in favor of the accused, such construction must not be so rigid as to defeat the intent of the legislature. Askew, 341 Ill. App. 3d at 580. After viewing the statutory language in its entirety, and giving consideration to the fact that the statutory language was adopted in response to Apprendi, we conclude that section 5 — 5—4 of the Code does not require the trial court to conduct a new trial in instances where the State intends to seek an extended-term sentence based solely on the existence of a defendant’s prior conviction. This interpretation harmonizes with the constitutional principles articulated in Apprendi and the other Illinois authorities noted above. See Askew, 341 Ill. App. 3d at 580. We therefore hold that the trial court did not abuse its discretion or err as a matter of law when it resentenced defendant to an extended term based on his prior criminal convictions without first granting a new trial. Defendant’s final contention on appeal is that the consecutive sentence and extended-term provisions of the Code under which he was sentenced following the grant of postconviction relief (730 ILCS 5/5 — 5—3.2(b)(1), 5 — 8—4(a) (West 2000)) violate the constitutional guarantees against double jeopardy, ex post facto laws, and the separation of powers. Although defendant’s contention is confusing and unfocused, he appears to argue that he cannot constitutionally be sentenced to consecutive extended terms of imprisonment based on his previous felony conviction. We find that each of the constitutional arguments raised by defendant in his final contention lacks merit. We will briefly address each of these points below.  Defendant first argues that the trial court’s imposition of consecutive sentences under section 5 — 8—4(a) of the Code violated his due process rights under Apprendi as it permitted the trial court, rather than a jury, to determine the factors warranting the imposition of a consecutive sentence. This argument was rejected in People v. Carney, 196 Ill. 2d 518, 536 (2001), wherein our supreme court held that consecutive sentences imposed under section 5 — 8—4(a) do not violate due process and that Apprendi does not apply to the imposition of consecutive sentences.  Defendant next argues that the trial court erred in receiving evidence at the resentencing hearing beyond the evidence of his prior felony conviction. Defendant claims that, under Apprendi, the trial court could not consider any evidence aside from his prior conviction. However, defendant cites no authority in support of his proposition that Apprendi limits the type of evidence that may be introduced during a sentencing hearing. As the State notes, the ordinary rules of evidence that apply during the guilt phase of a trial are not applicable during a sentencing hearing. People v. Bilski, 333 Ill. App. 3d 808, 818 (2002). Rather, the decision to admit particular types and sources of evidence during a sentencing hearing is within the discretion of the sentencing judge. Bilski, 333 Ill. App. 3d at 818. Here, although the trial court may have received evidence at sentencing relating to the commission of the crimes alleged to have been committed by defendant in this case, the record demonstrates that the trial court considered only the fact of defendant’s prior felony conviction in making its decision to impose an extended-term sentence. Therefore, we find no violation of Apprendi.  Defendant also argues that his extended-term sentence violated the state and federal constitutional guarantees against double jeopardy and ex post facto laws. Defendant contends that his extended-term sentences imposed under section 5 — 5—3.2(b)(1) constitute additional punishment for his prior 1979 felony conviction, which sentence he has already served. Defendant’s argument misses the mark. An ex post facto law is one that is retrospective, affects substantial rights, and disadvantages the defendant. Miller v. Florida, 482 U.S. 423, 430, 96 L. Ed. 2d 351, 360, 107 S. Ct. 2446, 2451 (1987). Defendant has not argued that the extended-term sentencing provisions of section 5 — 5— 3.2(b)(1) were not in effect at the time of the crimes charged in this case. Therefore, defendant has not presented a true ex post facto argument, i.e., that he was not resentenced according to the law in the effect at the time of the offense. See People v. O’Quinn, 339 Ill. App. 3d 347, 361-62 (2003). However, even if defendant had shown that a new sentencing law had been retroactively applied to his case, Illinois courts have previously held that legislative amendments to the provisions governing extended-term sentences merely affect a mode of procedure and do not violate constitutional ex post facto principles. See O’Quinn, 339 Ill. App. 3d at 362; People v. McClain, 343 Ill. App. 3d 1122 (2003).  Additionally, defendant has not presented a meritorious double jeopardy argument. That defendant has received an extended-term sentence in this case because of his prior conviction does not support defendant’s assertion that he has been tried and sentenced a second time for his 1979 conviction. Rather, as noted by the State, defendant’s sentences for his two aggravated criminal sexual assault convictions in this case were extended because he is a recidivist. The aim of recidivist statutes is to impose harsher sentences on offenders whose repeated convictions have shown their resistance to correction. People v. Lemons, 191 Ill. 2d 155, 160 (2000). Defendant has not provided a single authority holding that the State is constitutionally prohibited from considering a defendant’s criminal history as a sentencing enhancement. Rather, as noted above, the Apprendi Court recognized recidivism as an exception to the requirement that the State must establish beyond a reasonable doubt every fact used to increase a defendant’s sentence beyond the maximum term. Here, defendant does not deny the existence of his prior felony conviction or that the prior conviction was entered in a fair proceeding in which he was afforded due process. For all of these reasons, we conclude that defendant’s extended-term sentences did not violate his constitutional guarantee against double jeopardy.  Defendant next argues that “the sentencing scheme excluded the judiciary from the sentencing function and violate[d] the separation of powers.” However, defendant fails to recognize that the legislature has the authority to set the nature and extent of criminal penalties, and the courts are without authority to interfere with such legislation unless the challenged penalty is clearly in excess of the broad and general constitutional limitations. People v. Thomas, 171 Ill. 2d 207, 221 (1996). Finally, defendant argues that the statutes under which he was sentenced did not require the State to provide notice in the charging instrument of the facts allegedly qualifying him for an enhanced sentence. As noted above, when the State intends to rely on a prior conviction in seeking the imposition of an extended-term sentence, the State is not obligated to allege the prior conviction in the charging instrument and prove the conviction to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt. See Askew, 341 Ill. App. 3d at 581. For all of these reasons, we reject defendant’s broad constitutional challenges to sections 5 — 5—3.2(b)(1) and 5 — 8—4(a) of the Code. For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court of Lee County. Affirmed. GROMETER and KAPALA, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9736929 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:18.123778+00 ===

Supplemental Opinion Upon Denial of Rehearing PRESIDING JUSTICE HUTCHINSON delivered the opinion of the court: In his petition for rehearing, defendant concedes that the trial court’s July 27, 2001, order was final and immediately appealable. However, defendant asserts that the trial court failed to order the clerk of the circuit court to provide him with immediate notice of the July 27, 2001, adverse judgment as required by Supreme Court Rule 651(b) (134 Ill. 2d R. 651(b)). Defendant therefore contends that he was never admonished as to the necessity of filing a timely notice of appeal from the July 27, 2001, order and that his failure to do so should be excused. Defendant requests that we address the merits of his first two contentions on appeal.  Supreme Court Rule 651(b) requires that, upon the entry of a judgment adverse to a defendant in a postconviction proceeding, the clerk of the trial court “shall at once mail or deliver” to the defendant a notice advising him of the entry of the order and advising him of his right to appeal. 134 Ill. 2d R. 651(b). Rule 651(b) provides the form that the notice should take and requires that the defendant be advised of the steps necessary to preserve his right to appeal. 134 Ill. 2d R. 651(b). After a thorough review of the record, we agree with defendant that the clerk of the trial court failed to provide him with the required notice of adverse judgment. The record also reveals that the trial court failed to admonish defendant of the finality of the July 27, 2001, order and of the need to file a notice of appeal within 30 days to preserve his right to appeal.  In instances where the requirements of Rule 651(b) have not been satisfied, the reviewing court must treat a defendant’s untimely notice of appeal as a petition for leave to file a late notice of appeal within the contemplation of Supreme Court Rule 606(c) (188 Ill. 2d R. 606(c)). People v. Allen, 7 Ill. App. 3d 249, 251-52 (1972). The reviewing court must then grant the petition and consider the merits raised in the defendant’s appeal. Allen, 7 Ill. App. 3d at 252. The reviewing court must allow the filing of a late notice of appeal even when the six-month period for seeking leave to file a late notice of appeal provided in Rule 606(c) has already expired. See People v. Meeks, 31 Ill. App. 3d 396, 400 (1975) (noting that a reviewing court has jurisdiction to entertain a late notice of appeal in instances where the defendant received notice of the adverse judgment after the six months provided by Rule 606(c)). As a result of the trial court’s failure to ensure compliance with Rule 651(b) in this case, we must treat defendant’s untimely notice of appeal from the July 27, 2001, order as a petition to file a late notice of appeal and consider defendant’s contentions of error relating to the dismissal of portions of his postconviction petition. See Allen, 7 Ill. App. 3d at 252. Although we acknowledge that defendant was represented by counsel and present in court at the time the trial court made its ruling disposing of the postconviction petition in its entirety, the trial court’s failure to comply with Rule 651(b) meant that defendant never received the admonitions required by law, and fundamental fairness requires that we consider the contentions raised by defendant. See People v. Foster, 171 Ill. 2d 469, 473 (1996) (holding that reviewing court should entertain appeal where a trial court has failed to admonish the defendant how to preserve his right to appeal, even in instances where the defendant was represented by counsel and counsel was aware of necessary steps to preserve appeal). We thus turn to a consideration of defendant’s contentions of error relating to the trial court’s dismissal of portions of his postconviction petition. As detailed in our initial opinion, defendant contends that the trial court erred in dismissing that portion of his postconviction petition alleging the existence of “newly discovered chlamydia” evidence that purportedly exonerates him of the charged offenses. Defendant also contends that the trial court erred in dismissing that portion of his postconviction petition alleging that he was denied the effective assistance of trial counsel. We will consider each of these contentions in turn.  The Post-Conviction Hearing Act (the Act) (725 ILCS 5/122 — 1 et seq. (West 1998)) provides a mechanism by which defendants under criminal sentences in this state can assert that their convictions were the result of a substantial denial of their rights under the United States Constitution or the Illinois Constitution or both. People v. Coleman, 183 Ill. 2d 366, 378-79 (1998). A petition for postconviction relief is not an appeal of the underlying judgment; rather, it is a collateral proceeding. People v. Johnson, 206 Ill. 2d 348, 356 (2002). As such, a postconviction proceeding allows an inquiry only into constitutional issues that were not, and could not have been, adjudicated on direct appeal. Johnson, 206 Ill. 2d at 356. Issues that were raised and decided on direct appeal are barred from consideration by the doctrine of res judicata-, issues that could have been raised, but were not, are considered waived. Johnson, 206 Ill. 2d at 356. The trial court may dismiss a postconviction petition without a full evidentiary hearing where the petition fails to sufficiently demonstrate a constitutional infirmity that would necessitate relief under the Act. Coleman, 183 Ill. 2d at 380. We review de novo the dismissal of a post-conviction petition. Coleman, 183 Ill. 2d at 388-89.  We first consider defendant’s assertion that he is entitled to a new trial because the medical evidence demonstrated that he did not have chlamydia. On direct appeal, defendant similarly argued that he could not be guilty of the charged sex offenses because the trial evidence established that the 11-year-old victim had tested positive for chlamydia and that he tested negative for the disease. We rejected this argument, explaining: “The defendant testified that he had been tested and found not to have any sexually transmitted diseases. However, there was also testimony that a specific test for chlamydia is required in order to detect it. During deliberations, the jury sent a note to the trial court asking if there was any medical proof that the defendant did or did not have chlamydia. The defense counsel offered no objection to the trial court’s response that the jury must determine if there was such medical proof. Clearly, it was a question for the jury to determine based upon the evidence before it.” People v. Fikara, No. 2-95-1463, slip op. at 17 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). To the extent that defendant’s allegations in his postconviction petition raise similar questions regarding the trial evidence, these allegations are barred under the doctrine of res judicata. People v. Enis, 194 Ill. 2d 361, 375 (2000).  In his brief, defendant asserts that his postconviction petition contained “newly discovered evidence” that exonerated him of the charged sex offenses. However, our review of defendant’s petition and its attachments reveals no new medical evidence resolving the question of whether defendant suffered from chlamydia. Although defendant attaches the results from several blood tests taken during the years following his conviction, none of these results specifically reference a test for the presence of chlamydia or indicate whether defendant had the disease. Neither the contents of defendant’s petition and affidavits nor his exhibits support his claim on appeal that he “tested negative for the disease showing that he never had it and couldn’t possibly be the person who infected the victim.” Accordingly, we hold that the trial court correctly dismissed these allegations of the postconviction petition because defendant failed to establish that his constitutional rights were violated.  Within defendant’s discussion of the chlamydia evidence, he also asserts that the victim and her sister were incompetent to testify at trial due to their alleged use of psychotropic medications. We agree with the State that this argument could have been raised on direct appeal and that defendant’s failure to do so waives the issue for purposes of this postconviction proceeding. Johnson, 206 Ill. 2d at 356. Accordingly, we decline defendant’s request to consider the issue on appeal.  Defendant’s second contention of error concerning the post-conviction proceedings is that the trial court erred in dismissing that portion of the petition seeking a new trial on the basis of his allegations that his trial counsel was ineffective. Specifically, defendant argues that his trial counsel was ineffective because (1) counsel failed to establish that he never had chlamydia and therefore could not have transmitted the disease to the victim; (2) counsel failed to object to the State’s conduct of carving multiple charges “out of a single offense”; (3) counsel failed to investigate the mental histories of the victim and her sister and to challenge their competence to testify; (4) counsel failed to impeach the victim and her sister with prior inconsistent statements; and (5) counsel failed to object to the use of “tainted evidence.” These issues were not raised on direct appeal, and defendant’s failure to do so waives their consideration for purposes of this postconviction proceeding. See Johnson, 206 Ill. 2d at 356. However, defendant has also alleged that his appellate counsel was ineffective for failing to raise these issues on direct appeal. The waiver doctrine is inapplicable in instances where the alleged waiver of an issue stems from ineffective assistance of appellate counsel. People v. Haynes, 192 Ill. 2d 437, 476 (2000). We will therefore consider defendant’s allegations in the context of ineffective assistance of appellate counsel.  To establish that appellate counsel was ineffective for failing to raise an issue on direct appeal, a defendant must show that (1) his appellate counsel’s failure to raise the issue was objectively unreasonable, and (2) counsel’s decision prejudiced the defendant. People v. Easley, 192 Ill. 2d 307, 328-29 (2000). The sixth amendment right to effective assistance of counsel does not mandate that appellate counsel raise every conceivable argument that could be made. People v. Richardson, 189 Ill. 2d 401, 412 (2000). Counsel’s assessment of which issues to raise and argue will not be questioned unless it was patently wrong. Richardson, 189 Ill. 2d at 412. Therefore, unless the underlying issues are meritorious, a defendant has suffered no prejudice from counsel’s failure to raise them on appeal. Easley, 192 Ill. 2d at 329.  Initially, we note that appellate counsel did argue on direct appeal that defendant was denied the effective assistance of trial counsel. See Fikara, slip op. at 18-22. Appellate counsel’s argument consisted of 10 instances of trial counsel’s alleged ineffectiveness, including trial counsel’s failure to introduce medical records that purportedly established that defendant did not have chlamydia. In rejecting defendant’s request for a new trial based upon trial counsel’s alleged ineffectiveness, this court concluded that defendant could not establish that, but for his trial counsel’s failures, the jury would have acquitted him of the charged offenses. We explained that the evidence presented in the case was not closely balanced and that our review of the record satisfied us “that defendant’s conviction on the charges in this case was not the result of any failure on the part of *** defense counsel in his representation of the defendant.” Fikara, slip op. at 21. With this background, we address the allegations of ineffective assistance of counsel contained in defendant’s postconviction petition. Defendant’s first allegation of ineffectiveness is that trial counsel was ineffective for failing to establish that defendant did not have chlamydia. On direct appeal, we held that defendant was not denied the effective assistance of trial counsel as a result of counsel’s failure to introduce a medical report that indicated the results of a test for chlamydia. In so holding, we stated that, “even assuming that the document in question established that the defendant did not suffer from the disease, there was more than sufficient other evidence of the defendant’s guilt in the case.” Fikara, slip op. at 19. In light of our prior determination, we conclude that an appellate argument predicated upon trial counsel’s ineffectiveness for failing to prove that defendant did not have chlamydia would be without merit. Defendant’s second allegation of ineffectiveness is that trial counsel failed to argue that the indictment carved multiple charges “out of a single offense.” However, defendant did not make this allegation in his postconviction petition; therefore, we deem it waived. People v. Rovito, 327 Ill. App. 3d 164, 178-79 (2001). We thus decline to consider whether appellate counsel was ineffective for failing to raise this issue on direct appeal. Defendant’s third allegation of ineffectiveness is that trial counsel failed to challenge the competency of the victim and her sister based on their alleged use of psychotropic medication. As noted by the trial court, the ingestion of psychotropic medication does not give rise to a bona fide doubt as to a witness’s competency. See People v. Mitchell, 189 Ill. 2d 312, 331 (2000). Defendant offers no evidence, other than his own assertions, that these witnesses were incompetent to testify. Our review of the record reveals no indication that these witnesses had mental conditions that affected their ability to perceive, record, recollect, or narrate. See People v. Sykes, 341 Ill. App. 3d 950, 973 (2003). Additionally, as noted by this court on direct appeal, the other evidence admitted at trial corroborated the testimony of these witnesses as to defendant’s sexual abuse. Fikara, slip op. at 9-10. The children’s baby-sitter testified that she observed defendant standing in front of the victim, who was naked, with his pants and underwear at his knees. The victim’s mother and a police officer testified that the victim told them of the sexual acts defendant committed against her. Finally, medical testimony established that the victim had prior sexual contact. In light of this corroborative evidence, a challenge to the competency of the victim and her sister would not have resulted in defendant’s acquittal on the charges. Therefore, we hold that appellate counsel was not ineffective for failing to raise this issue on direct appeal. Defendant’s final two allegations of ineffectiveness are that trial counsel failed to impeach the victim and her sister with their prior inconsistent statements or to object to the use of “tainted evidence.” We conclude that these contentions have been waived on appeal as a result of defendant’s failure to support them with coherent argument and authority. See 177 Ill. 2d R. 341(e)(7). Defendant’s arguments on appeal here consist of short conclusory statements, devoid of any reference to the record on appeal or explanation specifying the facts underlying the claims. This court is entitled to a well-reasoned argument, along with citation of relevant authority. People v. Williams, 267 Ill. App. 3d 82, 86 (1994). Defendant’s failure to do so waives these issues on appeal. For all of the foregoing reasons, we agree with the trial court that defendant’s postconviction petition fails to establish that he was denied the effective assistance of appellate counsel. Accordingly, we hold that the trial court correctly determined that these allegations failed to sufficiently demonstrate a constitutional infirmity and properly dismissed these allegations of defendant’s postconviction petition. We affirm the judgment of the circuit court of Lee County disposing of defendant’s postconviction petition. Defendant’s petition for rehearing is denied. Affirmed. GROMETER and KAPALA, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9736930 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:18.819206+00 ===

OLSZEWSKI, Judge.
The question before this Court en banc is a narrow one: When a defendant is sentenced for a drug offense involving more than 2.0 but less than 10.0 grams of cocaine, should the enhanced mandatory minimum apply if he was convicted of a prior drug trafficking offense before being sentenced, but after the commission of the principal offense? After carefully reviewing the parties’ briefs and arguments, we are convinced that the sentence enhancement applies in this case.
*253On May 28, 1992, a jury convicted Kenneth Plass of possession and possession with intent to deliver cocaine, an offense he committed on June 13, 1991 [“the second offense”]. Sentencing occurred on the same day as the trial. At sentencing, Plass stipulated that he was convicted of a drug trafficking offense, possession with intent to deliver marijuana [“the first offense”], on December 12, 1991 [“the first conviction”]. The first offense occurred on April 4, 1991. As a result, it is evident that Plass committed the first offense before, but was convicted and sentenced after, he perpetrated the second offense. Furthermore, it is clear that the first conviction was final on the date that Plass was sentenced for the second offense.1
The trial court refused the Commonwealth’s request to apply the mandatory minimum sentence of two years incarceration and a $10,000 fine under 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7508(a)(3)(i), reasoning that since the first conviction did not occur before the second offense, an enhancement was improper. The Commonwealth appeals this refusal and asks us to determine whether the trial court erred in failing to consider the marijuana offense a prior conviction for purposes of this recidivist provision.
I.
Our Crimes Code provides:
(3) A person who is convicted of violating section 13(a)(14), (30) or (37) of The Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act where the controlled substance is [cocaine], shall be sentenced to a mandatory term of imprisonment and fine as set forth in this subsection:
(i) when the aggregate weight of the ... substance involved is at least 2.0 grams and less than ten grams; one *254year in prison and a fine of $5,000 or such larger amount as is sufficient to exhaust the assets utilized and the proceeds from the illegal activity; however, if at the time of sentencing the defendant has been convicted of another drag trafficking offense: three years in prison and a fine of $10,000 or such larger amount as is sufficient to exhaust the assets utilized in and proceeds from the illegal activity[.]
18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7508(a)(3)(i) (emphasis added). The Commonwealth argues that since “at the time of sentencing” Plass had been “convicted of another drug trafficking offense,” the marijuana offense, the trial court was required to impose the enhanced sentence. We agree.
Up to this point, no court has discussed the particular interpretation of this statute which concerns us here. We are therefore guided by the Statutory Construction Act, 1 Pa. C.S.A. § 1901 et seq., and must construe the statute in light of its plain language. Id., § 1903. Moreover, “[w]hen determining the meaning of any particular recidivist statute or section, it is the language of that statute or section, and no other, which must be interpreted or applied.” Commonwealth v. Gonzales, 415 Pa.Super. 564, 574, 609 A.2d 1368, 1373 (1992). Here, the language of § 7508(a)(3)(i) is unambiguous. “If at the time of sentencing, the defendant has been convicted of another drug trafficking offense,” the enhancement provisions apply. The legislature has defined “conviction” as it is used in this section:
Previous conviction. — For purposes of this section, it shall be deemed that a defendant has been convicted of another drug trafficking offense when the defendant has been convicted of another offense under section 13(a)(14), (30), or (37) of The Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act, or of a similar offense under any statute of any state of the United States, whether or not judgment of sentence has been imposed concerning that offense.
18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7508(a.l). Since the parties do not dispute that the marijuana first offense is “another offense” under the Controlled Substance, Drug, and Device, and Cosmetic Act which would trigger the recidivist provision in § 7508(a)(3)(i), *255and that “at the time of sentencing” for the current offense he was convicted of the first offense, we simply fail to see, under a plain reading of the statute, how the enhancement was inapplicable.
Plass argues that since the definitional section of “conviction” does not include a temporal element, the statute is ambiguous regarding when the conviction must have occurred for the enhancement to apply. In the absence of such a provision, Plass maintains that we must interpret the statute consistent with other recidivist statutes which embody the traditional notion that a conviction for a previous offense must have occurred prior to the commission of the second offense before a sentence enhancement may be imposed. See generally, Commonwealth v. Dickerson, 533 Pa. 294, 621 A.2d 990 (1993); Commonwealth v. Beatty, 411 Pa.Super. 450, 601 A.2d 1253 (1992) (en banc), alloc. granted, 531 Pa. 644, 612 A.2d 983 (1992); Commonwealth v. Mourar, 349 Pa.Super. 583, 504 A.2d 197 (1986) vacated on other grounds, 517 Pa. 83, 534 A.2d 1050 (1987). We have no quarrel with this philosophy. Our sedulous review of the relevant caselaw and this particular statute, however, convinces us that the legislature did not adopt the traditional rule when drafting the recidivist provision under scrutiny here.
If one thread can be said to tie the many controversies surrounding this Commonwealth’s recidivist statutes, it is from which point a sentencing judge must “look back” to determine whether a previous conviction can be used to enhance an offender’s sentence. In Commonwealth v. Dickerson, supra, the dispute involved an interpretation of our Commonwealth’s general recidivist statute, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 9714, which covers persons who commit murder, involuntary manslaughter, rape, and other serious felonies. That statute provides for an enhanced sentence when the person has “previously been convicted of a crime of violence” as delineated in subsection (b). 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 9714(a). Subsection (b) defines the temporal element, or “look back” provision, of a “previous conviction” as follows:
*256(2) The previous conviction occurred within seven years of the date of the commission of the instant offense, except that any time during which the offender was incarcerated in any penitentiary, prison, or other place of detention shall not be considered in computing the relevant seven-year period.
Id., § 9714(b)(2) (emphasis added). Dickerson committed two rapes on the same day and was subsequently convicted of both. The question was then whether the enhancement provision should apply, since the Commonwealth contended that the “previous” rape conviction occurred within seven years of the second offense, albeit within seven years after the commission of the offense.
Our Supreme Court rejected this interpretation:
The dispute arises because the legislature apparently did not consider the anomaly posed by appellee’s criminal behavior. In cases of recidivism, we expect the following sequence of events: first offense, first conviction, first sentencing, second offense, second conviction, second sentencing. In such a situation, the legislature provided that the mandatory minimum sentence would be imposed at the second sentencing if the first conviction occurred within seven years prior to the commission of the second offense. If the first conviction occurred more than seven years before the second offense, the legislature did not consider the criminal sufficiently blameworthy to merit an enhanced minimum sentence. The sequence of events in this case, however, was: first offense, second offense, first conviction, first sentencing, second conviction, second sentencing. We hold that in this sequence, the mandatory minimum sentencing statute does not apply because the first conviction did not occur within seven years prior to the commission of the second offense.
Id., 533 Pa. at 298-299, 621 A.2d at 992. The Supreme Court, in reaching this result, concluded that the legislature adopted the traditional recidivist policy by express language; the Court thus considered the starting point provided by the statute, “the date of the second offense,” and “looked back” to *257determine whether defendant had previously been conviction for the first offense.
In Commonwealth v. Beatty, supra, we interpreted the Motor Vehicle Code’s recidivist provision. Beatty, as did Plass here and Dickerson above, committed an offense which was not reduced to conviction before he repeated his criminal conduct. When he was sentenced on the repeat offense, however, the conviction was final. The statute under the Motor Vehicle Code provides for enhancements if a person has “violated” the DUI statute and has “previously been convicted” of another DUI offense. 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3731(e). The trial court determined that since Beatty had been convicted of the previous offense at the time of sentencing, the enhancement provisions applied.
We held that the “look back” period in the Code’s recidivist statute contemplates a “present violation [the date of the second offense] and a prior conviction [the first conviction].” Beatty, supra, 411 Pa.Super. at 454, 601 A.2d at 1255 (quoting Commonwealth v. Kimmel, 523 Pa. 107, 111, 565 A.2d 426, 428 (1989)). In other words, the legislature anchored the “look back” period by using the terms “violation” and “previous conviction” to determine whether the DUI offender is a recidivist deserving enhanced punishment. Accord, Commonwealth v. Tobin, 411 Pa.Super. 460, 601 A.2d 1258 (1992), aff'd, 533 Pa. 322, 623 A.2d 814 (1993). By looking back from the time of sentence, rather than the time of the commission of the second offense, the trial court in Beatty ignored the legislature’s intended starting point and frustrated the express statutory language.
Finally, in Commonwealth v. Eyster, 401 Pa.Super. 477, 585 A.2d 1027 (1991), alloc. denied, 529 Pa. 646, 602 A.2d 857 (1992), this Court was faced with the question of whether convictions which occur after the commission of a principal offense, but before sentencing on that offense, may be considered for purposes of defining a defendant’s prior record score under the sentencing guidelines. The sentencing guidelines applicable in Eyster provide that a “prior conviction” for purposes of a prior record score must be consistent with our *258legislature’s stated purpose behind enhancements under the guidelines:
... The guidelines shall:
* * * * * *
(2) specify a range of sentences of increased severity for defendants previously convicted of or adjudicated delinquent for one or more misdemeanor or felony offenses committed prior to the current offense.
42 Pa.C.S.A. § 2154 (emphasis added).
Thus, it is abundantly clear that under the guidelines the legislature adopted the traditional recidivist theory “that recidivist legislation attempts to encourage offenders to stay out of trouble and punishes recidivists who refuse to be deterred even after a conviction.” Eyster, supra, 401 Pa.Super. at 485, 585 A.2d at 1031. The express statutory language allows no other result. Accord, Dickerson, supra, 533 Pa. at 300-301, 621 A.2d at 993.
What distinguishes the recidivist statute in this case from those in Dickerson, Beatty, and Eyster, however, is the legislature’s inclusion-of one simple phrase: “[I]f, at the time of sentencing, the defendant has committed another drug trafficking offense ...” 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7508(a)(3)®. This language could not make it more clear that the relevant “look back” period begins at the time of sentencing. Moreover, if we were to adopt Plass’s construction of the term “previous conviction” by including the condition that it occur previous in time to the second offense, we would render superfluous the phrase “at the time of sentencing,” as used in the body of the statute. We must, however, construe a statute as to give effect to all of its provisions. 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1921(a).
Also, as we noted above and in the many cases interpreting recidivist statutes, the traditional policy behind recidivist legislation is to “punish more severely those offenders who have persevered in criminal activity despite the theoretically beneficial effects of penal discipline.” Dickerson, supra, 533, Pa. at 299, 621 A.2d at 992 (citing Commonwealth v. Wolfe, 349 Pa.Super. 415, 503 A.2d 435 (1986), appeal dismissed, 517 Pa. *259406, 537 A.2d 1370 (1988)). Neither law nor logic, however, requires the legislature to adopt this rationale for every sentence-enhancing statute. See Commonwealth v. Gonzales, supra (recidivist statute, providing that any person who has committed a firearms offense who has previously been convicted of murder at any time shall be sentenced to life imprisonment, does not require first conviction to precede second offense). Here, the legislature has expressly utilized the date of sentencing as the “look back” date for purposes of determining whether a sentence enhancement is required. We cannot question the plain words of the statute in an effort to enforce the spirit embodied in traditional recidivist legislation. 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1921(b).
We must therefore vacate the judgment of sentence as imposed by the trial court and remand this case for imposition of sentence in accord with the sentence enhancement provided by 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 7508(a)(3)(i).
II.
Plass contends that the enhanced sentencing scheme established by § 7508(a)(3) (i) violates the equal protection clause of the United States Constitution. In explaining this claim, Plass posits a hypothetical in which two offenders commit the same drug trafficking crimes, but because they are sentenced for their crimes in reverse order, they receive different treatment under the statute. This, he claims, violates equal protection because the difference in result is not rationally related to the purpose of the statute. We find this argument disingenuous.
The classification established by the statute singles out drug offenders who have been convicted of a previous drug offense at the time of sentencing on the principal offense. This class is neither “suspect” — it has not been traditionally oppressed or discriminated against — nor is the classification designed to deprive the class of any fundamental right. Commonwealth v. Eicher, 413 Pa.Super. 235, 605 A.2d 337 (1992), alloc. denied, 533 Pa. 598, 617 A.2d 1272 (1992); see Common *260wealth v. Wildermuth, 347 Pa.Super. 640, 501 A.2d 258 (1985) (mandatory sentencing law which classifies offender based on relative ages of victims not a suspect class). The classification will therefore survive equal protection scrutiny so long as it is not arbitrary and “rests upon some ground of difference having a fair and substantial relation to the object of the legislation so that all persons in similar circumstances shall be treated alike.” Commonwealth v. Chmiel, 416 Pa.Super. 235, 242, 610 A.2d 1058, 1061 (1992), alloc. denied, 535 Pa. 613, 629 A.2d 1376 (1993) (quoting Moyer v. Phillips, 462 Pa. 395, 400-401, 341 A.2d 441, 443 (1975)).
Here, there is no question that § 7508, which provides tougher sentences for convicted drug offenders, is designed “to alleviate the ravages of drug trafficking and drug abuse in our society by subjecting convicted drug dealers to greater periods of confinement.” Eicher, supra, 413 Pa.Super. at 266, 605 A.2d at 352. In Eicher, we rejected an equal protection challenge to § 7508 in the context of classifying an offender based on the weight of drugs involved in the offense. Id. Here, the claim is somewhat different, that is, Plass contends by establishing a “look back” period which focuses on the date of sentencing, the legislature inadvertently allowed for a defendant’s sentence to be determined not only by the severity of his crime, but also by administrative delay. He contends that prosecutors will abuse the “look back” period by delaying sentencing if an offender is near conviction on another drug offense.
We reject this argument. First, the legislature’s goal, imposing harsher sentences for repeat offenders, is clearly served by establishing a scheme which takes any previous offenses, whenever they occur, into account. Moreover, merely because § 7508 does not fit the traditional recidivist scheme as explained by our Supreme Court in Dickerson, supra, does not render it unconstitutional. Quite simply, the legislature has determined that deterrence and outright incapacitation of repeat offenders will better serve the societal interest in “alleviating] the ravages of drug trafficking” than does the traditional rehabilitative purpose of other recidivist legislation. *261The date of conviction for the first offense, under this view, is insignificant. Thus, § 7508 is reasonably designed to effectuate the purpose it seeks to achieve.
Second, we are unpersuaded that potential disparate treatment caused by administrative delay renders the statute unconstitutional. We have stated:
[I]t is impossible to provide a sentencing code which covers every possible contingency that may arise in sentencing. It is better for consistency and uniformity of interpretation to be applied across the board for the vast majority of cases while a few defendants in infrequent cases receive a benefit, than to create a cumbersome, confusing and error prone system which breeds continued litigation.
Eyster, supra, 401 Pa.Super. at 488, 585 A.2d at 1033. Here the enhanced sentencing provisions of § 7508 are easy to administer, and treat alike all defendants who at the time of sentencing have been convicted of a previous drug offense. The statute could not be more clear in intent or application; it is designed to incapacitate the drug offenders who infect our Commonwealth’s communities. If, in an isolated case, the Commonwealth’s conduct has caused imposition of an unfairly harsh sentence, the defendant may seek appropriate remedies by alleging and proving, among other things, prosecutorial misconduct.
The judgment of sentence is vacated. Case remanded to the trial court for imposition of sentence in accordance with this opinion. Jurisdiction relinquished.
CIRILLO, J., concurs and dissents.
KELLY, J., dissents, in which JOHNSON, J., joins.
. For a clearer picture of the chronology of events, they may be chronicled as follows:
(1) April 4, 1991 — first offense committed
(2) June 13, 1991 — The second offense committed
(3) December 12, 1991 — first conviction and sentencing
(4) May 28, 1992 — second conviction and sentencing.

=== CASE 2208361 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:29.321459+00 ===

406 Mass. 552 (1990)
548 N.E.2d 1255
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
ARTHUR A. BEMBURY.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
October 3, 1989.
January 25, 1990.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, NOLAN, LYNCH, & GREANEY, JJ.
Charles W. Rankin for the defendant.
Laura Callahan Burnham, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
GREANEY, J.
On June 29, 1971, a jury in the Superior Court convicted the defendant of the murder in the second degree of Louise Simmons (on an indictment which charged *553 him with murder in the first degree), and unlawfully carrying a firearm. The defendant filed a timely appeal from both convictions. A subsequent motion for a new trial was heard and denied. The order denying the motion for a new trial has not been appealed.
Represented by new counsel on appeal,[1] the defendant argues that a new trial is necessary because the judge erred in (1) refusing to allow his trial counsel to suggest bias on the part of Faye Simmons, the principal witness against him, by disclosing her juvenile record to the jury; (2) permitting his impeachment by prior criminal convictions; and (3) improperly instructing the jury on malice and reasonable doubt. As the offense resulting in the defendant's conviction of murder in the second degree occurred before July 1, 1979, review under G.L.c. 278, § 33E, is appropriate. See Commonwealth v. Davis, 380 Mass. 1, 16 (1980). We find no basis to order a new trial and no occasion to grant relief under G.L.c. 278, § 33E. Accordingly, we affirm the defendant's convictions.
We recount the principal evidence presented by the prosecution and the defense.
1. The Commonwealth's case. In February, 1970, Faye Simmons (Faye) was fourteen years old, and was living with her father, Alexander Simmons, and the victim, her mother, Louise Simmons, at 37 Schuyler Street in the Roxbury section of Boston. Faye and the defendant, nicknamed "Keetie," had been boy friend and girl friend for about six months. *554 Her mother did not approve of Faye's keeping company with the defendant.
On Sunday, February 8, 1970, the day before Louise Simmons was murdered, the defendant visited Faye at 37 Schuyler Street. The defendant and Faye discussed breaking off their relationship but agreed to talk again. Their conversation concluded with Faye stating that she would call the defendant the next day, February 9. On February 8, Faye advised her parents that she would not be seeing the defendant again.
Faye did not call the defendant on February 9. This led to the defendant's calling and asking her to meet him at 6 P.M. at a cafe near her home. At first, Faye refused to meet the defendant, but she eventually agreed to see him just to get him off the telephone. She did not meet the defendant, nor did she talk with him again that day. Instead, she remained at home with her parents. Faye's father left for work about 3:40 P.M. When he left, Mrs. Simmons was "in good condition."
At about 5:45 or 6 P.M., the defendant called and Faye's mother answered the telephone. Five to ten minutes later, Faye heard the front doorbell ring. Faye was standing by the kitchen near the back of the house because she was planning to leave by the back door. When the doorbell rang, she went to the hall. From her position, Faye could not see the front door. Faye heard a door open and then heard her mother say, "It's Keetie." She recognized the defendant's voice, asking to speak with Faye. Faye's mother said that Faye did not want to see the defendant. The defendant then said, "Well, I want to see her." Mrs. Simmons said, "Well, she doesn't want to see you."
Faye could not understand the conversation that followed. She heard some movement, "like a stumble," coming from the porch. Faye's mother said, "Well, you just shoot then!" Faye heard a shot, and her mother calling her name. Faye immediately heard another shot. Her mother again called "Faye."
*555 Faye went for help to a neighbor, who called the police. Officer Vincent D. Kelley of the Boston police department and his partner responded to Schuyler Street. There, Officer Kelley saw a man running into an alley. This man was stopped by Kelley, who approached him with his service revolver drawn.
Officer Kelley told the man, the defendant in this case, to stay where he was. The defendant had his hands in his pockets, and he was told by Kelley to put his hands in the air. The defendant raised his hands but then put them back into his pockets and appeared to fumble for something. The officer cocked his revolver and yelled for the defendant to put his hands back up in the air. The defendant did so.
Officer Kelley searched the defendant. He found a .22 caliber revolver in the defendant's pocket. The defendant was placed under arrest. The defendant said, "There was a shooting up the street." When the officer asked, "Where?," the defendant answered, "In the street, in the gutter." The defendant gave no address to identify the place of the shooting.
Officer Kelley handcuffed the defendant's left hand to his right hand. He then opened the defendant's revolver and took out five live rounds and two spent shells. The officer was eventually directed to 37 Schuyler Street, where he found Mrs. Simmons seriously wounded.
While he was still at 37 Schuyler Street with the defendant, Officer Kelley went into the kitchen. Faye was there; she grabbed a kitchen knife and went after the defendant. Kelley pulled out his night stick and knocked the knife from Faye's hand. Faye asked the defendant why he did it. The defendant said, "But I love you." She then went up to the defendant and put her arms around him, and said, "Sorry it had to end this way."
Mrs. Simmons died of gunshot wounds later than night. A ballistics test confirmed that two bullets found in Mrs. Simmons' body had been fired from the revolver taken from the defendant.
2. The defendant's case. The defendant testified in his own defense. He recounted his relationship with Faye, who he *556 thought was eighteen or nineteen years old. The defendant testified that on Sunday, February 8, he went to Faye's house and informed Faye that he was not coming back again. She asked him why and he did not give a reason.
On February 9, the defendant and Faye spoke again by telephone about the termination of their relationship. He eventually went to 37 Schuyler to talk with her about the problem.
The defendant went to 37 Schuyler Street and rang the doorbell. No one answered. He testified that the door was closed, but not locked. He rang the doorbell again. According to the defendant, he placed his hand on the door and found it open. The defendant went inside and saw Mrs. Simmons lying across the vestibule. He testified that he called, "Mrs. Simmons," twice, but that she did not respond. He then called, "Faye, Faye." He testified that he knew Mrs. Simmons had been hurt, but he did not know that she had been shot. The defendant saw a revolver lying on the floor about three feet from the body. He picked the revolver up, because he was scared, left the house, and ran down the street.
According to the defendant, he was apprehended shortly thereafter by Officer Kelley. The defendant told Kelley that a woman had been hurt and directed Kelley to 37 Schuyler Street. The defendant and Officer Kelley entered the Simmonses' house, walked past where Mrs. Simmons was lying, and went into the kitchen.
The defendant indicated that Faye came into the kitchen through the back door. According to the defendant, Faye said, "Where is my mother?" She went to the front of the house, came back, and grabbed a kitchen knife. Faye tried to attack the defendant, but Officer Kelley disarmed her. Faye ran over to the defendant and threw her arms around him and said that she loved him. One of the police officers asked Faye if she had seen the defendant commit the crime. Faye said that she had not because she had been next door.
3. Refusal of impeachment: Faye Simmons. Defense counsel filed a pretrial motion to inspect Faye's juvenile record *557 with a view toward using the record to demonstrate bias on her part. The motion was denied, and counsel, as was the practice in 1971, took an exception. When Faye had completed her testimony, defense counsel again moved for access to her juvenile record. The motion was again denied. We now have that record before us. We also have a copy of the transcribed statement given by Faye to the police on the night of the murder and a transcript of her testimony before the grand jury.[2] The defendant argues that the judge's denial of access to Faye's juvenile record deprived him of the opportunity to cross-examine her on possible bias resulting in a violation of his constitutional right to confront the principal witness against him.
The judge's ruling expressed the view, prevalent at the time of the trial, that a juvenile record was strictly confidential and, therefore, could not be introduced in evidence. Davis v. Alaska, 415 U.S. 308 (1974), decided three years after the defendant's trial, changed that view. The Davis decision held that, if information contained in a juvenile record indicated that the witness's testimony may be the product of official pressure or inducement, a claim that the record was confidential cannot prevail over the defendant's right to use the record to impeach the witness for bias. See Commonwealth v. Ferrara, 368 Mass. 182, 189-190 (1975). The defendant relies on the Davis and Ferrara decisions in making his argument. There is some irony in the fact that the defendant, by escaping and eluding detection for fifteen years, has gained *558 the advantage of arguing that a change in the law requires a new trial. Nevertheless, the defendant is entitled to consideration of the issue because his experienced trial counsel carefully preserved the issue for appellate review and because the defendant's direct appeal has remained pending. See note 1, supra; Griffith v. Kentucky, 479 U.S. 314, 328 (1987).[3]
The Davis and Ferrara decisions fashioned a general rule on the use of a juvenile record to show bias, but they did not provide a defendant an absolute right to impeach a witness by proof of past delinquencies. See Davis v. Alaska, supra at 321 (Stewart, J., concurring); Commonwealth v. Ferrara, supra at 186-187; Commonwealth v. Santos, 376 Mass. 920, 924 (1978). When the issue arises, the principal inquiry is whether the witness's juvenile record has a rational tendency to show bias on his or her part. Commonwealth v. Ferrara, supra at 187. If the record has no such tendency, it is not error to exclude it.
In deciding the issue several considerations may apply. First, does the record disclose the commission of "relatively serious delinquencies?" Commonwealth v. Ferrara, supra at 189. Second, are those delinquencies recent enough to support an inference of bias? Commonwealth v. DiRoma, 5 Mass. App. Ct. 853, 853-854 (1977). Third, what do the facts show with respect to the probationary status of the witness, whether some suspicion focused on the witness, and the witness's motives to please the prosecution? Commonwealth v. Santos, 376 Mass. 920, 924 (1978). Fourth, did the witness prior to the delinquency furnish a pretrial statement or testimony consistent in material respects with his or her testimony at trial? Commonwealth v. Haywood, 377 Mass. 755, *559 761-763 (1979). These considerations do not constitute an exhaustive list because, in the given case, other factors may also be relevant, such as the extent it was brought out to the jury that the witness may have had a dislike for the defendant and a motive to testify against him.
Faye's record in the Boston Juvenile Court discloses that she was twice adjudicated a delinquent child by reason of being a runaway (these adjudications were made on April 9, 1968, and on November 21, 1969). On September 1, 1970, she was adjudicated delinquent by reason of unarmed robbery, for which she was given a suspended sentence and assigned to the Youth Service Board and placed on probation until June 6, 1972. On May 21, 1971, she was found in violation of this probation. No final disposition of the probation violation appears on her record.
Faye's two incidents as a runaway child did not involve serious delinquencies and both cases were dismissed before the homicide occurred. These two adjudications would have had no logical tendency to show bias on Faye's part, and the defendant was not entitled to use them for that purpose.
Faye's adjudication as a delinquent by reason of her commission of an unarmed robbery did involve a serious offense which was committed seven months after the murder of her mother. Faye was also in violation of her probation for this offense when she testified at the trial. The value of this delinquency as possible evidence of bias has to be considered in light of Faye's statements about the crime that were given before the unarmed robbery. At 9:30 P.M. on February 9, 1970, the night of the murder, Faye gave a transcribed statement to a Boston police lieutenant in which she explained in detail her knowledge of the murder. On April 10, 1970, Faye testified before a grand jury and repeated to the jurors her knowledge of the incident. Both Faye's initial statement to the police, and her testimony before the grand jury, were given before she committed the unarmed robbery. In each of these pretrial accounts Faye identified the defendant as the person who came to the house and shot her mother. Further, Faye's testimony at the trial, with respect to the account of *560 the shooting, was detailed and consistent with the account of the shooting given in her initial statement to the police and in her grand jury testimony. The fact that Faye's trial testimony was the same in material respects pertaining to the shooting as her pretrial statement and grand jury testimony (both of which were furnished at a time when she lacked any motive to please the prosecution) satisfies us that the requested impeachment should not have been allowed.[4] See Commonwealth v. Haywood, supra at 761-763.
We add other considerations that are important. No contention was made at trial that Faye murdered her mother. Thus, at no time did suspicion focus on Faye. Further, through cross-examination defense counsel brought out that she had dislike for the defendant and motive to testify against him. Finally, the Commonwealth's case against the defendant was quite strong. Although that case depended on Faye's testimony, it was substantially strengthened by the defendant's possession of the murder weapon, his incriminating conduct after he left the scene of the crime, the over-all implausibility of his testimony, the lack of any other suspect, *561 and the testimony of other witnesses about his and Faye's behavior after the murder. We conclude that the defendant would not have been entitled to use Faye's juvenile record.
4. Impeachment of the defendant. Defense counsel objected to the defendant's impeachment by evidence of three prior convictions: two 1968 convictions, one of carrying a dangerous weapon (knife), and the other of the unauthorized use of a motor vehicle, and a 1969 conviction of unlawfully carrying an unloaded pistol. Acting on the basis of the law as it stood in 1971, the judge overruled the objection and allowed the impeachment. See Commonwealth v. West, 357 Mass. 245, 249 (1970) (stating that the word "may" in G.L.c. 233, § 21, "does not clothe the judge with discretion to receive or exclude this sort of evidence" when proffered by the cross-examining lawyer).
Since the date of the trial, decisions have modified the prior rule to hold that, notwithstanding the wording of G.L.c. 233, § 21, a judge has discretion to exclude a defendant's prior convictions if the possible prejudice that might arise from them exceeds their probative value. See Commonwealth v. Knight, 392 Mass. 192, 194 (1984); Commonwealth v. Chase, 372 Mass. 736 (1977). See also Commonwealth v. Ruiz, 400 Mass. 214, 215 (1987). The judge's decision to admit evidence of prior convictions will be reviewable on appeal. See Commonwealth v. Maguire, 392 Mass. 466, 470 (1984). Based on these decisions, the defendant now argues that permitting his impeachment by criminal convictions was reversible error.
We will assume, because of the objection made by defense counsel and the pendency of the defendant's appeal during these many years, that the defendant may raise the issue of his impeachment. We find no error in it.
The unauthorized use conviction bore no similarity to either charge on which the defendant was being tried. There was little chance that the jury might misuse that conviction. The 1969 conviction of unlawfully carrying a pistol was relevant to the defendant's testimony. On his direct examination, the defendant testified that he had last carried a handgun in *562 1968. The 1969 carrying conviction directly contradicted this testimony and suggested its falsity. Thus, the prosecutor was independently entitled to put the conviction in evidence to rebut the incorrect impression created by the defendant's testimony. The defendant's 1968 conviction of unlawfully carrying a knife was not similar to the crime charged of unlawfully carrying a firearm. The conviction was properly admitted.
Considering the impeachment in light of the judge's careful instructions to the jury on the use of the evidence only for the purpose of assessing the defendant's credibility, we perceive no error.
5. Jury instructions: malice. The defendant argues that the judge's instructions to the jury on the issue of malice aforethought created an improper mandatory presumption of malice, thereby abridging his right to due process. See Commonwealth v. Callahan, 380 Mass. 821, 823 (1980). In support of this contention, the defendant points to at least five instances where the judge used some form of the word "presumption" in his instructions on malice.
It has been established since the decisions in Mullaney v. Wilbur, 421 U.S. 684, 704 (1975), and Sandstrom v. Montana, 442 U.S. 510, 524 (1979), that the statement in jury instructions of any presumption  whether conclusive or rebuttable  that has the effect of shifting to the defendant the burden of proof of an essential element of a crime for which he is being tried violates a defendant's right to due process. The Mullaney and Sandstrom decisions are fully retroactive, see Hankerson v. North Carolina, 432 U.S. 233, 240 (1977), and the issue is available to a defendant whose defense counsel did not object to the questioned instructions. See Commonwealth v. Stokes, 374 Mass. 583, 588 (1978). However, it is also established that any error in the use of presumption language in jury instructions may be found harmless beyond a reasonable doubt if the commission of the crime is an issue which is not contested at the trial. See Commonwealth v. Lee, 383 Mass. 507, 512 (1981).
*563 The latter principle governs this case. The fact that Louise Simmons was murdered was not disputed at trial. The sole issue raised by the defendant was the identity of the murderer. In the circumstances, we need not decide whether the judge's instructions on malice were flawed because the element of malice was not an active issue at the trial. See Commonwealth v. Pisa, 384 Mass. 362, 363 (1981).
6. Jury instructions: reasonable doubt. The defendant claims that the judge improperly instructed the jury on reasonable doubt and thus denied him due process. The defendant made a timely objection at trial. Specifically, the defendant points to the following language as constituting error: "If an unreasonable doubt or a mere possibility of innocence were sufficient to prevent a conviction, practically every criminal would be set free to prey upon the community. Such a rule would be wholly impractical and would break down the forces of law and order and make the lawless supreme." See Commonwealth v. Madeiros, 255 Mass. 304, 307 (1926).
We have said that a charge of this character, standing alone, is deficient because it warns of the consequences of holding the prosecution to too high a standard of proof without a counter-balancing warning of the harm to the defendant in holding the Commonwealth to too low a standard. Commonwealth v. Spann, 383 Mass. 142, 150 (1981). Without condoning these aspects of a Madeiros-type charge, we have upheld instructions containing similar language in several decisions. See Commonwealth v. Tavares, 385 Mass. 140, cert. denied, 457 U.S. 1137 (1982); Commonwealth v. Spann, 383 Mass. 142 (1981); Commonwealth v. Williams, 378 Mass. 217 (1979); Commonwealth v. Seay, 376 Mass. 735 (1978). "It becomes a matter of reversible error [only] if the charge as a whole does not present the matter of proof beyond a reasonable doubt in a balanced way" (emphasis added). Commonwealth v. Spann, supra at 150.
The judge instructed the jury in an acceptable manner that the defendant was presumed to be innocent of the charges against him and that proof beyond a reasonable *564 doubt required proof to a moral certainty. See Commonwealth v. Spann, supra at 150-151; Commonwealth v. Seay, supra at 746. The judge's warning of the consequences of holding the Commonwealth to too strict a standard of proof was balanced by the statement that, "unless the evidence establishes facts which rest upon a more solid foundation than suspicion, guess work, speculation, conjecture, or even probability, the presumption of innocence must prevail." See Commonwealth v. Sheline, 391 Mass. 279, 296 (1984). Four times the judge expressly invoked the defendant's presumption of innocence, and on at least three occasions he mentioned the Commonwealth's burden of establishing the defendant's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. "The judge's definition of reasonable doubt in terms of moral certainty, his repeated admonitions that the Commonwealth bore the burden of proving the defendant's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, and his emphasis on the presumption of innocence which cloaked the defendant also helped to mitigate any negative effect of the judge's one-sided warning." Commonwealth v. Sheline, supra at 296-297. See Commonwealth v. Tavares, supra at 148; Commonwealth v. Seay, supra at 746; Commonwealth v. Williams, supra at 235. Because the charge taken as a whole presented the matter of proof beyond a reasonable doubt in a balanced way, we find no reversible error.
7. Review under G.L.c. 278, § 33E. Beyond noting the fact that the defendant's conviction is subject to review under G.L.c. 278, § 33E, see Commonwealth v. Davis, 380 Mass. 1, 16 (1980), the defendant makes no argument in his brief to support a conclusion that the entry of a verdict of a lesser degree of guilt is warranted. Nevertheless, we have reviewed the entire record and conclude that the jury's verdict of murder in the second degree is strongly supported by the evidence and is consonant with justice.
Judgments affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Consideration of the defendant's appeal in this court was delayed when he escaped in 1974, while on a furlough from the Massachusetts Correctional Institution, Norfolk. The defendant fled to California where he lived under an assumed name for the next fourteen years, eventually being apprehended and returned to Massachusetts. The Commonwealth made no motion in the interim to dismiss the appeal because of the defendant's escape. As a result, there is no occasion to consider the criteria for reinstating a criminal appeal which has been dismissed as the result of the defendant's having become a fugitive. See Commonwealth v. Hurley, 391 Mass. 76, 78-80 (1984). See also Commonwealth v. Cook, 380 Mass. 314, 316 (1980). The Commonwealth does not argue otherwise.
[2]  A single justice allowed the defendant's motion to expand the record to include Faye's juvenile record in a supplemental appendix. The Commonwealth subsequently moved to expand the record further to include Faye's transcribed statement to the police on the night of the incident and her grand jury testimony. The defendant objects to the Commonwealth's motion to expand the record. We have considered the defendant's arguments and allow the Commonwealth's motion. Fairness requires that the Commonwealth be allowed to contradict the defendant's argument based on an appellate record which he has been allowed to expand. We consider the district attorney's representations as to the authenticity of Faye's statement to the police and her grand jury testimony as sufficient to establish the reliability of these materials when considered with various indicia of authenticity contained in the materials themselves.
[3]  Griffith, supra at 328, holds that "a new rule for the conduct of criminal prosecutions is to be applied retroactively to all cases, state or federal, pending on direct review or not yet final, with no exception for cases in which the new rule constitutes a `clean break' with the past." We indicated in Commonwealth v. Waters, 400 Mass. 1006 (1987), that Griffith applies to all Federal constitutional claims, but not to State law claims. Since Davis expresses a Federal constitutional right, it would apply under Griffith to the defendant's direct appeal.
[4]  There were some inconsistencies between Faye's grand jury and trial testimony. One difference concerned which one of the two had initiated the break-off of the relationship. This point is relatively minor. There is also some disagreement over what was said by Faye to the defendant in the kitchen after the defendant's apprehension. The jury were given both versions of the meeting. Further, defense counsel brought out in cross-examination that Faye, in her prior testimony in the Roxbury District Court, had not mentioned anything said to her by the defendant in the kitchen. In view of this and the fact that Faye's account of the shooting was consistent, coherent, detailed, and extensive from her initial telling of it to the police through her trial testimony, we do not consider the discrepancy legally significant. Other inconsistencies, pointed to by the defendant, are inconsequential.
The defendant also argues that the lack of a final disposition on Faye's record on the unarmed robbery adjudication supports an inference that the authorities had given her favorable treatment. This inference has no basis in the record. For all we know, the violation of probation may have been left unresolved because the probation department of the Boston Juvenile Court decided not to press it in view of the murder or because Faye's behavior had improved to the point where further proceedings on the violation were considered unnecessary. Drawing inferences, one way or the other, from a bare record is not helpful.

=== CASE 9737006 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:12:40.962417+00 ===

JUSTICE DUNN delivered the opinion of the court: On June 20, 1988, plaintiff, William Baudin, filed an information request with defendant, City of Crystal Lake (City), regarding the policies and procedures of the Crystal Lake police department in the handling of information and the follow-up of a hit-and-run accident. Defendant denied plaintiff’s request, claiming that the information was exempt from disclosure under Illinois law. After plaintiff unsuccessfully appealed to the City, he then sought disclosure pursuant to the Illinois Freedom of Information Act (Information Act or Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 116, par. 201 et seq.) by filing a complaint for a declaratory judgment and injunctive relief on July 21, 1988. Plaintiff specifically sought a de novo review and an in camera inspection of the disputed material to determine what must be disclosed to him under the Act. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 116, par. 211(e). On February 8, 1989, the trial court, after hearing the arguments of counsel, denied plaintiff’s request for an in camera inspection and granted defendant’s motion for summary judgment. Plaintiff, an attorney acting pro se, appeals, contending that it was error for the trial court to refuse to inspect the materials in camera and to grant summary judgment to defendant because the trial court could not have made an independent, de novo determination of discloseable matter based only on the conclusory affidavits of defendant. We agree that the affidavits are merely conclusory and that the trial court had an inadequate factual basis for granting summary judgment for defendant. We reverse the judgment of the circuit court and remand the cause with instructions. Plaintiff originally sought information concerning the policies and procedures of the police department with respect to: (a) handling and receiving information from telephone callers regarding automobile accidents (hit-and-run); (b) receiving information in person concerning an accident; (c) follow-up on information received concerning automobile accidents; and (d) investigation guidelines with respect to automobile accidents, including hit-and-run accidents. Plaintiff also sought excerpts of radio tapes of the City’s police department for June 17, 1988, for the period between 8 p.m. and 8:30 p.m., and for June 18, 1988, from 9:15 a.m. to 9:45 a.m. In response to plaintiff’s request, defendant, through its freedom of information officer, Martin K. Vanags, sent a letter to plaintiff on June 23, 1988, denying plaintiff’s request and claiming that items (a) through (d) were exempt from disclosure under section 7(w) of the Information Act, which exempts information “related solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of a public body.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 116, par. 207(w).) Vanags’ letter also stated that the radio tapes were exempt from disclosure under section 7(e) of the Act, which exempts records of “State and local law enforcement agencies and correctional agencies that are related to the detection and investigation of crime.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 116, par. 207(e).) Plaintiff appealed the decision to the city manager, Joseph Misurelli, as head of the public body. Misurelli affirmed the decision to deny disclosure, stating the same reasons for the denial. Plaintiff sought review in the circuit court. On July 28, 1988, the circuit court entered an agreed order which denied plaintiff’s request for injunctive relief concerning preservation of the tape excerpts, based on the representation and assurance by the City that the tape excerpts and the policies and procedures would be preserved during the pendency of the court proceedings and that they were to be tendered to the court for an in camera inspection as the court or plaintiff requested and as “otherwise provided by law.” On August 18, 1988, the City filed its answer and sought dismissal of plaintiff’s action. On August 30, 1988, Baudin filed a motion to compel the City to produce the disputed materials for purposes of an in camera inspection by the trial court. On September 12, 1988, the City filed a motion for summary judgment. Plaintiff filed his motion to strike the City’s motion for summary judgment as well as the supporting affidavits which plaintiff claimed were conclusory; in the alternative, plaintiff moved to deny the defendant’s motion for summary judgment. The hearing to address these motions was periodically continued, and, on January 13, 1989, an order was entered setting the cause for further arguments on plaintiff’s motion to compel, defendant’s motion for summary judgment, and plaintiff’s motion to strike defendant’s affidavits and motion for summary judgment. Ultimately, the circuit court denied plaintiff’s request for an in camera inspection and granted defendant’s motion for summary judgment. The central issue to be determined is whether the procedures utilized by the circuit court were sufficient to provide plaintiff an adequate due novo determination of whether the requested information was discloseable under the Act; as a corollary, it must be determined whether the City met its burden of showing that the materials requested were exempted under the Act.  The purpose of the Information Act is to open governmental records to the light of public scrutiny. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 116, par. 201.) In order to foster governmental accountability and an informed citizenry, the public policy of this State encourages a free flow and disclosure of information between the government and the people; the Information Act is to be liberally construed to achieve this goal, and there is a presumption that public records are open and accessible, subject only to exemptions that are to be read narrowly. Bowie v. Evanston Community Consolidated School District No. 65 (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 373, 378, 538 N.E.2d 557.  The restraints on access to information are to be regarded as limited exceptions to the general rule that the people have a right to know the decisions, policies, procedures, rules, standards, and other aspects of governmental activity that affect the conduct of government and the lives of people. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 116, par. 201.) If any public record is exempt from disclosure under section 7 of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 116, par. 207) and it contains material which is not exempt, the public body shall delete the exempted material and make the remaining information available for inspection and copying. Ill. Rev. Stat., 1988 Supp., ch. 116, par. 208.  Under the Information Act, the burden of proof is on the City to establish that the material in question is exempt from disclosure; however, governmental agencies cannot clothe material regarding the affairs of government with an exemption from public disclosure by ipse dixit statements that the material is exempt. (Hoffman v. Department of Corrections (1987), 158 Ill. App. 3d 473, 475-76, 511 N.E.2d 759.) Reliance upon self-determination by public officials and employees as to what should or should not be disclosed to the public would frustrate the purposes of the Information Act. 158 Ill. App. 3d at 476.  Section 11(f) of the Act requires the circuit court to consider the matter de novo and requires the court to conduct whatever in camera inspection of the requested records it finds appropriate to determine whether the records or any part of them may be withheld under the Act. (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1988 Supp., ch. 116, par. 211(f).) Whether the material is exempt under the Act is necessarily a factual determination to be made by the court based on its examination of the affidavits and, if required, based on an examination of the documents themselves in camera. Hoffman, 158 Ill. App. 3d at 476-77.  In determining whether matter is exempt under the Act, a case-by-case approach is clearly warranted. (See City of Monmouth v. Galesburg Printing & Publishing Co. (1986), 144 Ill. App. 3d 224, 228, 494 N.E.2d 896; Reinstein v. Police Commissioner (1979), 378 Mass. 281, 290-91, 391 N.E.2d 881, 886.) An agency such as a police department cannot simply take the position that, since it is involved in investigatory work and some of its records are exempt from disclosure under the Act, every document in its possession somehow comes to share in that exemption. (See Bougas v. Chief of Police (1976), 371 Mass. 59, 66, 354 N.E.2d 872, 878.) The classification of information as “law enforcement” or “investigatory” does not necessarily foreclose access unless it can be shown, in a particular case, that disclosure would interfere with law enforcement and would, therefore, not be in the public interest. (McClain v. College Hospital (1985), 99 N.J. 346, 355-57, 492 A.2d 991, 996.) Routine review of governmental functions is not sheltered, but when the inquiry departs from the routine and focuses with special intensity upon a particular party, an investigation is under way. 99 N.J. at 355-57, 492 A.2d at 996. Based on its particular facts, this case is one of first impression in this court. There is a paucity of Illinois case law dealing "with the exemptions claimed by the City in the present case. We shall attempt to fill this void. Where necessary, we have considered persuasive decisions from other jurisdictions; in particular, we have considered decisions of the Federal courts, where the Illinois Act closely parallels Federal law. Griffith Laboratories U.S.A. v. Metropolitan Sanitary District (1988), 168 Ill. App. 3d 341, 345, 522 N.E.2d 744.  Plaintiff contends that the City failed to meet its burden of showing that it was entitled to the exemptions based on the City’s conclusory affidavits; plaintiff argues that, in the absence of an in camera inspection of the requested materials, the court could not have made an informed decision to grant summary judgment to the City. Summary judgment should be granted only when the pleadings, depositions, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue of material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2—1005(c).) The trial court is to construe the record before it strictly against the movant. (Gagliardo v. Vodica (1978), 58 Ill. App. 3d 1053, 1055, 374 N.E.2d 1302.) Summary judgment is a drastic remedy and, as such, must be granted only when the movant’s right to judgment as a matter of law is clear and free from doubt. Purtill v. Hess (1986), 111 Ill. 2d 229, 240, 489 N.E.2d 867; Allstate Insurance Co. v. Tucker (1989), 178 Ill. App. 3d 809, 812, 533 N.E.2d 1004. The City’s motion for summary judgment alleged that the information requested by plaintiff (items (a) through (d)) was exempt from disclosure under section 7(e) of the Act because the information concerns records of “State and local law enforcement agencies that are related to the detection and investigation of crime or the security and operations of correctional institutions.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 116, par. 207(e).) Alternatively, the City’s affidavits allege that the information requested was exempt from disclosure because it concerns matter “related solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of a public body.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 116, par. 207(w).) In support of its motion, the City appended the affidavit of Martin K. Yanags. He stated that plaintiff’s request for information (items (a) through (d)) related entirely to the “internal investigative rules and practices of the Crystal Lake Police Department regarding automobile accidents,” because the information “specifically” concerned “the proper use of complaint memo forms and reporting procedures, the procedures for communications and record department personnel, and the proper procedure for preparing departmental reports subsequent to investigations by police personnel.” The radio tapes (item (e)) were characterized as containing “the verbal reports of alleged criminal activity that is or has occurred in the City of Crystal Lake and are used for investigative purposes by the Police Department.” The affidavit of Joseph Misurelli, who affirmed Yanags’ decision to deny disclosure, was essentially a reiteration of Yanags’ affidavit.  We find from our examination of the City’s affidavits that they were entirely conclusory and merely recite or paraphrase the language of the statute without giving any clue as to the discloseability of the requested documents. As such, they provided an insufficient factual basis to permit the trial court to grant summary judgment to the City, particularly in the absence of an in camera inspection of the disputed material. The burden is on the governmental agency to prove that specific documents fit within one of the statutory exemptions. To meet this burden and to assist the court in making its determination, the agency must provide a detailed justification for its claim of exemption, addressing the requested documents specifically and in a manner allowing for adequate adversary testing. Antonelli v. Drug Enforcement Administration (7th Cir. 1984), 739 F.2d 302, 303, citing Vaughn v. Rosen (D.C. Cir. 1973), 484 F.2d 820, 826-28 (Vaughn I).  As the Vaughn court explained, it is obvious that the party with the greatest interest in obtaining disclosure is at a loss to argue with desirable legal precision for the revelation of the concealed information. (484 F.2d at 823.) Therefore, aside from legal argument,, where the sole support regarding the contents of documents and their exemption is contained in a conclusory affidavit, courts must no longer accept such conclusory or generalized allegations of exemption and must require a relatively detailed analysis of the documents in manageable segments. Vaughn, 484 F.2d at 823, 826. When an agency meets its burden by means of affidavits, in camera review is not necessary. (Hayden v. National Security Agency (D.C. Cir. 1979), 608 F.2d 1381, 1387.) However, the affidavits will not suffice if the agency’s claims are conclusory, merely reciting statutory standards, or if they are too vague or sweeping. 608 F.2d at 1387. We observe that, in the present case, one of the exemptions claimed by defendant was embodied in a statutory provision which has been amended during the pendency of this case in the trial court, a fact apparently unnoticed by the parties. (Pub. Act 85 — 1357, eff. Jan. 1, 1989 (amending Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 116, par. 207(e)).) The case must be disposed of by the reviewing court under the law as it exists at the time its decision is rendered. To the extent that defendant claims an exemption under section 7(e) regarding the “investigation and detection of crime,” defendant’s claim is mooted by the deletion of that language that formerly applied to law enforcement agencies, and that aspect of the former statutory provision is no longer at issue. (See People v. B.D.A. (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 229, 233, 464 N.E.2d 1073, 1075.) If the City is to sustain its burden of showing that it is entitled to an exemption because the material pertains specifically to the detection and investigation of crime, it must undoubtedly do so under one of the specific provisions of section 7(c) of the amended Act (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1988 Supp., ch. 116, par. 207(c)). On remand defendant will have to demonstrate what, if any, provision in that section is applicable. We decline to assume the role of advocate for the government on appeal, and we will act only on the record as it presently exists. See People v. Bartlett (1988), 175 Ill. App. 3d 686, 691, 530 N.E.2d 90. Though we have determined that the City’s affidavits were conclusory and that the trial court had an insufficient basis to grant summary judgment for defendant, our inquiry is not yet complete. Because the trial court must hold further proceedings consistent with the views expressed in this opinion, we believe that a recurring question will necessarily arise regarding the standard by which the circuit court is to determine the applicability of the remaining exemption claimed by defendant under section 7(w) of the Act, information related solely to the “internal personnel rules and practices of a public body,” in this case, a law enforcement agency. Defendant contends that the affidavits in support of its motion for summary judgment established that the information requested in items (a) through (d) of plaintiff’s request is related to the internal personnel rules and practices of a public body and that the material involved the detection, investigation, evaluation, and processing of automobile accident complaints filed with the City. Furthermore, defendant argues that the policies and procedures are not written to regulate the public and do not embody any “secret law” of the police department; rather, the withheld information refers to investigative techniques in the form of prescribed rules and practices. Defendant maintains that the documents requested by plaintiff are internal, directional regulations which have no public utility. Defendant’s characterization of the materials as investigative, internal personnel practices is, of course, conclusory. Defendant cites no authority for the proposition that such a characterization, even if valid, automatically confers an absolute exemption on the disclosure. The Illinois exemption for “internal personnel rules and practices” is similar to the Federal Freedom of Information Act provision commonly known as “Exemption 2.” (5 U.S.C.A. §552(b)(2) (West 1977); see Hardy v. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco & Firearms (9th Cir. 1980), 631 F.2d 653, 655.) The Hardy court determined that materials instructing law enforcement agents on how to investigate violations concerned internal personnel practices. 631 F.2d at 656. But see Hawkes v. Internal Revenue Service (6th Cir. 1972), 467 F.2d 787, 796-97 (internal personnel rules and practices refer only to employee-employer relations and working conditions; however, exemption found in other provisions of the Act). In interpreting the coverage of Exemption 2, the Hardy court held: “[L]aw enforcement materials, disclosure of which may risk circumvention of agency regulation, are exempt from disclosure. In so ruling we recognize the distinction between ‘law enforcement’ and ‘administrative’ materials. See, e.g., Hawkes v. Internal Revenue Service, 467 F.2d 787, 794-95 (6th Cir. 1972). ‘Law enforcement’ materials involve methods of enforcing the laws, however interpreted, and ‘administrative’ materials involve the definition of the violation and the procedures required to prosecute the offense. All administrative materials, even if included in staff manuals that otherwise concern law enforcement, must be disclosed unless they come under one of the other exemptions of the act. Such materials contain the ‘secret law’ which was the primary target of the act’s broad disclosure provisions.” 631 F.2d at 657. Finding certain law enforcement materials of the Internal Revenue Service discloseable under section (a)(2)(C) of the Federal Act (5 U.S.C.A. §552(a)(2)(C) (West 1977)), which concerns administrative staff manuals and instructions to staff, the Hawkes court described the law enforcement process and the limits of disclosure in the following terms: “Law enforcement is the process by which a society secures compliance with its duly adopted rules. Enforcement is adversely affected only when information is made available which allows persons simultaneously to violate the law and to avoid detection. Information which merely enables an individual to conform his actions to an agency’s understanding of the law applied by that agency does not impede law enforcement and is not excluded from compulsory disclosure under (a)(2)(C). Far from impeding the goals of law enforcement, in fact, the disclosure of information clarifying an agency’s substantive or procedural law serves the very goals of enforcement by encouraging knowledgeable and voluntary compliance with the law. Such clarifying information is found in agency rulings made public; it is also found in many cases in manuals and instructions like those sought here which are addressed specifically to agency personnel. It may be found in the criteria for investigative action; in standards for evaluation and so forth. Materials providing such information are administrative in character and clearly discloseable ***. The exception for law enforcement materials contained in (a)(2)(C) is, as suggested above, a very narrow one and is to be applied only where the sole effect of disclosure would be to enable law violators to escape detection. Thus, for example, there is reason to exempt from compulsory revelation details of a selective enforcement policy made necessary by a lack of sufficient investigatory personnel. Similarly interrogation techniques or the mechanics of an F.B.I. ‘stakeout’ arrangement properly could be excluded from disclosure ***.” (Emphasis in original.) Hawkes v. Internal Revenue Service, 467 F.2d at 795. In Hawkes, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit announced a variation of the test for excluding law enforcement materials from mandatory disclosure. The court stated that only “information which, if known to the public, would significantly impede the enforcement process” falls within the exemption in section (a)(2)(C). (Emphasis in original.) 467 F.2d at 795. In Crooker v. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco & Firearms (D.C. Cir. 1981), 670 F.2d 1051, a definitive test has been applied to “Exemption 2” regarding personnel rules and practices of an agency. Crooker traced the evolution and development of the law regarding the disclosure of investigatory and law enforcement materials. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit held in Croolcer that certain portions of the Bureau’s agents’ training manual entitled “Surveillance of Premises, Vehicles and Persons — New Agent Training” were exempt from disclosure under the internal personnel rules and practices exemption because they were developed predominantly for internal use and disclosure would significantly risk circumvention of the agency’s regulations or statutes. (670 F.2d at 1075.) In so holding, the court observed that the manual was used for predominantly internal purposes; it was designed to establish rules and practices for agency personnel, i.e., law enforcement investigatory techniques; it involved no “secret law” of the agency; and, it was conceded that public disclosure would risk circumvention of the agency’s regulations. In formulating a two-pronged test of “predominant internality” and disclosure significantly risking circumvention of an agency’s regulations or statutes, the court relied on the Supreme Court’s language in Department of the Air Force v. Rose (1976), 425 U.S. 352, 364, 369-70, 48 L. Ed. 2d 11, 23, 26, 96 S. Ct. 1592, 1600, 1603, as well as on the expression “predominant internality” used by Judge Leventhal in Jordan v. United States Department of Justice (D.C. Cir. 1978), 591 F.2d 753, 783-84 (en banc) (Leventhal, J., concurring). See also Vaughn v. Rosen (D.C. Cir. 1975), 523 F.2d 1136, 1150-51 (Vaughn II) (Leventhal, J., concurring). Judge Leventhal stated: “Exemption 2 is applicable where the document consists of internal instructions to such government officials as investigators and bank examiners. In such a case disclosure would permit circumvention of the law, and there is no substantial, valid external interest of the community at large in revelation. That composite presents a matter that involves solely internal personnel rules and internal practices of an agency for purposes of making Exemption 2 applicable.” Jordan, 591 F.2d at 783 (Leventhal, J., concurring). Judge Leventhal further explained: “[W]hen what is involved are internal instructions to such officials ***, and revelation would permit circumvention of law and regulations by the regulated and there is no substantial valid external interest, there is the essential quality of predominant internality ***.” 591 F.2d at 783 (Leventhal, J., concurring).  The Crooker test has been adopted by several appellate courts. (See cases cited in Hobart Corp. v. Equal Employment Opportunity Comm’n (S.D. Ohio 1984), 603 F. Supp. 1431, 1450, vacated (1985), 716 F. Supp. 307.) The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit has cited the Crooker test with approval, pointing out that it has now been codified at 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(7)(E) (1988). (Kaganove v. Environmental Protection Agency (7th Cir. 1988), 856 F.2d 884, 889.) We find the Crooker test applicable to the present case and hereby adopt it as the standard to determine whether investigatory or law enforcement materials should be disclosed under section 7(w) of the Illinois Information Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 116, par. 207(w)). It is likely that the Crooker test may also be applicable to certain provisions of section 7(c) of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1988 Supp., ch. 116, par. 207(c)). However, that precise question is not presently before us.  To summarize, we hold that: (1) the City has not met its burden of showing that it was entitled to the claimed exemptions; (2) the City’s affidavits were conclusory and constituted an insufficient basis for the trial court to grant summary judgment for the City; and (3) when a governmental agency such as defendant here believes that materials sought under our Freedom of Information Act are within an exempt category of investigatory or law enforcement materials as described herein, it should submit to the circuit court a detailed affidavit describing how disclosure significantly risks circumvention of the law or of the agency’s regulations. Where “investigatory” or “law enforcement” materials are involved, if the agency claims an exemption under the internal policies and practices provision, the test to determine whether the material is to be disclosed is the Crooker test. If a document for which disclosure is sought meets the test of “predominant internality” and if the disclosure significantly risks circumvention of the agency’s regulations or of statutes, the material is exempt from mandatory disclosure.  Upon remand, the trial court must make a de novo review of the agency’s classification decision, and the burden is on the agency to justify nondisclosure. The trial court shall require the agency to create as full a public record as possible concerning the nature of the documents and the justification for nondisclosure without compromising the secret nature of the information. If the affidavits show with reasonable specificity why the documents fall within the claimed exemption under the test announced here, then summary judgment is appropriate without in camera review. The affidavits must be sufficient to allow adversarial testing. If the agency fails to make a sufficient showing by affidavit to permit a responsible de novo review, the trial court may order in camera review of the documents. In such a case, those portions not covered by affidavit or containing “secret law” may be ordered disclosed. (See Hardy v. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco & Firearms, 631 F.2d at 657.) The circuit court shall order the release of segregable portions of documents that do not fall within the claimed exemption. (See Hayden v. National Security Agency, 608 F.2d at 1384.) The indexing of documents is not required unless the plaintiff brings a motion to that effect under the new provisions found in section 11(e) of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1988 Supp., ch. 116, par. 211(e)). For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court is reversed, and the cause is remanded -with directions. Reversed and remanded with directions. UNVERZAGT, RJ., concurs.

=== CASE 2207954 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:25.097102+00 ===

225 Cal. App. 2d 434 (1964)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
MACK CEPHUS JONES, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 7987.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Four.
Mar. 11, 1964.
Mack Cephus Jones, in pro. per., and Caryl Warner, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General and S. Clark Moore, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
JEFFERSON, J.
In an information filed by the District Attorney of Los Angeles County, defendant was charged with a violation of Penal Code section 459, burglary. Defendant pleaded not guilty. After a jury trial he was found guilty as charged. The degree of the crime was fixed as first degree. His motions for a new trial and to reduce the degree of the crime were denied, and he was sentenced to imprisonment in the state prison for the term prescribed by law.
Defendant originally appealed from the judgment in propria persona, this court having denied his request for appointment of counsel to assist him on appeal. The judgment of conviction was thereafter affirmed and defendant's petition for a hearing in the Supreme Court of California was denied. (People v. Jones, 204 Cal. App. 2d 722 [22 Cal. Rptr. 499].) Subsequently, the United States Supreme Court ruled that defendant was entitled to counsel at the appellate level and remanded the case for further proceedings. (Jones v. California, 374 U.S. 501 [83 S. Ct. 1878, 10 L. Ed. 2d 1045].) Pursuant to this mandate we vacated our original judgment and appointed counsel to represent defendant on this appeal.
The facts of the instant case, viewed favorably to the People, are as follows: On April 2, 1961, Mr. Kenneth D. Williams was staying in a single- family residence located at 1128 East 127th Street in the City of Los Angeles which was rented by Mr. Williams' uncle, one Merrit J. Vincent and referred to herein as the Vincent residence. When Williams left the house at approximately 4:30 in the afternoon on that date, all of the doors and windows leading to the outside were locked and in good order.
Willie R. Cochran, another uncle of Williams, lived in a house which is one block north of the Vincent residence. At approximately 7:30 p.m. on April 2, 1961, Mr. Cochran, from his porch, observed defendant crossing Central Avenue at *436 126th Street. His attention was drawn to defendant because the latter was shabbily dressed. Ten minutes later Mr. Cochran walked over to the vicinity of the Vincent residence and saw defendant looking into a vacant house which was next door. Defendant walked across the driveway of the vacant house to the back of the driveway of the Vincent residence and then to the front door of that house. He opened the door and went in.
Mr. Cochran went to the house and attempted to enter, but the chain fastening inside the door had been hooked. Mr. Cochran then went to his next-door neighbor's house, borrowed a .38 caliber pistol and returned to the Vincent residence. He attempted to open the front door again and found the chain hook still across the door. He heard what sounded to him like a chest of drawers or a dresser drawer being moved and other noises in the house. He shouted for the person inside to come out of the house with his hands raised. Defendant came to the front door, took the chain latch off, eased the door open and put his head out. He dropped something which he had in his hand, yelled "Don't shoot," opened the door and came out.
When defendant saw Cochran holding the gun, he started to curse and suggested that Cochran wouldn't shoot him. Defendant started off the porch. When he took a step, Mr. Cochran fired a warning shot. Defendant stopped and remained on the porch until the police came. During this interval, defendant asked Cochran to let him go and said that it wouldn't be worth the loss of time for Cochran to go to court.
A hi-fi set, a suitcase and some clothing had been removed from the house. The hi-fi set was found in the shrubbery near the vacant house where defendant had first been seen, and the suitcase containing a clock radio, shirts and socks was found in a nearby vacant lot.
After the property had been recovered, Mr. Cochran, and an investigating officer discovered that the screen on the Hollywood type back door had been ripped away from the frame near the knob, and that the window, which could be opened from the outside, had been lowered into the door. The bottom of the door had been nearly pulled off. Mr. Cochran testified that he had installed the door on Thursday and had checked it that morning. He stated that it was not broken at that time.
The court took judicial notice of the fact that on April 2, 1961, the sun set at 6:13 p.m. *437
[1a] The primary contention raised in the supplemental brief, filed on behalf of defendant by his court-appointed counsel, is that the trial court committed prejudicial error in failing on its own motion to instruct the jury that each juror must agree on the particular act or entry that constituted the basis of the conviction. The following argument is made: The information filed against defendant charged only one count of burglary. [2] The crime of burglary is complete upon the first entrance into the building. (People v. Piscitella, 90 Cal. App. 528 [266 P. 349].) [1b] The evidence in the instant case established that more than one entry into the house was made by defendant. The deputy district attorney noted, in both his opening and closing arguments, that the evidence established that successive entries were made into the house. Under these circumstances, it is argued, the trial court was bound on its own motion to instruct the jury that it must agree on which act or entry constituted the crime charged.
[3] The test used in determining what instructions must be given by a trial court on its own motion is stated to be "... that the court has a duty to give instructions on the general principles of law governing the case, even though not requested by the parties, but it need not instruct on specific points developed at the trial unless requested. [Citation.]" (People v. Wade, 53 Cal. 2d 322, 344 [1 Cal. Rptr. 638, 348 P.2d 116]; see also People v. Cofield, 203 Cal. 703, 709 [265 P. 914].)
[1c] There is no suggestion in the record that either defense counsel or the deputy district attorney contemplated the theory of the case in the trial court which defendant now advances. The statements of the deputy district attorney in his argument, that there were a number of entries made by defendant, were made in reference to the question as to the necessity to infer that defendant entered with intent to commit theft. They were not made with reference to defendant's newly advanced theory that any one of a series of entries could have constituted the basis for a conviction of the crime charged. The theory of the defendant's defense, as stated by his counsel in closing argument, was that defendant did not have the requisite criminal intent when he entered the house. It was argued that he was intoxicated; that he went to the house to see his ex-wife who had at one time lived in the house. This theory of the case did not call for the instruction defendant now asserts should have been given. [4] "[T]he trial court cannot be required to anticipate every possible *438 theory that may fit the facts of the case before it and instruct the jury accordingly. The judge need not fill in every time a litigant or his counsel fails to discover an abstruse but possible theory of the facts." (People v. Wade, supra, 53 Cal. 2d 322, 334.)
[1d] Defendant, in support of his argument, cites a number of cases holding that where the proof of either of two facts constitutes the offense charged, the jury should be instructed that they must agree among themselves that one fact or the other is established; that it will not do for part of them to agree on the existence of one fact, the rest concluding that the other fact alone was established. (People v. Thompson, 144 Cal. App. Supp. 2d 854, 859 [301 P.2d 313]; People v. Scofield, supra, 203 Cal. 703.)
However, in the instant case, the jury was properly instructed as to the degrees of burglary and were made aware that, in order to convict of first degree burglary, they must find that the entry was made at night. The fact that a unanimous verdict of first degree burglary was returned evidences the fact that all of the jurors must have concurred in finding defendant guilty of the last entry, since that was the only entry as to which a definite time of day was established. Under these circumstances, omission of the instruction that each juror must agree on which entry constituted the crime, was not error.
Defendant received a fair trial; his conviction of burglary in the first degree was supported by substantial evidence.
The judgment is affirmed.
Burke, P. J., and Kingsley, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737219 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:19:17.902142+00 ===

GIVAN, Chief Justice.
This is an appeal from denial of post-conviction relief.
In 1975 appellant was found guilty of Second Degree Burglary and was found to be an habitual criminal. As a result, he received a life sentence. In April of 1985, appellant filed a motion to correct his erroneous sentence, based upon the fact that one of the three prior felonies alleged to support the original habitual offender finding had subsequently been set aside in a post-conviction relief hearing.
He now claims this subsequent setting aside of one of the prior convictions renders his habitual criminal status void due to a violation of due process of law under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and art. 1, § 12 of the Indiana Constitution because the jury's verdict was presumptively based on an invalid predicate conviction.
The law at the time of appellant's conviction required that appellant be found to have been twice previously convicted, sentenced and imprisoned for felonies in order to be found to be an habitual offender. The fact that the State chose to cite three prior felonies did not invalidate the information. The third felony would be treated merely as surplusage. Hanks v. State (1948), 225 Ind. 593, 76 N.E.2d 702. However, appellant now claims that since *13one of the prior convictions has been set aside and the jury did not indicate which of the two prior felonies it based the habitual offender status on appellant is now entitled to have the habitual offender status set aside.
Following his original conviction, appellant appealed to this Court. See Eldridge v. State (1977), 266 Ind. 134, 361 N.E.2d 155, cert. denied, 434 U.S. 928, 98 S.Ct. 412, 54 L.Ed.2d 287. Although appellant might have insisted at his original trial that the jury designate which two of the three felonies they relied upon to fix his habitual criminal status, he did not do so. At this late date we must assume that the jury found that appellant had been convicted, sentenced and imprisoned upon all three of the felonies charged. The fact that appellant subsequently was successful in setting aside one of the three convictions still leaves two convictions established by the evidence in the original trial.
Appellant now claims that the Supreme Court held in his original appeal that State's Exhibit No. 7 was improperly admitted at trial and that it was necessary to establish that he had been imprisoned upon one of the two remaining prior felonies; however, appellant is incorrect in this observation. In the original appeal, the Supreme Court held that State's Exhibits Nos. 5, 6 and 7, purporting to be copies of commitments to the Indiana Reformatory, were not properly certified.
After making such an observation, the Court stated:
'"However|,] the error in admitting these exhibits is harmless, as evidence of his convictions and sentences was already before the jury through exhibits 2, 3 and 4. Further, exhibits 8, 9 and 10 were properly authenticated under the terms of Trial Rule 44. The erroncous admission of evidence is harmless when such evidence is cumulative of other evidence properly admitted." Id. at 189, 861 N.E.2d at 158-59.
Thus the Supreme Court in the original Eldridge case specifically held that there was ample evidence in the record showing conviction, sentencing and imprisonment of appellant on all three felonies.
The records in this case clearly indicate that appellant still stands properly convict ed of burglary and is in the status of an habitual offender. The trial court was correct in ruling that his petition for correction of his sentence be denied.
The trial court is affirmed.
PIVARNIK, J., concurs.
SHEPARD, J., concurs in result with separate opinion.
DeBRULER, J., dissents with separate opinion in which DICKSON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9736940 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:39.311659+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE JIGANTI, specially concurring: The complaint filed by the plaintiffs seeks an order to compel arbitration. The plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment seeks a judgment compelling arbitration. The order entered by the trial court, as interpreted by the majority, compels the parties to arbitrate. The majority finds, and I agree, that under existing law, as explained by the majority, the mother is not an uninsured for uninsured motorist purposes. The proper order was to reverse the summary judgment in favor of the defendant. The opinion should end there. However, the majority has suggested to the plaintiffs here that they file an action against a person not a party-defendant to this lawsuit. The majority then ruled that when that lawsuit is filed there will be coverage. Further, the court has ruled that the insurer may not raise a defense in behalf of their insured based on intrafamily immunity. I find this is a most imaginative effort at judicial economy. I respectfully decline to concur in that portion of the opinion.

=== CASE 2208047 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:26.042428+00 ===

99 Md. App. 220 (1994)
636 A.2d 481
SHIRLEY THOMAS STEPHENSON
v.
MARY SUSAN HAYDEN GOINS, PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ESTATE OF MARY LOU HOLDEN.
No. 615, September Term, 1993.
Court of Special Appeals of Maryland.
January 28, 1994.
Jonathan D. Isaacs, Bethesda, for appellant.
Cheryl Lynn Hepfer, Upper Marlboro, for appellee.
Argued before BISHOP, WENNER and CATHELL, JJ.
CATHELL, Judge.
Shirley Thomas Stephenson, appellant, was divorced from Mary Lou Holden on August 17, 1992, by the Circuit Court for Prince George's County. The trial court reserved ruling on the property issues and on October 13, 1992, issued a written order dividing the marital property and declining to make a monetary award. Ms. Holden died on April 20, 1993. Mary Susan Hayden Goins, in her capacity as personal representative of the estate of Mary Lou Holden, is appellee here. Appellant contests only the findings as to marital property and monetary award, not the judgment of divorce. He presents three questions in this appeal:
I. Did the court err in finding that the florist business was non-marital property?
II. Did the court err in allowing appellee's (wife) promissory notes to be entered into evidence for determining value of the business?
III. Did the court err in failing to determine the status of all property belonging to the parties?
We shall not be able to answer those questions as this appeal is not timely. We explain.
The docket entries indicate that a judgment of final divorce was entered on the docket on October 19, 1992.[1] On October 20, 1992, an opinion and order dated October 13, 1992, relating to the remaining issues, was filed. The effective date of the order was the date the docket entries indicate it was filed  October 20, 1992. Maryland Rule 2-601(b). See also Maryland Rule 8-202(f).
As to the divorce order, that date for appeal commenced to run on October 19; the time for the commencement of the appeal period for the remaining order was October 20. The entry of final judgment was thus no later than October 20, 1992. Generally, a party has thirty days after the entry of final judgment in which to file an appeal. Maryland Rule 8-202(a). The order of appeal was not filed until February 18, 1993.
On November 12, 1992, a motion for reconsideration and for a stay of judgment was filed. The filing of the motion was more than ten days after the filing of the order that appellant wanted reconsidered. Accordingly, its filing did not stay the running of the appeal period. Maryland Rules 2-534 and 8-202(c).
We do not include the date of October 20 in computing whether an appeal has been timely filed; we count from and including October 21. Maryland Rule 1-203(a). The last day an appeal could be filed would have been November 19, 1992. No order of appeal was filed within that period. Thus, the right to appeal ceased to exist.
On December 21, 1992, an order was filed attempting to stay the entry of final judgment pending the resolution of the motion to reconsider. This order was apparently backdated to November 12, 1990, the day after the motion was filed. However, it was ineffectual. The time for appeal had already expired prior to the entry of the order of stay on the docket. The only matter addressed in this order was an attempt to stay the entry of judgment. No modification of the previous order was made.
Maryland Rule 2-601(a) provides in pertinent part that the "clerk shall forthwith enter the judgment ... [or] enter the judgment as directed by the court." Subsection (b) as pertinent here mandates that the clerk enter a judgment on the "docket within the file, or in a docket book...." It further states that the clerk "shall record the actual date of the entry." More importantly, subsection (b) states "[t]hat date [the actual date of entry on the docket] shall be the date of the judgment." (Emphasis added.)
Likewise, Maryland Rule 8-202, addressing the time for filing a notice of appeal, defines the "entry" of a judgment. Subsection (a) states that "notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days after entry of the judgment or order...." Tracking the language of Rule 2-601(b), subsection (f) of Rule 8-202 defines "entry" as "the day when the clerk of the lower court first makes a record in writing of the ... order ... on a docket ... according to the practice of that court...."
We noted in our recent case of Davis v. Davis, 97 Md. App. 1, 10, 627 A.2d 17 (1993) (quoting Rohrbeck v. Rohrbeck, 318 Md. 28, 41, 566 A.2d 767 (1989)), that a final judgment must have three attributes:
(1) it must be intended by the court as an unqualified, final disposition of the matter in controversy, (2) unless the court properly acts pursuant to Md.Rule 2-602(b), it must adjudicate or complete the adjudication of all claims against all parties, and (3) the clerk must make a proper record of it in accordance with Md.Rule 2-601.
The October 19th and 20th judgments possess the three attributes. In Davis, we noted:
Under Rule 2-601(a) the court must direct the clerk to enter the judgment. If the court "indicates that a written order embodying the decision is to follow," the ruling from the bench will not be considered final.
Id. 97 Md. App. at 10-11, 627 A.2d 17. In the case sub judice, the order filed on October 20, 1992, was a written order.
In its recent case of Waller v. Maryland Nat'l Bank, 332 Md. 375, 631 A.2d 447 (1993), the Court of Appeals was faced with a docket entry in which judgment was entered but the clerk had erroneously added, without any authority from the trial court, the words "order to be filed." The Court opined that:
Rule 2-601 makes it clear that whether a final judgment has been entered must be determined by reference to the docket entry.
Id. at 378, 631 A.2d 447. The Court then quoted from P. Niemeyer & L. Schuett, Maryland Rules Commentary 445, 446 (2d ed. 1992):
Under this rule, there is no doubt about the date when a judgment is entered. Litigants and third persons can look at the file or docket to determine when the judgment was entered, and they are entitled to rely on that date as a public record.
Id. at 379, 631 A.2d 447. The Court then held:
It is generally true that when there is a conflict between the transcript of a trial and the docket entries, the transcript, unless shown to be in error, will prevail. Shade v. State, 18 Md. App. 407, 411, 306 A.2d 560 (1973). That principle would be fully applicable here, if a motion were filed to correct the erroneous docket entry. Where, however, the rules rely upon the form and date of the docket entry to establish the finality and date of finality of an order, the docket entry will control until corrected. As we made clear in Estep v. Georgetown Leather, 320 Md. 277, 284, 577 A.2d 78 (1990) and Doehring v. Wagner, 311 Md. 272, 274-75, 533 A.2d 1300 (1987), the docket entry itself must be sufficient to show finality.
For the protection of the parties and third persons, it is important that the integrity of the written docket entry be observed, until it is corrected or modified.
Id. at 379, 631 A.2d 447 (footnote omitted).
In the case sub judice, the trial court's original judgment of divorce was unconditional except as to the court's reservation of the property issues. In its opinion and order signed the next day, the court resolved those remaining issues. That order stated that the execution of the order was to be delayed for thirty days. At that time, the court did not stay the entry of judgment but merely its execution. Judgment was at that time entered.
Thereafter, on December 21, the court filed an order saying that the entry of final judgment was stayed as of November 12th. On December 21, however, the final judgment had already been entered and the appeal period had passed. Thus, it was too late to stay its entry. The judgment had become enrolled.
An unsigned, undated order of stay appears to have been originally attached to the motion for reconsideration. In any event, the attorney for the plaintiff below, appellee here, noted in her argument on the motion to reconsider that the motion included a request for a stay of entry. At the time of the filing of the motion to reconsider, however, the judgment had already been entered as a final judgment.
At oral argument, it was conceded that appellant had carried the pleading entitled "Motion to Reconsider" that included her request to stay entry of the judgment to the trial judge on November 12, 1992. The copy of the order to stay entry of the judgment was affixed thereto. However, appellant left the motion and unsigned order in the judge's chambers. Appellant did not see the order taken to the clerk's office then or later.
Maryland Rule 2-311(b) "Response" provides:
A party against whom a motion is directed shall file a response within 15 days ... unless the court orders otherwise, no response need be filed to a motion filed pursuant to Rule ... 2-534. If a party fails to file a response required ... the court may proceed to rule. ...
Thus, under the rule, appellee had fifteen days to respond to appellant's motion. The necessity of waiting for the response period may explain the delay in the court entering its order on the docket. The time for the appellee's response would have expired no earlier than November 27, 1992. It would, therefore, have not been in accordance with Maryland Rule 2-311 had the court's order been filed before that date. Even by that date, the first date on which the court could have properly filed its order to stay entry of the judgment (presuming, arguendo, that it has the power to order the stay of the entry as opposed to execution of judgment after its entry), the time for appeal had expired and the judgment was enrolled.
Maryland Rule 2-533(c) provides that if a motion for a partial new trial is granted the trial judge may "stay the entry of judgment...." No motion for new trial was made or granted in the case sub judice. Maryland Rule 2-534 provides that if a motion to alter or amend a judgment is made within ten days of the entry of judgment the judgment loses its finality for appeal purposes. Unnamed Attorney v. Attorney Grievance Comm'n, 303 Md. 473, 486, 494 A.2d 940 (1985), rev'd on other grounds, 313 Md. 357, 545 A.2d 685 (1988). In the case at bar, the motion for reconsideration and the motion for stay were not filed within ten days of the entry of judgment. Accordingly, they did not stay the running of the time for appeal. While Md.Rule 2-535 provides that a court, upon motion filed within thirty days, can, in a court trial, exercise any control over a judgment it could have exercised if a Rule 2-534 motion had been filed, the rule contemplates that the court's power to stay the entry of a judgment must be exercised prior to the date of finality of the judgment. In the case sub judice, the court's order staying "the entry of judgment" was not filed until after the judgment was entered and had become final and until after the appeal period had elapsed. Additionally, there has been no assertion that the docket entries were erroneously entered.
We said in Office of People's Counsel v. Advance Mobilehome Corp., 75 Md. App. 39, 44, 540 A.2d 151, cert. denied, 313 Md. 30, 542 A.2d 857 (1988), "After the judgment becomes enrolled, however, a judgment may be revised only upon a showing of fraud, mistake or irregularity. Maryland Rule 2-535(b)."
The Court of Appeals, in Eggert v. Montgomery County Council, 263 Md. 243, 246-47, 282 A.2d 474 (1971), under a similar set of circumstances, opined:
We have previously indicated that in equity the pleadings and definitive actions of the chancellor must be done by written documents duly filed in the equity case.
... The final order of December 23, 1970, had become enrolled on January 22, 1971, and, more importantly, the 30-day period for appeal to this Court also expired on that day.... The circuit court, in our opinion, did not have the power to "strike" the enrollment of the final order of December 23, 1970, nunc pro tunc as of January 22, 1971, by an order passed on January 26, 1971. [Citations omitted.]
See also Glass v. Glass, 284 Md. 169, 171, 395 A.2d 485 (1978) ("Initially we mention `that in equity the pleadings and definitive actions of the Chancellor must be done by written documents duly filed in the equity case"). We note that in the case sub judice there is no indication or evidence that the chancellor intended her backdated order to be a nunc pro tunc order as of its filing. When it was duly filed on the 21st day of December, the judgment was already enrolled, i.e., the appeal period had passed.
We are thus constrained to hold that when the trial court caused its order of stay to be filed on December 21, 1992, the judgment previously entered had become enrolled and the time for appeal had already expired. We shall, thus, dismiss this appeal because all the issues raised by appellant relate to the court's original judgment, not to its subsequent partial denial of appellant's motion to reconsider. The appeal is thus untimely.
APPEAL DISMISSED; COSTS TO BE PAID BY APPELLANT.
NOTES
[1]  The order itself was dated August 17, 1992.

=== CASE 2208051 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:26.09073+00 ===

225 Cal.App.2d 583 (1964)
GEORGE E. MACK et al., Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
HUGH W. COMSTOCK ASSOCIATES, INC. et al., Defendants and Respondents.
Civ. No. 21380.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
Mar. 16, 1964.
Drummond & Murphy and Patricia Lane for Plaintiffs and Appellants.
Lacey, Holbrook & Meyenberg, John R. Lamoreaux and Grunsky and Pybrum for Defendants and Respondents.
TAYLOR, J.
The plaintiffs appeal from a judgment of dismissal entered on an order sustaining the defendants' demurrers to their amended complaint and granting a motion to strike after plaintiffs had declined an opportunity to amend. The chief questions on appeal concern the proper measure of consequential damages recoverable in an action for breach of warranty and the statute of limitations.
[1a] The facts alleged by the second amended complaint are as follows: The plaintiffs, George and Gladys Mack, husband and wife, entered into a written contract in August 1954 with the defendant, Hugh W. Comstock Associates, Inc., hereafter referred to as Comstock, to have the latter construct a home in Pebble Beach at a cost of $110,923. The general contractor Comstock thereafter secured a heating subcontractor, defendant Boothe Radiant Heat, Inc., hereafter referred to as Boothe, to furnish and install a radiant heating system in accordance with the plans and specifications. Under the terms of their written agreement, Boothe expressly warranted to Comstock that the heating system would be free from defects of workmanship and materials for a period of five years, of merchantable quality and fit for the use intended. Comstock and Boothe in turn expressly and impliedly made the identical warranties concerning the radiant heating system to the plaintiffs.
The plaintiffs' home was completed about November 12, 1956. On numerous occasions in 1957, beginning in March, shortly after the plaintiffs moved in, and then on approximately six occasions in 1958 and 1959, leaks appeared in the radiant heating system. Leaks also appeared on April 17, 1960, May 16, 1960, August 13, 1960, October 23, 1960, March 30, 1961, July 10, 1961, July 17, 1962, and August 8, 1962.
Immediately on discovering each of these leaks, the plaintiffs notified defendants, who promptly attempted to repair *586 the heating system and on each occasion assured the plaintiffs there would be no further leaks. As a result of the leaks, the baseboards in the plaintiffs' home had to be removed, the custom carpeting and padding rolled up and replaced, as well as the gas shut off, boilers drained, furniture moved, etc. Plaintiffs also hired a watchman to inspect the premises for leaks in the heating system when they were away from home. In October 1962, the plaintiffs necessarily abandoned the radiant heating system installed by the defendants and replaced it with another system.
The complaint further alleged that the defects in workmanship and material which caused the leaks in the heating system resulted in great damage to the plaintiffs' home and furnishings and caused the plaintiffs mental anguish and humiliation. The complaint sought general damages in the sum of $25,000; $9,673.46 for the loss of carpeting, padding, new plumbing, painting, repairs and the expenses of installing a new heating system, and $350 living expenses during the repair and replacement of the carpeting and heating system.  [fn. 1]
Defendant Boothe demurred generally and also specially, alleging that the cause of action was barred by the statute of limitations (Code Civ. Proc.,  337, subd. 1; 338, subd. 3) and that the complaint was uncertain because it could not be ascertained how the plaintiffs had sustained general damages of $25,000. Defendant Comstock also demurred generally and specially, alleging that all causes of action were barred by the statute of limitations (Code Civ. Proc.,  340, subd. 3; 338, subds. 2, 3; 337, subd. 1; 339, subd. 1). Thereafter, Comstock filed its motion to strike all portions of the complaint except those dealing with the breach of warranty. The trial court entered its order granting the motion to strike, sustaining the demurrers, and giving plaintiffs 15 days within which to amend the complaint "... to state a cause of action for damage to the radiant heating plant itself, or recovery of the cost thereof, but not for any resultant damages or any other consequential damage to any other property or person." Plaintiffs declined to amend and the court entered the judgment of dismissal from which this appeal is taken.
The trial court erred in ruling that the appellants could not recover for the damage to their real and personal property *587 as well as other consequential damages resulting from the defective radiant heating plant designed, manufactured and installed by the respondents.
[2] The transactions between the parties were contracts for labor and materials rather than contracts of sale under the Uniform Sales Act (Civ. Code,  1789, subds. (6), (7); Corporation of Presiding Bishop v. Cavanaugh, 217 Cal.App.2d 492, 504 [32 Cal.Rptr. 144]) but the causes of action and measure of damages for breach of implied warranty are the same in both instances (Aced v. Hobbs-Sesack Plumbing Co., 55 Cal.2d 573 [12 Cal.Rptr. 257, 360 P.2d 897]). The liability need not be viewed as purely contractual, as the appellants contend, or purely delictual, as the respondents contend. [3] The measure of damages for breach of warranty (Civ. Code,  1789, subd. (6)) is substantially identical to that set forth for negligence actions (Civ. Code,  3300, 3333; Tremeroli v. Austin Trailer Equip. Co., 102 Cal.App.2d 464, 480 [227 P.2d 923]; Rutherford v. Standard Engineering Corp., 88 Cal.App.2d 554, 568 [199 P.2d 354]). [4] The same rules of foreseeability apply to an express contractual warranty (Maecherlein v. Sealy Mattress Co., 145 Cal.App.2d 275, at p. 278 [302 P.2d 331]) as to an implied warranty (Aced v. Hobbs- Sesack Plumbing Co., supra). [5] The modern view is that in consumer transactions (as distinguished from mercantile transactions), the recovery is best measured by the tort yardstick allowing recoupment for all damages proximately resulting from the breach (Greenman v. Yuba Power Products, Inc., 59 Cal.2d 57, 63 [27 Cal.Rptr. 697, 377 P.2d 897]; Ezer, The Impact of the Uniform Commercial Code on the California Law of Sales Warranties, 8 U.C.L.A. L.Rev. 281, 307; Prosser, Strict Liability to the Consumer, 69 Yale L.J. 1099).
[6] It is well settled in California that in an action for a breach of warranty, consequential damages can be recovered (Grupe v. Glick, 26 Cal.2d 680 [160 P.2d 832]). This court recently held lost profits, generally a much more controversial component of damages than those alleged in the instant complaint, recoverable in an action for breach of warranty (Tremeroli v. Austin Trailer Equip. Co., supra, at pp. 481 and 482). Authorities in other jurisdictions have allowed property and other consequential damages to homeowners resulting from defective or defectively installed furnaces or stoves (Handy v. Holland Furnace Co. (1960) 11 Wis.2d 151 *588 [105 N.W.2d 299]; Williams v. Ballenger (1952) 87 Ga. App. 225 [73 S.E.2d 509]).
[1b] The respondents had the duty to provide a radiant heating system fit for the purpose for which it was intended and the appellants had a right to rely thereon (Handy v. Holland Furnace Co., supra). The heat was supplied from hot water pipes installed in the floor and it was clearly foreseeable that a failure or leakage in the pipes could result in damage to the floors, as well as the woodwork and contents of the rooms, thus making the home temporarily unlivable. These items and the reasonable expenses entailed thereby are properly within the concept of allowable consequential damages.
We agree with the trial court's ruling that mental suffering is not a proper item of damages in this case. Although damages for mental suffering may be recovered for conduct in the nature of a trespass or nuisance (Acadia, California, Ltd. v. Herbert, 54 Cal.2d 328 [5 Cal.Rptr. 686, 353 P.2d 294]) or for breach of warranty were accompanied by personal injuries (Medeiros v. Coca-Cola Bottling Co., 57 Cal.App.2d 707 [135 P.2d 676]), our Supreme Court recently held that this state does not recognize a cause of action for mental anguish in the absence of contemporaneous bodily contact or an independent cause of action based on or having an element of wilfulness, wantonness or malice (Amaya v. Home Ice, Fuel & Supply Co., 59 Cal.2d 295 [29 Cal.Rptr. 33, 379 P.2d 513]).
We conclude that the appellants should have been permitted to amend their complaint to state causes of action for the breach of warranty, damage to their real and personal property resulting from the failure of the radiant heating pipes, the cost of the watchman and their extra living expenses during the time they were forced to move out of the home.
We now turn to the various contentions concerning the statute of limitations. Although the appellants, relying on Stowe v. Fritzie Hotels, Inc., 44 Cal.2d 416 [282 P.2d 890], argue that an appellate court cannot inquire into the merits of the special demurrer where a general demurrer is sustained, we think it would serve no useful purpose to rigidly apply the rule in this instance, as the issues concerning the measure of damages discussed above are also largely determinative of the applicable limitations.
[7] The complaint alleged breaches of both express and *589 implied warranties and consequential damages to person and property. Code of Civil Procedure section 337, subdivision 1, would cover the express warranties and provides a four-year statute of limitations. Code of Civil Procedure section 339, subdivision 1, would cover the implied warranties and provides a two-year statute (Riesen v. Leeder, 193 Cal.App.2d 580 [14 Cal.Rptr. 469]). However, we believe that where the damages to person or property, in addition to the warranted product, result from a breach of warranty, the more specific sections of Code of Civil Procedure sections 340 and 338 relating to the tortious injury or damage to person or property determine the statutory period (Lai Wum Chin Mock v. Belfast Beverages, 193 Cal.App.2d 770, 772-773 [14 Cal.Rptr. 602]; Strzelczyk v. Marki, 169 Cal.App.2d 703 [337 P.2d 846]; Rubino v. Utah Canning Co., 123 Cal.App.2d 18 [266 P.2d 163]). As noted above, damages for the alleged personal injuries are not recoverable in California, but the consequential damages to real and personal property are, and the three-year statute of limitations provided in Code of Civil Procedure section 338, subdivisions 2, 3, is the proper one to apply.
[8] We now consider the application of these statutes to the instant case. Respondents concede that when a product is built into a home with an express or implied warranty against defects of workmanship for a specific period of time and the product proves defective and not in conformity to the warranty, the warranty is "prospective" and the statute of limitations is tolled during the time the seller honestly endeavors to make repairs to enable the product to fit the warranty or at least until such time as it becomes reasonably apparent to the owner that the warranty cannot be met (Riesen v. Leeder, supra; Aced v. Hobbs- Sesack Plumbing Co., supra; Southern Calif. Enterprises v. D. N. & E. Walter & Co., 78 Cal.App.2d 750 [178 P.2d 785]). The complaint alleged that immediately on discovering each of the leaks in the radiant heating system, the appellants notified the respondents. On each occasion, the respondents attempted to make the heating plant conform to the warranty and assured the appellants that there would not be any further problems. In October 1962, appellants replaced the heating system installed by the respondents. Their first complaint in this action was filed on July 19, 1962. Under the facts alleged, there can be no question that on the cause of action for breach of warranty, the statute was tolled during the entire period *590 when the respondents attempted to repair the heating plant and assured the appellants that they would make the plant perform in accordance with its warranty (Aced v. Hobbs-Sesack Plumbing Co., supra, at p. 585) and the appellants' complaint was timely filed.
[9] There were no allegations in the complaint that the respondents had ever undertaken any repair to the real and personal property damaged other than the heating system itself. Clearly then the statute of limitations was not tolled as to the causes of action for these and other consequential damages. The complaint alleged that leakage in the radiant heating system and resulting property damage continued from 1957 until its replacement in 1962. The statute of limitations prescribed in Code of Civil Procedure section 338, subdivisions 2, 3, would apply and the appellants would be limited in their proof to those items of consequential damage incurred within the three-year period immediately preceding the filing of the first complaint.
[10] Finally, we note that the court erred in failing to state the specific grounds of its order sustaining the demurrers as required by Code of Civil Procedure section 472d. Appellants have not shown that they suffered any prejudice thereby and furthermore, their failure to call this irregularity to the attention of the trial court permitting a correction of the error, constitutes a waiver of the section (Kyne v. Eustice, 215 Cal.App.2d 627, 635 [30 Cal.Rptr. 391].)
Judgment reversed.
Shoemaker, P. J., and Agee, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. The first two causes of action were for personal injuries and breach of implied warranty against Comstock; the third and fourth for personal injuries and breach of implied warranty against Boothe.

=== CASE 9736941 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:44.043709+00 ===

OPINION
LANSING, Judge.
The City of North Branch appeals the trial court’s summary judgment invalidating an ad valorem tax for a storm sewer improvement for failure to comply with the notice procedures of Minn.Stat. §§ 429.-031-.081 (1986).
FACTS
In 1987, to alleviate flooding problems, the North Branch City Council established a storm sewer improvement district and constructed storm sewer facilities pursuant to Minn.Stat. §§ 444.16-.21 (1986). Before levying a tax to recover construction costs, North Branch published notice of a November 25, 1987 public hearing to certify the proposed tax and provided written notice to affected property owners.
Countryside Village owned property within the district and was notified of a proposed tax of $13,413.21. Countryside attended the November 25, 1987 hearing and served North Branch with written objection to the levy. North Branch certified the tax at the hearing. Countryside filed a timely notice of appeal to the trial court.
North Branch moved to dismiss the appeal, arguing that an ad valorem tax may only be appealed according to the procedures in Minn.Stat. ch. 278 (1986). Countryside moved for summary judgment, arguing that Minn.Stat. §§ 444.16-.21 (1986), permitting the establishment of a tax improvement district to finance sewer improvements, requires the city to follow the notice and appeal procedures for special assessments set forth in Minn.Stat. §§ 429.031-.081. Countryside further argued that because North Branch failed to state the general nature of the improvement, failed to state that no appeal could be taken unless the affected property owners properly objected to the tax, and failed to state in its written notice that Countryside had the right to appeal the tax, North Branch did not have jurisdiction to impose the tax.
The trial court denied North Branch’s motion to dismiss the appeal and granted Countryside’s motion for summary judgment. The court found that a storm sewer improvement tax levied under Minn.Stat. §§ 444.16-.21 incorporates the notice and appeal procedures outlined in Minn.Stat. §§ 429.031-.081. The court set aside the tax and ordered a “reassessment” under Minn.Stat. § 429.071, subd. 2.
ISSUE
Is notice to property owners of the right to appeal, as required by Minn.Stat. § 429.061, a jurisdictional prerequisite to levying a tax under Minn.Stat. §§ 444.-16-.21?
ANALYSIS
Historically, the legislature allowed a city to recover the costs of constructing a storm sewer improvement through special assessments. See Minn.Stat. § 429.021, subd. 1(2) (1986); Minn.Stat. § 444.075 (1986). Prior to imposing the assessment, the city was required to show that the property to be assessed received a special benefit from the improvement. See Anderson v. City of Bemidji, 295 N.W.2d 555 (Minn.1980).
Because of the difficulty of proving that each property specially benefited from an improvement, the legislature, enacted Minn. Stat. §§ 444.16-.21 (1986). These statutes allow a city to recover the cost of a storm sewer improvement through imposition of an ad valorem tax, which requires a city to show only general benefit or proper public purpose.
Under Minn.Stat. §§ 444.16-.21 a city may establish a storm sewer improvement tax district by ordinance. Prior to adopting the ordinance, the city must publish notice and hold a public hearing. After the hearing, the city may construct the improvement and finance construction by *208levying a tax on property located within the district. When the council of a municipality determines to make an improvement pursuant to chapter 444, “[t]he procedures of sections 429.031 to 429.081 shall apply.” Minn.Stat. § 444.18, subd. 2.
Minn.Stat. §§ 429.031-.081 imposes specific notice and appeal procedures on cities levying special assessments for local improvements. This section requires that
Notice shall * * * state that an owner may appeal an assessment to district court pursuant to section 429.081.
Minn.Stat. § 429.061, subd. 1 (1986). Minn. Stat. § 429.081 provides for a property owner’s appeal of a tax assessment to the district court.
The trial court held that the specific provisions of section 444.18 control over the general statutory provisions for other ad valorem taxes found in Minn.Stat. ch. 278. In order to give section 444.18 effect, the court stated that North Branch was required to provide Countryside with notice of the right to appeal under section 429.-081, and that the failure to give notice deprived the city of jurisdiction to impose the tax.
North Branch’s arguments to the contrary are not persuasive. We cannot read § 429.081 to apply only to the council and not to create an appeal right in an affected property owner. Neither can we agree that the provisions of chapter 444 conflict with chapter 429 in such a way that only the notice and hearing provisions of section 429 should be given effect. We agree with the trial court’s interpretation of the statute. The plain wording of Minn. Stat. § 444.18 requires the application of the notice provisions of § 429.061, subd. 1.
Failure to provide proper notice of appeal rights has been held to deprive a city of jurisdiction to impose a special assessment. Klapmeier v. Town Center of Crow Wing County, 346 N.W.2d 133 (Minn.1984). In Klapmeier, the court held that notice of public hearings must state that a property owner has the right to appeal and must indicate the time in which the appeal must be taken. Id. at 136. The Klapmeier court required strict compliance with section 429.061, stating: “Proper notice of assessment proceedings is a jurisdictional prerequisite to any action by the town board.” Id. (citations omitted).
No case law specifically addresses whether this strict compliance rule applies to ad valorem taxes. Because of the importance of property ownership to individuals and the similarity between the effects of an assessment and the ad valorem tax, we see no significant reason to distinguish between the two for purposes of notice of appeal rights. In fact, a strong reason exists for allowing the notice provisions normally pertaining to special assessments to apply in storm sewer improvement cases because in improvement cases arising under Minn.Stat. §§ 444.16-21 the city council may finance the improvement by issuing bonds without an election. See Op.Atty. Gen. 387-6 (March 10, 1982).
We note, however, that the trial court set aside the tax and ordered a “reassessment” pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 429.071, subd. 2. Because the proposed tax was an ad valorem tax rather than a special assessment, the tax should be “re-levied” rather than “reassessed.” Accordingly, we modify the trial court’s order.
DECISION
The trial court did not err in setting aside a proposed ad valorem tax for a storm sewer improvement because the city failed to include in its written notice to affected property owners notice of the right to appeal the tax.
AFFIRMED AS MODIFIED.
NIERENGARTEN, J., dissents.

=== CASE 9736942 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:44.053001+00 ===

NIERENGARTEN, Judge,
dissenting.
I dissent because I believe North Branch complied with all relevant procedural requirements of Minn.Stat. §§ 429.031-.081 (1986) as those requirements reasonably pertain to ad valorem taxes levied under Minn.Stat. §§ 444.18, 444.20 (1986). Countryside asserts North Branch did not notify Countryside of its right to appeal to the district court under section 429.081. I be*209lieve the notice given was sufficient and that notice of appeal under section 429.081 was unnecessary under the circumstances.
The legislature authorized local governments to establish special storm sewer improvement tax districts and to recover the costs of those systems by levying ad valo-rem taxes on property within the districts. See Minn.Stat. §§ 444.17-18, 444.20 (1986). The legislation clearly contemplates taxation rather than special assessment because creation of special tax districts is superfluous if cost recovery is accomplished by assessment. Notwithstanding that obvious fact, local governments which choose to recover improvement costs by levying ad valorem taxes apparently still must conform to the procedural requirements of sections 429.031 to 429.081, even though those sections apply specifically to special assessments. See id. § 444.18, subd. 2. Under the circumstances, I do not believe the legislature reasonably intended local governments to apprise property owners of their right to appeal under section 429.081, if the property is not being specially assessed and the local government recovers the costs of the improvements by levying an ad valorem tax. See id. § 444.18, subd. 2. Even if a city council issues obligations without an election for the purpose of financing improvements, property owners still are adequately advised of the council’s action and potentiál levies against their property by the applicable notice provisions of sections 444.17 and 429.031, subdivision 1.
Special assessments and ad valorem taxation are fundamentally different methods for meeting the cost of public improvements; they serve different purposes and are used under different circumstances. See State v. Roselawn Cemetery Association, 259 Minn. 479, 481, 108 N.W.2d 305, 307 (1961) (the term “taxation” does not include an assessment); see also 15 Op. Att’y Gen. 4, 4 (1982). Ad valorem taxation and special assessments also are challenged under separate procedures. See, e.g., MinmStat. §§ 429.081, 278.01-05 (1986). The right of appeal established in chapter 429 was designed for the purposes of challenging special assessments and applies only to persons aggrieved by “assessments.” See id. § 429.081 (“This section provides the exclusive method of appeal from a special assessment levied pursuant to this chapter.”). Accordingly, unless storm sewer improvement costs are recovered via special assessments, notification of appeal rights under section 429.081 is unnecessary. See id. § 444.075, subd. 2 (“When special assessments are pledged for the payment of the obligations, they shall be authorized and issued in accordance with the provisions of chapter 429”).
I also do not believe section 429.081 applies when costs of storm sewer improvements are recovered by ad valorem taxes because application of section 429.081 to ad valorem tax situations conflicts with section 278.01 which establishes a different and more appropriate method for challenging ad valorem taxes levied against property. Consequently, I would conclude notification of a property owner’s right to appeal under section 429.081 is useless and therefore unnecessary under these circumstances. Since North Branch chose to recover costs by levying an ad valorem tax and complied with the relevant procedural requirements of sections 429.031 to 429.081,1 would reverse the district court.
In 1984 this court invited the legislature to examine section 429.081 and suggested the legislature clarify the notice requirements contained in subdivision 1. See Peterson v. City of Inver Grove Heights, 345 N.W.2d 274, 277 (Minn.Ct.App.1984). To its credit, the legislature responded to our suggestion and specified the contents of the required notice. See 1986 Minn. Laws ch. 473, § 10. I believe section 444.18, subdivision 2 should be clarified in light of the fact that local governments may recover costs of storm sewer improvements either by special assessment or by ad valo-rem tax levies. I would invite the legislature to re-examine section 444.18 and clarify its intent with respect to the procedures required when improvement costs are recovered by ad valorem taxation rather than by special assessment.

=== CASE 9736943 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:48.58455+00 ===

MORGAN, Justice.
Nancy E. Bradeen (Nancy) and James B. Bradeen (James) were granted a divorce on May 29, 1987. James appeals only that portion of the decree regarding rehabilitative alimony and the partial award of attorney fees.
The parties had been married for approximately twenty-two years. At the time of divorce, James was earning approximately $28,000 per year and Nancy was earning less than $5,000, her wages being fixed at $3.80 per hour. By stipulation of the parties, accepted by the court, the total assets *88of the parties were distributed, 58% to James and 42% to Nancy. Nancy is 43 years of age and James is 46 years of age. Each has a high school education. James attended two years of college. Both suffer from minor medical ailments which are not disabling. Both are employable. The trial court noted that Nancy had undergone a great decrease in her status in life due to separation of the parties and that she lives on her income and support payments. The trial court found the parties to be of equal fault in the divorce and granted divorce to each.
The trial court ordered James to pay rehabilitative alimony in the amount of $500 per month for eleven years, then to decrease by $100 for each of the next four years, to terminate at the conclusion of the fifteenth year. The trial court also awarded to Nancy partial attorney fees in the amount of $3,000. This left a balance to be paid by Nancy in the amount of $1,707.40.
Three issues are raised on appeal. (1) Whether the trial court abused its discretion in awarding rehabilitative alimony absent a showing of foregone opportunities. (2) Whether the trial court erred in rejecting James’ proposed conclusion of law, which allegedly comports with the court’s oral findings. (3) Whether the trial court abused its discretion in awarding to Nancy $3,000 in attorney fees.
We note initially that James does not dispute that rehabilitative alimony may have application to nonprofessional persons. In fact, James points out that rehabilitative alimony was awarded to a nonprofessional whose work career was displaced by marriage in Booth v. Booth, 354 N.W.2d 924 (S.D.1984). For a similar holding see Hautala v. Hautala, 417 N.W.2d 879 (S.D.1988). The crux of James’ argument is that there is no showing in this case that the marriage displaced Nancy’s acquisition of job skills or occupational status.
“The amount and length of alimony payments is ... left to the discretion of the trial court. SDCL 25-4-41.” Guindon v. Guindon, 256 N.W.2d 894, 898 (S.D.1977). See Martin v. Martin, 358 N.W.2d 793 (S.D.1984); Booth, supra. This court will not disturb an award of alimony unless it clearly appears that the trial court abused its discretion. Baltzer v. Baltzer, 422 N.W.2d 584 (S.D.1988). Whether alimony, generally, is warranted, depends upon the trial court’s consideration of the length of the marriage; the respective earning capacity of the parties; their respective financial condition after the property division; their respective age, health and physical condition; their station in life or social standing; and the relative fault in the termination of the marriage. Arens v. Arens, 400 N.W.2d 900 (S.D.1987); Hanks v. Hanks, 296 N.W.2d 523 (S.D.1980). Likewise, “the decision whether to award ‘reimbursement’ or ‘rehabilitative’ alimony, and, if so, in what amount and for what length of time, is committed to the sound discretion of the trial court.” Saint-Pierre v. Saint-Pierre, 357 N.W.2d 250, 262 (S.D.1984) (emphasis added). The guidelines the trial court should look to when awarding rehabilitative or reimbursement alimony include “the amount of supporting spouse’s contributions, his or her foregone opportunities to enhance or improve professional or vocational skills, and the duration of the marriage following completion of the nonsupporting spouse’s professional education.” Id.
The purpose of rehabilitative alimony is to put the supporting spouse in a position to likewise upgrade their own economic marketability. See Hautala, supra; Tesch v. Tesch, 399 N.W.2d 880 (S.D.1987); Martin, supra; Saint-Pierre, supra; Booth, supra. As Saint-Pierre emphasized, we must not put the trial courts to the task of setting awards with mathematical precision; rather, they must be free to set such awards based on the peculiar facts and circumstances of each case. We cannot say, for example, that an award of six months is too short a period of time, and, conversely, several years is too long. Such rigid parameters would be to tie the equitable arms of the trial court. If an initial award of alimony is justified by the trial court and it finds evidence in the record, we are not going to disturb the same because the trial court, in good faith, has *89miscategorized the type of alimony it has awarded. Categories (reimbursement and rehabilitative) are to be used as guidelines by the trial court for setting the method and defining the purpose of such payments. Misapplication of a guideline is not reason for reversal except in extreme examples of an abuse of discretion. In Hautala, we noted that “the issue is not the name placed on alimony, but whether the record supports the award.” 417 N.W.2d at 882.
The trial court in this instance entered lengthy findings of fact covering all elements of property division, alimony, and rehabilitative alimony. In the trial court’s oral findings, it specifically found
[Nancy] maintained and did those things [faithful homemaker and mother] while he was able to, over the years earn a better income, until he’s reached the income of $28,000 a year. She’s now trying to start a career and earning less than $5,000 a year.... The court should provide that a spouse who has served in the capacity that Mrs. Bradeen has served so long, should be given an opportunity to refresh and enhance her job skills so she can earn her own living. It is difficult to do that when you are still raising a child and attempting to maintain a living. So, rather than grant permanent alimony here, I am going to grant rehabilitative alimony. I am going to grant it over a long period of time, otherwise I’d be strapping Mr. Bradeen with an unreasonable amount of money to pay, and I think it will take quite a long time for Mrs. Bradeen to help rehabilitate herself, so she can earn a decent living.... Her contribution wasn’t in the form of money, but in the form of being a homemaker and mother.... When someone gets married, they don’t plan on being divorced someday, so in the strict sense, Mrs. Bradeen did not forego opportunities to enhance her professional or vocational skills.
We will not assume that a woman who has devoted more than twenty years of her life to being a wife, mother, and homemaker, would not have enhanced her employment skills had she remained a single person. This leads to the obvious conclusion that opportunities were foregone. After setting the rehabilitative award, the trial court said: “I anticipate that in that term of years Mrs. Bradeen will be able to increase her skills and take whatever necessary courses and training she needs to take so she’s able to support herself at that time.” It is obvious that the trial court gave careful and thorough thought to this award and we find no abuse therein.
James next contends that the trial court’s oral decision does not comport with the judgment and decree. We disagree.
If the findings of fact and conclusions of law prevail over a trial court’s memorandum decision, Moser v. Moser, 422 N.W.2d 594 (S.D.1988), they certainly prevail over an oral pronouncement from the bench. We note here that the trial court incorporated its oral decision in it’s conclusions of law and the judgment and decree of divorce set out a scale for the alimony payments as follows:
(1) For the period of May 1, 1987, through April 30, 1998, the sum of $500 per month;
(2) For the perJod of May 1, 1998, through April 30, 1999, the sum of $400 per month;
(3) For the period of May 1, 1999, through April 30, 2000, the sum of $300 per month;
(4) For the period of May 1, 2000 through and including April 30, 2001, the sum of $200 per month;
(5) For the period of May 1, 2001 through and including April 30, 2002, the sum of $100 per month.
Said rehabilitative alimony obligation shall terminate according to the time schedule set forth above or upon the death or remarriage of [Nancy], whichever event first occurs.
We find that, as no disparity exists between the oral pronouncement and the written schedule, James’ argument is totally without merit.
For James’ last issue on appeal, he alleges that the trial court failed to first find that attorney fees were reasonable and *90suggests that such award should be modified or set aside. We disagree.
A review of the record reveals that the trial court considered all of the factors prescribed by our decisions in Lien v. Lien, 278 N.W.2d 436 (S.D.1979) and Holforty v. Holforty, 272 N.W.2d 810 (S.D.1978): (a) the amount and value of the property involved, (b) the intricacy and importance of the litigation, (c) the labor and time involved, (d) the skill required to draw the pleadings and the trying of the cause, (e) the discovery procedures utilized, (f) whether there existed complicated legal problems, (g) the time required to try the cause, and (h) whether written briefs were required in determining that attorney fees should be awarded and the amount of that award. The trial court particularly noted that James had materially increased the cost of these divorce proceedings and has the greater ability to pay. We find no abuse of discretion in awarding Nancy fees in the amount of $3,000, while leaving her responsible for $1,707.40.
Finally, both parties have moved for attorney fees on appeal in accordance with Malcolm v. Malcolm, 365 N.W.2d 863 (S.D.1985). We award attorney fees to Nancy in the amount of $750.
Affirmed in all respects.
WUEST, C.J., and SABERS, J., concur.
MILLER, J., concurs in result.
HENDERSON, J., dissents.

=== CASE 9736944 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:48.589125+00 ===

MILLER, Justice
(concurring in result).
I concur in the result of the majority decision.
I cannot blindly embrace the majority’s statement that “Categories (reimbursement and rehabilitative) are to be used as guidelines by the trial court for setting the method and defining the purpose of such [alimony] payments. Misapplication of a guideline is not reason for reversal except in extreme examples of an abuse of discretion.” (Emphasis added.)
Admittedly, we did note in Hautala v. Hautala, 417 N.W.2d 879, 882 (S.D.1988), that “... the issue is not the name placed on alimony, but whether the record supports the award.” However, that phrase was prefaced by the caveat “we urge the use of careful and consistent language....”
Subsequent to Hautala, we handed down Baltzer v. Baltzer, 422 N.W.2d 584 (S.D.1988). In special writings, Justice Henderson and I reviewed the history of rehabilitative and reimbursement alimony cases in this court. In my special writing (which was joined by Justice Morgan), I opined that a trial court errs in failing to properly designate a special type of alimony it intends to award and in failing to make the appropriate findings to support such award. I still hold to such view.
In this case the trial court awarded alimony, improperly characterizing it as rehabilitative alimony. However, as the majority states, it did make findings which supported the award. Under the specific circumstances of this case, I cannot find that the trial court abused its discretion.
Lastly, although I believe the attorney fee award was excessive, it does appear that the trial court considered and applied the appropriate factors and I cannot state that it abused its discretion.

=== CASE 9736945 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:48.593063+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. From the common law status of married women being economically incapacitated and dependent, alimony (a husband’s marital duty to support his wife when she is no longer his wife) was birthed. Women now hold over fifty percent of the jobs in the United States, and they are not, as a general rule, either economically incapacitated or dependent. As circumstances change, perceptions should change.
For a collection of alimony cases in this Court over a ten-year period, with my special writings, see Baltzer v. Baltzer, 422 N.W.2d 584, 589 (S.D.1988) (Henderson, J., concurring specially). Alimony has grown by leaps and bounds in South Dakota. I have warned this Court of those who would like to stand under the alimony tree and *91taste its sweet fruit. See Arens v. Arens, 400 N.W.2d 900, 903 (S.D.1987) (Henderson, J., specially concurring); Martin v. Martin, 358 N.W.2d 793, 801 (S.D.1984) (Henderson, J., concurring in part, dissenting in part).
Since my recitation of the gathered cases in Baltzer, add these seven cases to the growing, flourishing alimony business/decisional law of this state: Foley v. Foley, 429 N.W.2d 42 (S.D.1988) (Henderson, J., dissenting); Wright v. Wright, 427 N.W.2d 372 (S.D.1988) (Henderson, J., concurring specially); Henricks v. Henricks, 426 N.W.2d 569 (S.D.1988) (Henderson, J., concurring in part, dissenting in part); Williams v. Williams, 425 N.W.2d 390 (S.D.1988) (Henderson, J., concurring in result in part, dissenting in part); Clarke v. Clarke, 423 N.W.2d 818 (S.D.1988) (Henderson, J., disqualified); Dixon v. Dixon, 423 N.W.2d 507 (S.D.1988) (Henderson, J., concurring in part, dissenting in part); and Moser v. Moser, 422 N.W. 2d 594 (S.D.1988) (Henderson, J., concurring in result, without writing).
While the world concerns itself with the greenhouse effect and strategic arms reduction between the two great powers, and while heat and drought has parched the plains causing bad crops and thirsty livestock with resulting bankruptcies and an exodus from our farms/ranches, this Court is inundated with alimony appeals.
Essentially, I respectfully dissent on three grounds: 1) The record contains no plan for rehabilitation; 2) rehabilitative alimony is properly awarded for a short period whereas this award stretches out for fifteen years; 3) James is required to bear an unreasonable burden.
The first two grounds for dissent are interrelated, as the term for which rehabilitative alimony is awarded depends on the receiving spouse’s training or educational needs. See O’Neill v. O’Neill, 13 Conn. App. 300, 536 A.2d 978 (1988).
The record indicates that Nancy sought permanent alimony, both in her complaint, and through her counsel at the conclusion of the trial. No evidence regarding any plans for further education or special training was presented to the trial court. Despite this, the trial court ordered James to pay “rehabilitative alimony” for fifteen years, at the rate of $500 per month for eleven of these years. The trial court’s award has no relation, whatsoever, to the evidence before that tribunal. A trial court's decision must be soundly and substantially based upon the evidence. Owen v. Owen, 351 N.W.2d 139 (S.D.1984). “The term ‘abuse of discretion’ refers to ‘a discretion exercised to an end or purpose not justified by, and clearly against, reason and evidence.’ ” Moore v. Moore, 354 N.W.2d 732, 733 (S.D.1984) (quoting Herndon v. Herndon, 305 N.W.2d 917, 918 (S.D.1981)). Here, the trial court abused its discretion.
“Rehabilitative alimony has been defined as alimony payable for a short, specific, and determinable period of time, which payment will cease when the recipient is, in the exercise of reasonable efforts, in a position of self-support.” 24 Am.Jur.2d Divorce and Separation, § 746, at 731 (1983) (emphasis added). “Rehabilitative alimony basically contemplates an award considered necessary to assist a dependent spouse in regaining a useful and constructive role in society through vocational training or retraining, or therapeutic rehabilitation.” Supra. “ ‘Rehabilitative alimony has been used frequently when a dependent spouse enters a marriage with marketable skills, which then deteriorated through lack of use, or the dependent spouse is capable of becoming self-supporting through training or academic study.’ ” Hoak v. Hook, 370 S.E.2d 473, 479 (W.Va.1988) (quoting Cross v. Cross, 363 S.E.2d 449, 451 (W.Va.1987)). As O’Neill indicates, the term of alimony is related to the educational end. Here, where there is no educational plan or announced ambition — goal, a fifteen-year term is uncalled for.
The third ground for dissent is that this husband should not be paying alimony. Is there a need or justification for alimony in this case? Ought he pay alimony? Read Straub v. Straub, 381 N.W.2d 260 (S.D.1986); Grant v. Grant, 5 S.D. 17, 57 N.W. 1130 (1894). This ex-wife is knocking at the door of the Lady of Equity. A divorce *92was granted to both parties. When she found a job, she also found another man, maintaining a “continuous relationship” with him since 1984. He happened to be an alcoholic journalist. She lost interest in her own husband and substituted her interest in her alcoholic journalist and in her job. She traveled by car, from Rapid City to the Fort Meade Hospital in Sturgis, specifically to visit this individual. Liberated? Husband was apparently a bad fellow. He did not like his wife having a relationship. The trial court found that ex-wife’s relationship adversely affected husband both mentally and physically.
Ought he pay alimony? No! She and the alcoholic journalist should not live on her ex-husband’s earnings for the next fifteen years.

=== CASE 9736946 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:50.504051+00 ===

ROWLEY, President Judge:
In this appeal, we address the question which Juleann Ducjai (hereinafter “appellant”) has presented for our review1, to wit, whether the exclusivity provision contained in *368§ 72 of the Worker’s Compensation Act (hereinafter “WCA”), 77 P.S. § 1, et seq., is without force and effect in law since enactment of § 1719(a) of the Motor Vehicle Financial Responsibility Law (hereinafter “MVFRL”), 75 Pa.C.S.A § 1701 et seq. In other words, did the legislature intend to repeal § 72 sub silencio in all motor vehicle cases? Following an exhaustive review of the record, and the law relevant to this question2, we decide that the legislature did not so intend. We conclude that worker’s compensation benefits are the sole and exclusive remedy available to employees injured in a motor vehicle accident in the course and scope of their employment. Therefore, we affirm the trial court’s order granting summary judgment in favor of Dawn Dennis (hereinafter “appellee”), defendant in the trial court.
The procedural and factual background of this case were accurately and succinctly summarized by the trial court, as follows:
“The present matter was initiated by Praecipe of Summons filed by [appellant] on June 30, 1989, the resulting Writ in Summons being served on [appellee] on July 6,1989 and on [a] co-defendant [Peter Tarvin] on July 7, 1989.
‡ ;¡c ‡ ^ ‡
[Appellant] filed her complaint on January 17, 1991. In her complaint, [appellant] alleges that on July 27, 1987, she was a passenger in an automobile operated by [appellee]; that the vehicle operated by [appellee] collided with a pickup truck operated by co-defendant; that both [appellee] and *369co-defendant operated their respective vehicles negligently, as a result of which she sustained enumerated injuries.”
(Trial Court Opinion, 3/31/92, p. 1-2).
Further, the trial court stated in its well-reasoned opinion that:
“[t]he record before us establishes unequivocally that [appellant] was an employee of the Y.M.C.A. at Camp Kresge at the time of the accident; that [appellee] was [appellant’s] co-employee [when the accident occurred]; that, pursuant to the directions of the Director at Camp Kresge, [appellant] and [appellee] were driving to the Y.M.C.A. in Wilkes-Barre [when the accident happened]; and that [appellant] has received worker’s compensation benefits provided by the Y.M.C.A. as a result of the accident.”
Id. at p. 6-7.
After the pleadings were closed, appellee filed a motion for summary judgment with the trial court contending that she was entitled to judgment as a matter of law pursuant to 77 P.S. §§ 72 and 481(a). Neither appellant nor the co-defendant filed a brief in opposition to the motion. On March 30, 1992, the trial court granted appellee’s motion. Appellant filed a motion for reconsideration, which the trial court granted. The March 30th order was vacated and appellant was given five (5) days in which to file a brief in opposition to appellee’s summary judgment motion. On May 8,1992, after considering the briefs of both appellant and appellee, the trial court once again granted summary judgment in favor of appellee. This timely appeal followed.
The standard by which the grant of summary judgment must be reviewed is well-settled, and has been stated by this Court, as follows:
“A motion for summary judgment may properly be granted only 'if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a *370matter of law.’ Pa.R.C.P. 1035(b). See also Rybas v. Wapner, 311 Pa.Super. 50, 52, 457 A.2d 108, 109 (1983); Williams v. Pilgrim Life Insurance Co., 306 Pa.Super. 170, 172, 452 A.2d 269, 270 (1982). In passing upon a motion for summary judgment the [trial],court must examine the record in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Pocono International Raceway, Inc. v. Pocono Produce, Inc., 503 Pa. 80, 82, 468 A.2d 468, 470 (1983); Zimmerman v. Zimmerman, 322 Pa.Super. 121, 123, 469 A.2d 212, 213 (1983); Wilk v. Haus, 313 Pa.Super. 479, 480-482, 460 A.2d 288, 289-290 (1983). It is not part of the court’s function to decide issues of fact but solely to determine whether there is an issue of fact to be tried. Wilk v. Haus, supra at 482, 460 A.2d at 290; Tom Morello Construction Co. v. Bridgeport Federal Savings & Loan Association, 280 Pa.Super. 329, 334, 421 A.2d 747, 750 (1980). Any doubt must be resolved against the moving party. Chorba v. Davlisa Enterprises, Inc., 303 Pa.Super. 497, 500, 450 A.2d 36, 38 (1982); First Pennsylvania Bank, N.A. v. Triester, 251 Pa.Super. 372, 378, 380 A.2d 826, 829 (1977). Thorsen v. Iron and Glass Bank, 328 Pa.Super. 135, 140-141, 476 A.2d 928, 930-931 (1984). Accord Thompson Coal Co. v. Pike Coal Co., 488 Pa. 198, 203-204, 412 A.2d 466, 468-469 (1979); Day v. Volkswagenwerk Aktiengesellschaft, 318 Pa.Super. 225, 231, 464 A.2d 1313, 1316 (1983); Rybas v. Wapner, 311 Pa.Super. 50, 51, 457 A.2d 108, 109-110 (1983). However, parties seeking to avoid entry of summary judgment against them may not rest upon the averments contained in their pleadings. On the contrary, they are required to show, by depositions, answers to interrogatories, admissions or affidavits, that there is a genuine issue for trial. Pa.R.C.P. 1035(d). The court, in ruling upon a motion for summary judgment, must ignore controverted facts contained in the pleadings. Phaff v. Gerner, 451 Pa. 146, 303 A.2d 826 (1973); Younginger v. Heckler, 269 Pa.Super. 445, 410 A.2d 340 (1979). The court must restrict its review to the material authorized by Rule 1035 to be filed in support of and in opposition to the motion for summary judgment and *371only those allegations in the pleadings that are uncontroverted. Phaff v. Gerner, supra.”
Washington Federal Savings Loan Assoc. v. Stein, 357 Pa.Super. 286, 288-289, 515 A.2d 980, 981 (1986) (emphasis in original).
Further, it has been stated by this Court that:
“[o]nce a motion for summary judgment is made and is properly supported ... the nonmoving party may not simply rest upon the mere allegations or denials in his or her pleadings. Pa.R.C.P. 1035(d). In such a case, Rule 1035(d) requires that ‘by affidavits or as otherwise provided in the rule, [the nonmovant] must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.’ The purpose of Rule 1035(d) ‘is to assure that the motion for summary judgment may ‘pierce the pleading’ and to require the opposing party to disclose the facts of his claim or defense.’ Roland v. Kravco, Inc., 355 Pa.Super. 493, 501, 513 A.2d 1029, 1034 (1986) (quoting Goodrich Amran [sic] 2nd § 1035(d):5 at 460 (1976) (emphasis added by Roland court), [alloc.] denied, 517 Pa. 599, 535 A.2d 1058 (1987). Thus, once the motion for summary judgment has been properly supported, the burden is upon the nonmovant to disclose evidence that is the basis for his or her argument resisting summary judgment. Id. at 501, 513 A.2d at 1034.
Fiffick v. G.A.F. Corp., 412 Pa.Super. 261, 264-265, 603 A.2d 208, 210 (1992), quoting, Samarin v. G.A.F. Corp., 391 Pa.Super. 340, 346-347, 571 A.2d 398, 402 (1989).
In the instant case, appellee contends that the trial court’s order granting her summary judgment should be affirmed because she was entitled to judgment as a matter of law pursuant to § 72 and § 481(a) of the WCA. 77 P.S. § 72 provides that:
“If disability or death is compensable under this act, a person shall not be liable to anyone at common law or otherwise on account of such disability or death for any act or omission occurring while such person was in the same *372employ as the person disabled or lolled, except for intentional wrong.”
Further, 77 P.S. § 481(a) states that “[t]he liability of an employer under this act shall be exclusive and in place of any and all other liability to such employees____” (emphasis added).
Appellant, on the other hand, strenuously argues that § 1719(a) of the MVFRL is a special provision which, pursuant to the rules of statutory construction delineated in 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1901, et seq., acts as an exception to the more general provision contained in § 481(a) of the WCA. Further, appellant claims that 77 P.S. § 481(a) and 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 1719(a) are “irreconcilable,” such that, pursuant to the principles of statutory construction, the most recent provision, contained in the MVFRL, must prevail3. Section 1719 of the MVFRL provides, in pertinent part, as follows:
(a) General Rule. — Except for worker’s compensation, a policy of insurance issued or delivered pursuant to this subchapter shall be primary. Any program, group contract or other arrangement for payment of benefits such as described in section 1711 (relating to required benefits) 1712 (1) and (2) (relating to availability of benefits) or 1715 (relating to availability of adequate limits) shall be construed to contain a provision that all benefits provided therein shall be in excess of and not in duplication of any valid and collectible first party benefits provided in section 1711, 1712, or 1715 or worker’s compensation.”
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 1719(a). (emphasis added).
Our research has revealed no cases which address the precise issue of whether or not, since passage of the MVFRL, *373a person may recover both worker’s compensation benefits from her employer, and damages at common law from her co-employee, as a result of a motor vehicle accident which occurred while the co-employee was driving her own vehicle in the scope and course of their employer’s business. We do note, however, that prior to passage of the MVFRL, both this Court and the Pennsylvania Supreme Court addressed analogous factual scenarios and held that one co-worker is immune from common law tort liability for injuries sustained by another co-worker in a motor vehicle accident which occurred while both individuals were acting within the course and scope of employment. Simply put, both courts decided that the worker’s compensation benefits received by an employee were intended by the legislature to be the sole and exclusive avenue of recovery for a work-related injury4.
In Apple v. Reichert, 443 Pa. 289, 278 A.2d 482 (1971), the Pennsylvania Supreme Court upheld this Court’s decision refusing to strike a non-suit entered in favor of plaintiffs coworker. As noted by appellee, the facts of Apple are strikingly similar to those in the instant case. In Apple, as in this case, two co-workers were driving in an automobile privately owned by one of them while en route from one place of *374employment to another, with the express authorization of their supervisor, when they were involved in a collision with another car. In the instant case, as in Apple, the plaintiff-appellant sued both her co-employee and the driver of the other vehicle for personal injuries which she sustained in the accident. And, finally, in both cases, plaintiff-appellant made a claim for, and subsequently received, benefits under the Worker’s Compensation Act as a result of her injuries sustained in the work-related accident.
In Apple, the trial court concluded that both appellant and appellee were acting within the scope and course of their employment, that the WCA was applicable and that 77 P.S. § 72 provided immunity from liability for appellee such that a compulsory non-suit was entered in favor of appellee. Id. at 292, 28 A.2d at 483. In the present action, the trial court also concluded that appellant and appellee were “in the same employ” such that 77 P.S. § 72 immunized appellee from liability for appellant’s injuries resulting from the work-related accident.
In Apple, as in the instant case, appellant argued on appeal that her co-worker should not be immunized from' liability both because the parties were not acting within the scope of their employment at the time of the accident and because the purpose of the WCA was to prevent recovery against the employer’s liability carrier, not to protect employees from liability to their fellow employees. This Court and the Supreme Court affirmed the trial court’s conclusions in Apple, and, for the same reasons, we do likewise in the present appeal.
In Apple, our high Court stated unequivocally that “[t]he language of the amendment ... clearly provides that a co-employe is immune from liability for his negligent act resulting in injury to his fellow employe.” Id., 443 Pa. at 292, 278 A.2d at 483. The Court further opined:
“Nor do we see merit in appellant’s argument that the grant of immunity should be denied because this would provide a windfall for appellee’s liability insurer. While we *375can speculate that the legislature was more interested in fellow employee immunity for on-premises accidents due to negligence where the negligent employe is not likely to have liability insurance coverage, and we are aware that the employe’s automobile carrier here benefits rather than the employer’s compensation carrier, nevertheless we are not free to rephrase dear language of a statute in aid of a plaintiff even in circumstances like those in this case----
We read the amending Act as clearly phrased to protect all co-employes in all situations where negligent conduct of one employe may cause injury to a fellow employe, provided only that the injury in question is one that is compensable under the Act.”
Id. at 294, 278 A.2d at 485. (emphasis added).
Ten years after the Supreme Court’s decision in Apple, this Court considered the case of Sylvester v. Peruso, 286 Pa.Super. 225, 428 A.2d 653 (1981). In Sylvester, the plaintiff and defendant were co-employees who were involved in a car accident while driving to work in a company automobile. Although there was no contract requiring that their employer provide transportation for its employees, defendant had been directed to drive plaintiff to work in a company car by his employer, Stylecraft Fashions, Inc. At the time of the accident, defendant “had been driving the plaintiff to work for a period of eight (8) to ten (10) years.” Id. at 227, 428 A.2d at 654.
As a result of the incident, plaintiff sustained physical injuries and received workmen’s compensation benefits. She then brought a civil action against the driver of the car and her employer. Both defendants filed motions for summary judgment, which the trial court granted after concluding that the plaintiff was precluded from maintaining a civil action against either defendant because the sole remedy for her injuries was under the WCA.
In affirming the trial court’s order granting summary judgment, this Court concluded that:
*376“[b]ecause plaintiff received Workmen’s Compensation benefits from her employer [to compensate her for the injuries she sustained in the accident] we hold that the Workmen’s Compensation Act constitutes her sole remedy and that she cannot maintain civil actions against either her employer or her co-employee for injuries she received as a result of the May 20, 1977 accident.”
Id. at 228, 428 A.2d at 655. (emphasis added). This Court reasoned further that:
“... plaintiff filed for and received Workmen’s Compensation benefits thereby asserting her status as an employee engaged in the course of her employment at the time of the accident. To permit her now to disclaim such status so that she is able to pursue other benefits would be grossly unfair and would defeat the legislative purposes of the Workmen’s Compensation Act ...”
Id. at 228, 428 A.2d at 655.
Given the holdings of both Apple and Sylvester, the question now becomes whether, by passing the MVFRL, the legislature implicitly altered the state of the law regarding a co-employee’s tort liability for injuries sustained in a car accident occurring in the course and scope of employment. We conclude that it did not.
Although appellant relies upon § 1719(a) of the MVFRL and a recent Supreme Court decision, Kohler v. McCrory Stores, 532 Pa. 130, 615 A.2d 27 (1992), neither authority states, or even suggests, that the MVFRL overruled the exclusivity provision of the WCA, by permitting a plaintiff to maintain a common law tort claim against her co-employee merely because the injury occurred in a car rather than on the employer’s premises5. In fact, two recent cases, decided by *377our Supreme Court, have taken the position opposite to that advanced by appellant, albeit in different contexts than that involved in the present appeal.
Most importantly, in Hackenberg v. SEPTA, 526 Pa. 358, 586 A.2d 879 (1991), the Supreme Court specifically held that the MVFRL did not generally supersede the exclusivity provision of the WCA. There, an employee sued his employer, the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (hereinafter “SEPTA”), to recover damages he sustained in a car accident with an uninsured motorist while he was acting within the course and scope of employment. The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of the employer based on the exclusivity provision of the WCA and this Court affirmed.
In upholding this Court’s decision, the Supreme Court concluded that employees injured within the scope of their employment could not receive uninsured and underinsured motorist benefits against self-insured employers, because to do so would violate the exclusivity provision of the WCA6. In arriving at this conclusion, our high Court opined as follows:
“We disagree that section 1936 of the Statutory Construction Act requires the more recently enacted MVFRL to supersede the terms of the Workmen’s Compensation Act. It is improper to resort to a comparison of dates of enactment unless the statutes in question cannot be construed so as to give effect to both. Section 1933 of the Statutory Construction Act provides:
Whenever a general provision in a statute shall be in conflict with a special provision in the same or another statute, the two shall be construed, if possible, so that effect may be given to both. If the conflict between the two provisions is irreconcilable, the special provisions *378shall prevail and shall be construed as an exception to the general provision, unless the general provision shall be enacted later and it shall be the manifest intention of the General Assembly that such general provision shall prevail.
1 Pa.C.S. § 1933. Applying the analysis of section 1933 of the Statutory Construction Act, the requirement of section 1787 of the MVFRL that self-insured entities provide uninsured motorist coverage is, on the facts of this case, in irreconcilable conflict with the requirement of section 303(a) of the Workmen’s Compensation Act that worker’s compensation benefits are the sole and exclusive liability of an employer for an employee’s work-related injury. Section 303(a) of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, however, is clearly a special provision since it concerns a narrow class of accidents (those involving employees who are making claims against their employers), and it prevails over the more general terms of the MVFRL unless it is the manifest intention of the General Assembly that the general provision prevail. The legislature has not manifested such an intention. We conclude, therefore, that section 303(a) of the Workmen’s Compensation Law is an exception to the general rule of Section 1787 of the MVFRL, and that under the terms of the MVFRL a self-insured employer may not be required to pay both uninsured motorist benefits and worker’s compensation benefits to an employee who has received a work-related injury.”
Id., 526 Pa. at 369-370, 586 A.2d at 884-885. (emphasis added).
Secondly, in Alston v. St. Paul Insurance Companies, 531 Pa. 261, 612 A.2d 421 (1992), the Supreme Court considered the issue of whether “an employee who sustains an injury covered by the Pennsylvania Workmen’s Compensation Act ... may assert a separate tort action for injuries allegedly arising out of malicious and fraudulent conduct and abuse of the legal process to terminate workmen’s compensation benefits by agents of the employer’s insurance carrier.” Id. at 262, 612 A.2d at 421. There, it was held that the workmen’s compensation system, pursuant to the exclusivity provision of *379the WCA, encompasses all disputes over coverage and payments of benefits, including actions taken by the employer’s insurance carrier or its agents.
Finally, we observe that just recently, in amending the WCA, the legislature explicitly repealed and modified a number of provisions contained in the MVFRL. Sections 1735 and 1737 of the MVFRL were repealed absolutely while §§ 1720 and 1722 were repealed insofar as they related to worker’s compensation benefits. As a result of the new laws, a worker’s compensation carrier may now seek subrogation for any benefits paid in connection with actions arising out of the maintenance or use of a motor vehicle. Correlatively, an employee injured in the course and scope of employment may not pursue recovery of uninsured or underinsured motorist benefits in addition to the benefits he receives from worker’s compensation.
We believe that these changes in the law were intended by the legislature to proclaim the supremacy of the WCA’s exclusivity provision and to reaffirm the principle that an employee may not seek double recovery for a work-related injury. The legislature has tried time and again to make it clear that worker’s compensation benefits are to be the exclusive remedy for employment-related injuries, save for those intentionally inflicted. Given the legislative treatment of the entire concept of worker’s compensation, we cannot find any reasonable basis for concluding that the legislature intended to repeal § 72 of the WCA by inference. Had the legislature intended to expand the remedies available to an employee injured in a motor vehicle accident, we believe that it would have expressed that intent clearly (by including it in its recent amendments) rather than sub silencio.
Because the legislature did not express such an intent, and because the Supreme Court has strictly construed the exclusivity provision of the WCA generally, we must conclude that the holdings of both Apple and Sylvester still control cases such as the instant one. Section 72 of the WCA operates to immunize appellee from common law tort liability *380in this case such that appellant simply is not entitled to bring suit against her co-employee for injuries sustained in a car accident where both she and her co-employee were acting within the scope and course of their employment. As our Supreme Court observed in Kline, “[t]he Workmen’s Compensation Act explicitly states that it is the exclusive avenue of compensation----” Kline, 503 Pa. at 256-257, 469 A.2d at 161. (emphasis added).
Order granting summary judgment is affirmed.
CIRILLO, J., files a concurring statement.
. We observe that initially, this case was heard by a three-judge panel of this Court. There, appellant’s only argument was that summary judgment was inappropriate in this case due to unresolved factual issues. However, following the original panel decision, appellee filed a petition for reargument, and a brief in support thereof. Appellant opposed the petition. The petition was granted and the matter was certified to be heard before this Court en banc. Appellant and appellee both filed supplemental briefs on reargument. It was at this juncture that appellant first raised the instant statutory construction issue. Although appellant technically waived this argument, in the interest of judicial economy, we will address it because appellant’s summary judgment argument would have no validity if the premise upon which it *368was founded, to wit, that the legislature had changed the law sub silencio, was unsound. In her initial appearance before this Court appellant attempted to reach step two of the analysis without reaching step one. Because we conclude, in the first step of the analysis, that the legislature did not intend to repeal § 72 of the WCA insofar as it relates to motor vehicle cases, appellant’s original argument (that there are unresolved issues of material fact) is irrelevant such that we need not address it.
. It should be noted that in our review, we examined the Legislative History of the MVFRL, in an effort to determine the intent behind enactment of § 1719(a) as it relates to worker’s compensation benefits. However, our efforts in this regard were to no avail.
. The MVFRL, specifically § 1719(a), took effect on October 1, 1984. The WCA was originally enacted on June 2, 1915 and was thereafter amended several times. Recently, the WCA was again amended by the legislature, to be made effective as follows: the repeal of §§ 1735 and 1737 was immediate and the modification of §§ 1720 and 1722 took effect on August 31, 1993.
Parenthetically, we observe that the MVFRL's predecessor, the Pennsylvania No-Fault Motor Vehicle Insurance Act, was approved on July 19, 1974, and was made effective as of July 19, 1975.
. It should be noted that in Kline v. Arden H. Verner Co., 503 Pa. 251, 469 A.2d 158 (1983), the Pennsylvania Supreme Court considered a challenge to the constitutionality of the exclusivity provision of the WCA here at issue and found it to be constitutional. In so concluding, the Cotut flatly stated that “[c]onsistent with a plain reading of the [Worker’s Compensation] Act, its intent and purpose, we have held that workmen's compensation is the exclusive remedy for job related injuries.” Id. at 254, 469 A.2d at 159. (emphasis added). Further, the Court reasoned:
“[t]o change, alter or abolish a remedy lies within the wisdom and power of the legislature and in some instances, the courts. Access to a tribunal is not denied when the tribunal has no jurisdiction to entertain the claim or the remedy. Time and circumstances require new remedies to adjust to new and unforeseen losses and conditions. To do so, facets of the society often require new immunities or larger responsibility, as the legislature may determine. The workmen’s compensation law has deprived some [employees] of rights in exchange for surer benefits, [and has] immunized some, to make possible resources to benefit many, who w[]ere heretofore without possible or practical remedies.”
Id. at 255, 469 A.2d at 160.
. In Kohler, supra:
“the question before th[e] [Supreme] Court [wa]s whether an employee can set forth a valid cause of action against his employer under the personal animus exception to the Pennsylvania Workmen’s Compensation Act (‘Act’) for non-work-related injuries inflicted by a coworker solely for personal reasons, where the injured employee has previously accepted benefits pursuant to the Act. [The Court] h[e]ld that only a final adjudication of work-relatedness can estop an *377employee from asserting that his injuries are not work-related for purposes of maintaining an action against his employer under the personal animus exception to the Act.”
Id., 532 Pa. at 134, 615 A.2d at 29. We do not find any guidance in Kohler regarding the question now before us.
. The Hackenberg Court refers to § 303(a) of the WCA in its opinion. § 303(a) has been codified at 77 Pa.S. § 481(a).

=== CASE 9736947 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:50.509734+00 ===

CIRILLO, Judge,
concurring.
Section 72 of the Worker’s Compensation Act (the Act), 77 P.S. § 72, abrogates common law liability of one employee to another for negligence, provided that the injury is one compensable under the Act. See Apple v. Reichert, 443 Pa. 289, 278 A.2d 482 (1971); Jadosh v. Goeringer, 442 Pa. 451, 275 A.2d 58 (1971); Babich v. Pavich, 270 Pa.Super. 140, 411 A.2d 218 (1980). There have been few cases in which the courts of this Commonwealth have carved out an exception to the exclusivity provision of the Act, 77 P.S. 481(a), or co-employee immunity. Cf. Apple, supra; Sylvester v. Peruso, 286 Pa.Super. 225, 428 A.2d 653 (1981).
There are two recent cases from this court, however, which I believe warrant mention relative to the issue presented today: Ferry v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., 392 Pa.Super. 571, 573 A.2d 610 (1990) and Chatham v. Aetna Life & Casualty Co., 391 Pa.Super. 53, 570 A.2d 509 (1990). Additionally, I believe that the effect,, if any, of our Supreme Court’s decision in Selected Risks Ins. Co. v. Thompson, 520 Pa. 130, 552 A.2d 1382 (1989) on the Apple decision merits consideration.
Although Ferry and Chatham pertained to uninsured motorist benefits, and the instant case involves first party benefits, in both Ferry and Chatham this court construed the MVFRL as a source of recovery separate from worker’s *381compensation benefits. The Chatham court, guided by the Supreme Court’s decision in Thompson, stated:
[W]e take our direction from Thompson, the most recent pronouncement from the high court revealing that the MVFRL can be interpreted to sanction, in graphic terms, the Legislature’s condonation of a claimant/employee’s right to secure both work[er]’s compensation and uninsured motorist benefits resulting from work related injuries.
Chatham, 391 Pa.Super. at 59-60, 570 A.2d at 512. In Ferry, our court, relying upon Thompson and Chatham, reversed entry of summary judgment and agreed with the appellant’s argument that the MVFRL provides a separate source of recovery for employees injured by uninsured motorists that is independent of the exclusive remedy for work-related accidents under the Worker’s Compensation Act. Ferry, 392 Pa.Super. at 572-574, 573 A2d at 611.
Prior to the legislative amendment to the MVFRL,1 Sub-chapter C, entitled “Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist Coverage,” provided an exception to the exclusivity clause of the Worker’s Compensation Act:
§ 1735. Coverages unaffected by workers’ compensation benefits
The coverages required by this subchapter shall not be made subject to an exclusion or reduction in amount because of any workers’ compensation benefits payable as a result of the same injury.
75 Pa.C.S. § 1735.
Subchapter B, entitled “Motor Vehicle Liability Insurance First Party Benefits,” does not include a similar exception; it does, however, include provisions which make reference to workers’ compensation benefits as a separate recovery or set-off against other benefits. Section 1719 provides:
§ 1719. Coordination of benefits
(a) General rule. — Except for workers’ compensation, a policy of insurance issued or delivered pursuant to this subchapter shall be primary. Any program, group contract, *382or other arrangement for payment of benefits ... shall be construed to contain a provision that all benefits provided therein shall be in excess of and not in duplication of any valid and collectible first party benefits provided in section 1711, 1712, or 1715 or workers’ compensation.
75 Pa.C.S. § 1719(a). Section 1720 provides:
§ 1720. Subrogation
In actions arising out of the maintenance or use of a motor vehicle, there shall be no right of subrogation or reimbursement from a claimant’s tort recovery with respect to workers’ compensation benefits, benefits available under section 1711 (relating to required benefits), 1712 (relating to availability of benefits) or 1715 (relating to availability of adequate limits) or benefits paid or payable by a program, group contract or other arrangement whether primary or excess under section 1719 (relating to coordination of benefits).
75 Pa.C.S. § 1720.
The Legislature repealed absolutely section 1735 of the MVFRL,2 and it repealed section 1720 of MVFRL3 insofar as it relates to worker’s compensation benefits. Though both repeals were effective after this appeal was taken, the legislature’s actions do lend hindsight in this case and credence to the result. I submit, however, that prior to this recent legislative amendment, the law did not say with certainty that appellee Dennis was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Pa.R.C.P. 1035(b); Rybas v. Wapner, 311 Pa.Super. 50, 52, 457 A.2d 108, 109 (1983).
. Act No. 1993-44, S.B. No. 1, § 25(a) and (b), Approved July 2, 1993.
. Effective July 2, 1993.
. Effective August 31, 1993.

=== CASE 2208076 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:26.323798+00 ===

225 Cal.App.2d 591 (1964)
JAMES R. McCORMICK et al., Plaintiffs and Respondents,
v.
HARTLEY R. APPLETON et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Civ. No. 21386.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
Mar. 16, 1964.
Hartley R. Appleton, in pro. per., and George Olshausen for Defendants and Appellants.
Di Leonardo, Blake, Kelly, Aguilar & Leal and Stanley F. Leal for Plaintiffs and Respondents.
TAYLOR, J.
This is an appeal by defendants, Hartley and Esther Appleton, in a dispute between the owners of adjacent lots in the Russelhurst subdivision of Santa Clara County. The plaintiffs, James and Donna McCormick, filed their complaint seeking injunctive relief and damages for *594 trespass to real and personal property, alleging the wilful and wanton destruction of a boundary fence constructed in 1958 by the prior owner, R. Heaviside. The defendants answered, denying the allegations of the complaint and cross- complained for damages for trespass by the McCormicks' water main and for a determination of the common boundary in accordance with a 1961 survey. After a trial without a jury, the court denied relief on the cross-complaint, determined that the agreed boundary was along the 1958 fence line, enjoined the defendants from coming on the land of plaintiffs, and awarded compensatory damages of $350 and exemplary damages of $500 to the plaintiffs. The appellants contend that the trial court erred in its application of the law, its findings of fact, and in the award of damages.
Viewing the record most favorably to the judgment, as we must on appeal, the facts are as follows: On February 20, 1959, the respondents acquired lots 34 and 34A from Mr. and Mrs. R. Heaviside who had built a home on lot 34 in 1957, with a driveway on lot 34A. By a grant deed dated October 15, 1958, the appellants had acquired lot 38 from Mr. and Mrs. S. Crowe. The appellants' lot was unimproved and shared a boundary of approximately 137 feet with the easternmost portion of the south line of the respondents' property. Because of discrepancies between the lots and the subdivision map, both the Heavisides and the Crowes were uncertain about the location of the common boundary of their properties. Each independently ran survey lines from different points of beginning and arrived at certain compatible results as to the delineation of the boundary. Thereafter, they orally agreed on the common boundary line. In reliance on this determination and the boundary agreement, Heaviside constructed a split rail fence all around his property and made other improvements, including the planting of trees. The split rail fence extended about 121 feet on the common boundary with the Crowe property leaving an opening at one end to permit access to Crescent Road.
In the summer of 1961, several owners in the area discussed a jointly financed survey to be made by M. Wolff. The respondents preliminarily agreed to share the cost of the survey but in September 1961 told Wolff to stop the survey on their property. The respondents rejected the projected preliminary results because the Wolff line extended about 4 feet into their bedroom. The majority of the other owners also rejected the Wolff survey and its proposed realignment of *595 property lines. The appellants and a few others were in the minority which was willing to realign boundaries as suggested by Wolff.
On October 29, 1961, when the Wolff survey had been completed but not yet filed or accepted by the county, the respondents returned from a brief shopping expedition to find the appellant, Hartley Appleton, and two other men destroying the fence. The appellant, Hartley Appleton, testified that the Wolff survey showed the fence to be on his property and that he merely pushed it over because it was rotten and falling down anyway.
The court found that the prior owners, being uncertain of the true boundary, had agreed on the common boundary along the fence line; that in reliance thereon, Heaviside had constructed the fence and made other improvements;  [fn. 1] that from then until the present dispute, the owners of the contiguous parcels of property treated the fence line as the true boundary; that therefore Appleton's entry and destruction of the fence was a trespass. The court further found that the respondents had not agreed to be bound by the Wolff survey and that the respondents' water main did not trespass on the land of the appellants.
[1a] The appellants first contend that the trial court erred in finding an agreed boundary binding on successors in title because there was no acquiescence for the statutory time of five years (Code Civ. Proc.,  325. [2] The requirements of proof of an agreed boundary are uncertainty as to the true boundary line, an agreement between the coterminous owners fixing the line, and acceptance and acquiescence in the line so fixed for a period equal to the statute of limitations, or under such circumstances that substantial loss would be caused by a change in its position (Ernie v. Trinity Lutheran Church, 51 Cal.2d 702, 707 [336 P.2d 525]). [3] Thus, while the general rule requires that the period of acquiescence in the agreed boundary must be equal to the period of the statute of limitations (Silva v. Azevedo, 178 Cal. 495 [173 P. 929]), an exception has long been recognized where substantial loss would result unless the agreement were upheld (Young v. Blakeman, 153 Cal. 477, 482 [95 P. *596 888]). [1b] Here, the change suggested by the appellants would result in the taking of part of respondents' home and improvements made subsequent to the establishment of the agreed boundary and the equitable exception was properly applied. In the recent case of Kirkegaard v. McLain, 199 Cal.App.2d 484 [18 Cal.Rptr. 641], the court invoked the equitable exception and found an agreed boundary where the boundary fence had stood for a shorter period than provided by the statute of limitations and the loss to the owner would have been much less severe than in the instant case. We conclude that there was sufficient evidence to support the court's finding of an agreed boundary.
[4a] The appellants argue that the trial court failed to find that the fence had been built before the appellants purchased their land. The clear import of the finding concerning the boundary agreement between the previous owners is that the fence was built before the appellants acquired the property and, although the testimony was conflicting, there was ample evidence to sustain the finding. Heaviside testified that he built the fence with Crowe's lumber before his back injury on August 15, 1958, and the grant deed from Crowe to appellants was dated October 15, 1958.
In any event, a finding on the date of the building of the fence was not essential to the judgment. The evidence was uncontroverted that an agrement between the prior owners establishing the boundary line took place sometime prior to the appellants' acquisition of the property. [5] The agreement fixes the true boundary and when the division line is thus established, it attaches itself to the deeds of the respective parties (Young v. Blakeman, supra). [4b] The crucial date is that of the agreement and not the construction of the fence.
[6] The appellants claim that it was essential for the court to find whether the Wolff survey agreement superseded the prior boundary agreement between the parties. This subject was properly covered by the finding that the respondents had not agreed to be bound by the findings and determinations of the Wolff survey. The evidence showed that the respondents and other owners in the tract merely consented to the survey and to share the costs. They did not agree to be bound thereby, nor to adjust property lines accordingly. In fact, most of the parties concerned joined the respondents in rejecting the proposed preliminary realignment.
[7] The court's findings on the effect of the Wolff survey *597 and that there was an agreed boundary rendered inappropriate appellants' argument that other owners in the tract were necessary parties to the disposition of the action (Bank of California v. Superior Court, 16 Cal.2d 516 [106 P.2d 879]).
[8] Appellants argue that the court applied an erroneous theory of law in resolving all equities against them. They contend that the true rule is that equity will adjust its decrees to avoid hardships but not to defeat the basic right to have the boundaries readjusted where existing surveys are inaccurate. The answer is that the Wolff survey was not agreed upon by the parties as an accurate readjustment. There was sufficient evidence to find an agreed boundary and appellants failed to show any grounds for relief on their cross-complaint. Appellants do not dispute that the court properly balanced the hardships to avoid running a boundary line through respondents' house, but apparently contend that the court should have awarded damages to the respondents in lieu of other equitable relief. We think that under the particular circumstances of this case, and considering the fact that appellants' lot was not improved, the court properly exercised its equitable discretion both as to the result reached and the relief granted.
[9] Finally, we turn to the arguments concerning the award of compensatory and exemplary damages. The appellants contend that the evidence was insufficient to sustain an award of $350 compensatory damages, since the fence was built by Heaviside with lumber given to him by Crowe. The respondents testified that this figure represented the value or replacement cost. The appellants offered no rebuttal testimony. [10] It is well settled that owners of property are qualified to testify to the value thereof, and respondents' opinion was sufficient to sustain the court's finding (Holt v. Ravani, 221 Cal.App.2d 213 [34 Cal.Rptr. 417]).
[11] The appellants cite Civil Code section 841 to the effect that each coowner is bound equally to maintain the boundary fence unless one of them chooses to let his land lie without fencing, as authority for the proposition that respondents were not the sole owners of the fence and hence were entitled to recover no more than one-half of its value. The trial court properly concluded that this section does not apply where one party wrongfully damages the property of a neighbor by removing a preexisting boundary fence.
[12] As to the award of exemplary damages, the appellants *598 argue that the evidence is insufficient to establish malice or oppression. We cannot agree. Appellant Hartley Appleton testified that he attempted to notify the respondents before taking down the fence by ringing their doorbell; the respondent James McCormick testified that he had no doorbell or any similar device at his home. The respondents used and occupied lots 34 and 34A as a home, while the appellants' lot was unimproved and vacant. In view of these facts and the conduct of the appellant, an attorney at law, in taking down the fence when the Wolff survey had not even been filed with the county, and with knowledge of a quiet title action pending between the parties, the court could easily infer sufficient malice and oppression to warrant the exemplary damages.
Judgment affirmed.
Shoemaker, P. J., and Agee, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Although not expressly challenged by the appellants, the court's finding that Mr. Heaviside constructed his home in reliance on the boundary agreement is not supported by the evidence. The house was built in 1957; the boundary agreement was made in the summer of 1958.

=== CASE 9736948 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:51.848956+00 ===

OPINION
NIX,1 Chief Justice.
Appellant, Consolidated Supermarkets, Inc. (“Consolidated”), appeals from the Order of the Superior Court affirming the Order of the Court of Common Pleas which enjoined Consolidated from operating a pharmacy in the West Goshen Shopping Center (“the Shopping Center”). In this case, we granted allocatur to address the question of whether this Commonwealth should adopt Section 524 of the Restatement of Property as an exception to the Statute of Frauds and, if so, whether the facts of this case fit within the exception. However, because we find that this Commonwealth’s Statute of Frauds does not apply to the instant facts, we need not address whether Section 524 should be adopted. For the reasons that follow, we reverse.
This case was commenced on April 29, 1987, by Appellee, Thatcher’s Drug Store of West Goshen, Inc. (“Thatcher’s”), which for the last nineteen years has been operating a pharmacy in the Shopping Center immediately adjacent to Consolidated’s Shop-Rite supermarket. Thatcher’s commencement of this action was in response to Consolidated’s plan to operate a pharmacy in the supermarket.
The facts as found by the trial court are as follows: On October 29, 1965, Consolidated entered into a long-term lease with then owner, Enal Productions (“Landlord”), to open a Shop-Rite supermarket as an “anchor” store for the Shopping Center. Under the terms of the lease, Consolidated was prohibited from using more than twenty percent of its selling space for the sale of “non-food” items.
*472In September 1973, Thatcher’s entered into a ten-year lease with Landlord to open a pharmacy in the store immediately adjacent to the Shop-Rite supermarket. The lease contained the following paragraph protecting Thatcher’s from competition within the Shopping Center:
Landlord shall not lease any store within the premises for use as a drug store or pharmacy or for the sale of medical equipment or prosthetic supplies. The foregoing restriction shall not apply to any of the shopping center presently used as a supermarket or department store.
Record at 376a. The lease also prohibited Thatcher’s from selling any “food.”
In 1976, Thatcher’s installed a refrigeration case from which it sold milk. In response, Consolidated posted a sign in front of the supermarket announcing that: “Coming soon — a Shop-Rite pharmacy.” Upon seeing the sign, Ronald Zukin, the president and sole shareholder of Thatcher’s contacted Joseph Greenblatt, the comptroller and vice-president of Consolidated. Mr. Zukin asked Mr. Greenblatt why the sign announcing the coming of a Shop-Rite pharmacy was in the window. Mr. Greenblatt responded, “We don’t want you in the dairy business,” referring to Thatcher’s recent selling of milk. After some discussion, Mr. Greenblatt said, “You get out of the dairy business and we won’t open a pharmacy.” Within a week, Thatcher’s removed the refrigeration case, and, in response, the supermarket removed the pharmacy announcement.
In 1983, nearing the end of Thatcher’s ten-year lease, Mr. Zukin approached Landlord about securing a ten-year renewal. Mr. Zukin was informed that Consolidated desired Thatcher’s space to use as a Shop-Rite pharmacy. As a result, Mr. Zukin located an alternative site for the pharmacy three blocks from the Shopping Center. Mr. Zukin, with his attorney, negotiated a lease at the new location, drew a deposit check, and was prepared to finalize the deal. Before finalizing that deal, Mr. Zukin had a conversation with Landlord and was advised that Consolidated had changed its mind *473about taking Thatcher’s space and that a renewal would be offered to Thatcher’s.
When Mr. Zukin received the proposed renewal, he met with Mr. Greenblatt to seek assurances that Consolidated would not open a competing pharmacy. Mr. Zukin testified that Mr. Greenblatt’s direct response was, “We don’t hurt the little guys. We have no desire to want to hurt you and we have no intention of opening a pharmacy.” Mr. Greenblatt admitted in testimony that this meeting took place but denied making such a statement. Based on the assurances he received from Mr. Greenblatt, Mr. Zukin executed a ten-year renewal in late 1983.
Within the next year, Mr. Greenblatt became aware that Thatcher’s had a “Beverage Center” in front of its store. In response, a sign was again posted in the supermarket window announcing “Shop-Rite Pharmacy coming soon.” Again, Mr. Zukin contacted Mr. Greenblatt, who advised him that Consolidated did not want Thatcher’s to go into the soda business and, if Mr. Zukin would take his beverage center sign down, “we won’t be in the pharmacy business.” Within a few days, Mr. Zukin removed the beverage center sign and, immediately thereafter, the Shop-Rite pharmacy announcement was removed.
In 1985, Consolidated secured the rental space immediately adjacent to the supermarket, on the side opposite of Thatcher’s. Thereafter, Consolidated removed the partition wall between the supermarket and the new space and secured the federal and state licenses necessary to operate a pharmacy. Aware of Consolidated’s imminent plans to open a pharmacy, Thatcher’s filed the instant action seeking to enjoin Consolidated from implementing its plans.
Thatcher’s presented three grounds in its complaint in support of its request for injunctive relief: (1) breach of the lease between Consolidated and Landlord; (2) breach of an oral contract between Consolidated and Thatcher; and (3) estoppel based upon an oral promise and detrimental reliance. The trial court conducted an evidentiary hearing on May 7 and *4748, 1987. At the hearing, the breach of lease argument was rejected by the trial court and the oral contract theory was abandoned by Thatcher’s. The trial court ruled in favor of Thatcher’s on the grounds of equitable estoppel and entered a decree nisi enjoining Consolidated from operating a retail, prescription pharmacy on the premises of the West Goshen Shopping Center.
Consolidated filed exceptions to the trial court’s order claiming, inter alia, that the Statute of Frauds2 rendered any agreement between the parties unenforceable. In its “opinion sur exceptions,” the trial court upheld its decision on the basis of equitable estoppel but also determined that the Restatement of Property § 5243 provided an applicable exception to the Statute of Frauds defense. The trial court denied Consolidated’s exceptions and entered a final order. On appeal, the Superior Court, like the trial court, determined that the Restatement of Property § 524 provided an applicable exception to the Statute of Frauds defense.
Consolidated appealed and we granted allocatur. For the reasons that follow, we find that the Superior Court incorrectly affirmed the trial court’s decision to enjoin Consolidated from operating a pharmacy.
The first question we must address is whether this Commonwealth’s Statute of Frauds is applicable in the instant factual setting. By its terms, the Statute of Frauds governs “any ... interest of, in, or out of any ... lands.... ” 33 P.S. *475§ 1. Consolidated argues that the oral promise created an “easement.” However, this case does not involve an interest in land in the form of a negative easement. In this matter we are presented with an oral assurance by Consolidated that it did not intend to operate a pharmacy. Such an agreement not to compete does not qualify as an interest in land.
This Court indicated in Clements v. Sannuti, 356 Pa. 63, 51 A.2d 697 (1947), how a negative easement arises and operates.
[T]here can be no easement, no incorporeal right, binding the servient tenement, the effect of which would be to deprive its owner of the right of use or possession thereof. “An easement is a liberty, privilege or advantage which one may have in the lands of another without profit ... It may be merely negative ... and may be created by a covenant or agreement not to use land in a certain way....”
Id. at 65, 51 A.2d at 698 (quoting Slegel v. Lauer, 148 Pa. 236, 240, 23 A. 996, 997 (1892)). This definition is not so broad that Consolidated’s promise not to operate a pharmacy falls within it. The term “negative easement” can not be construed in such an expansive way.
To the extent Consolidated’s promise relates in any way to the land, the relationship is too tenuous to be treated as a basis for establishing an interest in land. At most, Consolidated made a covenant that it would not sell certain products. This is not analogous to the agreements that are conventionally referred to as negative easements. Negative easements are especially viewed as vehicles to assure the owner of the dominant estate that the owner of the servient estate will not interfere with the flow of air or light to, or the subjacent or lateral support of the dominant estate. Restatement of Property § 452 comment a.4 Treating Consolidated’s promise not *476to compete as a negative easement would go beyond what the Restatement contemplates. Since Consolidated’s promise to Thatcher’s does not qualify as an interest in land, neither the Statute of Frauds nor any of its exceptions applies to this case.
Consolidated also argues that Thatcher’s has failed to prove all the elements of the doctrine of estoppel by clear, precise and unequivocal evidence. Thatcher’s submits that it established all the requirements of estoppel and, therefore, the Superior Court was correct to apply it.5
The theory upon which Thatcher’s sought relief was a claim of “promissory estoppel.” The trial court found that Consolidated gave assurances to Thatcher’s that it “had no intention of opening a pharmacy.” However, that promise was not supported by consideration. Such a naked promise is generally not legally enforceable. However, under the doctrine of promissory estoppel, there is an exception to this general rule. Under this theory, *477Restatement (Second) Contracts § 90(1). The doctrine of promissory estoppel is the law in Pennsylvania. Central Storage & Transfer Co. v. Kaplan, 487 Pa. 485, 410 A.2d 292 (1979). A party asserting a claim of estoppel has the burden of establishing all the essential elements. Funds for Business Growth, Inc. v. Maraldo, 443 Pa. 281, 288, 278 A.2d 922, 926 (1971). One of those elements is that enforcement of the promise must be necessary to avoid injustice. Significantly,
*476[a] promise which the promisor should reasonably expect to induce action or forbearance on the part of the promisee or a third person and which does induce such action or forbearance is binding if injustice can be avoided only by enforcement of the promise.
*477[satisfaction of [this] requirement may depend on the reasonableness of the promisee’s reliance, on its definite and substantial character in relation to the remedy sought, on the formality with which the promise is made, on the extent to which the evidentiary, cautionary, deterrent and channeling functions of form are met by the commercial setting or otherwise, and on the extent to which such other policies as the enforcement of bargains and the prevention of unjust enrichment are relevant.
Restatement (Second) Contracts § 90, comment b. Several of the considerations listed in comment b are relevant to this case, and we factor them into the analysis of Thatcher’s claim.
Before doing so, we note that this Court is bound by the trial court’s findings of fact, unless those findings are not based on competent evidence. 2401 Pennsylvania Ave. Corp. v. Federation of Jewish Agencies of Greater Philadelphia, 507 Pa. 166, 172, 489 A.2d 733, 736 (1985). Moreover, absent an abuse of discretion, this Court is bound by the trial court’s assessment of the credibility of the parties. Wagner v. Wagner, 466 Pa. 532, 538, 353 A.2d 819, 822 (1976). However, the trial court’s conclusions of law are not binding on an appellate court, whose duty it is to determine whether there was a proper application of law to the facts by the trial court. 2401 Pennsylvania Ave., 507 Pa. at 172, 489 A.2d at 736. We are constrained, for the reasons that follow, to conclude that Consolidated’s “promise” is not enforceable.
There are three interrelated reasons for rejecting Thatcher’s claim: Thatcher’s reliance was unreasonable; nothing was done to formalize the promise; and no evidentiary, *478cautionary or deterrent functions were met under the circumstances. First, it was error for the trial court to conclude that, as a matter of law, Thatcher’s acted reasonably in relying on Consolidated’s representation that it did not intend to operate a pharmacy. Under the terms of its lease, Consolidated had a clear right to do so.6 Additionally, Thatcher’s lease specifically provided that any part of the shopping center already being used as a supermarket, which included Consolidated, was exempt from the clause prohibiting another store from selling drugs and medical supplies.
The language of the two lease agreements clearly reserved Consolidated’s right to operate a pharmacy. Under the particular circumstances of this case, where Thatcher’s sought ten years of protection from a source of potential competition with whom it had a less than amicable relationship, it was unreasonable for Thatcher’s to proceed on the basis of indefinite oral assurances.7
In view of the relationship between the parties and the nature and duration of the promise, any agreement not to compete should have been formalized. Proceeding in such a manner would have memorialized the occasion and reduced the possibility that the terms of the agreement would be misunderstood. As a business entity operating in the commercial setting, Thatcher’s showed poor judgment when it decided to renew its ten-year lease and forgo its opportunity to relocate on the basis of an indefinitely worded promise uttered in an informal conversation with' a potential competitor.
The second factor which weighs against enforcing the oral promise is the fact that it was made with relative informality. The record shows that, after receiving a telephone call from Ronald Zukin, Thatcher’s president and sole proprietor, Jo*479seph Greenblatt, Consolidated’s comptroller, stopped by to see Zukin. At that meeting, Zukin informed Greenblatt that: (1) he had been offered a new lease; (2) he had a lease at another location for ten years; and (3) he wanted assurances that Consolidated was not going to open a pharmacy. The trial court accepted Zukin’s testimony that Greenblatt replied, “we have no intention of opening a pharmacy.” (N.T. 5/7/87, Zukin, p. 27). Even accepting, as we must, that this is an accurate recounting of the discussion that occurred, it fails to reflect the degree of formality one would expect when business rivals operating in a commercial setting have rights at stake as important as the freedom to enter a new line of business and the choice of where to locate for a ten-year period of time. Despite the gravity of these matters, the record fails to reveal that the parties even so much as shook hands to formalize their agreement. This weighs against enforcing any promise. Restatement (Second) Contracts § 90, comment b.
Finally, the absence of a written agreement and any other formalities prevented critical evidentiary, cautionary, and deterrent functions from being performed. Here the factual predicate must be drawn solely from the testimony of Zukin and Greenblatt to determine the existence of any promise and its terms. The evidentiary problems created by this situation are made apparent by the very fact that this case is in essence a credibility dispute between Zukin and Greenblatt. Under the circumstances, the terms of the agreement were vague and at risk of being misunderstood. This prevented the parties from exercising the caution demanded by a situation in which each had significant rights at stake. Not being able to appreciate the seriousness of their actions, the parties were not deterred from making ill-considered promises.
It is this Court’s view that the combination of the specific factual circumstances of this case weighs against enforcing any promise Consolidated made not to open a pharmacy.
Accordingly, the Order of the Superior Court is reversed, and the injunction entered by the Court of Common Pleas of Chester County is hereby dissolved.
*480LARSEN and McDERMOTT, JJ., did not participate in the decision of this case.
ZAPPALA, J., concurs in the result.
PAPADAKOS, J., files a dissenting opinion.
. This case was reassigned to this writer on October 13, 1993.
. The Statute of Frauds provides in pertinent part that: "all leases, estates ... or any uncertain interest of, in, or out of any ... lands, tenements or hereditaments, made or created by ... parol, and not put in writing, and signed by the parties so making or creating the same ... shall have the force and effect of leases or estates at will only, and shall not, either in law or equity, be deemed or taken to have any other or greater force or effect....” Act of March 21, 1772, 1 Sm.L. 389, § 1, 33 P.S. § 1.
. Promises Enforceable by Estoppel.
An oral promise or representation that certain land will be used in a particular way, though otherwise unenforceable, is enforceable to the extent necessary to protect expenditures made in reasonable reliance upon it.
Restatement of Property § 524.
. We also find few meaningful similarities between Consolidated’s promise not to compete and the negative easement we recognized in Simplex Precast Industries, Inc. v. Biehl, 395 Pa. 105, 149 A.2d 121 (1959). In that case, an owner of three contiguous pieces of property sold one lot whose deed indicated that a cul-de-sac on the property would be temporary. We said this created a negative easement which operated to prevent the two remaining lots from being sold without the road first being extended. The theory was that the cul-de-sac would *476become permanent unless the previous owner was required to extend it before selling his other two lots.
. Since the beginning of this case, Thatcher’s consistently argued that it reasonably, foreseeably and detrimentally relied on Consolidated's assurances, inducing Thatcher’s to renew its ten-year lease. These facts, if accepted by the fact finder, would clearly establish a claim of estoppel as a basis for relief. Thatcher's states that its Complaint sets forth a claim for "promissory estoppel," but it was not so titled. Appellee's Brief at 26. Thatcher's submits that the Chancellor used the term “equitable estoppel" instead of "promissory estoppel” to refer to the theory upon which it sought relief. However, that does not change the fact that Thatcher’s theory, under whatever name one might assign to it, was one it never abandoned nor from which it ever retreated. As a result, all parties were aware of the claim and had an opportunity to litigate it. Therefore, Thatcher’s has preserved its right to have its claim of estoppel reviewed on appeal. To hold otherwise would be to elevate form over substance.
. The only restriction was that any pharmacy, together with the store’s other non-food operations, account for no more than twenty percent of the store's floor space.
. The statement "we have no intention of opening a pharmacy” is indefinite on its face and does not provide any absolute guarantee of what may.or may not happen in the future. It reflects the speaker's current state of mind, which is subject to change.

=== CASE 9736949 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:51.854545+00 ===

PAPADAKOS, Justice,
dissenting.
Consolidated Supermarkets, Inc. (Consolidated) appeals from the Order of the Superior Court affirming the order of the Court of Common Pleas of Chester County which enjoined Consolidated from operating a pharmacy in the West Goshen Shopping Center (the Shopping Center). For the following reasons, I dissent.
This case was commenced on April 29, 1987, by Appellee, Thatcher’s Drug Store of West Goshen, Inc. (Thatcher) which for fourteen years prior thereto had been operating a pharmacy immediately adjacent to Consolidated’s Shop-Rite Supermarket in the Shopping Center.
On October 29, 1965, Consolidated entered into a long-term lease with the then owner, Enal Productions, (Landlord) to open a Shop-Rite supermarket as an “anchor” store for the Shopping Center. Under the terms of the lease, Consolidated was prohibited from using more than twenty percent of its selling space for the sale of “non-food” items.
In September, 1973, Thatcher entered into a ten year lease with Landlord to open a pharmacy in the store immediately adjacent to the Shop-Rite supermarket. The lease contained the following paragraph protecting Thatcher from competition within the Shopping Center:
Landlord shall not lease any store within the premises for use as a drug store or pharmacy or for the sale of medical equipment or prosthetic supplies. The foregoing restriction shall not apply to any of the shopping center presently used as a supermarket or department store.
The lease also prohibited Thatcher from selling any “food.”
In 1976, Thatcher installed a refrigeration case from which it sold milk. In response, Consolidated posted a sign in front *481of the supermarket announcing that: “Coming soon — a Shop Rite pharmacy.” Upon seeing the sign, Ronald Zukin, the president and sole shareholder of Thatcher, contacted Joseph Greenblatt, the controller and vice-president of Consolidated. Mr. Zukin asked Mr. Greenblatt why the sign announcing the coming of a Shop-Rite pharmacy was in the window, Mr. Greenblatt responded, “We don’t want you in the dairy business,” referring to Thatcher’s recent selling of milk. After some discussion, Mr. Greenblatt said, “You get out of the dairy business and we won’t open a pharmacy.” Within a week, Thatcher removed the refrigeration case, and, in response, the supermarket immediately removed the pharmacy announcement.
In 1988, nearing the end of Thatcher’s ten year lease, Mr. Zukin approached Landlord about securing a ten year renewal. Mr. Zukin was informed that Consolidated desired Thatcher’s space to use as a Shop-Rite pharmacy and that renewal would not be offered to Thatcher. As a result, Mr. Zukin located an alternative site for the pharmacy three blocks from the Shopping Center. Mr. Zukin, with his attorney, negotiated a lease at the new location, drew a deposit check, and was prepared to finalize the deal. Before finalizing that deal, Mr. Zukin had a conversation with Landlord and was advised that Consolidated had changed its mind about taking Thatcher’s space and that a renewal would be offered to Thatcher.
When Mr. Zukin received the proposed renewal, he met with Mr. Greenblatt to seek assurances that Consolidated would not open a competing pharmacy. Mr. Zukin testified that Mr. Greenblatt’s direct response was, “We don’t hurt the little guys. We have no desire to want to hurt you and we have no intention of opening a pharmacy.” Mr. Greenblatt admitted in testimony that this meeting took place but denied making such a statement. Mr. Zukin also testified that at the time of the meeting he was aware of Consolidated’s lease restriction concerning “non-food” items (i.e., not more than 20% of the selling space) and was aware that the supermarket as then constituted was at or near its “non-food” limits. *482Based on the assurances he received from Mr. Greenblatt, Mr. Zukin executed a ten year renewal in late 1983.
Within the next year, Mr. Greenblatt became aware that Thatcher’s had a “Beverage Center” in front of its store. In response, a sign was again posted in the supermarket window announcing “Shop Rite Pharmacy coming soon.” Again, Mr. Zukin contacted Mr. Greenblatt,' who advised him that Consolidated did not want Thatcher to go into the soda business and if Mr. Zukin would take his beverage center sign down, “we won’t be in the pharmacy business.” Within a few days, Mr. Zukin removed the beverage center sign and, immediately thereafter, the Shop-Rite pharmacy announcement was removed.
In 1985, Consolidated secured the rental space immediately adjacent to the supermarket, on the side opposite of Thatcher’s. Thereafter, Consolidated removed the partition wall between the supermarket and the new space and secured the federal and state licenses necessary to operate a pharmacy. Aware of Consolidated’s imminent plans to open a pharmacy, Thatcher filed the instant action seeking to enjoin Consolidated from implementing its plans.
Thatcher presented three grounds in its complaint in support of its request for injunctive relief: (1) breach of the lease between Consolidated and Landlord; (2) breach of an oral contract between Consolidated and Thatcher; (3) estoppel based upon an oral promise and detrimental reliance. The trial court conducted an evidentiary hearing on May 7 and 8, 1987. At the hearing, the breach of lease argument was rejected by the trial court and the oral contract theory was abandoned by Thatcher. The trial court ruled in favor of Thatcher on the grounds of equitable estoppel and entered a decree nisi enjoining Consolidated from operating a retail, prescription pharmacy on the premises of the West Goshen Shopping Center.
Consolidated filed exceptions to the trial court’s order claiming, inter alia, that the Statute of Frauds1 rendered any *483agreement between the parties unenforceable. In its “opinion sur exceptions,” the trial court upheld its decision on the basis of equitable estoppel but also determined that the Restatement of Property (Second) Section 5242 provided an applicable exception to the Statute of Frauds defense. The trial court denied Consolidated’s exceptions and entered a final order. On appeal, the Superior Court, like the trial court, determined that the Restatement of Property (Second) § 524 provided an applicable exception to the Statute of Frauds defense and this Court granted Consolidated’s petition for allowance of appeal.
In my view, the Statute of Frauds and the Restatement of Property (Second) § 524 are irrelevant to the disposition of this case. I agree with the majority that the oral promise between Thatcher and Consolidated did not create an “interest in land” so as to bring it under the purview of the Statute of Frauds. The cases cited by Consolidated to show that the oral promise created an “easement” are inapposite. Both Burns v. Baumgardner, 303 Pa.Superior Ct. 85, 449 A.2d 590 (1982), and Haines v. Minnock Construction Co., 289 Pa.Superior Ct. 209, 433 A.2d 30 (1981), involved oral promises for building and height restrictions (easements) between the developers of tracts of land and purchasers. There is no such property right between Consolidated and Thatcher in this case, but, instead solely an oral promise not to compete. I disagree, however, that the evidence submitted to the Chan*484cellor does not establish Thatcher’s right to estop Consolidated from opening a competing pharmacy.
In Pennsylvania, the doctrine of equitable estoppel has been utilized as a means for enforcing oral promises.3 See, e.g., Ridley Park Shopping Center v. Sun Ray Drug Co., 407 Pa. 230, 180 A.2d 1 (1962); Ervin v. Pittsburgh, 339 Pa. 241, 14 A.2d 297 (1940).
Equitable estoppel is a doctrine that prevents one from doing an act differently than the manner in which another was induced by word or deed to expect. A doctrine sounding in equity, equitable estoppel recognizes that an informal promise implied by one’s words, deed or representations which leads another to rely justifiably thereon to his own injury or detriment, may be enforced in equity.
Novelty Knitting Mills, Inc. v. Siskind, 500 Pa. 432, 433, 457 A.2d 502, 503 (1983). The essential elements of equitable estoppel are inducement and justifiable reliance on that inducement to one’s detriment. Id. Moreover, the party asserting the estoppel has the burden of establishing the estoppel by clear, precise and unequivocal evidence. See, Blofsen v. Cutaiar, 460 Pa. 411, 333 A.2d 841 (1975).
In the instant case, the trial court, after hearing from the principals, found credible4 Mr. Zukin’s testimony that he met with Mr. Greenblatt who, in response to Mr. Zukin’s request for assurances, stated: “We don’t hurt the little guys. We have no desire to want to hurt you and we have no intention of opening a pharmacy.” The trial court found incredible Mr. Greenblatt’s assertion that he did not make such a statement. The trial court also found that Mr. Zukin knew from his prior dealings that Mr. Greenblatt had previously (in 1976) honored his promise to stop plans to open a pharmacy if Thatcher would not sell milk by removing signs announcing the opening of a pharmacy; and that Mr. Zukin knew, based on his *485knowledge of the supermarket layout and the terms of its lease, that the supermarket was at or near its maximum level of available selling space for non-food items. Under these circumstances, it was reasonable for Thatcher to believe that Consolidated would honor its oral promise not to compete and to act in reliance thereon.
In relying upon Consolidated’s oral promise, Thatcher relinquished its proposed lease at an alternative location and obligated itself to Landlord for an additional ten year term. Consolidated’s direct competition with Thatcher would have undoubtedly caused substantial injury to, or forced Thatcher out of business — a harm which could only be avoided by enforcing the promise not to compete. The lower court was correct in determining that Thatcher established its estoppel claim by clear, precise and unequivocal evidence.
I, therefore, dissent and would affirm the order of the Superior Court.
. The Statute of Frauds provides in pertinent part that:
*483any uncertain interest ... in ... lands, tenements or hereditaments, made or created by ... parol, and not put in writing, and signed by the parties so making or creating the same ... shall have the force and effect of leases or estates at will only, and shall not either in law or equity, be deemed or taken to have any other or greater force or effect....
Act of March 21, 1772, 1 Sm.L. 389, § 1, 33 P.S. § 1.
. Promises Enforceable by Estoppel.
An oral promise or representation that certain land will be used in a particular way, though otherwise unenforceable, is enforceable to the extent necessary to protect expenditures made in reasonable reliance upon it.
Restatement of Property (Second) § 524.
. In this Commonwealth, the concepts of equitable estoppel and promissory estoppel are used interchangeably.
. This Court is bound by the trial court's findings regarding the credibility of the witnesses. See, Wagner v. Wagner, 466 Pa. 532, 353 A.2d 819 (1976).

=== CASE 2208079 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:26.346499+00 ===

430 N.W.2d 893 (1988)
230 Neb. 259
FIRST NATIONAL BANK OF OMAHA, A National Banking Corporation, Appellant,
v.
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee.
No. 87-027.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
October 28, 1988.
*895 Thomas J. Culhane, William E. Morrow, James B. Cavanagh, and Gary L. Hoffman, of Erickson & Sederstrom, P.C., Omaha, for appellant.
Robert M. Spire, Atty. Gen., and Martel J. Bundy, Lincoln, for appellee.
HASTINGS, C.J., BOSLAUGH, WHITE, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, and GRANT, JJ., and COLWELL, District Judge, Retired.
COLWELL, District Judge, Retired.
Plaintiff's appeal involves a claim made under the State Tort Claims Act, Neb.Rev. Stat. §§ 81-8,209 et seq. (Reissue 1987). Plaintiff, First National Bank of Omaha (FNB), claims damage when it acquired a bank and a savings company as suggested and approved by the State of Nebraska (State) acting by and through the director of the Department of Banking and Finance (Department). The two institutions later became insolvent. The State's demurrer to the petition was sustained, and the trial court ordered the petition dismissed without leave to amend.
On April 8, 1985, FNB filed a claim with the State Claims Board for $3,760,000 damages caused by acts or omissions of the State. This claim was denied by the board on October 7, 1985. On April 1, 1986, FNB filed its petition in the Lancaster County District Court.
The petition informs us as follows. In April 1980, FNB loaned funds to James and Nancy Gillette to acquire the stock of First Security Bank and Trust Company (Bank) and First Security Savings (Savings), an *896 industrial loan and investment company, both of Beatrice, Nebraska. The loans were secured by stock in both institutions. In January 1983, both institutions were nearly insolvent and the loans were in default, primarily due to nonperforming loans made to Newt Copple, his associates, and related entities. As of April 8, 1983, those loans to the Bank amounted to $1,181,661, and the loans to Savings amounted to $1,537,308.08. FNB notified the Department of its decision to proceed against its collateral and sell the stock at public sale. The Department, acting through its director, Paul Amen, and its assistant director, Barry Lake, initiated and/or engaged in a series of discussions with FNB. On March 25, 1983, FNB sent notices to potential purchasers of its intent to sell the stock.
On March 10, 1983, the Department received notice from the Federal Bureau of Investigation of a pending investigation of fraudulent loan transactions at the Bank, and it had information of similar fraudulent loan transactions involving Commonwealth Savings Company and S.E. Copple, its president. This information was not shared with FNB.
On April 1, 1983, the director convened a meeting in his office, attended by FNB, the Gillettes, the Nebraska Depository Institution Guarantee Corporation (NDIGC), and S.E. Copple. A plan was proposed by the director for FNB to acquire the Bank and Savings that included three elements:
(a) The Bank and The Savings Company... would each loan S.E. Copple sufficient funds to permit him to purchase the Newt Copple loans from their respective institutions (thereby, in effect, extending his personal credit to further support those loans to Newt Copple and other related entities).
(b) FNB would accept the stock of the Bank and the Savings Company and the other collateral in satisfaction of the loans to the Gillettes, Beatrice State Company and Olympic Investment Company, and, thereby, become the owner of both institutions.
(c) The NDIGC would make a capital contribution of $200,000.00 to the Savings Company and provide a guarantee in the amount of $680,000.00 against further losses by that institution.
On April 8, 1983, FNB entered into an agreement with the Gillettes to acquire the stock and assets of Bank and Savings upon these conditions: (1) The Bank and Savings have each made a loan to S.E. Copple acceptable to the Department; (2) the NDIGC and Savings have made an agreement providing for capital advances and guarantees acceptable to the Department; and (3) the Department has provided assurances to FNB concerning the Bank's and Savings' capital adequacy, quality of assets, and violations of law. Barry Lake appeared as a witness to the execution of the agreement.
On April 8, 1983, the Department approved the FNB-Gillette agreement. No facts are alleged regarding the agreement. However, by inference, the suggested substitute loans were made by the Bank and Savings to S.E. Copple, and an agreement was made between Savings and NDIGC. There is a conclusion that the Department accepted the terms and conditions of the S.E. Copple loans, accepted the terms of the Savings-NDIGC agreement, and gave assurances to FNB concerning the capital adequacy, asset quality, and violations of law relating to the Bank and Savings. Soon, S.E. Copple defaulted on the notes to the Bank and Savings.
The concluding paragraph, paragraph 15, states six particular acts of negligence that FNB claims were the proximate cause of its damage. The State filed a motion to make parts of paragraph 15, alleging the acts of negligence, more definite and certain, and to strike parts thereof. The motion was granted. FNB realleged parts of paragraph 15 and amended other parts as ordered.
"The enumeration of specific acts of negligence should state the ultimate acts of negligence and not the conclusion of the pleader." (Emphasis supplied.) Graham v. Simplex Motor Rebuilders, Inc., 189 Neb. 507, 512, 203 N.W.2d 494, 498 (1973); *897 Ripp v. Riesland, 176 Neb. 233, 125 N.W. 2d 699 (1964).
FNB has alleged six separate acts or omissions of negligence. These allegations are mixed with lengthy operative facts and conclusions, making the negligent acts difficult to distinguish. Since the general allegation of negligence will withstand the challenge of a demurrer, see Crawford v. Ham, 209 Neb. 802, 311 N.W.2d 896 (1981), it is sufficient that we briefly summarize the allegations as being that the State was negligent in: (1) suggesting, fostering, and approving the April 8, 1983, FNB-Gillette agreement; (2) failing, in the course of its operational performance of regulatory duties, to discover S.E. Copple's insolvent condition; (3) approving the S.E. Copple transactions with the Bank and Savings; (4) failing to discover facts in the operational performance of its duties which would have prevented it from making assurances to FNB; (5) failing to timely advise FNB of the fraudulent and/or criminal conduct of S.E. Copple; and (6) failing to properly investigate the financial condition of S.E. Copple.
The State then demurred to the amended petition, claiming that there was a lack of jurisdiction and that the petition failed to state a cause of action. See Neb.Rev.Stat. § 25-806(1) and (6) (Reissue 1985). The demurrer was sustained "for the reasons set out in said demurrer," and the petition was dismissed for the reason that no cause of action can be stated. Neither party addresses the jurisdiction issue. FNB appeals, claiming the trial court erred in: (1) granting the motion to strike paragraphs 15(a), (c), (e), and (f); (2) sustaining the demurrer, because the amended petition stated a cause of action based on negligence under the State Tort Claims Act; and (3) dismissing FNB's petition, for the reason that it did state facts sufficient to state a cause of action for negligence under the State Tort Claims Act.
In view of the disposition of this case, it is not necessary to discuss the first assignment.
The second and third assignments are discussed together. A petition must contain a statement of facts constituting the cause of action, in ordinary and concise language and without repetition. See Neb. Rev.Stat. § 25-804 (Reissue 1985). "Proper pleading requires a petition to state in logical and legal form the facts which constitute the plaintiff's cause of action, define the issues to which the defendant must respond at trial, and inform the court of the real matter in dispute." Rosnick v. Marks, 218 Neb. 499, 501, 357 N.W.2d 186, 188 (1984). Ordinarily, a petition is liberally construed in favor of the pleader. See Bard v. Cox Cable of Omaha, Inc., 226 Neb. 880, 416 N.W.2d 4 (1987). Statutes authorizing suits against the State are to be strictly construed in favor of the sovereign, since they are in derogation of the State's sovereignty. See Frye v. Sibbitt, 145 Neb. 600, 17 N.W.2d 617 (1945). "Tested by general demurrer a petition for an extraordinary remedy is strictly construed." Emry v. Lake, 181 Neb. 568, 570, 149 N.W.2d 520, 522 (1967).
A cause of action is judicial protection of one's recognized right or interest, when another, owing a corresponding duty not to invade or violate such right or interest, has caused a breach of that duty. Ravenna Bank v. Custom Unlimited, 223 Neb. 540, 391 N.W.2d 557 (1986). In order for actionable negligence to exist, there must be a legal duty on the part of the defendant to protect plaintiff from injury, failure to discharge that duty, and damages proximately resulting from that undischarged duty. Tiede v. Loup Power Dist., 226 Neb. 295, 411 N.W.2d 312 (1987).
In Maple v. City of Omaha, 222 Neb. 293, 384 N.W.2d 254 (1986), a tort case brought under the Political Subdivisions Tort Claims Act, Neb.Rev.Stat. §§ 23-2401 et seq. (Reissue 1983), this court held:
Although we do not engage in a special-general duty analysis of sovereign immunity, it is still necessary for the claimant, in order to recover from the municipality, to prove that a duty was owed to him or her, that this duty was breached, and that an injury was proximately caused by that breach.
(Syllabus of the court.)
A general demurrer tests substantive legal rights of parties upon admitted *898 facts, including proper and reasonable inferences of law and fact which may be drawn from facts which are well pleaded. Dixon v. Reconciliation, Inc., 206 Neb. 45, 291 N.W.2d 230 (1980). As against a demurrer, the court must assume that the facts are as alleged, and cannot assume the existence of any facts not alleged, nor find facts in aid of the pleading, nor consider what evidence may be introduced at the trial. See Fisher v. Housing Auth. of City of Omaha, 214 Neb. 499, 334 N.W.2d 636 (1983). A demurrer reaches an instrument filed with and made a part of the petition. Cagle, Inc. v. Sammons, 198 Neb. 595, 254 N.W.2d 398 (1977).
STATUTES
Section 81-8,210(4) provides:
Tort claim shall mean any claim against the State of Nebraska for money only on account of damage to or loss of property or on account of personal injury or death, caused by the negligent or wrongful act or omission of any employee of the state, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, under circumstances where the state, if a private person, would be liable to the claimant for such damage, loss, injury, or death....
(Emphasis supplied.)
Section 81-8,219(1), in regard to claims exempt from the act, provides:
(a) Any claim based upon an act or omission of an employee of the state, exercising due care, in the execution of a statute or regulation, whether or not such statute or regulation be valid, or based upon the exercise or performance or the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function or duty on the part of a state agency or an employee of the state, whether or not the discretion be abused;
. . . .
(d) Any claim arising out of assault, battery, false imprisonment, false arrest, malicious prosecution, abuse of process, libel, slander, misrepresentation, deceit, or interference with contract rights.
(Emphasis supplied.)
Section 81-8,227 provides:
(1) Every tort claim permitted under this act shall be forever barred unless within two years after such claim accrued the claim is made in writing to the State Claims Board in the manner provided by this act.
(Emphasis supplied.)
Applicable here are Neb.Rev.Stat. §§ 8-1501 to 8-1510 (Reissue 1987), regulating the acquisition or merger of financial institutions, including the powers, duties, and authority of the Department and its director, particularly as they relate to failing institutions.
THE EXEMPTIONS
[T]he discretionary function or duty exemption in the State Tort Claims Act extends only to the basic policy decisions made in governmental activity, and not to ministerial activities implementing such policy decisions. [Citations omitted.] In other words, the State is liable for negligence of its employees at the operational level, where there is no room for policy judgment....
. . . .
... When one under no obligation to act does undertake action, one must act with reasonable care.
Wickersham v. State, 218 Neb. 175, 180-81, 354 N.W.2d 134, 138-39 (1984). See, also, Koepf v. County of York, 198 Neb. 67, 251 N.W.2d 866 (1977); Allen v. County of Lancaster, 218 Neb. 163, 352 N.W.2d 883 (1984).
Concerning misrepresentation, both parties argue that two federal cases should be considered: (1) United States v. Neustadt, 366 U.S. 696, 81 S.Ct. 1294, 6 L.Ed.2d 614 (1961), and (2) Block v. Neal, 460 U.S. 289, 103 S.Ct. 1089, 75 L.Ed.2d 67 (1983). Both cases involve the Federal Tort Claims Act.
The State relies on Neustadt, where it was held that misrepresentation under the act included willful or negligent misrepresentation, and an exemption applied where *899 the purchaser of a home relied upon an inaccurate inspection and appraisal made by the Federal Housing Administration. The essence of an action for misrepresentation is the communication of misinformation on which the recipient relies.
FNB relies on Block, where the Court held that the claim did not arise out of misrepresentation as in Neustadt but, rather, upon the former conduct of officials of the Farmers Home Administration (FmHA) from whom the claimant, Neal, obtained a loan to purchase a house. Neal's contract with the builder provided that the work was to conform to plans and specifications approved by FmHA and that FmHA had the right to approve or reject work, materials, and workmanship. After construction and acceptance of the house, defects in workmanship appeared. Neal claimed relief under the Federal Tort Claims Act, resulting from FmHA employees' failure to inspect and to supervise construction. In approving the claim, the Court distinguished the facts from those in Neustadt:
[T]he essence of an action for misrepresentation, whether negligent or intentional, is the communication of misinformation on which the recipient relies. The gravamen of the action against the Government in Neustadt was that the plaintiff was misled by a "Statement of FHA Appraisal" prepared by the Government. Neustadt alleged no injury that he would have suffered independently of his reliance on the erroneous appraisal....
. . . .
... FmHA's duty to use due care to ensure that the builder adhere to previously approved plans and cure all defects before completing construction is distinct from any duty to use due care in communicating information to respondent.
460 U.S. at 296-97, 103 S.Ct. at 1093-94.
FNB argues that the State had a duty imposed by law to conduct periodic examinations of Commonwealth that would have revealed irregularities at that institution; that the State breached that duty by failing to conduct such examinations; and that "[b]ut for that omission, the Department would not or should not have approved Appellant's takeover of [the Bank and Savings]; nor would (or should) the Department have given Appellant assurances as to the capital adequacy of these institutions." Reply brief for appellant at 5.
The State Tort Claims Act excludes a cause of action based on a discretionary function or duty, § 81-8,219(1)(a), and any cause of action based on misrepresentation or deceit, § 81-8,219(1)(d). However, the act does recognize a cause of action based on the negligent breach of a duty, whether such is imposed by statute or common law. See Wickersham v. State, supra.
With the bare record of the petition before us, we note that the 30-page petition, incorporating exhibits and a copy of the original claim filed with the board, is confusing in our determination of the operative facts supporting FNB's theory of recovery, i.e., that the State breached its duty to examine Commonwealth periodically as provided by law. We find these operative facts and inferences: The State failed to conduct periodic examinations of Commonwealth as provided by law; the State failed to exercise reasonable care in the operational performance of its regulatory duties; and the State improperly approved FNB's acquisition of the Bank and Savings institutions. As against these allegations, there are other and overriding allegations supporting the exemptions of discretion and misrepresentation. We agree with the trial court that the petition fails to clearly and concisely state facts alleging a cause of action in favor of FNB, and we affirm its order sustaining the demurrer.
Neb.Rev.Stat. § 25-854 (Reissue 1985) provides that if a demurrer is sustained, the adverse party may amend if the defect can be remedied by amendment. This is not an absolute right, and refusal by the trial court to permit an amendment of the petition must be shown to be an abuse of discretion. See Suzuki v. Gateway Realty, 207 Neb. 562, 299 N.W.2d 762 (1980). We are reminded that it is not the purpose of a demurrer to decide what the facts are, and, recognizing the distinction *900 between fraud and tort, we find that it is reasonably possible that FNB may be able to state a cause of action in support of its theory of recovery. The court's order dismissing the petition without leave to amend was in error and an abuse of its discretion; that order is set aside. This cause is remanded for further proceedings. Upon receipt of the mandate by the clerk of the district court, FNB shall have 30 days to file an amended petition.
AFFIRMED IN PART, AND IN PART REVERSED AND REMANDED WITH DIRECTIONS.

=== CASE 9736950 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:54.043817+00 ===

CONOVER, Judge.
This is a consolidated appeal.1 Plaintiffs-Appellants, property owners in Fair-wood Terrace subdivision in Monroe County, Indiana, and Mustin Manor subdivision in Madison County, Indiana, (Residents), appeal their trial courts’ grant of summary judgments in favor of Defendants-Appel-lees Christole, Inc. (Christole) and Hopewell Center, Inc. (Hopewell) (collectively, developers). Those judgments permit developers to operate group homes for developmentally disabled persons in the residents’ single family residential subdivisions.
We reverse.
The residents present several issues for our review which we restate as one, namely, whether the 1988 amendment of a statute authorizing the location of group homes for developmentally disabled and mentally ill persons in single family residential subdivisions constitutes a valid ret*1182roactive exercise of the state’s police power.
Before 1988, developer Christole purchased a single family residence in Fair-wood Terrace subdivision for use as a group home for the care of five unrelated developmentally disabled autistic children to be supervised by thirteen full and part-time staff members. All these developmentally disabled persons’ immediate families live elsewhere.
In 1988, Hopewell purchased a single family residence in Mustin Manor subdivision in which it proposed to care for unrelated developmentally disabled persons who also would be supervised by full and part-time staff members. The residents filed a petition for injunctive relief alleging these group homes violated restrictive covenants applicable to the lots in their subdivisions.
The residents of Fairwood Terrace assert Christole’s group home violates the following restrictive covenants applicable to their subdivision:
USE: No building, or any part thereof, erected or maintained in this subdivision shall be used for business or commercial purposes of any kind ...
BUILDINGS: Only one (1) single family dwelling may be erected or maintained on each lot in this addition ...
The residents of Mustin Manor maintain Hopewell’s group house violates two of their subdivision’s restrictive covenants, as follows:
1. LAND USE AND BUILDING TYPE. No lot shall be used except for residential purposes. No building shall be erected, altered, placed or permitted to remain on any lot, other than one detached single family dwelling not to exceed two (2) stories in height and a private attached garage for not more than two (2) cars. No building unattached to dwelling shall be permitted. No lot shall be replatted or subdivided.
5. NUISANCES. No offensive or noxious activity shall be carried on upon any lot nor shall anything be done thereon which may be or may become an annoyance or nuisance to the neighbor-hood_
The trial court enjoined Christole from violating the applicable covenants. An injunction was not issued against Hopewell because an agreement was reached between Hopewell and the residents providing the subject building would not be modified to accommodate developmentally disabled residents until the lawsuit was heard on its merits.
Thereafter, at its 1988 session, the Indiana legislature amended I.C. 16-13-21-14 and created a new section, 16-13-21-14.-1. The legislature’s 1988 amendment to Sec. 14 reads:
Sec. 14. (a) This section applies to each restriction, reservation, condition, exception, or covenant that is created before April 1, 1988, in any subdivision plat, deed, or other instrument of, or pertaining to, the transfer, sale, lease, or use of property.
(b) A restriction, reservation, condition, exception, or covenant in a subdivision plat, deed, or other instrument of, or pertaining to, the transfer, sale, lease, or use of property that would permit the residential use of property but prohibit the use of that property as a residential facility for developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons:
(2) on the ground that the persons residing in the residential facility are not related; or
(3) for any other reason;
is, to the extent of the prohibition, void as against the public policy of the state.
Although Christole had already filed an appeal, we ordered the case remanded to the trial court for further consideration in light of these amendments as a matter of judicial economy. After considering the 1988 amendment to I.C. 16-13-21-14, the trial court vacated its former judgment and entered summary judgment for Christole.
In the Mustin Manor case, Hopewell filed a motion and the residents a cross-motion for summary judgment. The trial court granted.Hopewell’s motion and denied the residents’ cross-motion. It found under *1183amended Sec. 14, the covenants were void as against public policy. In Christole, the trial court opined the 1988 amendment of 1.C. 16-13-21-14 and new section 16-13-21-14.12 were directed at the holding in Adult Group Properties, Ltd. v. Imler (1987), Ind.App., 505 N.E.2d 459, and it no longer stated the law. The trial court entered summary judgment for Christole.
The residents appeal.
I. The Police Power.
The state has the inherent power to enact laws, within constitutional limits, which promote order, safety, health, morals and the general welfare of society. Zahm v. Peare (1985), Ind.App., 502 N.E.2d 490, 494. This power is known as the state’s police power. Legislation will be sustained as within the authority of the legislature if it is a proper exercise thereof. Johnson v. St. Vincent Hospital, Inc. (1980), 273 Ind. 374, 404 N.E.2d 585, 599; Steup v. Indiana Housing Finance Authority (1980), 273 Ind. 72, 402 N.E.2d 1215, 1217, 1220-1221. It has been said
The police power of a State is recognized by the courts to be one of wide sweep. It is exercised by the state in order to promote the health, safety, comfort, morals, and welfare of the public. The right to exercise this power is said to be inherent in the people of every free government. It is not a grant, derived from or under any written constitution. It is not, however, without limitation, and it cannot be invoked so as to invade the fundamental rights of a citizen. (Emphasis supplied).
State v. Gerhardt (1896), 145 Ind. 439, 44 N.E. 469, 473. See also Blue v. Beach (1900), 155 Ind. 121, 56 N.E. 89, 92. Although it is the legislature’s prerogative to determine when the state’s police power should be invoked, it is the judiciary’s duty to determine in specific cases whether the police power has been invoked upon a subject which is subordinate to it. Blue, 56 N.E. at 92; Gerhardt, 44 N.E. at 473. The fundamental issue in such cases is whether the statute in question has a tendency to promote either the order, safety, health, morals or general welfare of society. Bruck v. State ex rel. Money (1950), 228 Ind. 189, 91 N.E.2d 349.
A statute is accorded every reasonable presumption supporting is validity and constitutionality. Miller v. State (1987), Ind., 517 N.E.2d 64, 71; Imler, supra, at 464. The burden is upon the challenger to rebut this presumption. Miller, supra. The challenger’s burden is to clearly and convincingly demonstrate the unconstitutionality of the statute. A court cannot question the wisdom or desirability of the legislation and substitute its judgment or opinion on the matter for that of the legislature. Dague v. Piper Aircraft Corp. (1981), 275 Ind. 520, 418 N.E.2d 207, 212. When a statute may be construed so as to support its constitutionality, we must adopt such a construction. Imler, supra, at 464.
II. Property Owners’ Rights.
While property rights are not absolute and may be restricted by government action which constitutes a proper exercise of police power, Dept. of Financial Institutions v. Holt (1952), 231 Ind. 293, 108 N.E.2d 629, 633; Zahm, 502 N.E.2d at 494, property cannot arbitrarily be taken or confiscated under the guise of the police power. Holt, supra, 108 N.E.2d at 634; School Town of Andrews v. Heiney (1912), 178 Ind. 1, 7, 98 N.E. 628, 630. Property is more than the physical object a person owns. It includes the right to acquire, possess, use and dispose of it without control or diminution. Holt, supra, 108 N.E.2d at 634. Therefore, any law restricting such rights must not be arbitrary, unreasonable, or beyond the necessities of the case. Holt, supra, 108 N.E.2d at 634; City of Muncie v. Pizza Hut of Muncie, Inc. (1976), 171 Ind.App. 397, 357 N.E.2d 735, 737. The legislature may not, under the guise of protecting public interests, impose unnecessary restrictions upon lawful *1184occupations or arbitrarily interfere with private rights. Holt, supra, 108 N.E.2d at 634. If the law prohibits something harmless, is unreasonable and purely arbitrary, or does not promote the health, safety, morality, comfort or welfare of society in general, it is an unauthorized exercise of police power. Id. Government action constitutes a proper exercise of police power when the collective benefit to the general public outweighs the restraint imposed. Zahm, supra, 502 N.E.2d at 494.
Christole contends I.C. 16-13-22-1 et seq., of which amended Sec. 14 is a part, reflects the legislature’s determination that integrating, or “mainstreaming”, the developmentally disabled into normal residential surroundings is an important purpose which provides qualified residents of group homes a measure of independent living in traditional homes as opposed to institutionalization and continued dependency. Hopewell argues whatever “impairment” of the subdivision residents’ constitutional rights is involved here, the same is absolutely necessary to achieve this important state purpose. Enforcement of such covenants would effectively prevent the establishment of group homes in virtually any private housing subdivision in this state and render meaningless rights otherwise granted our disabled citizens, it concludes.
Conversely, the residents claim amended Sec. 14 violates their constitutionally-protected right against deprivation of property without due process of law, and impairs the contract rights vested in them by their subdivisions’ covenants which proscribe multi-family housing and commercial operations in their subdivisions. Further, the residents in Mustin Manor subdivision argue the Sec. 14 amendment constitutes an invalid legislative attempt to grant the group house promoters a special privilege not available to the public generally, in violation of their constitutional right against class legislation.
Because we reverse, we need discuss only one issue.
III. Deprivation of Property Rights in Covenants.
The residents’ property rights are derived from both the United States and Indiana Constitutions. The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution, made applicable to the states by the Fourteenth Amendment, provides, in pertinent part:
... nor shall any person ... be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation.
The due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment further states:
... nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; ...
Of equal import, the Indiana Constitution provides, in Article I, § 21:
... No man’s property shall be taken by law, without just compensation; nor, except in case of the State, without such compensation first assessed and tendered.
In Pulos v. James (1973), 261 Ind. 279, 302 N.E.2d 768, our supreme court interpreted 'these constitutional provisions to prohibit the taking of private property, i.e., private rights granted by subdivision covenants, for private use. Citing several Massachusetts cases with approval, it said
... [Restrictive covenants] are real estate. They are part and parcel of the land to which they are attached and with which they pass by conveyance....
... [I]t is beyond the legislative power to take against his will, the property of one and give it to another for what the court deems private uses, even though full compensation for the taking is required. ... If the statute is merely for the benefit of individual property owners, the purpose does not justify the taking of a right in land against the will of the owner.
Pulos, 302 N.E.2d at 773-774. Thus, a property owner “is secure under the Constitution in his right to keep what is his own, even though another wants it for private uses ...” Id. Pulos also said even if such legislation was premised on benefit-ting the public good, it was still unconstitu*1185tional because no attempt was made to compensate the owners:
... It was for [the property owners’] benefit that the restrictive covenants were imposed. Their right to have them enforced is a property right and may not be taken from them without just compensation. Thus, even if it were maintained that the vacation of the restrictions was for the public good, we would run afoul of sections 21 and 23 of Article I of our state constitution and the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
Id., 302 N.E.2d at 774.3
In a final comment, the Pulos court discussed the prohibition of contracts which are against public policy. The court conceded the legislature may prohibit such contracts. However, it concluded the legislature may not impair previously legal contracts where the rights therein granted have already vested. Id. at 775. See also Supreme Council Catholic Knights of America v. Logsdon, et al. (1915), 183 Ind. 183, 108 N.E. 587, 592; Imler, supra.
In such cases, our authority on review is clear:
... courts may look to the character and reasonableness of the limitation for the purpose of determining whether or not it reaches beyond the scope of necessary protection and prevention.
Pizza Hut of Muncie, Inc., 357 N.E.2d at 737. See also Department of Insurance v. Schoonover (1947), 225 Ind. 187, 72 N.E.2d 747; Weisenberger v. State (1931), 202 Ind. 424, 175 N.E. 238.
Recently, our Indiana Supreme Court laid down a two-pronged test to be used in determining whether a statute or regulation constitutes a taking under the U.S. Constitution’s Fifth Amendment: whether or not the regulation (a) substantially advances a legitimate state interest, and (b) deprives the owner of the economically viable use of his property. Justice DeBruler, speaking for the court, said
The essence of the first prong of the test is whether government had the right to exercise its police power in the manner it did, regardless of the burden to property owners. Or, in other words, it asks the question: has government regulated where it should not have done so? If the regulation does not bear a substantial relation to the legitimate ends sought to be achieved, either through a failure of the statute as a whole to serve those ends or as applied to a particular piece of property, then the exercise of the police power is deemed to be unreasonable.
... [T]he essence of the second prong of the test is whether government has regulated to a greater extent than it should have so that a land owner has been effectively deprived of productive use of his property.
Dept. of Natural Resources v. Indiana Coal Council, Inc. (1989), Ind., 542 N.E.2d 1000, 1002-1003, citing Nollan v. Calif. Coastal Comm’n. (1987), 483 U.S. 825, 834, 107 S.Ct. 3141, 3146, 97 L.Ed.2d 677, 687.
A proper exercise of the state’s police power must benefit the general public, not merely a small group of its citizens. The police power should not be used for the benefit of a small group in the guise of benefitting the public. Pizza Hut of Muncie, Inc., supra, 357 N.E.2d at 737, and Holt, supra, 108 N.E.2d at 637.
After careful consideration of the above precedent, we have determined amended Sec. 14 is not a valid exercise of the state’s police power because it (a) violates the residents’ Fifth and Fourteenth Amendment rights under the U.S. Constitution, and their rights under Article I, § 21 of the Indiana Constitution, and (b) fails the first prong of the Indiana Coal test.
*1186IV. Fifth Amendment Violation.
In Nollan, supra, the progenitor of Indiana Coal, seacost landowners wanted to build a permanent home to replace a cottage located on their land. The California Coastal Commission conditioned the issuance of its permit to do so upon the Nollans’ granting the public an easement to pass across their beach, which was located between two public beaches. The Nol-lans were to receive no compensation therefor, only the permit. The Commission argued its requirement was not a “taking” under the Fifth Amendment, it was merely a restriction upon the use of the Nollans’ property, i.e., a legitimate exercise of its police power. The Court rejected that argument, saying
... Perhaps because the point is so obvious, we have never been confronted with a controversy that required us to rule upon it, but our cases’ analysis of the effect of other governmental action leads to the same conclusion. We have repeatedly held that, as to property reserved by its owner for private use, “the right to exclude [others is] ‘one of the most essential sticks in the bundle of rights that are commonly characterized as property.’ ” Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp., 458 U.S. 419, 102 S.Ct. 3164, 3174, 73 L.Ed.2d 868 (1982), quoting Kaiser Aetna v. United States, 444 U.S. 164, 176, 100 S.Ct. 383, 391, 62 L.Ed.2d 332 (1979). In Loretto we observed that where governmental action results in “[a] permanent physical occupation” of the property, by the government itself or by others, see 458 U.S., at 432-433 n. 9, 102 S.Ct., at 3174-3175, n. 9, “our cases uniformly have found a taking to the extent of the occupation, without regard to whether the action achieves an important public benefit or has only minimal economic impact on the owner,” id., at 434-435, 102 S.Ct., at 3175-3176. We think a “permanent physical occupation” has occurred, for purposes of that rule, where individuals are given a permanent and' continuous right to pass to and fro, so that the real property may continuously be traversed, even though no particular individual is permitted to station himself permanently upon the premises.
Nollan, 107 S.Ct. at 3145.
The Commission also argued the easement there requested was simply one part of a comprehensive program to provide continuous public access to the beach as the lots undergo development or redevelopment. In answer to that proposition, the Supreme Court said
That is simply an expression of the Commission’s belief that the public interest will be served by a continuous strip of publicly accessible beach along the coast. The Commission may well be right that it is a good idea, but that does not establish that the Nollans (and other coastal residents) alone can be compelled to contribute to its realization. Rather, California is free to advance its “comprehensive program,” if it wishes, by using its power of eminent domain for this “public purpose,” see U.S. Const.Amdt. V; but if it wants an easement across the Nollans’ property, it must pay for it.
Nollan, 107 S.Ct. at 3150.
Likewise here. Each proposed group house will be a permanent structure in the subdivision where each developer proposes to locate them, no mere easement is involved. Under Nollan, a “permanent physical occupation” will occur by a commercial structure which will be a multi-person, not a single family residence. Both these conditions violate each subdivision’s covenants. Thus, the residents’ Fifth Amendment rights would be violated if such occupation was to occur or continue unabated.
Patently, such “permanent physical occupation” is substantially more than a mere restriction upon the use of the residents’ property. Even if the state was the moving party here, it would have to “pay for it”, as was the case in Nollan. Because the statute makes no provision for payment, and private parties cannot condemn the property interests of other private property owners, amended Sec. 14 constitutes an invalid exercise of the state’s police power, Nollan, supra; Indiana Coal, *1187supra; Pulos, supra, both as to the U.S. Constitution’s Fifth Amendment and the Indiana Constitution’s Article I, § 21. Fountain Park Co. v. Hensler (1927), 199 Ind. 95, 155 N.E. 465, 469.
Amicus briefs were filed in the Christole case by the Indiana Department of Mental Health and Community Residential Facilities Council and by the Association for Retarded Citizens of Indiana, Inc. The Department’s brief raises an issue not raised by the parties herein, namely, whether recent amendments to the Federal Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. 3601, et seq. have preempted this field vis-a-vis state legislation. We decline to address that issue because (a) the issue was not raised by the parties to this appeal, and (b) the parties have not been afforded an opportunity to brief it.
Reversed and remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
BUCHANAN, J., concurs.
MILLER, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. Clem v. Christole, Inc., No. 53A04-8712-CV-393 in this Court, an appeal from Monroe Superior court No. III, and Richards v. Hopewell Center, Inc., No. 48A02-8906-CV-268 here, an appeal from Madison Superior Court No. II, involve common questions of law and fact. Thus, they were ordered consolidated for consideration on appeal, cf. Ind. Rules of Procedure, Appellate Rule 5(B).
. New section 14.1 voids as against public policy all such covenantial restrictions "created after April 1, 1988[.]" Because this appeal concerns covenants lawfully operative prior to April 1, 1988, we express no opinion as to the effectiveness of new section 14.1, a factual posture not present in these cases.
. Pulos does not specifically refer to the term "police power.” However, it relies on the concepts involving the proper and improper exercise of police power. The determination of whether the legislature acted outside the constitutional proscriptions which limit the exercise of that power is inherent in its discussion of the issues there presented. Thus, we rely on it in our resolution of these cases, believing Pulos sets forth the standards which must be met before an attempted exercise of police power as it relates to the taking of private property is valid.

=== CASE 9736951 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:54.051373+00 ===

MILLER, Judge,
dissenting.
I dissent.
I believe it is unnecessary to reach the constitutional issues, because, in my view, a group home is a residential use, not a business use. The group homes in this case do not violate the restrictive covenants contained in the respective deeds. There is no dispute that both homes are the type of building — single family dwelling — permitted by the covenants. Further, the uses are residential and not the business uses prohibited by the covenants. The detailed reasons for my conclusion were expressed in my dissent in Adult Group Properties, Ltd. v. Imler (1987), Ind.App., 505 N.E.2d 459. I will not repeat them here.1 If constitutional issues were of significance in this appeal, I would find that ease law mandates that the retroactive provision in the statute: (1) does not violate due process; and (2) does .not unconstitutionally impair the residents’ contracts because it is a legitimate and narrowly drawn exercise of the police power.
I. Background
In Adult Group Properties, the majority held that, in enacting IND. CODE § 16-13-21-14 (which purported to void restrictive covenants that “would permit the residential use of property but prohibit the use of that property as a residential facility for developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons," but contained no specific retroactive application), the legislature did not intend to void restrictive covenants which would prohibit group homes on the basis that they were business enterprises. In addition, the majority, relying on Pulos v. James (1973), 261 Ind. 279, 302 N.E.2d 768, indicated that to interpret the statute so as to void such covenants would be a violation of Article I, Sections 21 and 23 of the Indiana Constitution and the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution. However, Adult Group Properties did not contain an extensive discussion of the constitutional issue.
Following the decision in Adult Group Properties, the legislature amended I.C. § 16-13-21-14, to render void as against public policy existing restrictive covenants (effectively making the statute retroactive) which would prohibit group homes on the ground that the group home was a business, the residents were not related, or for *1188any other reason. (The legislature also added IND. CODE § 16-13-21-14.1 which prospectively voided restrictive covenants based on the same grounds as those found in I.C. § 16-13-21-14, and therefore, does not .concern us here.) This amendment (I.C. § 16-13-21-14) effectively destroys the primary basis for the decision in Adult Group Properties — that the legislature did not intend to void such covenants if they prohibited group homes as a business enterprise or as not being a “family” within the definitions of the covenants — and clarifies the legislative intent. However, the majority in Adult Group Properties also indicated without extensive discussion that, if the statute were construed to void such covenants, it would be unconstitutional. This is the issue before us.
Here, the majority concludes the statute violates the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments of the U.S. Constitution and Article 1, § 21 of the Indiana Constitution. The residents also claim the statute violates Article 1, § 10 of the U.S. Constitution2 and Article 1, § 24 of the Indiana Constitution 3 — the contract clauses — and is unconstitutionally broad in its terms. The majority does not discuss these issues. Because I would hold that the statute is constitutional, I will also discuss these issues.
II. The Due Process Challenge
The majority holds that the statute violates the due process clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments and Article 1, § 21 of the Indiana Constitution, relying on Pulos, supra, to conclude that the statute results in a “taking” of property without due process or just compensation. However, Pulos is inapplicable 'to the circumstances in this case and contrary to more recent decisions of the United States Supreme Court and our supreme court.
In Pulos our supreme court held a statute which authorized a metropolitan plan commission to vacate restrictive covenants contained in the recorded plans of a subdivision was unconstitutional because it authorized the taking of property for a private purpose. The Marion County Plan Commission had vacated restrictive covenants which prevented commercial use of the property in the subdivision. The only parties who benefitted from the vacation of the covenants were owners who wished to use their property for commercial purposes. Our supreme court stated:
“The effect of the instant statute as applied to these facts is to extinguish this right as affecting the land described in the petition so far as found to exist in the respondents, not for any public use nor to subserve any public end, but merely for the benefit of other private landowners whose estates are less valuable by reason of the existence of the right and who could make more advantageous and profitable uses of their own land if these encombrances were out of the way. It has been found expressly that the enforcement of the restrictions would ‘not be injurious to the public interests.’ That finding must be accepted as final and true. Each of the respondents is to be forced against his will to surrender his right in the nature of an easement in the land of another when it is not ‘inoperative, illegal or void’ according to the decision of the land court. He will be obliged to make surrender of this real estate right and accept money damages in place of it, not because demanded by the public interests, but because a neighbor desires it for his private aims. This is plain from the bald statement of the facts.”
(emphasis in original) Id., 302 N.E.2d at 773, quoting Sprague v. Kimball, 213 Mass. 380, 382, 100 N.E. 622, 624. The court then concluded:
Here the plaintiffs’ property rights in the covenants of Meadowview have been purportedly taken and destroyed by the defendants pursuant to a statute of the State of Indiana for the sole use and benefit the defendants, i.e. their use of their land in Meadowview for business rather than residential purposes.
Id., 302 N.E.2d at 774.
Clearly, the Pulos court was concerned with a “taking" for private purposes. *1189Contrary to the majority’s assertion, the case before us does not involve a taking for private purposes; it involves an exercise of the police power for the general welfare. Any benefits received by the operators of the group homes or the residents of such homes are purely incidental to the legitimate public purpose of the act. The mere fact that a statute may benefit private individuals does not render it unconstitutional, if its general purpose is public in nature. Steup v. Indiana Housing Finance Authority (1980), Ind., 402 N.E.2d 1215, 1221.
There can be no doubt that the legislature in enacting I.C. § 16-13-21-14 was addressing an area of broad public concern. As the Wisconsin supreme court in Overlook Farms v. Alternative Living Services (1988), 143 Wis.2d 485, 422 N.W.2d 131, 136 (a case dealing with the constitutionality of a statute similar to I.C. § 16-13-21-14) stated:
Without legislation such as this, the elderly, handicapped and mentally retarded would be forced either to live alone where they cannot sufficiently care for themselves, or be unnecessarily instu-tionalized where, according to expert testimony, the patients
give up their independence, they are subject to regulations and specific requirements of living in an institution like a nursing home, become very depressed, sometimes stop eating, sometimes they become ill, only from the fact that they are at the wrong level of care, not to mention that it’s very expensive to maintain someone in a nursing home, if they don’t need it.
We would be remiss to hold that legislation directed at ameliorating such effects is not a significant and legitimate public purpose directed at a broad health and social problem.
In addition, Congress has recently evidenced a similar concern with the problems of handicapped citizens by enacting the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3601, et seq., which outlaws discrimination in housing based on an individual’s handicap.
The State has a legitimate interest in the health and welfare of its handicapped citizens. This interest is a far cry from the purely private concerns involved in Pulos, supra.
Finally, although there is language in Pulos which suggests that such a statute even if enacted for a public purpose would be unconstitutional,4 this language is mere dicta, and is neither the most recent nor the most extensive explication of our supreme court’s position on this issue.
In Department of Natural Resources v. Indiana Coal Council, 542 N.E.2d at 1001, our supreme court extensively discussed the meaning of “taking” within the context of the due process clauses in light of the numerous Supreme Court’s decisions on the question. In Dep’t of Natural Resources, 6.57 acres of a 305 acre farm (the entire farm contained approximately 1.537 million tons of mineable coal) were designated by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) as unsuitable for surface mining because the 6.57 acres contained “an archaelogically significant area, rich in cultural deposits with substantial historic and scientific value.” Id. at 1001. The owner of the farm and the Indiana Coal Council challenged the DNR’s action on the basis that it was an unconstitutional taking of property.
Our supreme court explained that in determining whether an unconstitutional tak*1190ing has occurred, the court applies a two prong test: (1) Whether the legislation substantially advances a legitimate state interest; and (2) Whether it deprives an owner of economically viable use of his property. The court explained:
The essence of the first prong of the test is whether government had the right to exercise its police power in the manner it did, regardless of the burden to the property. Or, in other words, it asks the question: has government regulated where it should not have done so? If the regulation does not bear a substantial relation to the legitimate ends sought to be achieved, either through a failure of the statute as a whole to serve those ends or as applied to a particular piece of property, then the exercise of the police power is deemed to be unreasonable.
* * * * * *
The economic inquiry of the second prong of the test has its roots in Justice Holmes’s decision in Pennsylvania Coal [v. Mahon], 260 U.S. 393, 43 S.Ct. 158, 67 L.Ed. 322 [1922], which is generally regarded as the seed from which all modern regulatory taking cases have grown. In that case, a Pennsylvania statute requiring that a certain amount of coal be left unmined so as to prevent subsidence to the surface estate was struck down as unconstitutional because it interfered with the distinct investment-backed expectations of the owners of the mineral estate and did not provide compensation for the coal that was “taken.” This consideration for distinct investment-backed expectations remains essential today. Penn Central [Transportation Co. v. City of New York], 438 U.S. 104, 124, 98 S.Ct. 2646, 2659, 57 L.Ed.2d 631, 648 [1978]; Kaiser Aetna v. United States, 444 U.S. 164, 175, 100 S.Ct. 383, 390, 62 L.Ed.2d 332, 343 (1979). It is also necessary to examine the economic impact of the regulation on the claimant in terms of the diminution in value of the land, id., and the extent of any interference with the present use of the land, Penn Central, 438 U.S. at 136, 98 S.Ct. at 2665, 57 L.Ed.2d at 656. In determining the degree of diminution in value, the particular segment that is affected is not considered alone, but the claimant’s property as a whole is compared to that portion which is encumbered. Keystone [Bituminous Coal Ass’n v. DeBenedictis], 480 U.S. [470] at 497, 107 S.Ct. [1232] at 1248, 94 L.Ed.2d [472] at 496 [1987]. Of course, the nature and character of the interference is also relevant; and where a regulation results in permanent physical occupation of property, a taking will almost invariably be found. Id., 480 U.S. at 488-489 n. 18, 107 S.Ct. at 1244 n. 18, 94 L.Ed.2d at 490 n. 18; Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp., 458 U.S. 419, 102 S.Ct. 3164, 73 L.Ed.2d 868 (1982).
Id. at 1003.
The court then concluded the regulation was not an unconstitutional taking because the economic impact was comparatively small and “[p]rotecting our national and state heritage through the preservation of archaeological sites must be included in this broad spectrum of legitimate interests of government.” Id. at 1005.
If the State has a legitimate interest in protecting the artifacts of the dead, it surely has a legitimate interest in protecting the health and welfare of its living handicapped citizens. In addition, the statute in question here bears a substantial relation to the ends sought to be achieved. In IND. CODE § 16-13-21-1 to 19 the legislature has enacted a detailed statutory and regulatory scheme for “mainstreaming” handicapped individuals into normal family environments. I.C. § 16-13-21-14 is substantially related to this goal. Therefore, the statute does not violate the first prong of the test. It is legislation substantially related to a legitimate state interest.
Turning to the second prong of the test, it is necessary to recognize that the economic impact on the property must be such that “a land owner has been effectively deprived of productive use of his property.” Id. 542 N.E.2d at 1003. It is important to recognize that Dep’t of Natural Resources involves a restriction on the use of the *1191party’s own property, as do virtually all of the cases dealing with this issue. See Penn Central Transportation Co. v. City of New York (1978), 438 U.S. 104, 98 S.Ct. 2646, 57 L.Ed.2d 6315 and cases cited therein. Contrary to the majority’s assertion, the case at bar does not involve a restriction on the use of the residents’ property, nor does it result in “a permanent physical occupation” of their property. The residents may continue to use their property for residential purposes. In addition, unlike-the circumstances in Nollan v. Calif. Coastal Comm’n (1987), 483 U.S. 825, 107 S.Ct. 3141, 97 L.Ed.2d 677 no portion of their property is being occupied (even temporarily) by the group homes. The governmental action in this case is far less intrusive than the action in Dep’t of Natural Resources. The use of the resident’s property has not been affected in the slightest degree. Therefore, the statute is not an unconstitutional taking of property.
III. Impairment of Contract — Retroactive Effect of the Statute
The residents also claim the statute violates the contract clauses in Article I, § 10 of the United States Constitution6 and Article I, § 24 of the Indiana Constitution7 because its retroactive effect impairs the provision of their covenants.
As Judge Shields explained in Wenke v. City of Indianapolis (1981), Ind.App., 429 N.E.2d 295, 298.
A retrospective application of a statute to a contract entered into before the effective date of that statute can impair contractual obligations contrary to both the United States and Indiana Constitutions. U.S. Const. Art. 1 § 10; Ind. Const. Art. 1 § 24. There are, however, exceptions to the general rule. The prohibition against impairment of contracts is not an absolute one. The contract clause of either constitution does not restrict the exercise of the state’s police power to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Finerty v. State ex rel. School City of Gary, (1938) 213 Ind. 470, 12 N.E.2d 941.
In Allied Structural Steele Co. v. Spannaus (1978), 438 U.S. 234, 98 S.Ct. 2716, 57 L.Ed.2d 727, the United States Supreme Court established a two-step analysis for determining whether a statute violates the contract clause. The first step requires a determination of “whether the state law has, in fact, operated as a substantial impairment of a contractual relationship.” Id. at 244, 98 S.Ct. at 2722. If the impairment is minimal the inquiry ends at this point and the law is constitutional. However, if a substantial impairment is found, the court moves to the second step which involves an examination of the nature and purpose of the statute. Id. at 245, 98 S.Ct. at 2723.
Before applying step one, it is necessary to note the standard to be applied when considering the constutionality of a statute. A statute is presumed to be constitutional and the challenger has the burden of rebutting the presumption. Miller v. State (1987), Ind., 517 N.E.2d 64. All reasonable doubts are resolved in favor of the statute’s constitutionality. Id. Therefore, the residents carry a heavy burden in order to rebut the presumption of constitutionality.
Here, in the Christole group home case, the only evidence presented by the residents which they claim shows an impairment of their contract expectations, was *1192evidence that on Wednesday evenings seven to thirteen cars were parked on the property and the adjoining street, thereby increasing traffic and the number of cars parked on the street. Christole responded that staff meetings were held every other Wednesday evening, which resulted in a maximum of thirteen cars parked in the area. I note that it is not unusual for residents to hold meetings (i.e., bridge clubs, Bible study classes) in their homes resulting in a similar increase in traffic and parked cars. This evidence is unpersuasive and, at best, shows a minimal impairment.8 Therefore, the inquiry ends. Allied Structural Steele, supra. The residents have failed to meet their burden of rebutting the presumption of constitutionality.
However, in the Hopewell Center case, the residents presented evidence in the form of an affidavit of a real estate appraiser, who stated he had made two studies on the impact of group homes on the surrounding neighborhood and a specific study on the impact of the Hopewell group home on its surrounding neighborhood, and had concluded that the presence of the Hopewell group home would reduce the value of surrounding property between 20% and 5%, depending on the proximity of the individual surrounding homes to the group home. The evidentiary value of this affidavit is questionable.
When reviewing a grant of summary judgment, this court applies the same standard as the trial court. Sharp v. Indiana Union Mutual Insurance Co. (1988), Ind.App., 526 N.E.2d 237. Ind. Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 56(E) states: “Supporting and opposing affidavits shall be made on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as would be admissable in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that the af-fiant is competent to testify to the matters stated therein.” (Emphasis added) Although the affiant states that he is a licensed real estate broker, has taken classes in appraisal, attended numerous seminars on appraisal9 and conducted several thousand appraisals, the affidavit completely fails to show that the affiant has any training or competence in conducting studies or analysis of any kind on the impact of in: eluding one type of use in an area with a different use, including the impact of group homes on the surrounding property. In addition, the affidavit contains no facts from which the court could determine the validity of the studies. The affiant merely states that he “has checked through sources available to him, market values, marketing time and made detailed studies of the before and after effects of the placement of these facilities.” The court is not informed of the nature of the “sources available to him,” nor of the extent of his checking of market values and marketing time. For all the affidavit shows, he could have checked five properties or hundreds of properties. In addition, the court does not know if he eliminated other variables which might affect the value of surrounding property. The affiant has simply stated an opinion, supported by studies, which studies are unsupported by any facts which would show either the validity of the studies or his competence to conduct them and evaluate the results.10
*1193As this court stated in Interstate Auction, Inc. v. Central National Insurance Co. (1983), Ind.App., 448 N.E.2d 1094, 1101, “a court considering a motion for summary judgment should disregard inadmissible information contained in supporting or opposing affidavits.” This information was inadmissible and should be ignored. Therefore, the residents in the Hopewell case have also failed to show more than a minimal impairment of their contract.
However, even if we were to consider the opinion contained in the affidavit and were to consider it evidence of substantial impairment of the contract, the law is not unconstitutional. A finding of substantial impairment merely requires a consideration of the nature and purpose of the statute. Allied Structural Steele, supra.
The statute in question advances a legitimate state interest. In addition, the statutory and regulatory restrictions placed on group homes by I.C. § 16-13-21-1 et seq. carefully control the operation of such group homes and insure that they maintain a residential character. See I.C. § 16-13-21-10. In this case, the legitimate state interest outweighs any resulting impairment of the residents’ contract rights. See Overlook Farms, supra (even though there was substantial impairment of contract, state’s interest in welfare of elderly and handicapped outweighed residents’ contract rights).
IV. Overbreadth
Finally, the residents argue that the inclusion of the words “for any other reason” in I.C. § 16-13-21-14 render the statute unconstitutional because such language is vague and overbroad. The residents claim these words would allow group homes to violate restrictive covenants related to the *1194type of structure allowed, lot size or set back restrictions. This argument is merit-less.
A statute must be construed so as to render it constitutional. Miller, supra. In Ayers v. Porter County Plan Commission (1989), Ind.App., 544 N.E.2d 213 (a case involving a zoning authority’s right to require a group home to seek a special exception) we suggested that a zoning authority could require a group home to comply with structural requirements such as type of building (i.e., single family), lot size or set back requirements.
Restrictive covenants relating to property are analogous to zoning restrictions in the sense that they are generally of two types: (1) restrictions on use of the property; and (2) restrictions on the type of structures permitted. See 101 A. C.J.S. “Zoning and Land Planning” § 2. I note that the provisions of this statute (I.C. 16-13-21-1, et seq.) concerning both restrictive covenants and zoning ordinances preclude the exclusion of group homes because they are allegedly used as a business or because the residents are not related. This indicates that the legislature was concerned with restrictions based on use. In addition, two other sections of the statute (I.C. 16 — 13— 21-11.5 and § 16-13-21-12) provide that “[t]he residential facility may be required to meet all other zoning requirements, ordinances and laws.” Reading the statute as a whole, it is clear the legislature did not intend to void restrictive covenants based on structural requirements, nor to permit group homes to ignore laws and ordinances with respect to health codes and building restrictions. See Ayers, supra. Therefore, it is unnecessary to consider whether such a law would be constitutional.
I would hold that I.C. § 16-13-21-14 is constitutional and would affirm the trial courts.
. My position in this regard is not novel. The Missouri Supreme Court, in Blevins v. Barry-Lawrence County Ass’n (1986), Mo., 707 S.W.2d 407, found it unnecessary to consider whether a restrictive covenant which limited the use of property to residential purposes and single or double family dwellings was void pursuant to a statute similar to IND. CODE § 16-13-21-14, because the proposed group home was a residential use located in a single family dwelling type of structure. See also, cases cited in my dissent in Adult Group Properties, supra. More recent support of this position is found in Residential Management Systems, Inc. v. Jefferson County Plan Comm’n (1989), Ind.App., 542 N.E.2d 227 and Ayers v. Porter County Plan Comm'n (1989), Ind.App., 544 N.E.2d 213, where this court held that group homes were a residential use and a "family” within the definitions in the respective zoning ordinances. The zoning ordinances defined a "family” as a group of individuals “living as a single housekeeping unit" — a far cry from a commercial enterprise.
. "No State shall ... pass any ... law impairing the obligations of contracts.... ”
. “No ex post facto law or law impairing the obligation of contracts shall ever be passed.”
. The language is as follows:
"Even if we should attempt to uphold the constitutionality of the provision in question upon the premise that the commission was authorized to act thereunder only for the public good and not. to benefit private individuals, we would, nevertheless be without support. No provision has been made to compensate those owners of other lots within the plat. It was for their benefit that the restrictive covenants were imposed. Their right to have them enforce is a property right and may not be taken from them without just compensation. Thus, even if it were maintained that the vacation of the restrictions was for the public good, we would run afoul of sections 21 and 23 of Article I of our state constitution (supra) and the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States (supra).”
Pulos, 302 N.E.2d at 774.
.In Penn Central, the owners of Grand Central Station in New York City sought to erect a 55-story office building above the existing station. Permission to erect the building was denied pursuant to New York City’s Landmarks Preservation Law, because the building would destroy the architectural and aesthetic value of the station. The Court held that even though the owners would lose substantial revenue because they could not erect the building, no taking had occurred, because they could continue to gainfully use the station. The state's interest in maintaining the historical value and architectural integrity of a building outweighed the owners’ expectation of substantial profit. Again, I observe that, if the state has a legitimate interest in protecting inanimate objects, it must necessarily have a greater interest in protecting its living needy, elderly, and handicapped citizens.
. "No State shall ..pass any ... Law impairing the Obligation of Contracts.”
. "No ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts shall ever be passed.”
. There was no evidence that the increased traffic impaired the value of the surrounding property. I note that a family with three high school-age children “with wheels" would increase the traffic in the neighborhood, but would not be a violation of the covenants.
. The affiant states these seminars were conducted by the Society of Real Estate Appraisers and the Institute of Real Estate Appraisers (I assume he was referring to the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers). Although he states he has attended these seminars, he does not state that he is a member of these organizations or has been designated by them as an expert appraiser or survey analyst, nor does he allege that the content of these seminars related to conducting surveys.
. Two cases involving expert opinions on community standards in the context of obsenity prosecutions are instructive. In Albright v. State (1986), Ind.App., 501 N.E.2d 488, this court held that an expert in the field of sexual dysfunction was not shown to be qualified to testify as an expert on general community standards. Here, the affiant has shown that he is competent to appraise specific property, but has failed to show he is competent to conduct or analyze studies.
Further, as Judge Shields explained in Saliba v. State (1985), Ind.App., 475 N.E.2d 1181, 1187-*119388, in discussing the admissibility of surveys (public opinion polls):
The admissibility of a public opinion poll depends primarily upon the presence of circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness. 1 J. Moore, Moore's Federal Practice 2.712 (1982). Public opinion polls are surveys designed to elicit the state of mind of a targeted population (“universe") through an examination of a representative portion (“sample”) of the universe. Through accepted statistical analysis, the sample data is used to project the opinion of the entire targeted population. In short, the circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness are premised on (1) the use of generally accepted surveying techniques in conducting the poll and (2) adherence to statistically correct methods in conducting the poll and evaluating the results.
This twofold inquiry has led to the judicial development of six foundational criteria which are generally accepted as scientifically necessary to insure a poll's reliability and, consequently, its admissibility. The proponent of a poll has the burden of establishing: (1) the poll was conducted by an expert in the field of surveying; (2) the relevant universe was examined; (3) a representative sample was drawn from the relevant universe; (4) the mode of questioning was “correct” (mail, telephone, personal interview, etc.); (5) the sample, questionnaire, and the interview were designed in accordance with generally accepted standards; (6) the data gathered was accurately reported; and (7) the data was analyzed in a statistically correct manner. J. Moore, supra at 138; accord Baumholser v. Amax Coal Co., 630 F.2d 550, 552 (7th Cir.1980). The adherence to this generally accepted methodology renders the poll’s results admissible in the form of expert opinion.
Although some of these criteria may be inapplicable to this kind of study, certainly it must be shown that: (1) the data was compiled in accordance with generally accepted standards; (2) the data gathered was accurately reported; and (3) the data was analyzed in a statistically correct manner. Here, we are hampered in determining if the other criteria apply because we do not know the source of or type of data relied upon.
In Duncan v. George Moser Leather Co. (1980), Ind.App., 408 N.E.2d 1332, this court discussed the admissibility of expert opinion testimony based upon reports not in evidence or which are inadmissible under the hearsay rule. The court explained:
In order for the opinion to be admissible (1) the expert must have sufficient expertise to evaluate the reliability and accuracy of the report, (2) the report must be of a type normally found reliable, and (3) the report must be of a type customarily relied upon by the expert in the practice of his profession or expertise. Smith v. State, supra [(1972), 259 Ind. 187, 285 N.E.2d 275]; Capital Improvement Board of Managers v. Public Service Commission, supra [(1978), 176 Ind.App. 240, 375 N.E.2d 616]; In re Adoption of Lockmondy (1976), 168 Ind.App. 563, 343 N.E.2d 793; Rosenbalm v. Winski, supra [(1975), 165 Ind.App. 378, 332 N.E.2d 249].
Id. at 1343.
I note that, here, the studies relied upon by the affiant are not in evidence and the affidavit fails to show that the studies and opinion based on them meet these criteria.

=== CASE 2208149 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:27.001897+00 ===

636 A.2d 728 (1994)
STATE
v.
Michael A. BALLARD.
No. 93-4-C.A.
Supreme Court of Rhode Island.
February 17, 1994.
Jeffrey Pine, Atty. Gen., Thomas Dickinson, Deputy Atty. Gen., for plaintiff.
Richard Corley, Providence, for defendant.
OPINION
PER CURIAM.
The appellant, Michael A. Ballard (Ballard), was convicted of multiple counts arising out of the kidnapping of three young persons. On two of the counts he was sentenced to life imprisonment. On the remaining counts he was sentenced to serve an aggregate of sixty-five years. All sentences imposed were to be served consecutively. Consequently Ballard was sentenced to serve two life sentences plus sixty-five years, all consecutively.
Pursuant to Rule 35 of the Superior Court Rules of Criminal Procedure, Ballard moved to reduce his sentences, arguing that the sentences imposed upon him were disproportionate to sentences that had been imposed upon his two codefendants, one of whom was sentenced to twenty years and the other to twenty-five years (the latter was reduced to twenty years). Ballard pointed out that both codefendants have since been released. Both codefendants pleaded guilty to the charges that had been brought against them.
Ballard went to trial and was convicted on nine counts of kidnapping, conspiracy, assault with a dangerous weapon, and carrying an unlicensed firearm. Ballard's conviction was affirmed by this court in State v. Ballard, 439 A.2d 1375 (R.I. 1982).
After hearing these arguments, the justice who had presided at his trial reduced his sentences by making the sixty-five years imprisonment concurrent with the two life sentences but left the two life sentences to be served consecutively.
Ballard appealed to this court and contended before us that the trial justice abused his discretion in declining to reduce his sentences further pursuant to the Rule 35 motion as being disproportionate to sentences imposed upon his codefendants and also sentences imposed upon others for similar charges.
After hearing the arguments of counsel and examining the briefs filed by Ballard and by the state, this court is evenly divided concerning whether the trial justice abused his discretion in declining to reduce Ballard's sentence further than he did following the Rule 35 hearing. Consequently the decision of the trial justice is affirmed by an evenly divided court.

=== CASE 2208153 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:27.039286+00 ===

225 Cal. App. 2d 503 (1964)
CHRISTIAN BECK, a Minor, etc., Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
SAN FRANCISCO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Defendant and Appellant.
Civ. No. 20794.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
Mar. 12, 1964.
Dallas D. Brock, Jr., for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Thomas M. O'Connor, City Attorney, and Jerome Cohen, Deputy City Attorney, for Defendant and Appellant.
TAYLOR, J.
The minor plaintiff, Christian Beck, through his guardian ad litem, Carl Beck, filed this action for damages for personal injuries suffered when Christian was struck by two other pupils on school grounds. After the jury returned a verdict in favor of the plaintiff for $7,678, *506 the court denied the defendant school district's motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict and the district appeals from the order of denial. The court granted the district's motion for a new trial on the insufficiency of the evidence and the plaintiff cross-appeals from the order granting the new trial.
The pertinent facts are as follows: At the time of the injury, Christian was 15 years old, and a sophomore at Mission High School in San Francisco. On May 22, 1959, the day of the annual school carnival, Christian, after attending his morning classes, looked for a teacher to obtain permission to leave the school grounds. He looked in vain in the school building and then went outside to the yard where the carnival was held. Because it was noontime and he was hungry, he decided to get something to eat. As he walked to the food ticket booth in the center of the yard, he saw two older boys he did not know standing nearby. He noticed they were smoking in violation of the school rules. While Christian stood in line for about 5 to 10 minutes, he "unconsciously" stared at the smokers, wondering how they could get by with such an obvious violation of the strictly enforced rules against smoking on the school grounds. After purchasing his tickets, Christian walked away still "sort of" staring at the smokers who then came over and asked him what he was looking at. When he replied "Nothing," one struck a "sneak blow" which spun him around, while the other knocked him to the ground. Christian struck his head and suffered a severe injury.
A girl screamed and a crowd formed around the plaintiff. The scream was heard by the teacher charged with the general supervision of the carnival, A. J. O'Connor, who immediately turned around and saw the plaintiff lying on his back. O'Connor also noticed a man standing near the plaintiff, assumed it was a teacher, and left to get the nurse. Other school officials testified that of the 23 teachers assigned to the carnival, none were absent from their assignments, that five or six teachers were in the area of the ticket booth just before the incident, and that when adolescents gather, rowdyism tends to occur unless there is supervision. Vince Belli, plaintiff's fellow student, testified that he looked but did not see any teachers in the area in question from the time he arrived prior to the incident until several minutes thereafter. There was evidence that some of the teachers were conversing with each other. There had never been any fights or difficulties at *507 previous festivals. On this occasion, there was nothing unusual, no loud talking or shoving or other circumstances to indicate that any trouble was brewing. The evidence establishes without contradiction that the plaintiff was injured by the sudden wilful act of two 17-year-old fellow students. The two assailants did not have a reputation for belligerency or fighting. The plaintiff testified that they did not address him in a pugnacious manner and that he received a "sneak punch."
The alleged liability of the school district is based on section 903 of the Education Code  [fn. 1] which provides that a school district is liable for injuries resulting from the negligence of its officers or employees. [1] A school district has a duty to supervise the conduct of children on school grounds at all times and to enforce pertinent rules or regulations (Taylor v. Oakland Scavenger Co., 17 Cal. 2d 594 [110 P.2d 1044]). [2] The failure to do so may constitute actionable negligence (Tymkowicz v. San Jose etc. School Dist., 151 Cal. App. 2d 517, 520 [312 P.2d 388]). [3] It is not necessary to prove that the very injury which occurred must have been foreseeable by the school authorities in order to establish that their failure to provide the necessary safeguards constituted negligence. [4] Negligence is established if a reasonably prudent person would foresee that injury of the same general type would be likely to happen in the absence of such safeguards (Taylor v. Oakland Scavenger Co., supra; Lehmuth v. Long Beach Unified School Dist., 53 Cal. 2d 544, 553 [2 Cal. Rptr. 279, 348 P.2d 887]). [5] However, there must be a proximate causal connection between the inadequacy of the supervision and the accident (Forgone v. Salvador U. E. School Dist., 41 Cal. App. 2d 423 [106 P.2d 932]). [6] While foreseeability is one factor in the delineation of negligence, it is equally pertinent in the exploration of proximate cause, especially when an intervening act plays a contributory role in the accident (Raymond v. Paradise Unified School Dist., 218 Cal. App. 2d 1, 8 [31 Cal. Rptr. 847]).
[7] We first consider the denial of the district's motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict. The rule in passing upon such a motion is the same as for nonsuits. (Waller v. Southern Cal. Gas Co., 170 Cal. App. 2d 747 [339 P.2d 577]). "Unless it can be said, as a matter of law, that no other reasonable conclusion is legally deducible from the *508 evidence and that any other holding would be so lacking in evidentiary support that a reviewing court would be impelled to reverse it upon appeal, or the trial court set it aside as a matter of law, the trial court is not justified in taking the case from the jury." (Seneris v. Haas, 45 Cal. 2d 811, 821 [291 P.2d 915, 53 A.L.R. 2d 124].) [8] We must therefore disregard all conflicts in the evidence and view it in a light most favorable to the plaintiff (Cain v. Friend, 171 Cal. App. 2d 806 [341 P.2d 753]; Coates v. Chinn, 51 Cal. 2d 304, 305 [332 P.2d 289]). [9] There was testimony that no teachers were seen in the area from sometime prior to the incident until several minutes thereafter and that there is a tendency for a gathering of adolescents to engage in rowdyism unless under proper supervision. Plaintiff established a sufficient prima facie case of lack of supervision and thus a violation of a duty owed him by the district (Amaya v. Home Ice, Fuel & Supply Co., 59 Cal. 2d 295, 307-309 [29 Cal. Rptr. 33, 379 P.2d 513]).
[10a] The district argues that its motion should have been granted because the proximate cause of the accident was not the claimed lack of supervision but an intervening wrong which supervision would not have prevented. While this view is supported by our decision in Woodsmall v. Mt. Diablo etc. School Dist., 188 Cal. App. 2d 262, 266- 267 [10 Cal. Rptr. 447], and Wright v. City of San Bernardino High School Dist., 121 Cal. App. 2d 342, 347 [263 P.2d 25], we think the better approach is to treat the causal relationship between lack of supervision and injury as a fact determination for the jury (Raymond v. Paradise Unified School Dist., supra, at pp. 7, 8; Ziegler v. Santa Cruz City High School Dist., 168 Cal. App. 2d 277 [335 P.2d 709]; Tymkowicz v. San Jose etc. School Dist., supra). [11] As stated in the Raymond case, each of the proximate cause decisions turns on its own facts and has little value as precedent.
[12] Although a school district is not liable for injuries arising from the unlawful or wilful misconduct of its students (Reithardt v. Board of Education, 43 Cal. App. 2d 629 [111 P.2d 440]), the wilful act of a student may not in itself be a sufficient intervening cause to relieve the district of its own liability. (Charonnat v. San Francisco Unified School Dist., 56 Cal. App. 2d 840 [133 P.2d 643]). [13] There is no fixed standard of supervision and whether the intervening cause was sufficient to relieve the district in the instant case was a question of fact properly left to the jury on *509 the trial as were the matter of the adequacy of the supervision of the carnival and the question of proximate cause (Rodrigues v. San Jose Unified School Dist., 157 Cal. App. 2d 842 [322 P.2d 70]).
[10b] We conclude that the trial court properly denied the district's motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict.
We now turn to the order granting the district's motion for a new trial. [14] On appeal, all presumptions are in favor of an order granting a new trial and against the judgment and the appellate court will reverse such an order only where as a matter of law, there is no substantial evidence to support a contrary judgment. [15] The granting of a motion for a new trial rests so completely within the discretion of the trial court that the appellate court can interfere only when a manifest abuse of discretion appears and the burden of showing such abuse is on the plaintiff (Vanni v. Burns, 179 Cal. App. 2d 58, 61 [3 Cal. Rptr. 487]; Mazzotta v. Los Angeles Ry Corp., 25 Cal. 2d 165, 169 [153 P.2d 338]). [16] In the instant case, there was testimony that some 23 teachers had been assigned to the carnival and that 5 or 6 of these were in the area of the attack just before the plaintiff was struck. There was also testimony that there had been no trouble at previous carnivals and that the attack was wilful and unheralded. This testimony afforded substantial evidence upon which the jury could have based a judgment for the district either on the ground of adequacy of supervision or lack of proximate cause (Woodsmall v. Mt. Diablo etc. School Dist., supra). The trial court did not abuse its discretion and was legally justified in granting the district's motion for a new trial.
The order granting the new trial and the order denying the motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict are affirmed. Each party is to bear his own costs.
Shoemaker, P. J., and Agee, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Former section 1007.

=== CASE 2208075 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:26.309603+00 ===

146 Wis.2d 116 (1987)
430 N.W.2d 353
STATE of Wisconsin, Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
Curtiss L. CHILDS, Defendant-Appellant.[]
No. 87-0267-CR.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs September 14, 1987.
Decided July 28, 1988.
*118 For the defendant-appellant the cause was submitted on the briefs of Jack E. Schairer, assistant state public defender.
For the plaintiff-respondent, the cause was submitted on the brief of Donald J. Hanaway, attorney general, and Jerome S. Schmidt, assistant attorney general.
Before Dykman, Eich and Sundby, JJ.
SUNDBY, J.
Curtiss Childs appeals a judgment convicting him of second-degree sexual assault (fellatio), contrary to sec. 940.225(2)(a), Stats.[1] He claims that several trial errors entitle him to a new trial. First, the trial court erred in instructing the jury that oral stimulation of the penis is fellatio. Second, the trial court erred in denying his motion for a mistrial or, in the alternative, for a cautionary instruction because of the prejudicial effect of evidence of the complainant's prior sexual conduct. Third, the trial court erred in allowing his parole agent to testify in rebuttal as to statements made by Childs to the agent in a pre-revocation interview. Finally, Childs contends that he should be granted a new trial in the interest of justice because it is probable a retrial would produce a different result. We conclude that there were errors in *119 Childs's trial but that they were harmless. We therefore affirm the judgment.
I.
BACKGROUND OF THE CASE
Childs and the complainant met in a Madison bar where they drank, danced and talked. After the bar closed, they went to Child's apartment where they proceeded from talking to kissing to hug-dancing, fondling and sexual intercourse. The complainant claimed that she did not consent to the intercourse. The jury was unable to reach a verdict on a vulvar sexual intercourse charge, and, on the state's motion, the trial court dismissed the charge. The jury found Childs guilty of sexual intercourse, fellatio, by the use or threat of force or violence.
II.
FELLATIO INSTRUCTION
Childs claims that the trial court erred in instructing the jury that fellatio is the oral stimulation of the penis.
Section 940.225(5)(b), Stats., defines sexual intercourse as follows:
"Sexual intercourse" includes the meaning assigned under s. 939.22(36)[2] as well as cunnilingus, fellatio or anal intercourse between persons or any other intrusion, however slight, of any part of a person's body or of any object into the genital or anal opening either by the defendant or upon *120 the defendant's instruction. The emission of semen is not required.
Childs argues that the instruction relieved the state of its burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt an essential element of the offenseintrusion of his penis into the complainant's mouth. He contends that failure to instruct the jury on the essential elements of an offense is "plain constitutional error requiring reversal." We conclude that the jury was properly instructed as to the law.
Note 1 to Wis. J ICriminal 1200 advises:
If fellatio or cunnilingus is alleged to have occurred, the following should be used to simply tell the jury that for the purposes of the Sexual Assault Law, these acts are sexual intercourse:
"Cunnilingus, the oral stimulation of the clitoris or vulva, is sexual intercourse."
"Fellatio, the oral stimulation of the penis, is sexual intercourse."
(Both definitions are from Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary.) (Emphasis in original.)
[1, 2]
In the absence of a statutory definition, the common and generally understood meaning of a word should be applied in the construction of a statute. Wood County v. Bd. of Vocational, T & A Ed., 60 Wis. 2d 606, 614, 211 N.W.2d 617, 620 (1973). The ordinary and common meaning of a word may be established by the definition in a recognized dictionary. Id. The ordinary and common meaning of fellatio includes oral stimulation of the penis without penetration into the month. Therefore, the jury was properly instructed as to the meaning of fellatio.
*121 III.
EVIDENCE OF PRIOR SEXUAL CONDUCT
Section 972.11(2)(b), Stats.,[3] makes inadmissible in any prosecution under sec. 940.225, Stats., any evidence of the complainant's prior sexual conduct except evidence as to conduct with the defendant, subject to exceptions which are not applicable here. Sexual conduct includes the complainant's "lifestyle." Sec. 972.11(2)(a).
In the prosecutor's examination of the complainant, the following questions were asked and the following answers were given:
Q. ... Why did you go with a strange man to his apartment that night?
A. ... [O]ver the whole course of the evening he got me talking to him and I thought he was nice and we were getting along and I wanted to continue talking to him. And there were a number of factors and I may have had a little too much to drink. Also I didn't want to go back to my apartment and bother my roommates with noise with my music and I wanted to listen to music.
Q. I assume you've had a lot of time to rethink that decision.
*122 A. Right. It's also something that I had never done before.
Q. It's not something that you'd done before?
A. No.
Childs did not object to this testimony until the next morning when he moved for a mistrial or, in the alternative, for a curative instruction. We need not decide the state's claim that Childs waived the error because we conclude it was harmless.
The introduction of the evidence was error. The complainant's testimony signalled to the jury that she regarded the practice of going from a bar to a strange man's apartment as morally improper and not part of her lifestyle. Her testimony tended to make her story more credible. The evidence was inadmissible under sec. 972.11 (2)(b), Stats. See State v. Gavigan, 111 Wis. 2d 150, 159, 330 N.W.2d 571, 576 (1983) (prior sexual conduct includes lack of sexual activity). See also State v. Mitchell, 144 Wis. 2d 596, 424 N.W.2d 698 (1988) (testimony that victim had been virgin inadmissible).
[3]
However, in view of the rest of the complainant's testimony, the jury's assessment of her credibility could not have been affected by her gratuitous response. The complainant testified that at Child's apartment there "was a slow progression from kissing, slow dancing to a little more fondling, to sitting down and eventually, ... after a number of minutes ... it slowly progressed to the floor" where "[w]e were continuing to make out." She let Childs remove her blouse, shirt, bra and pants. The complainant does not claim that, up to the time Childs forced her to have vaginal intercourse and fellatio, she did not consent to their love-making. In view of her testimony, we *123 conclude that there is no reasonable possibility that her testimony as to her life-style contributed to childs's conviction. See State v. Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d 525, 543, 370 N.W.2d 222, 232 (1985) (state's burden is to establish that there is no reasonable possibility that error contributed to conviction).
IV.
TESTIMONY OF PAROLE AGENT
The state concedes that Childs's out-of-court statements to his parole agent were not clearly inconsistent with his trial testimony. Under the test which the state applies, State v. Evans, 77 Wis. 2d 225, 235-36, 252 N.W.2d 664, 668-669 (1977), the rebuttal testimony of the parole agent was not admissible because it did not impeach Childs's testimony. Under State v. Thompson, 142 Wis. 2d 821, 826-34, 419 N.W.2d 564, 565-568 (Ct. App. 1987), because Childs's statement to his parole agent was coerced, it was not admissible for any evidentiary purpose. For a discussion of the fifth amendment exclusionary rule, see Note, The Impeachment Exception to the Sixth Amendment Exclusionary Rule, 87 Colum. L. Rev. 176, 182 (1987).
[4]
On voir dire, the agent testified that he obtained Childs's statement in a pre-revocation interview. He stated to Childs that he expected Childs's answers to be honestly made and truthful "and I will use that statement with other information that I gather to make a decision to which way I shall proceed, meaning that I would proceed with revocation or some other form of action." A statement to a probation or *124 parole agent in such circumstances is coerced. Thompson, 142 Wis. 2d at 832, 419 N.W.2d at 568.[4]
We conclude, however, that admission of the agent's testimony was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. In Thompson we held that the admission in that case of the probationer's coerced statement was not harmless error, in spite of the state's argument that there was a "strong evidentiary basis" for the jury's verdict. 142 Wis. 2d at 834-35, 419 N.W.2d at 569. It is the general rule that "the admission in evidence, over objection, of [a] coerced confession vitiates the judgment because it violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment." Lynumn v. Illinois, 372 U.S. 528, 537, (1963) quoting Payne v. Arkansas, 356 U.S. 560, 568 (1958). In Thompson, we also quoted Mincey v. Arizona, 437 U.S. 385, 398 (1978) as follows:
[A]ny criminal trial use against the defendant of his involuntary statement is a denial of due process of law "even though there is ample evidence aside from the confession to support the conviction." Jackson v. Denno, [378 U.S. 368,] 376 [(1964)].
142 Wis. 2d at 835, 419 N.W.2d at 569 (emphasis in original).
*125 [5]
However, the general rule against admission of an involuntary statement or coerced confession is not a per se rule. See Harrison v. Owen, 682 F.2d 138, 140 (7th Cir. 1982) (there is no blanket prohibition against a harmless error finding in the context of inadmissible confession). In Milton v. Wainwright, 407 U.S. 371 (1972), the Court held that admission of incriminating statements made to a "Judas" cellmate was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt because the jury, in addition to hearing this evidence, heard overwhelming evidence of Milton's guilt, including no less than three voluntary full confessions made by Milton prior to his indictment.
Milton v. Wainwright is an exception to the general rule. The Supreme Court has reversed convictions predicated on involuntary confessions as a matter of law on at least thirty-one occasions. See Miller v. Fenton, 741 F.2d 1456, 1470 n. 3 (3rd Cir. 1984) (Gibbons, J. dissenting), rev'd, 474 U.S. 104 (1985), on remand, cert. denied, 479 U.S. 989 (1986).
Several federal circuit courts of appeals have applied a harmless error test in cases in which an improperly obtained confession was admitted into evidence. In United States ex rel. Moore v. Follette, 425 F.2d 925 (2d Cir. 1970), cert. denied, 398 U.S. 966 (1970), the court held that the admission of an improperly obtained confession was harmless error where there was a properly obtained confession. However, the court stated that "[t]he case where admission of an improperly obtained confession can be considered harmless error is exceedingly rare...." 425 F.2d at 928.
In Harrison v. Owen, the court held that any error arising out of the admission of police officers' testimony *126 regarding petitioner's oral incriminating statements was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The admissible testimony of petitioner's neighbor concerning petitioner's incriminating statements was of an extremely high quality and probative value. There was no challenge to the truthfulness of the neighbor's testimony, and the evidence against the petitioner as a whole, disregarding his statements to the police officers, established guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The court said:
Instead of allowing the jury to hear the story only once rather than twice, exclusion of the police officer's testimony would have little consequence to the final outcome. A different conclusion might be reached if [the neighbors'] testimony were challenged as untrue. Under that circumstance, the police officer's testimony would take on substantial importance. (Citation omitted.)
682 F.2d at 141.
[6]
The distinction which appears thus far is that if the involuntary or coerced confession or statement has no evidentiary value, and is merely cumulative of voluntary statements of the defendant, its admission constitutes harmless error. We conclude that the distinction is valid.
In Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18, 22, reh'g denied, 386 U.S. 987 (1967), the Court announced "that there may be some constitutional errors which in the setting of a particular case are so unimportant and insignificant that they may, consistent with the Federal Constitution, be deemed harmless, not resulting in the automatic reversal of the conviction."
*127 Justice Stewart, concurring in the result, pointed out that when involuntary confessions had been introduced at trial, the Court had "always reversed convictions regardless of other evidence of guilt. . . . Even when the confession is completely `unnecessary' to the conviction, the defendant is entitled to `a new trial free of constitutional infirmity.'" Chapman, 386 U.S. at 42 (quoting Haynes v. Washington, 373 U.S. 503, 518-19 (1963)). The majority acknowledged that "our prior cases have indicated that there are some constitutional rights so basic to a fair trial that their infraction can never be treated as harmless error." One of the constitutional infractions cited by the court as an example was a coerced confession, Payne v. Arkansas. Chapman, 386 U.S. at 23 n. 8. The Wisconsin Supreme Court has likewise noted that there are constitutional errors, including admission of a coerced confession, which automatically result in reversal. Dyess, 124 Wis. 2d at 543, n. 10, 370 N.W.2d at 231-232.
In a recent case, Satterwhite v. Texas, 100 L. Ed. 2d 284 (1988), the United States Supreme Court reaffirmed its statement in Chapman that there are some constitutional rights the infraction of which can never be harmless error. Id., 100 L. Ed. 2d at 293. Satterwhite involved the admission of psychiatric testimony in violation of the defendant's sixth amendment right set out in Estelle v. Smith, 451 U.S. 454 (1981). Satterwhite urged the Court to adopt an automatic rule of reversal for such violations. The Court declined to do so, nothing that it had applied an automatic reversal rule to sixth amendment violations only when "the deprivation of the right to counsel affectedand contaminatedthe entire criminal proceeding." Satterwhite, 100 L. Ed. at 294. The *128 Court stated that it had permitted harmless error analysis where the evil caused by a sixth amendment violation is limited to the erroneous admission of particular evidence at trial, citing Milton v. Wainwright. Id.
[7]
The evidence admitted in Milton v. Wainwright was a coerced confession obtained in violation of Milton's fifth amendment right against self-incrimination as well as his sixth amendment right to counsel. The Court relied on Chapman in holding that the admission of the confession was harmless error. The Satterwhite Court likewise relied on the Chapman harmless-error rule. Applying the Chapman rule to this case, we conclude that the error in admitting the testimony of Child's parole agent was so "unimportant and insignificant" that it was harmless. Childs's statement to his parole agent was merely cumulative of his in-court testimony, did not incriminate him, and added nothing to the state's case.
Childs argues, however, that the parole agent's testimony prejudiced him because it revealed to the jury that he was a parolee and suggested by "innuendo" that he was not a credible witness. It is disingenuous of Childs to suggest that the jury was not already aware that the state did not regard him as a credible witness. In fact, the state's strategy may have backfired since the parole agent confirmed that Childs's testimony was completely consistent with what he had previously told his parole agent after he had been admonished that he should be truthful.
Further, the jury could have been favorably influenced towards Childs by the fact that, despite his record of four criminal convictions, he was considered by the state to be sufficiently trustworthy to be placed *129 under parole supervision rather than imprisoned. We see no prejudice.
V.
DISCRETIONARY REVERSAL
Childs argues that we should order a new trial in the interest of justice because of the improper admission of the prior sexual conduct evidence and the parole agent's testimony. He contends that without this evidence, it is probable that a retrial would produce a different result.
[8]
In order to exercise our different-result power of discretionary reversal under sec. 752.35, Stats., we must be convinced that Childs should not have been found guilty and that justice demands that he be given a new trial. State v. Wyss, 124 Wis. 2d 681, 736, 370 N.W.2d 745, 771 (1985). We are not so convinced.
By the Court.Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[]  Petition to review denied.
[1]  Section 940.225(2), Stats., provides:
Whoever does any of the following is guilty of a Class C felony:
(a) Has sexual contact or sexual intercourse with another person without consent of that person by use or threat of force or violence.
[2]  Section 939.22(36), Stats., reads: "`Sexual intercourse' requires only vulvar penetration and does not require emission."
[3]  Section 972.11(2)(b), Stats., provides in part:
If the defendant is accused of a crime under s. 940.225, any evidence concerning the complaining witness's prior sexual conduct or opinions of the witness's prior sexual conduct and reputation as to prior sexual conduct shall not be admitted into evidence during the course of the hearing or trial, nor shall any reference to such conduct be made in the presence of the jury . . . .
[4]  We emphasize that our holding is not a modification or extension of Thompson. Under the amended rules of probation and parole signed by Childs, his parole status was subject to revocation if he failed to inform his parole agent of his whereabouts and activities when directed to do so by the agent. Childs was thus required to choose between giving answers to his parole agent which could incriminate him in a subsequent criminal prosecution and losing his conditional liberty as a price for exercising his fifth amendment right to remain silent.

=== CASE 2208096 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:26.518163+00 ===

636 A.2d 1326 (1994)
Joanne COPPOTELLI
v.
BREWER YACHT YARD AT COWESETT, INC., et al.
No. 93-303-Appeal.
Supreme Court of Rhode Island.
February 4, 1994.
*1327 Timothy O'Hara, Resmini & O'Hara, Associates, John Verdecchia, DeSimone & DeSimone, Providence, for plaintiff.
Edward Gnys, III, Gunning, LaFazia & Gnys, David Oliveira, MacAdams & Wick, Providence, for defendant.
OPINION
PER CURIAM.
This case came before the court on January 11, 1994, pursuant to an order directing the parties, codefendants Brewer Yacht Yard at Cowesett, Inc. (Brewer), and Mark DeStefano d.b.a. The Folly Landing Restaurant, Inc. (Folly Landing), and the plaintiff, Joanne Coppotelli, to show cause why this matter should not be summarily decided. Folly Landing appeals the granting in Superior Court of Brewer's motion for summary judgment.
After hearing the arguments of counsel and reviewing the memoranda submitted by the parties, we are of the opinion that cause has not been shown.
The plaintiff filed suit claiming she had slipped and fallen on a foreign substance on an exterior stairway leading to Folly Landing, and she claimed that the stairs were unreasonably steep. Folly Landing operated a restaurant housed on property owned by Brewer pursuant to the terms of a written lease. The stairway on which plaintiff claims she fell led to the second-floor restaurant.
Folly Landing pressed two issues on appeal: (1) whether the stairway was part of the leased premises or was part of the common area, and (2) whether the indemnity clause of the lease relieved Brewer of liability. The evidence in this case supports a finding that the stairway was part of the demised premises under the lease, that Folly Landing retained exclusive use of the stairway, and that Folly Landing was responsible for maintaining the stairway. Our rule in Ward v. Watson, 524 A.2d 1108, 1109 (R.I. 1987), has established that a landlord, Brewer in this case, is not liable for injuries sustained by a tenant or a guest, here plaintiff, on the tenant's leased premises unless the injuries result from a latent defect known to the landlord but not to the tenant or from the landlord's breach of a covenant to repair. Because neither of the latter conditions is applicable in this case, Brewer is not liable for the alleged injury.
On the second issue this court has held that exculpatory indemnification clauses are valid. See Rhode Island Hospital Trust National Bank v. Dudley Service Corp., 605 A.2d 1325, 1327 (R.I. 1992). We are of the opinion, therefore, that the trial justice did not err in finding that no genuine issue of material fact existed with respect to Brewer's liability.
Consequently Folly Landing's appeal of the granting of Brewer's motion for summary judgment is denied and dismissed. The judgment of the Superior Court is affirmed.
SHEA, J., did not participate.

=== CASE 9736952 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:59.724972+00 ===

JUSTICE HARTMAN delivered the opinion of the court: This appeal involves a commercial dispute between a secured inventory lender and a rescinding purchaser, following default by a third-party borrower. Chicago Limousine Service, Inc. (CLS), brought a replevin action against Hartigan Cadillac, Inc. (Dealership),1 and General Motors Acceptance Corporation (GMAC), the secured inventory lender of the Dealership, seeking possession of two 1985 Cadillac limousines. After a six-day bench trial, the circuit court awarded possession of the vehicles,2 damages, and costs to CLS, and dismissed GMAC’s affirmative defenses and counterclaim. On appeal, GMAC questions whether the circuit court erred in finding that CLS had a superior right to possession of the vehicles and, alternatively, challenges the damage award. On cross-appeal, CLS claims the court erred in not awarding damages for the lost use and enjoyment of the vehicles. The following facts emerge from the evidence adduced at trial. CLS provides private livery and limousine service to corporate and individual clients, and primarily uses stretch Cadillac and Lincoln limousines in its operations. Since 1976, GMAC, the inventory lender to the Dealership under a security agreement (Agreement) dated May 26, 1976, advanced money to the latter for the purchase of its new car inventory (floor plan financing), as well as for costs incurred in converting new Cadillacs into stretch limousines. The Agreement gave the Dealership the right to sell the vehicles in the ordinary course of business and also provided that GMAC’s security interest attached to proceeds derived from such sales, as well as to after-acquired property. Among the vehicles financed under this Agreement were two 1985 Cadillac limousines (subject vehicles), upon which the Dealership owed GMAC over $72,000 as of June 1986. The Dealership began doing business with CLS in the summer of 1985. Around June 24, 1986, Alvin Golub (Al), the president of CLS, received a telephone call from Kenneth Schielka, the Dealership’s general manager, inquiring whether CLS was interested in purchasing two 1985 stretch limousines for a price of $27,000, among other vehicles. Al told Schielka he wasn’t interested, and the price was “out of line” since the 1987 models were about to come out. Nevertheless, Al told Schielka he would stop by the Dealership to discuss the matter, which he did the next day, and spoke with Schielka and James Hartigan, its president, regarding the two limousines. The subject limousines were similar to the type of vehicle CLS always purchased, and Al agreed to take them. Initially priced at $27,000, eventually they agreed on a price of $25,000 for each car. Typically, CLS would not take immediate physical possession of vehicles purchased from the Dealership; CLS lacked adequate garage facilities, so it arranged that equipment installation be completed at the Dealership. Al told Hartigan he would be sending a man from CLS to install radios in the vehicles within a few days. Schielka advised Al that he would process the necessary paperwork and send salesman Tim Godomski to the CLS office the next day with the purchase documents. On the 25th and 26th of June, Godomski arrived at the CLS offices, where he and Al executed the necessary sales instruments, including a purchase order and invoice for each vehicle, a form stating that CLS had taken delivery of the limousines on June 25, 1986, and a CLS check in the amount of $50,000 payable to the Dealership. The original documents were taken by Godomski and maintained by the Dealership in a “deal jacket” kept in its files, except for the check, which was deposited on June 27,1986. Around June 30, Schielka telephone Al and asked to cancel the deal since the Dealership had a buyer willing to pay more money for the two vehicles. Due to the good business relationship between CLS and the Dealership, A1 agreed to cancel, telling Schielka to keep the cars and “just send me back any money.” Within a day or two, A1 received two checks for $25,000 each from the Dealership, which were deposited into the CLS account. Around July 5, A1 heard that GMAC had taken over the Dealership and called Schielka to inquire about the Dealership’s financial situation. According to Al, he was not informed previously that the Dealership was experiencing financial difficulty. Schielka told A1 that there should be no problem; nevertheless, A1 immediately called CLS’s bank in an attempt to stop payment on the $50,000 check to the Dealership. The check already had been paid, however. CLS was informed on July 10 that the two $25,000 checks from the Dealership were dishonored. The debit notice from the bank directed the payee to “Refer to maker.” A1 called Schielka, who advised him that the checks would be made good. CLS never" redeposited the checks. Previously, the Dealership had a line of credit with its bank to cover overdrafts. In early July, however, its bank froze the Dealership’s account. Prior to July 1, 1986, GMAC knew of the Dealership’s financial problems, considering it one of the financially weaker dealerships “for a number of years.” On July 2, GMAC learned the Dealership was “out of trust,” meaning it had not turned over to GMAC the applicable proceeds derived from the sale of vehicles in which GMAC maintained a security interest. On that date, GMAC received one-half million dollars in checks from the Dealership which were dishonored. In response, Mark Daly, a control branch manager for GMAC, immediately placed Carl Swanson, a GMAC employee, at the Dealership to monitor the inventory. According to Daly, he did not ask Swanson on that day to determine which vehicles physically located on the premises had been sold; he did expect Swanson to ascertain such information eventually. After July 2, Swanson or another GMAC employee was at the Dealership during all business hours. When the Dealership received a payment by check, it immediately was endorsed over to and deposited by GMAC. At some point, GMAC took control of all keys to the vehicles on the premises. The public was not advised of GMAC’s involvement at the Dealership, however. On July 16, AI and Harold Golub went to the Dealership in person, where Schielka advised them he could not release the limousines. He referred them to Swanson, who claimed the cars belonged to GMAC. The Golubs then met with Hartigan, who signed a note3 promising that the Dealership would pay CLS $50,000 if the limousines were not delivered within 30 days. Hartigan testified that as far as he was concerned, CLS bought the two vehicles from the Dealership. The Dealership never paid GMAC the $72,000 balance it owed for the subject vehicles. Meanwhile, after talking with Golub, Swanson called Daly to advise him of that conversation. Swanson related that Golub described some transaction involving the purchase of the limousines by CLS and another in which CLS obtained a check from the Dealership; he told Daly he did not think the Golubs had the paperwork evidencing these transactions. Daly did not direct Swanson to investigate the matter with Schielka or check the Dealership’s records. A1 called Daly and requested the subject vehicles. Daly told A1 that CLS was not a good-faith purchaser of the two limousines; because of the two checks sent to CLS from the Dealership, Daly considered CLS to be an unsecured creditor. Daly also believed CLS was not a good-faith purchaser because it did not take physical possession of the vehicles and had paid under value for them. Based on these conclusions, Daly instructed Swanson not to release the vehicles to CLS. Daly admitted at trial, however,' that he never talked to Schielka or Hartigan, nor asked Swanson to check the Dealership’s records, nor caused GMAC to investigate CLS’s claim. GMAC also continued to hold the certificates of origin for the subject vehicles. CLS filed a complaint for replevin on August 21, 1986, against the Dealership and GMAC, claiming it was the owner and lawfully entitled to possession of the subject vehicles; the vehicles were being wrongfully detained by the Dealership and/or GMAC; and the value of the property was $50,000. The complaint sought possession of the vehicles, the value of the property not delivered, and damages. In response, GMAC filed a motion to dismiss or in the alternative for judgment on the pleadings, which the circuit court denied on August 29, 1986, and then also entered a preliminary order for replevin, finding CLS “established a prima facie case to a superior right to possession of the disputed property.” On January 5, 1987, the circuit court entered an order finding as premature GMAC’s motion for judgment on the pleadings. GMAC then filed its verified answer, affirmative defenses, and counterclaim. The affirmative defenses asserted: (1) CLS was not a good-faith purchaser for value because it acted in bad faith by allowing the vehicles to remain at the Dealership, paid grossly inadequate value for the vehicles, and accepted checks from the Dealership in consideration for its interest in the vehicles or alternatively, as part of a “check kiting” scheme; and (2) CLS’s acceptance of the two checks from the Dealership constituted a sale, thus rendering the vehicles “after acquired property” to which GMAC’s ■ security interest attached. GMAC’s counterclaim sought possession of the vehicles, the value of the property wrongfully withheld by CLS, and damages, based on the same rationales asserted in the affirmative defenses. CLS filed a verified reply to the affirmative defenses and a verified answer to the counterclaim. Eight witnesses testified at the ensuing trial. On August 13, 1987, the circuit court found in favor of CLS and against GMAC on the complaint for replevin; it dismissed GMAC’s affirmative defenses; and found for CLS on GMAC’s countercomplaint, which was also dismissed. Further, the court determined CLS was entitled to possession of both vehicles.4 The circuit court also entered a $19,100 judgment for CLS as damages against GMAC for wrongful detention of the limousines, but denied CLS rental value damages. From this judgment GMAC appeals, and CLS cross-appeals. I  The primary issue on appeal is whether CLS or GMAC had the superior right to possession of the two limousines under the provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 26, par. 1—101 et seq.) (UCC). GMAC contends it has a security interest in the subject vehicles under UCC section 9—203(1) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 26, par. 9—203(1)), which states, in part: “(1) *** [A] security interest is not enforceable against the debtor or third parties with respect to the collateral and does not attach unless (a) the collateral is in the possession of the secured party pursuant to agreement, or the debtor has signed a security-agreement which contains a description of the collateral ***; and (b) value has been given; and (c) the debtor has rights in the collateral.” GMAC next asserts its rights are superior to those of CLS based on section 2—403(1) of the UCC (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 26, par. 2—403(1)), which provides, in part: “(1) A purchaser of goods acquires all title which his transferor had or had power to transfer except that a purchaser of a limited interest acquires rights only to the extent of the interest purchased. A person with voidable title has power to transfer a good title to a good faith purchaser for value. When goods have been delivered under a transaction of purchase the purchaser has such power even though * * * (b) the delivery was in exchange for a check which is later dishonored ***.” (Emphasis added.) GMAC urges that CLS’s acceptance of the Dealership’s two checks in exchange for the cancellation of the original transaction constituted a “voluntary transfer” by CLS of its interest in the vehicles, characterizing CLS as a seller whose security interests arose because it accepted two subsequently dishonored checks from the Dealership (a debtor). Although the checks were later dishonored, continues GMAC, voidable title was passed to the Dealership, which nevertheless had the power to transfer good title under section 2—403(1). Describing itself as a good-faith purchaser from the Dealership, GMAC concludes it has a superior right to possession of the vehicles.  CLS, on the other hand, claims it was not a seller and disputes GMAC’s characterization of the subsequent cancellation of the purchase agreement as a “sale.” It argues it was a buyer in the ordinary course when it purchased the limousines in the original transaction, and retained that status after the Dealership unsuccessfully attempted to rescind the purchase agreement. CLS acknowledges GMAC’s original perfected security interest in the Dealership’s vehicles and proceeds from the sale of those vehicles, but relies on section 9—307(1) of the UCC (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 26, par. 9— 307(1)), which declares, in part: “[A] buyer in the ordinary course of business *** takes free of a security interest created by his seller even though the security interest is perfected and even though the buyer knows of its existence.” Based upon its asserted status as a buyer in the ordinary course of business pursuant to section 9—307(1), CLS concludes it is entitled to possession of the two limousines.  Under section 9—203(1) of the UCC, a security interest in collateral attaches when (1) a security agreement containing a description of the collateral is signed by the debtor, (2) value is given by the secured party, and (3) the debtor acquires rights in the collateral. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 26, par. 9—203(1); Central National Bank v. Worden-Martin, Inc. (1980), 90 Ill. App. 3d 601, 413 N.E.2d 539; see also General Electric Credit Corp. v. Tidwell Industries, Inc. (1977), 115 Ariz. 362, 364, 565 P.2d 868, 870.) In this case, the first two requirements clearly were satisfied. First, the Dealership signed an agreement which provided GMAC with a security interest in new and used vehicles held for sale or lease, “all vehicles of like kinds or types now owned or hereafter acquired,” and “all additions and accessions thereto and all proceeds of such vehicles.” (Emphasis added.) This clause sufficiently describes the collateral in the instant case (vehicles of like kinds or types hereafter acquired) and meets the first requirement of section 9—203(1). (See Tidwell Industries, 115 Ariz. 362, 565 P.2d 868.) Second, GMAC advanced substantial amounts of money to the Dealership. The preexisting indebtedness of over $1.65 million owed to GMAC, including financing for the subject vehicles, constituted value given under the UCC (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 26, par. 1—201(44)), and satisfies the second element of section 9-203(1). In re Samuels & Co. (5th Cir. 1976), 526 F.2d 1238, 1242, cert, denied sub nom. Stowers v. Mahon (1976), 429 U.S. 834, 50 L. Ed. 2d 99, 97 S. Ct. 98. The third requirement of section 9—203(1), whether the debtor (the Dealership) reacquired rights in the limousines, is a point of contention in this case. GMAC argues that the cancellation of the original transaction constituted a voluntary transfer of CLS’s interest in the limousines back to the Dealership; CLS responds that the failed rescission between it and the Dealership resulted in the original sales contract for the vehicles remaining in effect and its retention of status as a buyer in the ordinary course of business with a superior right to possession. The original transaction clearly constituted a sale to CLS, which transferred the Dealership’s interest in the vehicles to CLS and converted GMAC’s security interest into the proceeds of the sale. We must determine now the effect of the rescission between CLS and the Dealership, specifically, whether the rescission caused title to the vehicles to return to the Dealership when those parties sought to cancel the transaction, thereby becoming subject to GMAC’s perfected security interest in after-acquired property.  CLS correctly asserts that a contract can be cancelled or rescinded by agreement of the parties. (Volk v. Kendall (1979), 71 Ill. App. 3d 211, 213, 389 N.E.2d 697.) Also, CLS properly observes: “ ‘To be entitled to rescind the contract of sale the buyer must first comply with conditions precedent, such as by returning or offering to return the goods to the seller ***. Where the buyer puts it out of his power to return the goods he thereby also puts it out of his power to rescind the contract.’ ” (Tobey v. Sundling (1974), 25 Ill. App. 3d 205, 211, 323 N.E.2d 30, quoting 32 Ill. L. & Prac. Sales §67, at 389 (1957).) CLS argues that in the instant case, the Dealership failed to comply with a condition precedent, namely, returning what it received.  The determination of whether a debtor acquires title depends upon the intentions of the parties. In Central National Bank v. Worden-Martin, Inc. (1980), 90 Ill. App. 3d 601, 603-04, 413 N.E.2d 539, a debtor was given possession of a car upon his promise of later payment; although the debtor's check subsequently was dishonored, the court held the parties intended the transaction to be a credit sale which immediately passed title from the transferor. Similarly, the record in the instant case shows that the parties to the June 30 rescission intended the possessory interest in the vehicles to return immediately to the Dealership in exchange for subsequent payment. Indeed, the express purpose of the rescission, as demonstrated by the evidence, was that the Dealership reacquire the vehicles for an imminent resale to a higher-paying customer. The rescission was complete, and the interest in the vehicles transferred, when the Dealership tendered the two checks to CLS in return for the “cancellation” of the sale, and CLS accepted and deposited them. Further, at the time of the rescission, the Dealership did not “put it out of its power” to return the $50,000. (Tobey v. Sundling, 25 Ill, App. 3d at 211.) No record evidence suggests the Dealership knew it did not have the ability to return the $50,000, which would have meant it did not have the power to enter into the agreement to rescind. Rather, the bank froze the Dealership’s account in early July, after the rescission agreement of June 30. At oral argument, CLS conceded that no record evidence existed to demonstrate the Dealership knew it was insolvent when it wrote the subsequently dishonored checks. To the contrary, GMAC suggested that the Dealership believed it could cover the checks based upon $1 million in overdraft protection it thought it had from the bank.  CLS insists that the rescission did not transfer interest in the vehicles until the $50,000 check from the Dealership cleared. As we have seen, however, section 2—403(1) of the UCC allows a person to acquire voidable title in property although delivery is in exchange for a subsequently dishonored check. Whether the second transaction constituted a “sale” by CLS, or not, it did operate to transfer CLS’s interest in the two limousines back to the Dealership. Section 2—403 is “applicable to a person taking by any form of ‘purchase’ as defined by” the UCC (see Ill. Ann. Stat., ch. 26, par. 2—403, Uniform Commercial Code Comment 1, at 332 (Smith-Hurd 1963)); under the UCC, purchase includes “taking by sale, discount, negotiation, mortgage, pledge, lien, issue or reissue, gift or any other voluntary transaction creating an interest in property.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 26, par. 1—201(32).) Here, the voluntary agreement to rescind created an interest in the vehicles for the Dealership, which vehicles then became subject to the after-acquired property clause in the Agreement between the Dealership and GMAC. In summary, the requirement that the debtor acquire rights in the collateral was satisfied when the Dealership obtained its interest in the two limousines pursuant to the rescission agreement; under section 9—203(1), GMAC’s Article 9 interest attached to the subject vehicles, to the exclusion of any interest claimed by CLS. II As noted, the Dealership received only voidable title in the limousines bécause it paid with subsequently dishonored checks, but the Dealership nevertheless had the power to transfer good title to a good-faith purchaser for value under section 2—403(1)(b). The issue then becomes one of priority: if the Article 9 secured party (GMAC) was a good-faith purchaser for value, it is prior under section 2—403(1) to the aggrieved transferor (CLS). In re Samuels & Co., 526 F.2d at 1243.  Under the secured transactions provisions of the UCC, the general definition of “good faith” set forth in section 1—201(19) of the UCC is applicable. (Massey-Ferguson, Inc. v. Helland (1982), 105 Ill. App. 3d 648, 653, 434 N.E.2d 295.) That section provides (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 26, par. 1—201(19)) that “ ‘Good faith’ means honesty in fact in the conduct or transaction concerned.” Examples of bad faith might include “lies, deceit, overreaching or other examples of dishonesty in fact in the transaction.” (Massey-Ferguson, Inc., 105 Ill. App. 3d at 654.) Further, “good faith” may require that the purchaser take its interest without notice of the outstanding claims of others. The concepts of good faith and notice, while distinct, may be “intertwined and facts which are sufficient to constitute notice may impeach the claim of good faith.” 1 R. Anderson, Uniform Commercial Code, §1-201:123, at 252 (3d ed. 1981).  In this case, the circuit court analyzed the evidence and initially found bad faith on the part of GMAC, based on GMAC’s: knowledge of the Dealership’s poor financial condition; presence at the Dealership based on its knowledge of the insolvency; refusal to inquire into CLS’s claim or check the records at the Dealership; unjustified refusal to deliver the limousines to CLS upon demand; and subsequent attempts to justify its actions. Later, the court variously stated: “the bad faith *** isn’t bad faith that they [GMAC] did anything wrong”; that GMAC acted with “comparatively” less good faith than the other party; and that GMAC had not “acted improperly.” The record does reveal that GMAC eventually learned of CLS’s purchase of the limousines but refused to release the vehicles; the deal jackets containing the documents of purchase were not found until a search was initiated by reason of the litigation; and GMAC exercised extensive control of the Dealership’s operations. There is no evidence that GMAC participated in the decision to freeze the Dealership’s bank account. From the foregoing, the circuit court’s position as to whether GMAC was a good-faith purchaser is patently ambiguous and unclear. Whether the circuit court found bad faith on the part of GMAC or equivocated with its rather novel finding of “comparative good faith” need not be determinative of the right to possession of the vehicles in any event, as the following discussion demonstrates. Ill  Assuming, arguendo, that GMAC did not have a superior interest under section 2—403(1), the right to possession of the limousines ultimately rests upon a resolution of the priority between the parties. The priority provisions of Article 9 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 26, par. 9—312(5)(a)) declare: “In all cases not governed by other rules ***, priority between conflicting security interests in the same collateral shall be determined according to the following rules: (a) Conflicting security interests rank according to priority in time of filing or perfection. Priority dates from the time a filing is first made covering the collateral or the time the security interest is first perfected, whichever is earlier, provided that there is no period thereafter when there is neither filing nor perfection.” As previously noted, the Dealership reacquired an interest in the limousines (albeit voidable) by virtue of the rescission agreement; GMAC’s security interest in after-acquired property immediately attached pursuant to the underlying perfected security agreement signed by the Dealership. In contrast, there is no evidence that CLS ever perfected a security interest in the vehicles under any method available under Article 9. As a result, GMAC must be held to have possessed a prior security interest. The circuit court erred in awarding possession of the subject vehicles to CLS. This seemingly harsh result is mandated under the facts of the case and the applicable provisions of the UCC. We fail to see how this results in a double recovery as claimed by CLS, since GMAC was never paid for financing the limousines by the Dealership. GMAC is not seeking to penalize CLS, as suggested by the dissent; rather, it is asserting its rights under the UCC to protect itself. It is the Dealership’s insolvency, and not GMAC’s actions, which created this hardship for CLS. It should be noted that CLS was not without remedy as an aggrieved transferor and could have reclaimed the vehicles, which claim would have been superior to any then possessed by GMAC. Pursuant to UCC sections 2-507(2), 2-511(3) and 2-702 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 26, pars. 2—507(2), 2—511(3), 2—702), a seller of goods who received payment by a subsequently dishonored check has a right to reclaim the goods from the buyer within 10 days after their delivery. (See Holiday Rambler Corp. v. First National Bank & Trust Co. (10th Cir. 1983), 723 F.2d 1449, 1451-52.) According to UCC Comment 2 of section 2—702 (Ill. Ann. Stat., ch. 26, par. 2—702, Uniform Commercial Code Comment 2, at 510 (Smith-Hurd 1963)), and, expressly applicable here (see Ill. Ann. Stat., ch. 26, par. 2—507, Uniform Commercial Code Comment 3, at 385-86 (Smith-Hurd 1963)): “The ten day limitation period operates from the time of receipt of the goods.” Thus, in the case at bar, CLS had 10 days to reclaim the vehicles after the Dealership “received” them, i.e., 10 days after the June 30 rescission operated to “deliver” the interest in the limousines to the Dealership. During the 10-day5 period, this right of reclamation would not have been subject to GMAC’s remedies under Article 9. Further, it might not have been subject to GMAC’s rights under section 2 — 403, if GMAC were to have been found lacking in good faith, upon further clarification by the circuit court. If a seller fails to timely assert his rights, however, he loses his right to reclaim; after 10 days, the sale is no longer conditional, and the buyer can sell or give a security interest to a subsequent purchaser free of the transferor’s right to reclaim. (Holiday Rambler Corp., 723 F.2d at 1452.) Here, because CLS did not attempt to reclaim the vehicles until July 16, beyond the 10-day period, which began running on June 30, CLS must be held to have failed to timely assert its rights; GMAC’s perfected security interest therefore prevails.6  IV  GMAC requests damages from CLS under section 19—123 of the replevin statute (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 110, par. 19—123), which provides that in a replevin action, “where the right of property is adjudged against the plaintiff, the defendant is entitled to damages in the amount of the use of the property from the time of its taking until its return.” (International Harvester Credit Corp. v. Helland (1986), 151 Ill. App. 3d 848, 856, 503 N.E.2d 548.) GMAC suggests CLS wrongfully obtained possession of the two limousines and is liable for damages.  We fail to see how CLS “wrongfully detained” the limousines and precluded GMAC’s “use” of the vehicles. From the time of CLS’s first demand for possession (July 16), GMAC exerted total control over the vehicles, as evidenced by its refusal to release them to CLS. Further, the vehicles were maintained at the Dealership’s premises during GMAC’s presence there. The first arguable possession by CLS did not occur until entry of the August 19, 1986, order for replevin. Shortly thereafter, on September 12, CLS and GMAC entered into an agreed order which provided that neither party could transfer any interest in the limousines without prior order of the court or written agreement between the parties. GMAC never acted to modify the order before the vehicles were sold at auction. Under the circumstances, GMAC cannot contend that CLS precluded any use of the vehicles so as to entitle GMAC to damages. For the reasons set forth above, we reverse the judgment of the circuit court and remand with directions to award the funds held in escrow, representing the right to possession of the vehicles, to GMAC. As a result of this disposition, we need not address GMAC’s challenge of the damage award or CLS’s cross-appeal. Reversed and remanded. DiVITO, J., concurs.   The Dealership is not involved in this appeal.    Ultimately sold, with proceeds held in escrow. See footnote No. 4.    this Note, dated July 16, 1986, was not signed by CLS. CLS never received the $50,000 referred to in the Note.    The two limousines had been sold at auction on June 27, 1987, near the end of the trial, for $40,600, and the proceeds deposited in an escrow account.    The circuit court erroneously ruled that CLS had 21 days within which to reclaim the vehicles; that period of time (actually, 20 days) is referable only to the rights of a secured creditor under UCC section 9—306 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 26, par. 9—306) within which to perfect its security interest, a procedure which CLS never invoked.    We are not convinced, as is the dissent, that CLS was not “sophisticated” in commercial transactions. We note that CLS attempted to turn over half of its fleet of at least 27 limousines every other year, which necessarily involved numerous purchases and resales of vehicles in the course of its operations.

=== CASE 9736953 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:10:59.73109+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE BILANDIC, dissenting in part: I agree with the majority’s disposition of issue IV. However, I respectfully dissent from the majority’s opinion for issues I, II, and III. The two limousines involved in this case had their origin with a manufacturer. Hartigan’s role as the dealer was to market and distribute the limousines to ultimate users. GMAC’s inventory financing provided the necessary capital for Hartigan to purchase vehicles from the manufacturer. CLS was the ultimate user that purchased the two limousines from the dealer. GMAC’s security agreement with the dealer permitted the sale of the two limousines to CLS (an ultimate user) free and clear of any inventory lien in favor of GMAC. However, as correctly stated by the majority, GMAC’s security interest attached to the proceeds of the sale to CLS. Thus, GMAC exchanged its lien on the limousines for a lien on the $50,000 paid by CLS to Hartigan. GMAC is Hartigan’s banker. The majority view would make CLS the banker. Bankers are constantly concerned with the possible insolvency of their debtors. However, the ultimate user who purchases vehicles from an authorized dealer of a major manufacturer, and pays cash for the vehicles, should be able to do so with the confidence that he acquired good title. Therefore, on June 26, 1986, CLS acquired title to the limousines; GMAC acquired a lien on the $50,000 paid by CLS to Hartigan. Because GMAC was not vigilant in enforcing its lien on the proceeds, it now seeks to penalize CLS. On appeal, the facts and inferences are to be construed against the appealing party — here, GMAC. (Heimberger v. Chebanse (1984), 124 Ill. App. 3d 310, 463 N.E.2d 1368.) It is the appellate court’s “obligation to accept those inferences arising from the conflicting nature of the evidence which support the judgment of the trial court.” (In re Estate of Gigele (1978), 64 Ill. App. 3d 136, 139, 380 N.E.2d 1144.) Any doubts which may arise from the incompleteness of the record will be resolved against the appellant. (Foutch v. O’Bryant (1984), 99 Ill. 2d 389, 392, 459 N.E.2d 958.) In the absence of a record sufficient to establish the error urged on review, a reviewing court will indulge in every presumption favorable to the judgment or order appealed from. Village of Hillside v. John Sexton Sand & Gravel Corp. (1983), 113 Ill. App. 3d 807, 447 N.E.2d 1047. Applying these standards of review to the facts of this case, I conclude that the trial court correctly determined that CLS was entitled to possession in spite of the alleged priority asserted by GMAC. The majority grants a priority to GMAC by concluding that Hartigan reacquired an interest in the limousines from CLS after June 26, 1986, and, therefore, GMAC’s lien reattached to defeat the interest of CLS. I respectfully disagree with this conclusion. The owners of CLS are livery drivers, not sophisticated financiers. They did not need nor want to purchase the limousines. They yielded to Hartigan’s pitch of a deal they could not refuse. On June 30, 1986, the dealer came calling again. This time the dealer wanted to reacquire the two limousines so that the dealer could profit by a resale at a higher price. Because of the accommodating nature of CLS to Hartigan, the majority holds that Hartigan reacquired an interest in the limousines by reason of the Uniform Commercial Code and the after-acquired property clause of the security agreement between GMAC and Hartigan. Since the limousines were reacquired by Hartigan, the lien of GMAC is reattached. In my opinion, this reasoning is fallacious. The Uniform Commercial Code provides in part: “§1—102. *** (1) This Act shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its underlying purposes and policies. (2) Underlying purposes and policies of this Act are: (a) to simplify, clarify and modernize the law governing commercial transactions; (b) to permit the continued expansion of commercial practices through custom, usage and agreement of the practices;” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 26, par. 1—102. The Uniform Commercial Code’s policy that “the principles of law and equity *** shall supplement [the Uniform Commercial Code’s] provisions” also applies. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 26, par. 1—103. Certainly CLS did not intend to part with $50,000 cash and the two limousines. Under the facts of this case, I believe that the return of the $50,000 to CLS and the return of the two limousines to Hartigan was to be simultaneous. Hartigan did not return the cash so it did not reacquire any interest in the limousines. Without a reacquired interest by Hartigan, there is nothing upon which GMAC’s lien could be reasserted. Under the facts of this case, in determining the competing rights of a good-faith purchaser from an authorized automobile dealer and the inventory financier of the dealer, logic, law and equity compel me to come down on the side of the purchaser. Accordingly, I would affirm.

=== CASE 9736954 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:11:02.390571+00 ===

JUSTICE CLARK delivered the opinion of the court: Following a jury trial in the circuit court of Vermilion County, the defendant, John Lucas, was convicted of four counts of murder (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1) and of concealment of a homicidal death (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 9 — 3.1). The State requested a hearing to consider whether the death penalty should be imposed. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(d).) The trial court, at a separate sentencing hearing, found the defendant to be eligible for the death penalty and found that there were no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude the imposition of a sentence of death. The circuit court sentenced the defendant to death and to a five-year term of imprisonment for the concealment of a homicidal death. The death sentence was stayed (107 Ill. 2d R. 609(a)) pending direct appeal to this court (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, §4(b); 107 Ill. 2d R. 603). Defendant raises 19 issues on appeal which, for ease of review, are grouped to reflect whether the issues relate to pretrial, trial or sentencing matters, or whether they concern constitutional questions. The issues which relate to the pretrial stage question whether the trial court erred in denying the defendant’s motion to suppress when: (1) the defendant did not receive adequate Miranda warnings; and (2) the police failed to scrupulously honor the defendant’s request to confer with counsel. Defendant raises nine issues concerning the conduct of the trial itself. Specifically, he questions: (1) whether he was denied a fair trial by an impartial jury when the trial court denied his motion for a change of venue; (2) whether the trial court improperly dismissed two venire members for cause; (3) whether evidence of his prior conduct towards the victim was improperly admitted; (4) whether the trial court improperly admitted evidence of his DUI conviction and of prior injuries suffered by the victim; (5) whether the trial court erred by denying his motion for a mistrial; (6) whether the State presented improper testimony during its case in rebuttal; (7) whether he was denied a fair trial as a result of remarks made by the prosecutor during closing argument; (8) whether the trial court abused its discretion by allowing the jury to view autopsy photographs; and (9) whether the murder and involuntary manslaughter instructions given by the court denied the defendant a fair trial. Defendant’s allegations of error at the sentencing phase concern: (1) whether the language of section 9 — 1(b)(7) of the Criminal Code of 1961 permits the arbitrary and capricious imposition of the death penalty; (2) whether the sentencing authority is required to make written findings of fact when imposing the death penalty pursuant to section 9 — 1(b)(7); (3) whether the trial court’s finding that the defendant was eligible for the death penalty was supported by the evidence; (4) whether mitigating factors sufficient to preclude the imposition of the death penalty were present; and (5) whether the trial court erred in considering evidence of unadjudicated criminal conduct during the sentencing hearing. The defendant also presents various constitutional challenges to the Illinois death penalty statute, which, as we discuss below, we need not address. While the record is extensive, we will summarize the portions relevant to our disposition of this matter. The following evidence was adduced at trial. At the time of the incident, the defendant was living with Shelly Carrigan and their seven-month-old son, Danny. On the evening of January 28, 1986, the defendant and Shelly Carrigan took Danny with them to a party. At the party, the defendant consumed beer, corn liquor, marijuana and amphetamines. The defendant, Shelly Carrigan and Danny left the party between 1:30 and 2 a.m. on January 29,1986. Shelly Carrigan testified that the defendant had been “pretty well drunk” and that when they arrived home, he was so intoxicated that she had to put him to bed. The defendant testified that he could not remember leaving the party. However, he remembered going into Danny’s room sometime that night and shaking Danny in his crib. In the process, he banged Danny against the side of the crib. The defendant indicated that at the time he was aware that he was shaking Danny. After shaking Danny, the defendant noticed that Danny had stopped breathing. In an effort to revive him, he splashed water on him and then placed him on the floor and performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) on him. The defendant then went back to bed. The next morning, unsure whether the events of the preceding night had actually occurred, he checked on Danny and discovered that he was dead. The defendant decided to hide Danny’s body in the vicinity of Grape Creek, a wooded area not far from his residence. As he was leaving, he told Shelly Carrigan, who was still in bed, that he was going to get groceries. The defendant then dressed Danny’s body, drove it to Grape Creek, and hid it under a pile of wood and debris. After leaving Grape Creek, the defendant drove to an Eisner’s grocery store, and went in briefly. He then drove home and told Shelly Carrigan that Danny had been kidnapped from his car at the Eisner’s. The two drove back to Eisner’s and called the police. The police arrived at the Eisner’s at approximately 10:15 a.m. The defendant and Shelly Carrigan were taken to the Public Safety Building, where they were questioned about the alleged kidnapping while the defendant’s car was checked for evidence of the kidnapping. The defendant was initially questioned about the kidnapping by Investigators Miller and Hartshorn at 11 a.m. Based on certain inconsistencies in the defendant’s story, they began to suspect his involvement in the incident; however, they did not place him under arrest. At 1:15 p.m., the police officers advised the defendant of his Miranda rights and again proceeded to question him about the alleged kidnapping. When the defendant indicated that he would like to speak to an attorney, the officers ceased questioning and left the room. Subsequently, the defendant’s mother and brother came to the police station. The police informed them that they believed that the defendant was lying about the kidnapping and allowed them to speak to the defendant. The defendant’s brother testified at trial that he and his mother were asked by the police to find out the truth regarding the child’s disappearance. After talking to his mother and brother, the defendant decided that he did not need an attorney, that he would take a polygraph test, and that he would talk to the police. While the defendant was at the Public Safety Building, the police obtained Shelly Carrigan’s permission to search the house and car. The police obtained bloodstained bedding from Danny’s room and took numerous photographs of the room. The defendant was again interviewed at 7:43 p.m. on January 29, 1986, after he had submitted to a polygraph examination. After again being advised of his Miranda rights, he stated that he thought he had been involved in Danny’s death and agreed to show the police where Danny’s body was hidden. The defendant repeated his statements on tape at 7:53 p.m. On January 30, 1986, at 10:23 a.m., the defendant told the police that on the evening of January 28, 1986, he had gone into Danny’s room and had thrashed and banged Danny around in the crib. Once he realized that Danny was not breathing, he had attempted to revive him by performing CPR on him. He also stated that he had hidden the body at Grape Creek and later claimed that Danny had been kidnapped. Dr. Maratos, the medical pathologist who performed an autopsy on Danny, testified that the cause of death was suffocation. He stated that Danny also suffered other injuries, the most significant of which were a fractured left arm and a ruptured liver, and that the ruptured liver would have proved fatal had Danny not been suffocated. Dr. Maratos also testified that all of the injuries had occurred prior to Danny’s death and that they could have been caused by someone holding Danny by his left arm and striking him against a solid object. Dr. Maratos described numerous autopsy photographs showing various aspects of the autopsy, several of which were submitted to the jurors during deliberations. Thomas Miller and Richard Magers, friends of the defendant, testified at trial that they had been at the party with the defendant on January 28, 1986, and had seen the defendant drink beer and moonshine. Four or five marijuana cigarettes were passed around during the evening and were shared by most of the people at the party. At one point during the evening, Shelly Carrigan left the party for approximately half an hour. During her absence, Thomas Miller cared for Danny when he cried while the defendant continued to spend most of the evening drinking and playing cards. The State also introduced evidence regarding a September 10, 1985, incident in which Danny sustained a broken arm while in the defendant’s care. The defendant contended that Danny’s arm had been broken when the defendant tripped and accidentally dropped Danny. Gordon Terry, an investigator from the Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS), testified that when he accused the defendant of breaking Danny’s arm, the defendant laughed and stated that he could not prove it. Shelly Carrigan testified at trial that her pregnancy caused her relationship with the defendant to deteriorate. As she paid more attention to the impending birth, she paid less attention to the defendant and, as a consequence, his drinking increased. Their relationship became so strained that she moved out prior to Danny’s birth. The defendant first saw Danny several weeks after he was born, and approximately one month after Danny’s birth Shelly moved back with the defendant. She also testified that when Danny’s arm was broken in September 1985, the defendant told her it had happened when he tripped over a cord and dropped Danny. She further stated that some time after Danny’s arm was broken in September 1985, she saw the defendant shake and twist Danny while holding him by the left arm and right leg. When she asked the defendant what he was doing, he became very hostile and stated, “You make me do things like this.” The defendant presented a defense of voluntary intoxication. David Merritt, a counselor who had treated the defendant for alcoholism, testified on his behalf. He stated that the defendant suffered from blackouts, which he described as memory loss which prevented the defendant from remembering events that occurred while he was intoxicated. He also stated that based upon interviews with the defendant and from reviewing documents generated by others who had interviewed the defendant, he believed that the defendant was an alcoholic in the severe, fatal stage of chemical dependency. In rebuttal, the State presented the testimony of Dr. Paul Haskin, a clinical psychologist who specializes in alcohol and drug rehabilitation. Dr. Haskin testified that blackouts, or alcohol-induced amnesia, can occur in anyone who ingests alcohol very rapidly. He stated that at a certain blood-alcohol level the brain does not register what is going on; “blackout” refers to that period of time. The jury received instructions relative to the offense of murder, the lesser included offense of involuntary manslaughter and concealment of a homicidal death. The defendant was convicted of four counts of murder and concealment of a homicidal death. As the defendant had waived sentencing by a jury prior to trial, the sentencing hearing was conducted by the trial judge. At the first phase of the bifurcated sentencing hearing, the trial judge found that the defendant had attained the age of 18 or more at the time of the incident, that the victim was under the age of 12 and that the death had resulted from exceptionally brutal or heinous behavior, indicative of wanton cruelty. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 9— 1(b)(7).) Based on these findings, the court found the defendant to be eligible for the death penalty. At the second phase of the sentencing hearing, the court heard evidence in aggravation and mitigation. In aggravation, the State introduced the testimony of the defendant’s mother, who stated that the defendant had twice threatened her. The defendant’s brother also testified that the defendant was violent when he was intoxicated, and a friend of the defendant testified that he had seen him wield a tire iron during a potential brawl. Shelly Carrigan testified that the defendant had beaten her. In mitigation, the defendant presented extensive evidence that he was an alcoholic and a drug addict. His sister testified that he had been deeply affected by the untimely deaths of various friends and family members. Members of the sheriff’s department testified that the defendant was a model prisoner. The presentence investigation report revealed that the defendant did not have a juvenile record and that he had never been convicted of a felony. He had, however, been convicted of shoplifting, illegal transportation of alcohol, and eight traffic offenses, including one for driving under the influence of alcohol. The trial court found that there were no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude the imposition of the death penalty and sentenced the defendant to death. PRETRIAL Prior to trial, the defendant filed a motion to suppress certain statements and evidence, claiming that the police had violated his Miranda rights (Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436, 16 L. Ed. 2d-694, 86 S. Ct. 1602) by not advising him that he had a right to the presence of court-appointed counsel during questioning and by continuing to interrogate him after he requested an attorney. At the hearing on the motion to suppress, it was established that at approximately 11 a.m. on January 29, 1986, the defendant was brought to the Public Safety Building to give a statement regarding the alleged kidnapping of his son. After the initial questioning the defendant chose to remain in the building, and at 1:15 p.m. he was interviewed a second time. During this second interview, the defendant was advised of his Miranda rights. The defendant initially waived his rights and agreed to answer some questions and to submit to a polygraph test. However, at some point during questioning the defendant stated “maybe I better get a lawyer” or words to that effect. The police immediately ceased questioning the defendant and exited the interrogation room, leaving the defendant behind. Later that afternoon, the defendant’s mother and brother arrived at the Public Safety Building. They were informed by the officers that the police did not believe the defendant’s story about the kidnapping and were permitted to speak to the defendant. The defendant’s mother and brother both urged him to waive the presence of an attorney and to take a polygraph test. After speaking to his family, the defendant informed the police that he did not desire an attorney and that he would take the polygraph test. At approximately 7 p.m. that evening, the defendant signed a consent form and took a polygraph test. At approximately 7:43 p.m., after the defendant was again advised of his Miranda rights, the defendant admitted his involvement in Danny’s death and agreed to show the police where Danny’s body was hidden. At approximately 7:53 p.m. he made the same statements on tape. The defendant argues that his incriminating statements were inadmissible at trial because they were obtained in violation of Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 86 S. Ct. 1602. He maintains that he was in custody when he was interrogated at 1:15 p.m. and that his Miranda rights had attached at that time. He claims that, in violation of Miranda, the police did not cease their interrogation once he requested to speak to an attorney but, rather, continued to interrogate him by using his mother and brother as their agents. Since his mother and brother were acting in consort with the police, the defendant claims, his subsequent waiver of his Miranda rights was invalid and all of his statements should have been suppressed. The rules of Miranda apply to admissions made by a defendant while he is in custody “ ‘or otherwise deprived of his freedom of action in any significant way.’ ” (People v. Wipfler (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 158, 168, quoting Miranda, 384 U.S. at 444, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 706, 86 S. Ct. at 1612.) In determining whether statements were made in a custodial setting, a court must consider all of the circumstances surrounding the questioning including the location, time, length, mood and mode of the interrogation, the number of police officers present, the presence or absence of family and friends of the accused, any indicia of formal arrest, any evidence of restraint, and the age, intelligence and mental makeup of the accused. (People v. Savory (1982), 105 Ill. App. 3d 1023, 1028; see also People v. Burris (1971), 49 Ill. 2d 98, 102-03.) After examining these factors, the court must make an objective determination as to “ ‘what a reasonable man, innocent of any crime, would have thought had he been in the defendant’s shoes.’ ” Wipfler, 68 Ill. 2d at 166, quoting Hicks v. United States (D.C. Cir. 1967), 382 F.2d 158, 161. In the present case, the trial court found that the defendant was not in custody at 1:15 p.m. and, consequently, Miranda was inapplicable. We agree with this assessment. The record indicates that the defendant accompanied the police to the Public Safety Building voluntarily. He was first questioned at 11 a.m. for 30 to 40 minutes regarding his son’s alleged kidnapping. At 1:15 p.m. the defendant was advised of his Miranda rights and questioned a second time regarding his son’s disappearance. The interview took place in one of the rooms in which all witnesses are questioned; the room was not locked, and the defendant was free to move around. The evidence does not indicate that he was treated differently than other witnesses or that he was at the Public Safety Building for anything other than general questioning regarding his son’s alleged kidnapping. Although the officers testified that they had noted certain discrepancies in the defendant’s account of the kidnapping, the defendant had not been arrested, booked, fingerprinted or physically restrained at 1:15 p.m. and had not been told that he had to remain in the building. In fact, when the defendant agreed to take the polygraph test at approximately 2:30 p.m., he was informed that he could wait for the examiner at the Public Safety Building or leave and return at 7 p.m. It was not until approximately 7:43 p.m., when the defendant indicated that he was responsible for his son’s death, that the officers indicated that the defendant would not have been free to leave and the interrogation became custodial. Based on these facts, we believe that a reasonable man would not have believed that he was in custody at 1:15 p.m. The fact that the defendant was advised of his Miranda rights at 1:15 p.m. does not, in and of itself, create a custodial situation (Wipfler, 68 Ill. 2d at 170-71) since it is clear that the first time he was advised of those rights the defendant was not “deprived of his freedom of action in any significant way.” (See Miranda, 384 U. S. at 444, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 706, 86 S. Ct. at 1612.) Accordingly, we agree with the trial court’s finding that the defendant was not in custody at 1:15 p.m. Moreover, even if we were to assume that the interrogation at 1:15 p.m. was custodial, we do not believe that the defendant’s Miranda rights were violated. According to the record, once the defendant indicated a desire to speak with counsel, the police ceased their interrogation and did not communicate with him about the case until the defendant himself initiated contact and informed them that he would waive his right to an attorney and take the polygraph test. The defendant’s argument that the police reinitiated interrogation through his mother and brother is without merit. The defendant’s mother and brother came to the Public Safety Building of their own accord. Both the officers and Mrs., Lucas testified that the police had not requested or suggested that they convince the defendant to speak to them without an attorney. We do not believe that the defendant’s brother’s statement that “[the police] wanted to know if we would go talk to him to see if we could find out what — you know, what actually happened” establishes complicity with the police. So long as the police have not incited or coached family members to prompt a confession, the fact that the defendant chose to speak to the police after conferring with family members does not make his waiver invalid. (See People v. Whitehead (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 425, 436-40.) Accordingly, we find that the defendant’s statements were freely and voluntarily given without any subterfuge or compelling influence. The defendant also contends that his Miranda warnings were deficient because, although the officers informed him that an attorney would be appointed for him if he could not afford one, he was not told that he could have appointed counsel present prior to and during questioning. This contention is not supported by the record. Investigator Hartshorn testified that each time the defendant was advised of his rights, he was told that an attorney would be appointed for him at no cost to him if he could not afford one. On the taped statement made at 7:53 p.m. on January 29, 1986, the defendant acknowledged that he knew he had a right to have an attorney present during questioning, and that he voluntarily waived that right. Furthermore, the fact that the defendant requested the presence of an attorney at the 1:15 p.m. interview belies his argument that he was not aware that he had the right to have counsel present during questioning. Accordingly, we find that the defendant received adequate Miranda warnings, and that his waiver of those rights was knowing and voluntary. For these reasons we hold that the trial court did not err in denying the defendant’s motion to suppress. TRIAL The defendant next argues that the circuit court improperly denied his motion for a change of venue. Defendant contends that the fact that 19 potential jurors had to be excused because they had already formed an opinion as to the defendant’s guilt or innocence illustrates that prejudicial publicity about the incident in his county was pervasive, and supports his argument that he did not receive a fair trial by an impartial jury. The State responds that the fact that venire members with preformed opinions were detected and excused during voir dire indicates that biased members were removed from the panel and that the jurors who were selected were impartial and uninfluenced by the pretrial publicity. During voir dire, each prospective juror who was ultimately selected stated that he or she was either unfamiliar with the case, or had heard of it only generally. Each juror stated that he or she could disregard anything previously heard or read, and that he or she had not formed an opinion as to guilt. The State also points out that when the entire jury was selected, the defendant was given an additional opportunity to challenge individual jurors. He did not challenge any of the jurors for cause, nor did he exercise any of his 14 remaining peremptory challenges on the jurors of whom he now complains. A motion for a change of venue must be granted only when “ ‘there are reasonable grounds to believe that the prejudice alleged actually exists and that by reason of the prejudice there is a reasonable apprehension that the accused cannot receive a fair and impartial trial.’ ” (People v. Whitehead (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 425, 440, quoting People v. Berry (1967), 37 Ill. 2d 329, 331.) The jurors who are ultimately chosen need not be “totally ignorant of the facts and issues involved” (Irvin v. Dowd (1961), 366 U.S. 717, 722, 6 L. Ed. 2d 751, 756, 81 S. Ct. 1639, 1642); they must, however, be able to lay aside their opinions and decide the case on the evidence presented at trial (People v. Lego (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 323, 335; People v. Speck (1968), 41 Ill. 2d 177, 184, rev’d & remanded on other grounds (1971), 403 U.S. 946, 29 L. Ed. 2d 855, 91 S. Ct. 2279). After examining the voir dire proceedings, we do not believe that the jury was biased by pretrial reports of the incident. As previously noted, voir dire revealed that none of the jurors had specific knowledge about the case or had formed opinions as to the defendant’s guilt. The fact that 19 venire members were excused for cause because they had been influenced by the pretrial publicity does not affect our determination. The relevant inquiry is “not the amount of publicity in a particular case, but whether the defendant in that case received a fair and impartial trial.” (Speck, 41 Ill. 2d at 183.) Considering the entire record, we conclude that, while there was some publicity attendant to the incident, the defendant received a fair trial from an impartial- jury and that he was not prejudiced by the denial of his motion for a change of venue. Defendant next contends that he was denied a fair trial when the trial court improperly excused two venire members for cause. During voir dire, the trial court inquired of venireperson H*** whether she could follow the law as instructed, to which she replied that she could, provided it did not involve the death penalty. The trial court, over the defendant’s objection, announced its intention to question venireperson H*** to determine whether her feelings regarding the death penalty would affect her ability to objectively determine the defendant’s guilt or innocence. (See Witherspoon v. Illinois (1968), 391 U.S. 510, 20 L. Ed. 2d 776, 88 S. Ct. 1770.) The court indicated that should she be chosen to serve on the jury, the court would have to Witherspoon the entire venire, including the jurors previously selected, to ensure that there were no jurors with scruples against the death penalty. Alternatively, if venireperson H*** were excused, the court stated that it would also excuse venireperson L***, another member of the venire who had heard the comment. In Witherspooning venireperson H***, the following colloquy ensued: “THE COURT: Is it your belief that John Lucas will automatically be sentenced to death if the jury convicts him of murder? JUROR H***: No. (Shakes head back and forth.) THE COURT: Is it your belief that John Lucas will not receive the death penalty if the jury convicts him of murder? JUROR H***: Now phrase that again? THE COURT: Is it your belief that John Lucas will not or may not receive the death penalty? JUROR H***: No, I haven’t come to no [sic] conclusion— THE COURT: Okay. JUROR H***: —either way. THE COURT: Is it your belief that the jury will be called upon to decide the question of death if you convict him of murder? JUROR H***: It — Someone mentioned yesterday that — just mentioned that if a death penalty was — could they do it, and I hadn’t ever given it a thought until last night, and I really thought about it. I thought if somebody— THE COURT: Do you believe this may be your responsibility? JUROR H***: If somebody — If you would ask me to impose the death penalty, I couldn’t do it. THE COURT: My question is, though, do you think that’s going to be something you are going to have to do? JUROR H***: No, I am not saying that, but it was just— (Shakes head back and forth) I wanted to be honest— THE COURT: Yes. JUROR H***: —that I hadn’t ever really thought about it that much until last night. THE COURT: Will your beliefs concerning the possible penalties make it difficult for you to judge this case on the question of guilt or innocence? JUROR H***: No, (shakes head back and forth) I don’t have any problem of [sic] guilt or innocence. * * * THE COURT: Is it your position, ma’am, that in the event the defendant were convicted of murder in this cause, and it was your responsibility to follow the instructions of the Court with regard to determining whether or not he should receive the death penalty, that you could, under no circumstances, vote for that penalty— JUROR H***: I couldn’t vote for the death penalty. THE COURT: —you could not vote for the death penalty? JUROR H***: Life imprisonment, but not the death penalty.” After this exchange, the court excused both prospective jurors for cause, explaining on the record that it was doing so not because they could not follow the instructions of the court, but rather to prevent them from informing the other jurors that the death sentence was a possible penalty. Defendant maintains that the court’s ruling was improper for two reasons. First, he contends that by excusing venireperson H*** for cause the trial court violated the holding in Witherspoon which prohibits the exclusion of venire members for cause in capital cases based on their views regarding the death penalty unless their stated opposition to the death penalty would prevent or substantially impair the performance of their duties as jurors. (See Witherspoon, 391 U.S. at 521-23, 20 L. Ed. 2d at 784-85, 88 S. Ct. at 1776-77; People v. Brisbon (1989), 129 Ill. 2d 200, 224-25.) Since venireperson H*** had testified that her views on the death penalty would not interfere with her ability to determine the defendant’s guilt or innocence, defendant claims she was not ‘ ‘ Witherspoon-excludable. ’ ’ Second, defendant argues that since he had waived jury sentencing prior to trial, a juror’s views regarding the death penalty were irrelevant, and the trial court had no reason to be concerned that, if selected, venireperson H*** or venireperson L*** might mention the death penalty to the other jurors. We do not agree with either argument. As to the first point, the record is clear that the trial court did not exclude these potential jurors because of their views on the death penalty but, rather, to avoid contamination of the venire. Thus, the Witherspoon rule is not applicable. As to defendant’s second contention, the record indicates that the defendant had waived his right to a jury for the sentencing phase prior to trial specifically to preclude the State from death qualifying, or “Witherspooning,” prospective jurors. (See Daley v. Hett (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 75, 82 (the State’s right to question prospective jurors as to their views regarding the imposition of the death penalty as provided under Witherspoon does not come into effect when a defendant waives jury sentencing prior to trial).) The trial court recognized that were it to Witherspoon the entire venire, the defendant’s purpose for waiving jury sentencing would have been defeated. However, the court also recognized that if either of the prospective jurors were placed on the panel, the issue of the death penalty could potentially be injected into deliberations. As none of the other jurors had been “Witherspooned,” the court had no way of determining whether this factor would affect their determination of guilt or innocence. Thus, rather than prejudice either the defendant or the State, the court dismissed both prospective jurors for cause. This court has long held that the determination of whether to remove a juror for cause rests within the sound discretion of the trial judge. (People v. Hyche (1979), 77 Ill. 2d 229, 239.) That determination is entitled to deference, and will not be disturbed on review absent an abuse of discretion. (People v. Harris (1967), 38 Ill. 2d 552, 556.) It is clear from the facts of this case that the trial court dismissed both prospective jurors in an effort to insure a fair trial and avoid possible prejudice to either the defendant or the State. Under these circumstances, we cannot say that it was an abuse of discretion to excuse the jurors for cause. Next, defendant contends that he was denied a fair trial when the State elicited irrelevant and prejudicial testimony from Tom Miller, Richard Magers, Carol Newman, Shelly Carrigan, and the defendant himself in an effort to portray the defendant as a poor father. He maintains that this evidence was neither relevant to nor probative of his guilt, but was only intended to portray him as a distasteful human being. At trial, Tom Miller testified that while they were at the party on January 28, 1986, when Danny cried, it was Miller, not the defendant, who attended to his needs and comforted him. Richard Magers, who was also at the party, similarly testified that Shelly Carrigan, not the defendant, cared for Danny and whenever Danny cried during Shelly’s absence, Tom Miller, not the defendant, comforted him. Carol Newman, a nurse employed with the Vermilion County health department, testified that on January 28, 1986, Shelly Carrigan and the defendant brought Danny in for DPT and polio immunizations. She stated that although she had seen Danny in a professional capacity four times prior to January 28, 1986, the defendant had not accompanied Danny on his visits until that date. Shelly Carrigan testified that her pregnancy caused her relationship with the defendant to deteriorate as she paid more attention to the impending birth and less attention to the defendant. As a consequence, his drinking increased and their contacts became almost nonexistent. Once Danny was bom, the defendant did not see him until he was two or three weeks old. Finally, she stated that prior to January 28, the defendant had not accompanied them to the Well-Baby clinic or to the doctor’s office. On cross-examination, the State questioned the defendant as to why he had not seen Shelly and Danny until several weeks after Danny was born; why Danny did not have his last name; who cared for Danny at the party; and his relationship with Shelly Carrigan. The State argues that when defense counsel characterized the defendant as a loving father in his opening statement, he opened the door to evidence of the relationship between the defendant and the decedent. It maintains that this evidence is relevant to show intent and motive: intent in the sense that the defendant’s prior acts are probative of the absence of accident (see, e.g., People v. Manzella (1973), 56 Ill. 2d 187 (evidence that the defendant had previously threatened and assaulted the victims was relevant to show criminal intent)), and motive in the sense that the prior acts tend to show that the defendant had a reason for killing the decedent (see, e.g., People v. Stewart (1984), 105 Ill. 2d 22 (evidence that the decedent had previously turned the defendant in to the police is relevant to establish motive)). We agree. Evidence is relevant if it has any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable than it would be without such evidence. (See People v. Johnson (1986), 114 Ill. 2d 170, 193; People v. Monroe (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 317, 322 (adopting Fed. R. Evid. 401).) Evidence which tends to establish- that the accused had a motive for killing the decedent is relevant, and if the evidence, at least to a slight degree, tends to establish the motive relied on, it is also competent. Stewart, 105 Ill. 2d at 56; People v. Branion (1970), 47 Ill. 2d 70, 77. We believe the preceding evidence is both relevant and competent to establish motive. Throughout the trial, the defendant claimed that the decedent’s death was unintentional. The State attempted to show, however, that the defendant in fact resented the decedent for coming between him and the decedent’s mother, Shelly Carrigan, and that this resentment in part motivated him to kill Danny. Thus, evidence of the defendant’s relationship both with the decedent and Shelly Carrigan is probative of whether Danny’s death was accidental or intentional, and is therefore admissible. The fact that this evidence may be prejudicial does not render it inadmissible. See People v. Foster (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 365, 374. A related issue is whether the trial court erred in admitting evidence of two other instances in which the defendant allegedly abused the decedent. The first incident of alleged abuse occurred in September 1985, when Danny sustained a broken arm while in the defendant’s care. The defendant maintained that the arm was broken when he dropped Danny. Dr. Mohan Jahm, a radiologist, testified at trial that the break sustained by Danny in 1985 was of the same type as the one Danny suffered on the date of his death. The second incident occurred subsequent to the September 1985 break. Shelly Carrigan testified that, after having an argument with the defendant, she had seen him shaking and twisting Danny while holding him by an arm and a leg. She had informed the defendant’s mother about the incident and Mrs. Lucas called DCFS. Florence Lucas testified that Shelly Carrigan had told her about the twisting incident and that several days later she had called DCFS. Gordon Terry, the DCFS investigator assigned to the case, testified that when he interviewed Shelly Carrigan about the incident in which the defendant had allegedly twisted the decedent by an arm and a leg, she denied that it had occurred. The defendant similarly denied that the twisting incident had occurred. Terry further stated that when he accused the defendant of breaking. Danny’s arm in September 1985, the defendant laughed and said, “yeah, but you can’t prove it.” Defendant objects to these statements on the basis that they were introduced only to establish his propensity to abuse the decedent. Generally, evidence of prior acts and offenses may not be introduced to show propensity to commit crime. (People v. Bartall (1983), 98 Ill. 2d 294, 309-10.) However, evidence of other crimes is admissible if it tends to prove modus operandi, design, motive or knowledge. (People v. Shum (1987), 117 Ill. 2d 317, 352; People v. McKibbins (1983), 96 Ill. 2d 176, 182; see also M. Graham, Cleary & Graham’s Handbook of Illinois Evidence §404.5, at 163 (4th ed. 1984).) In fact, evidence of other offenses is admissible if relevant for any purpose other than to show propensity to commit crime. People v. King (1986), 109 Ill. 2d 514, 530; People v. Dewey (1969), 42 Ill. 2d 148, 157; see also M. Graham, Cleary & Graham’s Handbook of Illinois Evidence §404.5, at 163 (4th ed. 1984). In the case before us, the defendant’s involvement in the decedent’s death was established by his own testimony. However, the defendant claimed that he did not have the intent to kill or cause great bodily harm to Danny. Evidence that the defendant was involved in prior incidents in which the decedent suffered similar injuries was admissible to show the presence of intent and the absence of accident. The evidence was relevant for a purpose other than to show the defendant’s propensity to commit crime, and was therefore admissible. See McKibbins, 96 Ill. 2d at 186; Dewey, 42 Ill. 2d at 157. The defendant objects to Florence Lucas’ testimony on the additional grounds that it was improperly admitted as a prior consistent statement. He contends that evidence of prior consistent statements is admissible only to refute a charge of recent fabrication and, in this case, the defense had never contended that Shelly Carrigan had fabricated her statement that she informed Florence Lucas about the twisting incident. The record indicates, however, that Florence Lucas’ testimony was admitted as a foundation for Gordon Terry’s testimony, not as a prior consistent statement. Evidence which is admissible for one purpose cannot be excluded for the reason that it would not be admissible for another purpose. (People v. Monroe (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 317, 323.) Thus, while it may not have been admissible as a prior consistent statement, we find no error in the admission of that testimony for foundational purposes. The defendant also contends that he was improperly precluded from impeaching Gordon Terry’s account of his conversation with the defendant. The defendant sought to show, through the written report of a coworker, that the defendant had stated “you can’t prove it” rather than “yeah, but you can’t prove it” in response to Terry’s accusation that he had broken Danny’s arm. Defendant’s attempt to impeach Terry with a written statement of a co-worker was improper. Defendant also objects to evidence elicited by the State on its. cross-examination of the defendant regarding the fact that he had been arrested for driving while intoxicated in 1982. We note, however, that the defendant did not object to this testimony at trial and did not raise the issue in a post-trial motion. As both a trial objection and a written post-trial motion are required to preserve alleged trial errors, we find that the issue has been waived. See People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 176, 186. Next, the defendant contends that his due process rights were violated when a witness made reference to the fact that he had requested to speak to an attorney after being advised of his Miranda rights. The record establishes that while the defendant’s mother, Florence Lucas, was being questioned by the assistant State’s Attorney, the following colloquy took place: “EXAMINATION BY [ASSISTANT STATE’S ATTORNEY]: Q. Now, after you — was that the only conversation you had with John then? A. No. The investigators had told me that John had asked for a lawyer. Q. Okay.” At this point defense counsel objected and requested a side bar. Outside of the hearing of the jury, defense counsel objected to further testimony on the subject and moved for a mistrial. He indicated, however, that he did not want the testimony stricken or a curative instruction to be given; this was to avoid drawing attention to the statement. The court sustained the objection, but denied the defendant’s motion for a mistrial on the bases that the statement had not been elicited by the prosecutor but had been volunteered by the witness and that the defendant had not been prejudiced by the comment. The witness was then instructed, outside of the jury’s presence, not to make any more references to the fact that the defendant had requested an attorney. The defendant now argues that this remark violated his due process rights under Doyle v. Ohio (1976), 426 U.S. 610, 49 L. Ed. 2d 91, 96 S. Ct. 2240, and that it was error for the trial court not to grant a mistrial. We do not agree. In Doyle, the Supreme Court held that “the use for impeachment purposes of [a defendant’s] silence, at the time of arrest and after receiving Miranda warnings, violated the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.” (Doyle, 426 U.S. at 619, 49 L. Ed. 2d at 98, 96 S. Ct. at 2245.) Although the present case differs from Doyle in that the reference was to the defendant’s request to speak to an attorney rather than his post-arrest silence, we find the situation to be similar, as both the right to remain silent and the right to an attorney are guaranteed under Miranda. The Supreme Court noted in Doyle that “while it is true that the Miranda warnings contain no express assurance that silence will carry no penalty, such assurance is implicit to any person who receives the warnings. In such circumstances, it would be fundamentally unfair and a deprivation of due process to allow the arrested person’s silence to be used to impeach an explanation subsequently offered at trial.” (Doyle, 426 U.S. at 618, 49 L. Ed. 2d at 98, 96 S. Ct. at 2245.) We find that the same reasoning can be applied to the defendant’s request to speak to an attorney and hold that a defendant’s request to confer with counsel similarly cannot be used for impeachment purposes at trial. In People v. Miller (1983), 96 Ill. 2d 385, aff'd (1987), 483 U.S. 756, 97 L. Ed. 2d 618, 107 S. Ct. 3102, this court considered the issue of when a Doyle violation does not constitute reversible error. In Miller, the prosecutor made a single reference to the defendant’s post-arrest silence. The jury was instructed to disregard the question and no other reference or argument regarding the silence occurred. Under these circumstances, and in light of the court’s determination that the properly admitted evidence was sufficient to prove the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, the reference was found to be harmless error. (Miller, 96 Ill. 2d at 396.) In affirming this court’s decision, the Supreme Court noted that since the defendant’s post-arrest silence was not submitted to the jury as evidence, no Doyle violation had occurred. Miller, 483 U.S. at 765, 97 L. Ed. 2d at 630, 107 S. Ct. at 3108. Relying on Miller, we do not find that the facts in this case mandate reversal. In the case at bar, the improper reference was not made by the prosecutor but was volunteered by a witness. Immediately after the statement was made, the court sustained the defendant’s objection and instructed the witness to make no further references to the defendant’s request for an attorney. The remark was not stricken and a curative instruction was not given based on defense counsel’s indication that he did not want to draw attention to the statement. The record indicates that the prosecutor made no further reference to the defendant’s request for an attorney and it was not argued as evidence. Based on these facts, and the overwhelming evidence of the defendant’s guilt, we find that the reference was harmless. Defendant’s next contentions of error concern evidence admitted during the State’s case on rebuttal. As part of its case on rebuttal, the State recalled Investigator Hartshorn and Investigator Miller, who testified that the defendant had not told them that he had ingested “white cross” pills at the party on January 28, 1986. The State introduced this testimony to rebut the defendant’s testimony on direct examination that he had taken four or five “white cross” pills at the party. The defendant argues that this was not proper rebuttal evidence, since the defendant had admitted on cross-examination that he had not told the police that he had taken the pills. We note from the record, however, that the defense did not object to either Investigator Hartshorn’s or Investigator Miller’s rebuttal testimony regarding the amphetamines. Unless incompetent testimony is objected to at the time of its admission, any objection to the testimony is waived. (People v. Ross (1968), 41 Ill. 2d 445, 462-63.) Accordingly, this issue will not be considered. The State also introduced the testimony of Dr. Paul Haskin, a clinical psychologist specializing in alcohol and drug rehabilitation, who testified that a blackout, or alcohol-induced amnesia, does not indicate that the person suffering the blackout was incapable of acting knowingly or voluntarily during the period which he later cannot remember. Defendant contends that this was improper rebuttal testimony because it did not contradict prior testimony regarding blackouts. He claims that in the guise of rebuttal evidence the State was actually presenting new evidence as to the defendant’s mental state. Evidence which would tend to “explain, repel, contradict or disprove the evidence of the defendant” is admissible in rebuttal even though such evidence would have been admissible as part of the State’s case in chief. (People v. Daugherty (1969), 43 Ill. 2d 251, 255.) Although such evidence should not be reserved for rebuttal, these matters rest largely within the discretion of the trial court and such rulings ordinarily will not be set aside on review. People v. Waller (1977), 67 Ill. 2d 381, 387. Applying these principles, we find Dr. Haskin’s testimony to be particularly appropriate on rebuttal. During the defendant’s case in chief, David Merritt, a certified addictions counselor who had treated the defendant for alcoholism, testified that the defendant suffered from blackouts. He described a “blackout” as a short-term memory loss and stated that an individual having a “blackout” is unable to recall anything that has taken place during a specific period of time. He further testified that blackouts differentiate social drinkers from chronic alcoholics. On rebuttal, Dr. Haskin testified that the term “blackout” is a misused term and the condition is actually alcohol amnesia, which results from the rapid ingestion of alcohol and the subsequent failure of the brain to register events once a certain alcohol level is reached. Dr. Haskin stated that while anyone who rapidly ingests alcohol could suffer from alcohol amnesia, the condition occurs more frequently in abusive drinkers because they tend to drink more rapidly than moderate drinkers. As it is clear that Dr. Haskin’s testimony was introduced to explain and refute David Merritt’s testimony regarding blackouts, we find that it was properly admitted on rebuttal and will not disturb the trial court’s ruling. Defendant also contends that he was denied a fair trial as a result of various remarks made by the prosecutor in his closing argument. Defendant cites four different comments, only two of which drew objections. We note that where defense counsel does not object to the allegedly prejudicial remarks, any error would normally be waived unless the comments were so inflammatory that the defendant could not have received a fair trial, or so flagrant as to threaten deterioration of the judicial process. (People v. Owens (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 88, 104.) Accordingly we first examine the comments to which no objections were made to determine whether they were so prejudicial as to deny the defendant a fair trial. First, the defendant claims that the prosecutor’s argument that the defendant’s only defense was voluntary intoxication precluded jury consideration of the lesser included offense of involuntary manslaughter. We disagree. While voluntary intoxication is normally not a defense to the commission of a crime (People v. Winters (1963), 29 Ill. 2d 74, 80) evidence that the intoxication was so extreme as to suspend the power of reason may be used to negate the existence of the mental state which is an element of the crime. (People v. Free (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 378, 407-08; Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 3 — 2.) In the present case, the defendant attempted to establish that his intoxication was so severe that he could not form the mental state required to support a murder conviction. Contrary to the defendant’s assertion, argument that he was too intoxicated to know or intend the consequences of his actions would not preclude consideration of the lesser included offense of involuntary manslaughter, but would in fact support it. Consequently, we cannot say that this argument was prejudicial. Next, defendant argues that the prosecutor improperly commented about the victim’s family when he stated that, because of the defendant’s conduct, Shelly Carrigan was left with nothing and that Danny never had a chance to know the fishing hole where his body had been hidden. This court has consistently condemned the admission of evidence that the deceased left a family or argument by the prosecution which dwells upon the decedent’s family. (People v. Jimerson (1989), 127 Ill. 2d 12, 41; People v. Hope (1986), 116 Ill. 2d 265, 275; People v. Bernette (1964), 30 Ill. 2d 359, 371.) However, not every mention of a decedent’s family necessarily entitles the defendant to a new trial, since, depending on how it is introduced, the evidence and argument may be harmless. People v. Free (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 378, 414; see, e.g., People v. Wilson (1972), 51 Ill. 2d 302, 307 (where evidence concerning the decedent’s family was more incidental than calculated and was not presented in such a manner as to cause the jury to believe it was material, reversal was not required). In the present case, the objectionable comments were made in passing and the prosecutor did not dwell on them. Since the argument was presented incidentally and not in such a manner as to cause the jury to believe it was material, we find that the comments were harmless and do not warrant reversal of the defendant’s convictions. Having determined that the foregoing comments, to which no objections were made, were neither so inflammatory nor so flagrant as to deny the defendant a fair trial, we turn to the comments to which objections were made. Defendant contends that the prosecutor’s statement that the defense consisted solely of evidence of blackouts misstates the evidence. He maintains that this argument misstated the facts because the defendant had presented other evidence of intoxication. An examination of the State’s closing argument indicates that while at one point the prosecutor did state that having blackouts is not a defense, he went on to argue that the other evidence presented by the defendant similarly did not establish a defense. We recognize that in analyzing the propriety of any statement, the statement must be considered in the context in which it was made (People v. Turner (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 540, 561), and having considered the prosecutor’s statement in the context of the entire closing argument, we find that it was not a misstatement of the evidence. Finally, the defendant objects to the prosecutor’s statements that he “lived off” his mother and that he “lived off” women. Defendant argues now that the statements were sufficiently prejudicial to warrant reversal. This court has consistently held that statements may not be made in closing arguments solely to arouse and inflame the passions of the jury. (People v. Johnson (1987), 119 Ill. 2d 119, 139; People v. Terry (1984), 99 Ill. 2d 508, 517.) However, improper remarks made during closing argument generally do not constitute reversible error unless they result in substantial prejudice to the accused. People v. Caballero (1989), 126 Ill. 2d 248, 273; People v. Baptist (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 19, 29. In the present case, we agree with the defendant that the prosecutor’s remarks that the defendant “lived off” various individuals bore no relevance to his guilt or innocence and were improper. However, we note that the court recognized that these references were improper, and sustained the defendant’s objections to these statements. Furthermore, the jury was specifically instructed that closing arguments are not evidence and that they should disregard any argument not based on the evidence. In view of these admonitions, and the substantial evidence of the defendant’s guilt, we cannot say that these remarks either constituted a material factor in the defendant’s convictions or otherwise prevented him from receiving a fair trial (see People v. Johnson (1986), 114 Ill. 2d 170, 199). Consequently, we find that they do not warrant reversal of the defendant’s convictions. The defendant next argues that the trial court abused its discretion by permitting the jury to consider, during its deliberation, certain photographs of the decedent taken in the autopsy room. He contends that any probative value the photographs may have had was outweighed by their gruesomeness and that they were calculated only to prejudice and inflame the jury. The record indicates that the jury was permitted to view Exhibits 37, 38, 40, 45 and 46. Exhibits 37, 38, 40 and 46 are 8-inch by 10-inch color photographs; Exhibit 45 is a 5-inch by 7-inch color photograph. Exhibit 37 shows a bruise to the decedent’s head. The photograph depicts an incision through the scalp to the skull and the decedent’s empty chest cavity can be seen at the bottom of the photograph. Exhibit 38 depicts the decedent after his scalp was dissected and retracted. The decedent’s skin was cut from ear to ear and retracted over his face to reveal a hematoma. The decedent’s empty chest cavity is also visible in the photograph. Exhibit 40 depicts the decedent cut open from throat to groin. His skin has been retracted to display his rib cage and his internal organs. The photograph also depicts Dr. Maratos’ hand holding the left lobe of the decedent’s liver. Exhibit 45 shows a close up of the decedent’s liver held by forceps. Exhibit 46 depicts Dr. Maratos’ hand holding the decedent’s left lung. The decedent’s rib cage has been cracked open and various other organs are exposed. The State justifies the admission of the photographs on the ground that they depict the nature and extent of the decedent’s injuries. It contends that Exhibits 37 and 38 were necessary to illustrate the hematoma on the head; Exhibits 40, 45 and 46 were necessary to show the abdominal injuries and were probative of the force used to inflict the injuries. Under the present standard for admissibility of photographic evidence, photographs that are relevant to establish any fact in issue are admissible in spite of the fact that they may be of a gruesome or disgusting nature. (People v. Foster (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 365, 377.) The responsibility of weighing the probative • value and potentially prejudicial effect of the photographs rests with the trial judge, and his decision as to which evidentiary items should be taken into the jury room will not be disturbed absent a clear showing of abuse. People v. Shum (1987), 117 Ill. 2d 317, 353. Clearly, the photographs in question may be perceived as gruesome. However, as they are probative of the extent and severity of the decedent’s injuries, we cannot say that the decision to submit them to the jury was an abuse of discretion. The next issue is whether the trial court properly instructed the jury as to the correct burden of proof on the involuntary manslaughter charge. Relying upon People v. Reddick (1988), 123 Ill. 2d 184, the defendant contends that the instructions given in the present case erroneously state the burden of proof on the issue of whether the defendant acted in a reckless manner. In Reddick, the jury received instructions on both murder and voluntary manslaughter. The murder instruction required that the State prove that the defendant performed acts which caused the decedent’s death and that, when he performed those acts, he knew that they created a strong probability of death or great bodily harm to the decedent. The voluntary manslaughter instructions given to the jury in Reddick required that the State prove that the defendant performed acts which caused the decedent’s death and that when he did so, he knew that the acts created a strong probability of death or great bodily harm, but that in causing such death, he was acting out of either intense passion or under the unreasonable belief that his acts were justified. This court held: “[T]he instructions ***, when read together, erroneously state the burdens of proof on the issues of whether the defendants acted under either intense passions or unreasonable beliefs that their actions were justified. The voluntary manslaughter instructions indicate that to obtain a voluntary manslaughter conviction the People must prove the existence of one of the alternative mitigating mental conditions which the People contend did not exist. By contrast, the murder instruction makes no mention of the mitigating mental conditions. These instructions essentially assure that, if the jury follows them, the jury cannot possibly convict a defendant of voluntary manslaughter. The reason is that even if a mitigating mental state is proved, it will have been proved by the defendant, not the People.” (Reddick, 123 Ill. 2d at 194-95.) This court treated proof of unreasonable belief or heat of passion as an affirmative defense to the murder charge; once a defendant produced enough evidence to put the defense in issue, the burden shifted to the State to disprove, not prove, the mitigating mental conditions of voluntary manslaughter beyond a reasonable doubt. Reddick, 123 Ill. 2d at 197. In the present case, the murder instructions submitted to the jury placed the burden on the State to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendant performed the acts which caused the decedent’s death; that when the defendant did so, he intended to kill or do great bodily harm to the decedent (count I); that he knew his acts would kill or cause great bodily harm to the decedent (count II); that he knew his acts created a strong possibility of death or great bodily harm to the decedent (count III); or that he caused the death of the decedent while committing the offense of aggravated battery of a child (count IV). The involuntary manslaughter instruction submitted to the jury, Illinois Pattern Instructions, Criminal, No. 7.08 (2d ed. 1981) (involuntary manslaughter), provides that to sustain a charge of involuntary manslaughter the State must prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendant performed the acts which caused the decedent’s death; that the defendant performed those acts recklessly; and that those acts were likely to cause death or great bodily harm. Defendant maintains that the same circumstances exist in the present case as in Reddick. He contends that since the State did not desire an involuntary manslaughter conviction, it would not introduce evidence that the defendant had acted recklessly. Since the involuntary manslaughter instruction requires that the State prove recklessness, any evidence presented by the defendant could have been disregarded by the jury. Thus, defendant contends that the jury should not have been instructed that the burden is on the State to prove recklessness but, rather, that the burden is on the State to disprove recklessness. The State contends that this case is distinguishable from Reddick. It maintains that it does not have to disprove recklessness in order to establish the intent or knowledge necessary for a murder conviction because recklessness is not an affirmative defense to murder but, rather, a separate and distinct mental state. We agree. In Reddick, this court treated unreasonable belief and heat of passion as affirmative defenses to the murder charge which had to be disproved by the State because, if present, they would lessen the defendant’s culpability for his otherwise murderous conduct. In the present case, as the State correctly notes, recklessness is not a less culpable form of intent or knowledge. On the contrary, recklessness and knowledge are mutually inconsistent mental states. (People v. Hoffer (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 186, 195.) Since murder is an intentional or knowing killing (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1) and involuntary manslaughter, by definition, is an unintentional killing (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 9 — 3), where a determination is made that one exists (i. e., an intentional killing), to be legally consistent, the other (i.e., an unintentional killing) must be found not to exist (Hoffer, 106 Ill. 2d at 195; see also People v. Spears (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 396, 404). Accordingly, we find no error in the instructions given. Defendant also contends that the involuntary manslaughter instruction prevented the jury from considering evidence in mitigation presented by the defendant. He maintains that since the involuntary manslaughter instruction required that the State prove recklessness, any evidence of recklessness presented by the defendant could be disregarded by the jury. We find this argument to be similarly without merit. The record indicates that the defendant raised the defense of voluntary intoxication at trial. Voluntary intoxication is a defense to criminal conduct when the intoxication is so extreme as to suspend the power of reason and render the accused incapable of forming the specific intent which is an element of the offense with which he is charged. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 6 — 3.) Any evidence of intoxication must be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the State has established the requisite mental state for the offenses charged. In the present case, although the State has the burden of proving a reckless mental state to support a charge of involuntary manslaughter, it is clear that any evidence regarding the defendant’s mental state presented by the defendant in refuting the charge would be considered by the jury. Consequently, we find no error in the involuntary manslaughter instruction. For the reasons stated, we affirm the defendant’s convictions. SENTENCING Having determined that no reversible error occurred during the guilt phase of the defendant’s trial, we now consider the alleged errors at the sentencing phase. Defendant first contends that his death sentence must be vacated because it was imposed under an unconstitutional provision of our Criminal Code, section 9 — l(b)(7) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(b)(7)). Section 9— l(b)(7) provides that a defendant who has attained the age of 18 or more and who has been found guilty of first degree murder may be sentenced to death if: “the murdered individual was under 12 years of age and the death resulted from exceptionally brutal or heinous behavior indicative of wanton cruelty.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(b)(7).) Relying on Maynard v. Cartwright (1988), 486 U.S. 356, 100 L. Ed. 2d 372, 108 S. Ct. 1853, the defendant contends that the language “exceptionally brutal or heinous behavior” is so broad and subjective that it fails to properly guide a sentencer’s discretion, and thereby results in an unreasoned and capricious imposition of the death penalty. In Maynard v. Cartwright (1988), 486 U.S. 356, 100 L. Ed. 2d 372, 108 S. Ct. 1853, the Supreme Court held that an aggravating factor in the Oklahoma death penalty statute was unconstitutionally vague, as applied to that defendant, because the language “especially heinous, atrocious, or cruel” failed to guide or limit the discretion of the sentences (Maynard, 486 U.S. at _, 100 L. Ed. 2d at 379, 108 S. Ct. at 1857.) The defendant argues that the language in section 9 — 1(b)(7) is analogous to that in Maynard, and is similarly unconstitutionally vague. This court considered the constitutionality of section 9 — 1(b)(7) in People v. Odle (1989), 128 Ill. 2d Ill. In Odle, we held that section 9 — l(b)(7) does not suffer from the same infirmities as the Oklahoma statute considered in Maynard, because it is much more specific in describing the conduct which qualifies an accused for the death penalty. (128 Ill. 2d at 140.) However, this court emphasized that while the statute is constitutional on its face, in order to be constitutional in application all of the qualifying requirements must be present: “the victim must be under the age of 12, and the conduct which brings about the victim’s death must not only be exceptionally brutal or heinous, it must also be such that it is indicative of wanton cruelty.” (Emphasis in original.) (Odle, 128 Ill. 2d at 141.) We find Odie to be controlling, and reject the defendant’s contention that the language of section 9 — 1(b)(7) is unconstitutionally vague. See also People v. Kidd (1989), 129 Ill. 2d 432. The defendant argues that even if section 9 — l(b)(7) is valid on its face, his death sentence should nonetheless be reversed because section 9 — l(b)(7) was unconstitutionally applied in his case because his conduct did not rise to the level of “exceptionally brutal or heinous” behavior. He further argues that since the circuit court made no express findings as to why the conduct involved was brutal or heinous, meaningful review of the sentence is impossible. Defendant’s argument that the lack of express findings results in an unreviewable sentence has previously been rejected by this court (see People v. King (1986), 109 Ill. 2d 514, 550-51; People v. Brownell (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 508, 544), and will not be reconsidered. As this court noted in Brownell, in each death penalty case the entire record undergoes scrutiny for errors and defects. The sentencing hearing is reviewed with the object of ascertaining whether any aggravating factors have been proven beyond a reasonable doubt and whether there are mitigating factors sufficient to preclude the imposition of the death sentence. People v. Brownell, 79 Ill. 2d at 543. In accordance with this mandate, we consider whether the defendant’s conduct was proven to be “exceptionally brutal or heinous” and “indicative of wanton cruelty.” In People v. La Pointe (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 482, 499, this court rejected a vagueness challenge to identical language contained in section 5 — 8—1(a)(1)(b) of the Unified Code of Corrections (Ill. Rev. Stat., 1978 Supp., ch. 38, par. 1005 — 8—1(a)(1)(b)). The LaPointe court held that the phrase “exceptionally brutal or heinous behavior indicative of wanton cruelty” must be given its ordinary and popularly understood meaning (La Pointe, 88 Ill. 2d at 499-500) and defined “heinous” as being “ ‘hatefully or shockingly evil: grossly bad: enormously and flagrantly criminal’ ”; “brutal” was held to mean “ ‘grossly ruthless, devoid of mercy or compassion: cruel and cold-blooded.’ ” (La Pointe, 88 Ill. 2d at 501, quoting Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1050, 286 (1971).) Cases in which this court has found brutal or heinous behavior to be present have generally involved prolonged pain, torture or premeditation. See, e.g., People v. Odle (1988), 128 Ill. 2d 111 (where defendant strangled his 11-year-old brother with his hands and, when his hands became tired, finished murdering him by tying a pajama bottom around his neck until it was compressed to the size of an adult man’s wrist, his conduct was exceptionally brutal and heinous, indicative of wanton cruelty); People v. Mitchell (1984), 105 Ill. 2d 1 (where defendant repeatedly beat 16-month-old child with her hands, fists, and belt, standing the child back up to hit her again each time the child fell, conduct was exceptionally brutal or heinous and indicative of wanton cruelty). The evidence in the present case indicates that the cause of the decedent’s death was suffocation which occurred almost immediately after the injuries were inflicted. There was testimony that the injuries themselves could have been inflicted by a single blow. There is no conclusive evidence in the record to indicate that the decedent’s death was either premeditated, prolonged or tortuous. Applying the above-mentioned principles, we cannot say that the circumstances surrounding the decedent’s death were exceptionally brutal or heinous and indicative of wanton cruelty. Accordingly, we find that all of the qualifying requirements of section 9 — l(b)(7) have not been met and, consequently, the defendant is not eligible for the death penalty under section 9 — l(b)(7). As section 9 — 1(b)(7) was the sole statutory aggravating factor relied on in finding the defendant eligible for the death penalty, the defendant’s death sentence is vacated and the cause is remanded to the circuit court of Vermilion County for the imposition of a sentence other than death. Defendant raises a number of other challenges to his death sentence and to the Illinois death penalty statute itself. In light of our determination that he is not eligible for the death penalty, those arguments will not be considered. For the reasons stated above, the convictions are affirmed, but the death sentence is vacated and the cause remanded to the circuit court of Vermilion County with directions to impose a sentence upon the defendant other than death. Convictions affirmed; death sentence vacated; cause remanded with directions.