=== CASE 9738782 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:38.732481+00 ===

*613Wilkins, J.
(dissenting, with whom Hennessey, C.J.,
joins). In my view, the court has not previously faced the issue presented in this case. The traditional disproportionate assessment case, unlike this one, has involved a municipality in which the bulk of the real estate was in the single family or residential category and one or more classes of industrial, commercial, or business property were assessed at a higher proportion of fair cash value than the municipality’s residential real estate. In cases of that character, the municipal average and the average of the most favored class are roughly equivalent. The remedy of abating assessments on nonresidential property to the proportion applicable to residential property thus seemed equitable and appropriate. Such was apparently the situation in Assessors of Weymouth v. Curtis, 375 Mass. 493 (1978), a decision in which I did not participate, where for the first time we held, but without analysis, that an abatement to the average of the most favored class of property was required.1
Abatement to the average of the most favored class in this case results in the successful taxpayer’s paying less than it would have paid if the city had assessed all property at 100% of cash value or at the same proportion of fair cash value. As a consequence of the court’s decision, the taxpayer receives a windfall from the city’s violation of the law. I doubt that an abatement to a proportion below the municipal average is required either statutorily or constitutionally, and I do not read the court’s opinion as resting on constitutional grounds or on any explicit statutory mandate. However, there is some logic for the court’s determination to abate the taxpayer’s assessment to the average of the most favored class. In that way, the tax*614payer will be treated equitably in relation to the class which (on this record) obtains the most favorable treatment. The question remains, however, whether the choice selected by the court is truly the better one in this instance and in all other instances, as the opinion seems to indicate.
A decision to grant any abatement, of course, tends to have a negative impact on the revenues of the city. Any shortfall of revenue will have to be made up by an appropriate increase in the tax revenues collected in some subsequent fiscal (tax) year. The increase in taxes to make up for revenue deficiencies resulting from abatements to the average of the most favored class will fall inequitably on those taxpayers whose assessments are above that average. Those disfavored taxpayers will be persons who do not protect their rights by seeking and obtaining abatements. In general, they will be people who do not have the resources or understanding necessary to carry through the process of seeking an abatement.
The procedural requirements of an abatement proceeding are not simple. If every aggrieved taxpayer were to pursue such a remedy, the process would become cumbersome and, from a practical point of view, inadequate. The cost of a hearing before the Appellate Tax Board, involving legal expenses and often expert testimony, is not inconsiderable. A landlord who passes any increase in local real estate taxes through to tenants will have little or no incentive to seek an abatement, and, as a practical matter, individual tenants may not be able to pursue abatement procedures.
It is thus apparent that the windfall to a taxpayer who knows how to and does protect his rights places an extra burden on those who are similarly discriminated against but do not protect their rights. While one might conclude that, in the best of all worlds, a taxpayer who does not protect his rights has made an informed choice not to do so, as a practical matter, in the Alice in Wonderland world into which Boston assessment practices have fall*615en, such informed choices are not made. In its decision to assure equality of treatment between the taxpayer in this case and owners of property in the most favored class, the court has indirectly chosen to heap an additional, and I think, an unfair burden on other taxpayers who already have been treated inequitably.
I prefer a result that gives the taxpayer an abatement to the level at which it would have been assessed if the law had been complied with. Even such a result would not avoid unfairly shifting some burden onto property assessed at more than the municipal average of 50.2% (e.g., as the record shows, triple dwelling units, which have an average assessment ratio of 62.2%), but at least the taxpayer’s windfall would not be shifted to others beyond what is necessary to achieve a reasonably fair result for the taxpayer: — a tax based on its just proportion of the total obligation.
I would reverse the decision of the Appellate Tax Board and order that (with an appropriate adjustment in the tax factor) the abatement be granted to the level of the municipal average.2 Attempts at relief from the general inequity of Boston real estate assessment practices should be made in proceedings brought in direct challenge to the system (see, e.g., Bennett v. Assessors of Whitman, 354 Mass. 239 [1968]; Coan v. Assessors of Beverly, 349 Mass. 575 [1965]; Bettigole v. Assessors of Springfield, 343 Mass. 223 [1961]), and not in individual abatement proceedings where the pattern of relief is haphazard, partial, and, at least in this case, inequitable to others.
The dictum to the same effect in Shoppers’ World, Inc. v. Assessors of Framingham, 348 Mass. 366, 377-378 n.10 (1965), relied on a principle asserted to be found in Sioux City Bridge Co. v. Dakota County, Neb., 260 U.S. 441, 446 (1923), although that case in fact did not involve different classes of property of which one was the most favored.
I agree with the opinion of the court that "a taxpayer makes out at least a prima facie case of disproportionate assessment if he shows that his property is assessed at a percentage of fair cash value greater than the average percentage for all taxable property in the city or town,” using the Commissioner of Revenue’s determination under G. L. c. 58, § 10C. Supra at 609.

=== CASE 9738783 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:39.749183+00 ===

Dethmers, J.
On August 31, 1958, plaintiff was injured in a collision between Ms automobile and one owned and operated by defendant’s decedent, who was fatally injured in tbe accident and died that day. This suit against decedent’s estate is brought to recover plaintiff’s resultant damages.
This is defendant’s appeal from an order denying her motion to dismiss. The facts constituting tbe basis for the motion are as follows: Probating of decedent’s estate commenced on September 5, 1958. The probate court entered an order fixing December 2, 1958, as the date for hearing on claims. It was adjourned until December 9,1958, claims were heard, and the hearing on claims then was closed. The assets of the estate were duly distributed. On January 20, 1959, an order entered assigning the residue and the final account of the administratrix was allowed and approved. By order of the probate court dated January 30, 1959, the administratrix was discharged. On May 6; 1960, plaintiff filed in the probate court a motion to reopen the estate, together with a statement and proof of claim for the above mentioned damages. That motion was granted by the probate court on January 17, 1961. On February 7, 1961, the instant action was commenced in circuit court.
Defendant says that her motion to dismiss should have been granted because: (1) the probate court was without jurisdiction to reopen the estate and appoint her again as administratrix and hence there is no proper defendant before the court having legal capacity to be sued; (2) the probate court order reopening the estate is void under the provision of CL *3431948, § 704.56 (Stat Ann 1959 Cum Supp § 27.3178 [307]); and (3) the provisions of CL 1948, § 704.56 (Stat Ann 1959 Cum Supp § 27.3178[307]), and CL 1948, § 708.18 (Stat Ann 1943 Eev § 27.3178[428]), bar plaintiff from maintaining this suit in circuit court after such reopening, for the reason that no claim therefor was filed in probate court or suit filed in circuit court during the original administration of the estate and before its closing.
It will be noted that defendant’s position is predicated on the assumption that the estate had been probated, closed, and then reopened. The record does not bear out defendant’s contention that the estate ever was closed. There was an order assigning residue, an order allowing the final account of the administratrix and an order discharging her as such. There was no provision in any of those orders nor any special order closing the estate.
In CL 1948, § 708.18 (Stat Ann 1943 Rev § 27.3178 [428]), it is provided:
“On the application of a creditor who has failed to present his claim, if made within 18 months following the time originally fixed by the court for the presentation of claims, and before such estate is closed, the judge of probate shall allow further time, not exceeding 1 month, for such creditor to present his claim.”
Here plaintiff’s statement and proof of claim was filed in probate court before the estate was closed and within 18 months following the time originally fixed by the probate court for presentation of claims. It was, therefore, entitled to be considered by the probate court and was not barred by the statute.
In this case, however, while the estate was still open, plaintiff commenced this action of trespass on the case against the fiduciary in circuit court. This is permissible, so long as decedent’s estate is not *344closed, under the provisions of CL 1948, § 708.22 (Stat Ann 1943 Rev § 27.3178[432]). In the case of In re Chamberlain’s Estate, 298 Mich 278, it was held that one in the position of plaintiff here has the option, under said section of the statute, to pursue his tort claim either in probate court or by filing a tort action in circuit court. None of defendant’s contentions or citations of authority in her briefs in this case obviate plaintiff’s right under that statute to maintain this suit. For example, In re Cook Estate, 366 Mich 323, is a case in which the estate had been “finally closed” and the attempt of the claimant was to cause the estate to be reopened for the presentation of a tardy claim. Suit in circuit court under CL 1948, § 708.22 (Stat Ann 1943 Rev §.27.3178 [432]), had not been attempted and the right to do so was not involved. And so in Seilnacht v. Wayne Probate Judge, 201 Mich 536, there was an order of the probate court containing, inter alia, the language “said estate closed,” and involved was a petition for “revival of the commission on claims,” not, as here, a suit in circuit court under the above statute.
Affirmed. Costs to plaintiff.
Kelly, J., concurred with Dethmers, J.

=== CASE 9738784 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:39.752803+00 ===

Black, J.
(concurring in affirmance). This action for damages, counting on negligence committed by defendant’s decedent, originated in the circuit court —not the probate court. It depends on no claim filed in probate and was expressly authorized by the 1939 amendment which, for the first time, provided a choice of remedies for the possessor of a right of action in “trespass on the case” against a person whose death has occurred after the right has arisen. See section 22 of chapter 8 of the probate code of *3451939 (CL 1948, § 708.22 [Stat Ann 1943 Rev § 27.3178 (432)]) and In re Chamberlain’s Estate, 298 Mich 278, 287.
The defendant moved to dismiss, alleging completed probate of the deceased tortfeasor’s estate and denial of &• legally suable status on her part. The motion was denied and defendant has appealed.
The only question requiring present determination is whether the defendant is a suable fiduciary under CL 1948, §708.22 (Stat Ann 1943 Rev §27.3178 [432]). We all agree that she is and will remain so until her decedent’s estate is actually closed as provided in the probate code. We are agreed, too, that the estate has not as yet been closed for want of a probate order of closing.
Plaintiff’s claim as filed in probate, alleging the same, cause, is not before us. It has not, either as to merit, statutory timeliness, or dismissibility, come to test either in probate or circuit. Its disposition remains the initial responsibility of the court where filed.
Plaintiff’s point that continued negotiations for adjustment, proceeding as same were between plaintiff and the decedent’s liability insurer during what counsel call “quickie probate proceedings,” required timely notice of such proceedings as a matter of due process, is expressly noted and passed as unnecessary to decision.
Affirmed. Costs to plaintiff.
Kavanagh and Souris, JJ., concurred with Black, J.

=== CASE 9738785 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:39.756015+00 ===

Otis M. Smith, J.
(dissenting). The following opinion, which I adopt as my own, was written by former Justice Adams before his departure from this bench.
*346The key question in this case is what constitutes the closing of an estate. Mr. Justice Dethmers and Mr. Justice Black would hold that an estate is not closed until an order has been entered by the probate court specifically closing the estate. Section 56 of chapter 4 of the probate code, CL 1948, § 704.56 (Stat Ann 1959 Cum Supp § 27.3178 [307]), reads as follows:
“After allowance of the final account and entry of order for distribution, the fiduciary shall make distribution, taking receipts for the same, and upon filing such receipts and the receipts showing payment of the inheritance tax or the issuance of an order determining that no tax is payable, he may be discharged and his bondsmen released.
“The court may, upon petition having been filed after the closing of an estate, cause the same to be reopened for the purpose of administering -after discovered assets or to complete the administration of the same in case said estate was closed without being fully administered by the fiduciary or court, or for the correction of typographical errors, omissions, or misdescription of property contained in any order or record in said estate, and for any of these purposes may appoint a successor fiduciary: Provided, however, That the failure o£ a claimant to file a claim against said estate during the original administration thereof shall not be a cause for reopening the same or for the appointment of a successor fiduciary.”
The first paragraph of the statute, when taken in conjunction with the second paragraph which provides for a reopening to correct errors, would appear to be a full and complete description of the steps necessary to close an estate. Once the fiduciary has been properly discharged, and his letters and bond canceled, an estate has been closed. "While a recital or an order of the court to that effect may be desirable for the sake of clarity, none is required by *347the code, nor would such a recital or order add anything to the facts set forth in the code which constitute a closing.
My views with regard to statutes of limitation were set forth in In re Cook Estate, 366 Mich 323, and need not be restated here.
I would remand for entry of an order granting the motion to dismiss.
Caer, C. J., did not sit.
O’Hara, J., took no part in the decision of this case.

=== CASE 9738786 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:40.348031+00 ===

STATON, Judge.
After hearing evidence, the trial court issued a decree dissolving the marriage of Bruce Myers and Laura Myers and awarding custody of their son, Keith Allen Myers, to Laura Myers. Bruce Myers appeals the grant of custody.1 We hold that the trial court abused its discretion when it acted under a presumption that the mother should have custody of a child upon dissolution of marriage.
At the end of 1974, Bruce and Laura Myers agreed their marriage was irretrievably broken. They agreed that Bruce would file a petition seeking dissolution of their marriage and that he would retain custody of Keith, born April 15, 1973. Bruce filed the petition on December 31, 1974. Hearings were held on five occasions extending over nineteen and one-half months. On November 2, 1977, each side rested. On December 13, 1977, the court entered judgment awarding custody of Keith to Laura.
Bruce filed a motion to correct errors which was denied. Attached to the motion was the sworn affidavit of Thomas C. Sop-ko, the attorney who represented Bruce at the hearings relating to the dissolution proceeding. Sopko indicated (referring to an attached exhibit) that on November 4,1977, the court notified the attorneys of its intended disposition of the case, including its decision to award custody of Keith to Laura. On November 7, the next regularly scheduled court date, Sopko conferred with the trial judge, the Honorable William Ho-sinski. In his affidavit, Sopko averred:
“10. That during the course of said conversation the undersigned advised the Judge of the undersigned’s great surprise and concern regarding the Judge’s decision on the matter of custody of the one minor child of the parties.
“11. That during the course of said conversation, the Judge, indicated to the undersigned that the only testimony that the Court was actually concerned with was the testimony of the two (2) psychiatrists who testified on the last day of the series of the aforementioned hearings.
“12. That additionally, the Judge also indicated to the undersigned that while the Judge was familiar with the present *1362status of the Dissolution of Marriage Act which sets forth that there no longer is any presumption favoring the mother in the determination of child custody, that he was of the personal opinion that the mother should be given the benefit of the doubt.
“13. That the Judge went on to further relate that it was his personal opinion that in most instances that the mother is the more appropriate custodial parent.
“14. That thereafter, the undersigned and counsel for the Respondent while endeavoring to work out some mutually agreeable visitation program with the child for the Petitioner, had occasion to have a joint conference in the Chambers of the Honorable William Hosinski during which said conversation the undersigned and counsel for the Respondent inquired as to the opinion of the Court with regard to what would be a reasonable visitation program.
“15. That the undersigned suggested to the Court that since his client had, in fact, had custody of the minor child for approximately three and one-half (3V2) years, and at all points in time since the Petition for Dissolution of Marriage was filed back in December of 1974, that the undersigned was of the considered opinion that his client should now enjoy at least the same liberal visitation program that the Court had established during the course of the proceeding for the Respondent-mother when she was the noncustodial parent.
“16. That the Judge indicated to the undersigned that this should necessarily not be the case as in the Judge's opinion it had been ‘an abnormal situation’ wherein the father had custody of the child during the pendency of these proceedings.
“17. That once again, during the course of this second conversation, the undersigned had additional discussions with the Court concerning a father being awarded custody of his children, and again the Judge indicated that it was his opinion that in most situations, the mother is, and should be, presumed to be a more fit and proper person to be the custodial parent.”
Sopko’s affidavit was attached to Bruce’s motion to correct errors pursuant to Ind. Rules of Procedure, Trial Rule 59(D), which provides as follows:
“When a motion to correct errors is based upon evidence outside the record, the cause must be sustained by affidavits showing the truth thereof served with the motion. The opposing party has fifteen [15] days after service of affidavits in which to serve opposing affidavits and fifteen [15] days after service of the motion in which to file cross-errors' or in which to assert relevant matters relating to the kind of relief to be granted. The period for filing affidavits may be extended for an additional period not exceeding thirty [30] days for good cause shown or by written stipulation.”
Laura’s attorney, who was present at one of the conversations between Sopko and the trial judge, failed to file any opposing affidavits.
Sopko’s affidavit became part of the record of the proceedings under Ind. Rules of Procedure, Appellate Rule 7.2(A)(1). The trial judge certified the transcript and failed to file opposing affidavits, under AP. 7.2(A)(3)(c).
Under the rules of our courts, if Sopko’s affidavit contained erroneous statements, either Laura or the trial judge could have filed opposing affidavits. Since no opposing affidavits were filed, this court must accept as true the facts averred in Sopko’s affidavit filed on behalf of Bruce. Roberts v. Watson (1977), Ind.App., 359 N.E.2d 615; Scharbrough v. State (1968), 249 Ind. 316, 232 N.E.2d 592. See also Jackson v. State (1978), Ind.App., 372 N.E.2d 1242.
Accepting such facts as true, we must determine whether the trial judge’s remarks constitute reversible error in regard to the determination of custody.
Indiana statutory law provides as follows:
*1363“the court shall determine custody and enter a custody order in accordance with the best interests of the child. In determining the best interests of the child, there shall be no presumption favoring either parent.” IC 1971, 31-l-11.5-21(a) (Burns Code Ed., Supp.1977).
The trial judge was bound to render his custody decision in accordance with this provision. However, Judge Hosinski’s remarks to Sopko indicated he was unable or unwilling to do so—he personally presumed that in most instances the mother is the more fit and proper custodial parent, and that the mother should be given “the benefit of the doubt.”
The trial judge’s remarks at the close of the evidence provide further support for Bruce’s contention that the judge acted with a presumption in favor of the mother. The judge stated:
“There is no doubt in the Court’s mind about the competency or the genuine concern of the mother, Laura, or the father to take care of his son. There never was a question with the Court as to if he is a competent person to take care of his child. There has quite candidly been some concern as far as the Court is concerned as to the mother to take care of the child solely because of the evidence that came out of the trial, and you have had the hearing, and we devoted a great number of hours to this case.
“I am certain that neither party here can contend that the Court has handled this in an arbitrary or capricious manner, and we have not done so because of the seriousness of the problems which are involved.
“However, all that necessarily comes down to one question here, and that is the mental capacity of the mother to discharge her duties as a mother, and the Court’s decision as to who is the best in the long run for this boy.”
The pivotal question the trial judge faced in this case was not the mental capacity of Laura coupled with who would be best for the child. The question was simply what custodial determination would serve the best interests of' Keith, with no presumption favoring either parent. Schwartz v. Schwartz (1976), Ind.App., 351 N.E.2d 900; Buchanan v. Buchanan (1971), 256 Ind. 119, 267 N.E.2d 155.
In light of his own remarks, the trial judge seems to have reasoned as follows: In the case before him, he determined, after resolving his own concern as to Laura’s competence, that either parent was competent to take care of Keith. However, there remained a question regarding Laura’s mental capacity to discharge her maternal duties. Rather than resolving that question in favor of Bruce’s receiving custody of Keith, the judge gave Laura the “benefit of the doubt” and awarded her custody of the child. Apparently the judge would have given Bruce custody of Keith only if he had found Laura mentally incapable of caring for Keith.
A judge who follows such a process abuses the discretion granted him by statute. To be sure, a judge often faces a difficult choice in determining the custodial situation which would serve the best interests of the child. Where one parent is unfit or unable to care for the child, the choice is clear. However, when either parent is competent to care for his or her child, the judge must choose the better of two alternatives. In doing so, he is charged statutorily with looking only to the best interests of the child. He may not indulge in any presumption favoring either parent. He may not give either parent “the benefit of the doubt.”
In making a custody determination the court is charged with considering:
“all relevant factors including:
(1) the age and sex of the child;
(2) the wishes of the child’s parent or parents;
(3) the wishes of the child;
(4) the interaction and interrelationship of the child with his parent or parents, his siblings, and any other person who may significantly affect the child’s best interests;
(5) the child’s adjustment to his home, school and community; and
*1364(6) the mental and physical health of all individuals involved.”
IC 1971, 31-1 — 11.5-21(a) (Burns Code Ed., Supp.1977). At the hearings on custody, each parent is responsible for demonstrating his or her fitness, and for introducing evidence that might reflect the other parent’s incapacity to serve the child’s best interests. The trial court then exercises its discretion to award custody of the child consistent with the child's best interests.
Normally this Court will not reverse a custody determination unless a manifest abuse of discretion is shown. Schwartz v. Schwartz, supra, 351 N.E.2d 900; Buchanan v. Buchanan, supra, 256 Ind. 119, 267 N.E.2d 155. Before a decision will be held to constitute an abuse of discretion, it must be “ ‘clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court’.” Schwartz, supra, 351 N.E.2d at 901; Shaw v. Shaw (1973), 159 Ind.App. 33, 304 N.E.2d 536, 539.
After a careful examination of the record, it is apparent to this Court that the trial judge could have rendered his custody decision only because he had acted under the presumption that the mother is the more fit and proper custodial parent. The trial judge abused his discretion by indulging in a statutorily-prohibited presumption and by rendering a custody decision that does not appear to be in the best interests of the child.
The evidence in the present case establishes that Keith was being competently cared for by Bruce and Bruce’s parents. The trial judge himself noted in his closing remarks:
“There isn’t any concern about his paternal grandmother, Mrs. Myers, who has been doing an excellent job, who according to the testimony was interviewed by the Public Welfare and has done a splendid job of raising Mr. Myers and his two brothers, establishing a reputation in the community for caring for male offspring.”
Laura raised not a single question regarding Bruce’s capability as a father to Keith. All the evidence shows that Keith had been in a happy, stable home environment for three years while in Bruce’s custody.
On the other hand, Laura had a history of mental problems. She had attempted suicide three times, twice after the birth of Keith. She had been hospitalized for the treatment of her mental breakdowns. Two psychiatrists testified at the hearing. Both indicated that she was no longer on medication and was able to function in her present situation. One psychiatrist, who had treated Laura, could not predict whether a psychotic episode would be triggered by future stresses, such as those related to full-time care of a child. The other psychiatrist, who testified to Laura’s normalcy, had consulted with her only on three recent occasions and knew nothing about her attempted suicides.
The record contains uncontradicted evidence that Laura is an excellent housekeeper and cook. However, the evidence that she is a good mother is not as unequivocal. Further, at the time of the hearing, Laura had worked at a succession of at least five jobs since her separation from Bruce.2 She indicated that, if she received custody of Keith, her mother, Mrs. Nemeth, would babysit Keith during working hours. However, Mrs. Nemeth testified that she had never taken care of Keith (except for an hour here or there) and Laura presented no testimony to demonstrate the suitability of such an arrangement.
The record fails to provide support for the trial judge's decision to award custody of Keith to Laura, in the absence of a presumption in her favor.
We find that the trial judge abused his discretion in deciding to award custody of Keith to Laura. The judgment of the trial court is reversed and this cause is remanded with instructions for the court to conduct a hearing on the matter of the custody of Keith, said hearing and the court’s decision to comply with tne provisions of IC 1971, 31-1-11.5-21.
*1365GARRARD, P. J., concurs.
HOFFMAN, J., dissents with opinion.
. In her brief, Laura Myers fails to address any of the issues raised by Bruce Myers on appeal.
. On the other hand, Bruce has steady employment as a mechanical engineer at Bendix Corp.

=== CASE 9738787 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:40.35329+00 ===

HOFFMAN, Judge,
dissenting.
I dissent.
The well-settled rule on appeal, apparently ignored by the majority, is that this Court will consider only that evidence most favorable to the judgment, together with all reasonable and logical inferences which may be drawn therefrom. Cook v. Rosebank Development Corp. (1978), Ind.App., 376 N.E.2d 1196, at 1199; Utica Mut. Ins. Co. v. Ceding (1977), Ind.App., 370 N.E.2d 373, at 376.
Further, that evidence will be viewed with due regard for the opportunity of the trial court to observe the demeanor of witnesses and to form judgments of their credibility. Schwartz v. Schwartz (1976), Ind. App., 351 N.E.2d 900, at 901; Cornwell v. Cornwell (1940), 108 Ind.App. 350, at 354, 29 N.E.2d 317, at 318.
This Court may neither weigh the evidence nor substitute its judgment for that of the trier of fact, In Re Marriage of Patus (1978), Ind.App., 372 N.E.2d 493, at 495, even though we might have reached a different conclusion had we been the triers of fact. J. I. Case Co. v. Sandefur (1964), 245 Ind. 213, at 223, 197 N.E.2d 519, at 523.
These principles of review apply to all cases, and those cases involving questions of child custody are no exceptions. See, e. g. Shaw v. Shaw (1973), 159 Ind.App. 33, 304 N.E.2d 536 (stating presumption in favor of appellee).
The evidence most favorable to Laura, as appellee, is as follows:
Two psychiatrists testified that, although Laura had previously experienced some problems requiring psychiatric treatment, she was now capable of caring for her son, Keith. Further, the difficulties which she had experienced occurred a number of years ago, and she had required no treatment for about two and a half years prior to trial.
Laura testified that she was employed on a full-time basis and was financially able to maintain her own household without outside assistance. During her working hours, Keith would be cared for by her mother. Laura further stated that she was living in a two-bedroom apartment where Keith would have his own bedroom; whereas, if Bruce were to have custody, Keith would be required to stay in his paternal grandparents’ bedroom.
Two witnesses testified to Laura’s fitness as a parent. One observed that Laura took great pride in the care of Keith and that the boy was well-behaved when in the company of his mother. The other noted that Laura and Keith got along very well and that Keith was always neat and clean. Both concluded that Laura was a fit and proper person to have permanent custody of her son.
The testimony of other witnesses indicated that Bruce had exhibited signs of a bad temperament on a number of occasions, including one incident when he struck Laura during her pregnancy and two others when he damaged household fixtures by striking them with his fist.
In view of this evidence I cannot agree that the decision below was “ ‘clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court,’ ” thus requiring a reversal of the judgment. See: Schwartz v. Schwartz, supra; Shaw v. Shaw, supra; Buchanan v. Buchanan (1971), 256 Ind. 119, 267 N.E.2d 155. Where, as here, the record contains ample evidence to support the trial court’s award of custody, no abuse of discretion will be found. Schwartz, supra, 351 N.E.2d at 901—902.
That the trial judge may have made casual, off-the-record remarks which might be construed as an indication that he considered an improper presumption regarding custody is of absolutely no moment in this case. The conversations reported by attorney Sopko’s affidavit do little more than relate the observations made by Judge Ho-sinski in the course of his many years of hearing cases such as these. In my view, the use of those off-hand, off-the-record observations to impeach the judgment falls *1366short of being a necessary exercise in advocacy. More importantly, the fact that the judgment is sustainable as a matter of law renders any discussion of such matters irrelevant.
The decision reached today by the majority can only encourage a multitude of appeals based on events occurring outside the courtroom, thereby discouraging open communication between the bench and bar. The wisdom of avoiding such a result is self-evident.
I would therefore affirm the judgment below.

=== CASE 2217646 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:31.830072+00 ===

119 N.W.2d 900 (1963)
Jack ESTELLE and Georgis M. Estelle, Appellees,
v.
IOWA STATE HIGHWAY COMMISSION, Appellant.
No. 50841.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
February 12, 1963.
Rehearing Denied April 8, 1963.
*902 Evan Hultman, Atty. Gen. of Iowa, Des Moines, C. J. Lyman, Sp. Asst. Atty. Gen., Ames, Henry M. Keyes, State Counsel, Iowa State Highway Commission, Ames, William L. Meardon, Iowa City, for appellant.
D. C. Nolan and G. A. Schlaegel, Iowa City, for appellees.
PETERSON, Justice.
This case involves the condemnation of a leasehold. In 1951 plaintiffs rented a tract of land, 100 by 150 feet, at or near the southwest corner of Highways No. 218 and No. 1 in Iowa City. The land was rough and had about 15 trees upon it, but with no buildings. Plaintiffs at first built a small shed which they used for some time as a fruit and vegetable stand. In 1956 they converted the building into a drive-in root beer stand. They first rented under oral lease from year to year, and in 1957 they entered into a written lease with the owners, Mr. and Mrs. Goodwin, for a 10-year term, which ran from June 12, 1957 to June 12, 1967. Upon the making of this lease they started a restaurant business and extended their building to where its size became approximately 42 by 48 feet. They cleared and leveled the land, poured a concrete floor for the building, and made a parking place of rock and gravel as to the remainder of the lot.
In 1958 the Highway Commission commenced negotiations for acquiring plaintiffs' leasehold. Same were not consummated, and on July 29, 1960 the leasehold was condemned. The Sheriff's Jury awarded plaintiffs $11,000. From this award plaintiffs appealed. Upon trial of the appeal the District Court jury awarded plaintiffs $20,500. The Highway Commission appealed.
Appellant assigns 14 alleged errors. Many are inconsequential. Some are not prejudicial to defendant. We can summarize those meriting our attention as follows:
1. The Trial Court erred in failing to instruct the jury as to the proper measure of damages.
2. Error was committed in ruling that personal property (the equipment in the restaurant) even if it can be adapted to other business, or to personal use, could be considered in fixing the value of the leasehold.
3. The court erred in admitting the evidence of some witnesses that they took into consideration the matter of a renewal of the lease in testifying as to value of leasehold, and in rejecting defendant's requested Instruction 3 as to such question.
4. It was error for the court to admit any evidence that plaintiffs had a compensable interest in the building, in that the tenant had only a restricted right of removal as to the building.
5. The court erred in not submitting appellant's requested instruction that the jury should not give attention to costs, interest and attorneys fees.
6. The verdict was excessive.
I. Plaintiffs started their business in the manner as heretofore stated. They expended substantial sums in developing the ground occupied by the restaurant, and in *903 building and equipping the restaurant property.
The 58th G.A. in 1959 amended Section 472.14, Code of Iowa, I.C.A., which pertains to the appraisement and report of commissioners, by adding to said section the following sentence as to personal property:
"In assessing the damages the owner or tenant will sustain, the commissioners shall consider and make allowance for personal property which is damaged or destroyed or reduced in value."
The written lease between Mr. and Mrs. Goodwin and plaintiffs provided that they should pay $50. per month rental but that lessors were under no obligation to furnish anything except the land. From 1951 until 1958 plaintiffs improved the land by making the following improvements:
1. Removed the trees and excavated and leveled the balance of the lot.
2. Purchased and spread upon the part of the lot not used for the restaurant building many tons of rock in order to make it usable for parking of cars.
3. Oiled the rock in order to make and keep it in condition for driving purposes.
4. Purchased all lumber and other material necessary for the building of a proper restaurant building.
5. Connected all utilities such as electricity, water and sewer to the building not only for general usage but also for their toasters, electric sign, and connection with the well they drilled.
6. Drilled a 55-foot well on the premises.
7. Installed a complete concrete floor for the restaurant, and for walks adjoining the building.
8. Installed a gas furnace for the heating of the building.
9. Purchased and installed complete kitchen equipment and all the necessary fixtures, dishes and other utensils for the proper maintenance of a modern restaurant.
II. The primary question in this case pertains to measure of damages. It was necessary that this be carefully outlined in the trial court's instructions, and that the trial court guard the record carefully to keep out immaterial and extraneous matters. It is our opinion the trial court meticulously and carefully accomplished this purpose.
The substance of instructions 6 and 10 as to the measure of damages are as follows:
"* * * The measure of damages is the fair and reasonable market value of the unexpired term of the lease with the building, fixtures and other personal property located thereon, on July 29, 1960, immediately before the appropriation by defendant, less the rental reserved for the remainder of the lease and less the reasonable value of any personal property removed by plaintiffs after the condemnation.
"* * * You may consider all the varied elements of value as described by the evidence, in regard to the location of the premises, the surroundings thereof, its accessibility, the use to which same has been put, its improvement, nature, character, type and general construction of the building and fixtures located thereon, the depreciation as to said building, fixtures and personal property, if any, since their construction or purchase * * * and any other material facts disclosed by the evidence. * * *."
"Plaintiffs are not entitled to recover the cost of any specific item or the sum total of various specific items as such, and the matters above suggested and other facts and circumstances as shown in the evidence should *904 be considered by you only in so far as they may bear upon the fair and reasonable value of plaintiffs' property at the time of its condemnation on July 29, 1960."
Four witnesses testified on behalf of plaintiff as to the value of the property on the date of condemnation. Mr. Estelle testified as to such damages, after qualifying himself as to complete knowledge of all facts. He said plaintiffs' damages were in the amount of $35,000.
The witness, Mr. Homer Berven, testified he lived in Iowa City and that he had been a licensed real estate broker in the State of Iowa since 1946. He had familiarized himself with property in Iowa City and vicinity, including leaseholds and real estate generally. He had made a special study of appraisal and had used what are known as the Stevens method and the Wenslick method, both of which are recognized by appraisal authorities. He had engaged in considerable FHA appraisal work and had appeared on occasions as a witness in condemnation cases. He testified that taking the three elements into consideration of (1) the unexpired term of the lease of six years, ten months, and seventeen days, less reserve rents, and (2) taking into consideration the building, duly depreciated and (3) depreciated value of restaurant equipment, after deducting the salvage secured from the auction sale of the equipment, he arrived at a value of $28,000.
Mr. Walter C. Chudwick testified he was a resident of Iowa City. He holds a real estate brokers license issued by the State of Iowa in 1935. He sells real estate of all kinds in Iowa City and vicinity; he has been an appraiser for the Home Owners Loan Corporation; he has been a GI appraiser and has represented various insurance companies with reference to appraisal of property in the last few years. He testified he made a careful examination of the plaintiffs' property at or about the time it was being condemned and that he valued same at said time at $29,200.
Mr. J. F. Fairbank testified he is a resident of Iowa City and has lived in the city for 41 years. He was in the restaurant business in said city for 30 years but retired from that business three years ago and now holds a real estate broker's license. He was well acquainted with plaintiffs' restaurant on Highway No. 1 immediately west of Highway 218 and of the restaurant equipment. His appraisal as to the value of the property on the date of the condemnation was $29,412. He described the building and the fixtures in detail.
Three witnesses testified on behalf of defendant. Mr. James W. Pearson stated he was a realtor and real estate appraiser in Iowa City and had been for the past 20 years. He has appraised property for the Iowa State Highway Commission, various insurance companies, FHA and local banks. He testified he was familiar with plaintiffs' place of business and restaurant and in his opinion the leasehold, with building and restaurant equipment less depreciation were of the value on the date of condemnation of $5200.
Mr. Rolland Smith testified he was in the real estate business in Iowa City and had been since 1946. He took a special course in real estate appraisals at the Stevens Appraisal School. He has appraised for Veterans Administration, insurance companies, banks and Iowa State Highway Commission. He owned a restaurant in Iowa City for 26 years and is familiar with restaurant equipment. He appraised plaintiffs' leasehold, with building and restaurant equipment, properly depreciated, and after deducting the salvage secured at the auction sale, at a value of $5454.75.
Mr. Samuel D. Whiting testified he is in the real estate and insurance business in Iowa City and has been for nearly 30 years. He holds a real estate broker's license and has made appraisals for the Highway Commission and for banks in the Iowa City area. He testified he was familiar with plaintiffs' cafe and with the building and *905 restaurant equipment. He testified the valuation of the leasehold, building and equipment depreciated, and after deducting the net proceeds of the auction sale, was $5200.
The question of the value of leaseholds and the various elements involved therein varies as to the facts of each case. This court properly stated in Des Moines Wet Wash Laundry v. City of Des Moines, 197 Iowa 1082, 198 N.W. 486, 34 A.L.R. 1517: "It is impossible to specify all of the elements that enter into such a problem. In fact all of them cannot be anticipated, and many of them are developed in the course of the litigation consequent upon the exercise of the right of eminent domain. They will vary with the character of the property affected and the uses to which the property is applied."
The case of Des Moines Wet Wash Laundry v. City of Des Moines, supra, involved the condemnation by the City of Des Moines of a laundry plant. Appellant City contended the measure of damages was the fair rental value of the leased premises for the unexpired term of the lease. The mere rental value of the premises would allow nothing under appellant's theory for the building and improvements on the premises, the going value of a profitable business, and many other elements which might reasonably go into the value of the unexpired term of the lease by reason of the unique use to which the premises are being put.
In said case our Court outlined clearly and sharply the measure of damages, and it is apparently substantially the rule adopted and used by the trial court in the case at bar. This court approved statements made to the jury in the trial court in the Wet Wash Laundry case as follows: "You may consider all the varied elements of value as disclosed by the evidence in the case in regard to the location of said premises; the surroundings thereof; its accessibility; nearness to the business center; the use to which the same has been put; the purpose for which the buildings and improvements located thereon were used; the general construction of such buildings; the depreciation to such buildings, if any, since they were constructed, by reason of their use for the purposes for which they were constructed and used; the manner of using the same in connection with the business plaintiff was conducting with the equipment in said building."
We have considered the question of value of personal property since the adoption of the amendment to Section 472.14 in the case of Gaar v. Iowa State Highway Commission, 252 Iowa 1374, 110 N.W.2d 558. In that case the owner of the leasehold had removed all personal property from the hotel prior to the condemnation. We held there was, therefore, no personal property in the Highway route to be condemned. The value of a statement in the case as far as the present case is concerned appears in the following quotation: "* * * They could sell; move the building on to other real estate; remove and store or sell the furnishings * * * [t]hey could also maintain their status quo, and, if and when the appellee (Highway Commission) took the properties, recovered just compensation for the taking thereof, together with damages representing the loss in value to the personal property."
It is a well established rule that witnesses cannot testify as to the cost of buildings and equipment as a part of the damage to the leasehold, even if the buildings and equipment are completely destroyed or disposed of. After a witness has been properly qualified he can testify as to the value of the leasehold at the time of condemnation. In arriving at the proper value, the witness may, in arriving at his answer, consider cost of construction, less depreciation, and any other pertinent or material factors. This is not for a jury to speculate upon. It is confined to the testimony of qualified witnesses.
In the instant case the trial court properly gave instructions, and ruled upon admission *906 of evidence on such basis. For example, appellees' counsel inquired of Mr. Estelle as to cost of the building and of personal property. Proper objection was sustained.
III. While the primary and predominant question in this case is the measure of damages as between plaintiffs and defendant, several auxiliary contentions are made by appellant which should receive our attention.
1. Appellant contends the trial court erred in its ruling on adjudication of law points in holding that personal property which can be adapted to other business or to personal use could be considered in fixing the value of the leasehold, when completely taken.
The condemnation proceeding put plaintiffs out of business. As shown in the testimony of Mr. Estelle, one of the plaintiffs, he tried to find another location to which he could move his business. He testified:
"Q. Well now, did you have any place to move it to? (the restaurant equipment).
"A. No. I didn't have no place to put it.
"Q. Was there any location of similar character you could have moved into at that time?
"A. No. First time the Highway talked to me, 1958, I started hunting. I had several real estate people hunting places for me; they couldn't locate any I could get right away. * * *
"Q. State whether or not you attempted to find a comparable location where you could replace the business in this community?
"A. Yes. I tried for several months to find a place and I had two real estate companies hunting places but they couldn't locate me anything that I could build and get started again quick enough before I had to get out of this place. * * *"
Mr. Estelle testified on re-re-direct examination:
"I talked * * * about moving the present building over farther but Mr. Goodwin said no. This was after the Highway Commission had been there and done some surveying. Mr. Goodwin was afraid to either sell or lease any ground along there for fear that if the Highway took it he would be in a lawsuit with people he had sold or rented to so we just dropped it."
In view of the fact that it was impossible for plaintiffs to secure another location comparable to the one defendant condemned and in view of their inability to move their restaurant building and their restaurant equipment to a location near the one defendant condemned, the adaptability of the personal property for other business or for personal use was, in fact, immaterial as long as it was all taken or sold on a forced sale. The record disclosed there was no personal use of material value. There was nothing for them to do except salvage what they could from the restaurant equipment through a public auction sale, and let defendant take possession of the property and raze the building. This is, in fact, what happened.
Plaintiffs' situation was somewhat the same as described in the Des Moines Wet Wash Laundry case by the Court as follows:
"The condemnation and removal of the leased premises by the city terminated plaintiff's business and destroyed its plumbing and steam connections, installed and equipped at its own expense * * *."
2. Appellant contends the trial court erred in admitting evidence that plaintiffs could find no comparable location on which to continue their business after condemnation. We have to some extent *907 considered the above assignment of error in Division III, sub-section 1. This has some elements of similarity to the case of Redfield v. Iowa State Highway Commission, 251 Iowa 332, 99 N.W.2d 413, 85 A.L.R.2d 96. It is true said case pertained particularly to the sale price of comparable properties located in the vicinity of the property condemned. Iowa had previously followed what was referred to as the Pennsylvania rule as distinguished from the Massachusetts rule. In the case we said:
"* * * After considering the advantages and disadvantages of each rule, being aided by well considered opinions of learned courts on both sides of the question, we feel it is advisable now to join those who adhere to the Massachusetts rule (permitting evidence of value of comparable property) and we now adopt that rule."
In the case at bar the only comparability which was considered by any of the witnesses was the testimony of Mr. Berven, witness for plaintiffs, where he made a comparison of rentals. He testified in considering the lease:
"I considered that the building could be used only for restaurant purposes. I considered comparable rentals, but I could only find one and that was the Dog-and-Suds out on Highway 6. It is a much smaller building but I am now speaking of land only. * * * I was speaking about the rental of the land alone, independent of the building. I took that into consideration in arriving at the fair rental value of the land rented by Mr. Estelle."
"Q. And what did you find that to be, the rental value of that land where the Dog-and-Suds is located? * * *
"A. $100 a month."
3. Appellant vigorously contends the Court erred in rejecting its requested instruction No. 3 which pertains, as appellant alleges, to the testimony of some witnesses that they took into consideration in their appraisal as to the damages, the matter of renewal of lease, when in fact the lease gave plaintiffs no right of renewal.
An examination of the record does not, sustain appellant's contention as to this matter. Mr. Homer Bervin testified as follows:
"I took into consideration the fact that he (Mr. Estelle) might be able to renew the lease but did not assess any value to it because the lease had not been renewed * * * I gave no value to a possible renewal by Mr. Estelle."
Mr. J. F. Fairbank, one of plaintiffs' witnesses, testified: "In arriving at my value of the restaurant business, the lease rights and so forth, I took into consideration the value of his lease, the access to the building itself, and the restaurant equipment, and that is all." (Emphasis ours.)
Mr. Walter C. Chudwick, one of plaintiffs' witnesses, did testify about the renewal as follows:
"I considered that there would probably be a renewal in arriving at the value and consideration of this factor has an effect on the value I gave."
However, this matter was considered by the trial court when defendant's counsel moved that the testimony of Mr. Chudwick be stricken, for among other reasons, that the lease "would be renewed, and took said renewal into consideration in arriving at his value * * *" The court said: "Overruled. You were the one that brought out the evidence there with reference to the hotel agreement, they didn't. Now so far as striking all of this witness's testimony, that is overruled for the reason that the jury can determine what weight or credit they want to give this testimony. That isn't up to me to do that."
Plaintiff, Mr. Estelle, as owner of the property with his wife, did not offer any testimony including renewal of the lease.
*908 4. Appellant contends it was error for the court to admit any evidence that plaintiffs had a compensable interest in the building. The Highway Commission contends the lease did not confer on the tenant any right of removal; the lessor controlled the removal of the building and it should not be considered a part of the leasehold which was condemned.
Paragraph 9 of the lease provided as follows:
"(9) The Lessees agree and undertake that at the expiration of this lease, or any renewal thereof, they will, if the Lessors so desire, restore the property to the same condition it was in at the time of the making of this lease, and deliver the property to the Lessors in substantially the same condition it was in at the time the Lessees received the same, except that Lessees shall not be required to replace any trees that may be removed in order to install the restaurant and parking area."
It will be noted that the primary statement in the lease with reference to the building is as follows:
"The Lessees agree and undertake at the expiration of this lease, or any renewal thereof, they will, * * * restore the property to the same condition it was in at the time of the making of this lease * * *".
This placed upon Lessees the obligation of removing the building.
It is true that the clause appears in the lease that Lessees should remove "if the Lessors so desire." Appellees attempted without success to have both Mr. Goodwin and Mr. Estelle testify as to an oral agreement between them as to the non-necessity on the part of plaintiffs for removal of the building. The court sustained all objections to such testimony on the ground that it was testimony varying a written lease. It is not necessary that we pass upon this legal question.
Our position is that unless Mr. Goodwin, the landlord, affirmatively notified plaintiffs prior to the time the lease expired, or in this case it would be prior to the time defendant took possession of the property, that said lessor desired possession of the building, it remained the property of plaintiffs and was part of the condemned leasehold.
No such notice was given, either verbal or written. The Highway Commission removed and destroyed the building erected by plaintiffs on land owned by Mr. and Mrs. Goodwin. The record does not disclose that the building was considered when the fee was condemned or settled for. On the basis of the record we have the right to assume that all personal property, including the building, were included in the condemnation and in the appraisals of the leasehold by the witnesses.
5. Appellants contend it was error on the part of the court not to give requested instruction No. 1 in which appellant contends the court should instruct the jury they were not to consider or take into account the matter of court costs, interest, or attorneys fees for plaintiffs' attorneys.
It was not error for the court to fail to give such instruction. The statute is clear in condemnation cases as to how the court costs and interest, and attorney fees for plaintiffs' attorneys shall be paid. See sections 472.23, 472.24 and 472.33, Code of Iowa 1960, I.C.A.
6. The final assignment of error by appellant is that the verdict of the jury was excessive and contrary to law.
On this question each condemnation case is based upon the peculiar facts of the particular case under consideration. The citation of other cases as to the amount of damages allowed in leasehold cases would be of no value.
In the case at bar Mr. Goodwin, the landlord, analyzed the situation of the development *909 of plaintiffs' leasehold on this property in well expressed language as follows:
"At the time the property was leased to Mr. Estelle, it had no weather proof surfacing, rock, or anything like that, but was a bare piece of ground with trees and it was just ordinary pasture land. Mr. Estelle made the improvements on the ground in reference to removing the trees and leveling it off as that was the understanding we had. When Mr. Estelle took the property over, the main utilities, water, sewer, gas, and light, were on the curbing along Highway No. 1 and Mr. Estelle did all the work in attaching the utilities to the restaurant. I did not make any improvements upon the ground myself. There were approximately 15 trees of sizes varying from six inches up to twelve inches in diameter. Part of the ground was rather sloping and on about half of the ground we had dumped some dirt from a previous building that we had erected on the corner for a service station. It took quite a bit of dirt to level it off so that it would be acceptable for parking, and I would imagine there was probably 20 hours of bulldozing work. * * *
"Mr. Estelle put in a deep well at his own expense with a pressure pump on it. Since the restaurant business has been established by Mr. Estelle, I have been living right south of it and have observed that his business gradually increased and developed from year to year and observed that there was more traffic and more people coming to his premises."
In view of all the facts shown in this case, the verdict was not excessive.
Considering the complete record, we do not find reversible error.
The case is affirmed.
Affirmed.
All Justices concur.

=== CASE 9738788 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:42.128856+00 ===

*1185Snell, J.
— Defendant, Ronald Maurice Stump, was indicted by the grand jury of Polk County for “Murder in the First Degree as defined in sections 690.1 and 690.2 of the 1958 Code of Iowa * * The indictment charged that defendant “did with malice aforethought, premeditation, deliberation and intent to kill, murder Michael Daly in Polk County, Iowa.” Defendant was represented by able, experienced and resourceful counsel of his own choice. The indictment was followed by defendant’s motions to require a physical examination of a State witness; motion to set aside and quash indictment; demurrer to indictment; application for bill of particulars; motion to require the State to plead responsively to defendant’s motions; petition for production of books and papers; and a plea of not guilty. Prior to trial defendant, through counsel, gave notice of reliance on the defense that he was at some other place at the time of the alleged commission of the offense; a defense commonly known as an alibi.
Trial to a jury resulted in a verdict of guilty of murder in the second degree. The usual motions to direct a verdict, in arrest of judgment and for new trial were made and overruled. From judgment of imprisonment pursuant to Code section 690.3 defendant has appealed.
I. Pursuant to section 793.18, Code of Iowa, we have examined the record without regard to technical errors or defects which do not affect the substantial rights of the parties in order that there may be such judgment on the record as the law demands. It is our duty to determine whether or not defendant has had a fair trial; review questions of law and procedure; determine whether proper evidence has been admitted and improper evidence rejected, and whether there is evidence to support issuable questions of fact determined by the jury. It is not for us to pass upon or decide issuable questions of fact properly submitted to the jury. Under our Constitution and statutes that is what juries are for.
Detailed recitation of voluminous testimony admitted for consideration by the jury but not germane to our problems is not necessary.
*1186We have examined the entire record, replete with objections made and exceptions taken, but will within reasonable limitations confine our discussion to the matters argued and claimed to be error.
Defendant was 22 years old at the time of trial. He had graduated from college with honors. In June 1961 he was employed in Des Moines. While in college in 1959 and 1960 he met, dated and became engaged to marry Leanna Skultety. As time passed Miss Skultety concluded that they were incompatible in some things, particularly in religion. Her ardor cooled and she broke the engagement. Defendant was not easily discouraged and persisted in his efforts to gain the young lady’s favor. He had little success.
In January 1961 Miss Skultety met and began dating regularly Michael Daly. They became engaged to marry in February 1961. Faced with such upsetting developments defendant obtained and showed to Miss Skultety a derogatory report on Michael Daly. Defendant’s dissuasive efforts did not prevail.
On the evening of June 9, 1961, Daly and Miss Skultety were together in her car. After driving around they stopped in front of the home of Daly’s parents. Miss Skultety testified that another car had been following them. A man identified by Miss Skultety as defendant got out of the other car. Daly and Miss Skultety got out of her car. She testified that she heard a noise, turned and saw defendant shoot Daly; that Daly fell toward the back of the car; that defendant walked■ closer, stood over him and fired. She screamed, heard footsteps, heard and saw the other car go. She ran into the house and called Michael Daly’s father. An ambulance and the police were called and the alarm for the apprehension of defendant was sounded. Daly died in the hospital a few hours later as a result of a gunshot wound in his head. The murder weapon was never produced.
Miss Skultety was the only eyewitness to the shooting. Her identification of defendant as the assailant was positive and unequivocal.
Other witnesses testified as to defendant’s presence in the neighborhood, hearing shots sounding like firecrackers, and *1187seeing the departing car. There was disagreement among the witnesses as to the description of the departing car. There was ample evidence identifying defendant as the assailant to support a jury verdict. The extensive testimony, derogatory in nature, relative to the prior conduct of the three principals in this tragic love triangle need not be repeated here.
Defendant was taken into custody in Ottumwa on the morning of June 10. He was at the home of a relative with whom he had spent at least the latter part of the night.
Defendant testified that between 7:30 and 8 p.m. on June 9 he started for Ottumwa. This was prior to the shooting. He said he arrived in Ottumwa between 10 and 10:30. Defendant called a number of witnesses who testified as to his activities and their own observations and time and distance computations to show that defendant could not have been present at the time and place of the shooting.
II. Defendant called as a witness in his behalf John Moody, at the time of trial a deputy sheriff, but at the time of the shooting a life insurance agent. The witness testified that on June 9, 1961, he had dinner with Michael Daly and another man and at that time took from Daly an application for $10,000 life insurance naming Daly’s father as beneficiary. The premium was not paid, the transaction never consummated and the policy never issued. During the conversation “there was some mention” of Leanna Skultety.
At this point counsel for the State objected to the testimony and on motion the Court struck the testimony as immaterial.
Later defendant made an offer of proof, in the absence of the jury, that in the conversation between Daly and witness Moody, Daly said “he had Leanna Skultety pregnant, that she was then pregnant three months and that he guessed he was going to have to marry her.” The offer of the testimony was refused. The rulings were proper.
Testimony that at dinner time Daly signed an application but did not pay for life insurance payable to his father was wholly immaterial as a defense to the charge that later that evening he was shot by defendant.
Statements by Daly that he had Leanna Skultety *1188pregnant were properly rejected. They had no probative value whatsoever except possibly to prove motive in defendant as a rejected suitor. That would not help the defense. The fact that Leanna Skultety was pregnant by Daly was not in issue and was no secret. She had so testified in direct examination as a State’s witness.
Defendant’s argument that the evidence about an unconsummated application for insurance was material in that it would permit the jury to draw the inference that the victim’s father might have a motive for killing his own son is not persuasive. Evidence tending to incriminate another must be confined to substantive facts and create more than a mere suspicion that such other person committed the offense. State v. Rosenberg, 238 Iowa 621, 625, 27 N.W.2d 904. If the credibility of Leanna Skultety was to be weakened by evidence of her pregnancy that purpose had been accomplished by her own admission long before defendant’s offer of testimony. The argument does not merit further discussion.
Defendant argues that objections to the testimony and offer of proof were not sufficiently complete or timely.
State v. Bales, 251 Iowa 677, 681, 102 N.W.2d 162, 165, quotes with approval from 22 C. J. S. The statement quoted now appears with only slight change in 22A C. J. S., Criminal Law, section 740, as follows:
“The person injured by the crime, whether alive or dead, is in no sense a party to the prosecution, and therefore, as a general rule, his statements and declarations are not evidence either for or against accused, unless they are relevant on the question of accused’s guilt and were made in his presence, or unless they are admissible as part of the res gestae * * * or perhaps as threats * * *. Such testimony is generally inadmissible as hearsay.”
State v. Bales on page 682 Iowa Reports also says:
“The rule is well established in this jurisdiction that, although an insufficient objection is interposed, if the court sustains the same and there was in fact a good and sufficient objection to the reception of the evidence, there is no reversible error. In re Will of Smith, 245 Iowa 38, 46, 60 N.W.2d 866, *1189and cases cited therein. In re Will of Crissick, 174 Iowa 397, 416, 156 N.W. 415, 422, often referred to as ably stating the rule, it was said: ‘If matter is, in fact, objectionable * * * it does not matter that objection was not more specific, or that none was interposed. * * * But, where the court sustains an objection, and there are, in fact, good grounds for so doing, there will be no reversal because good reasons or full reasons were not presented below.’ ”
Defendant argues that a litigant may not wait for answers which are responsive to questions asked without objection, and then, if the answer is unsatisfactory, have it stricken from the record. Assuming, arguendo, that is the law it does not follow that a trial court must sit idly by and permit the incumbering of the record with immaterial and hearsay evidence or that there is reversible error when such matter is stricken.
The contentious reaction of defendant’s counsel to adverse ratings was followed, outside the presence of the jury, by an acrimonious colloquy; a rhubarb. It illustrated what was obvious and inevitable. The Court and counsel did not see eye to eye on the admissibility of testimony. The fact that the trial court, in camera, expressed a low regard for the probative value of some testimony and that counsel reacted against restraint is no ground for reversal.
III. Defendant called as a witness Charles E. Hosier. The witness had been called to the hospital because of an accident to his brother. In the waiting room he saw a Mrs. McManigal, her daughter Constance, Leanna Skultety, Mrs. Skultety and another lady who might have been Mrs. Daly, He saw Leanna Skultety talking to Mrs. McManigal but did not hear anything said at that time. He then repeated statements allegedly made to him by Mrs. McManigal. Leanna Skultety was not in the conversation. She was seated some distance away. There is no claim that she Avas being quoted. There is nothing but a possibility that she even heard what was said.
Mr. Hosier, referring to Mrs, McManigal, testified:
“Q. Now, will you repeat the conversation that you heard, at that time? A. She said, ‘Isn’t this terrible that them being, brothers,’ then she went on to tell me that they were, explained *1190how nice boys they were but they had been drinking, and she said, ‘It is going to be awfully hard on the family.’
“Q. And, is that about all that you can remember? A. Yes, sir, outside of her explanation about their going to school and being such good boys.”
The testimony was objected to and later stricken. There was no error.
Mrs. MeManigal was not called as a witness at the trial. There is no claim that she was quoting anyone and her comments under the circumstances were neither a part of the res gestae nor connected with anything shown to be part of the res gestae. She was merely expressing her own reaction to a tragedy. Mr. Hosier’s testimony as to what Mrs. MeManigal may have said was irrelevant to the issues on trial, hearsay, not within any exception to the hearsay rule and clearly within the trial court’s discretionary power of exclusion.
IV. Defendant urges error in the admission over objections of the testimony of police officers concerning alleged conversations with defendant while under arrest and in custody and in failing to gi*ant a mistrial after admitting such testimony.
Allen Simmons, a Des Moines police officer assigned to the Detective Bureau, went to Ottumwa with two other officers on June 10, 1961, to take defendant into custody. The officer testified as to a conversation with defendant while returning to Des Moines and as to his own investigations. The officer did not relate any incriminating admissions by defendant. He did quote defendant as saying “ ‘I did not shoot at her’ ” referring to Leanna Skultety. "Witness was then asked, “Did you have any other conversation with him that you can recall?” He answered, “In response to his statement that, after that, that he did not wish to discuss the matter any further until he talked to an attorney, I told him that was his legal right, that he didn’t have to answer any questions.”
There is no claim by the State that police officers ever gave defendant any formal notice of his rights under the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of Iowa.
Upon defendant’s arrest his father, very properly, hur*1191ried to his aid. Father and son counseled together at the county jail before the conversations with officers to which defendant objects. Defendant’s father testified, “I talked with him. I asked him about things in general and wondered what was up and I advised him not to talk without an attorney, and I also told him to watch these boys or they will try to trick you into some admission.” We thus have a situation where defendant was warned by his father; he refused to discuss the matter “any further until he talked to an attorney”; and was told by the police officer “that he didn’t have to answer any questions.” Defendant was a graduate of the State University, elected to the honorary fraternity Phi Beta Kappa, a member of the university debating team, president of the University Forensics Association and Delta Sigma Kho, honorary speech fraternity. With this background, warning, and evidence of awareness it would be most naive to conclude that defendant was surreptitiously tricked into admissions by the superior intelligence of police officers. Defendant was aware of his rights. His statements are presumed to be voluntary. State v. Kelley, 253 Iowa 1314, 1325, 115 N.W.2d 184, 190.
Gerald Limke, a police officer, testified concerning a conversation with defendant at the city jail on June 11. We quote from the record:
“Q. Can you tell us some of the remarks that the defendant made to you? A. We talked of the shooting of Mr. Daly. I asked him if he felt any remorse about Mr. Daly’s death.
“Q. What answer did he make to that remark ? A. He answered ‘People like Daly either should be dead or belong dead.’ ”
That one accused of crime may refuse to answer questions and that he is entitled to the aid of counsel is so firmly ingrained in our law as to be axiomatic. 5th Amendment, 6th Amendment and 14th Amendment, Constitution of the United States. Article I, sections 9 and 10, Constitution of the State of Iowa. Evidence obtained by illegal search and seizure is not admissible. Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U. S. 643, 81 S. Ct. 1684, 6 L. Ed.2d 1081.
Evidence of statements obtained by force or duress is not admissible but “The sole test in this state as to the admissi*1192bility of inculpatory statements or confessions is; Were the same voluntary or not!” State v. Beltz, 225 Iowa 155, 163, 279 NW. 386, 390. See also State v. Mikesh, 227 Iowa 640, 644, 288 N.W. 606. Defendant does not argue that the statements, if made, were not voluntary.
Error is claimed and based on the assertion that defendant was never advised of his constitutional rights or his right to remain silent. The premise from which defendant argues is unsound factually and legally. Defendant knew of his rights and asserted them. He was told “that he didn’t have to answer any questions.” See Division IY, supra.
In Iowa advice as to constitutional rights is not a prerequisite to admissibility of evidence of inculpatory admissions.
In State v. Beltz, supra, on pages 162 and 163 of Iowa Beports, it is said:
“We have no statute in the State of Iowa requiring police officers to warn persons in custody that all statements made by them will be available to the prosecution in the trial of a case. Ordinarily in the absence of such a statute, there is no duty on the part of law-enforcing officers to so caution prisoners, and statements or confessions made without such cautioning or warning are admissible in evidence.”
In State v. Marcus, 240 Iowa 116, 121, 34 N.W.2d 179, 182, it is said:
“Complaint is made of the overruling of objections to questions propounded police officers concerning statements and admissions of defendant when first called to the police station. The statements appear to have been voluntary. Defendant points out he was not cautioned or warned they might be used against him. This would not make them inadmissible.”
See also State v. Benson, 230 Iowa 1168, 300 N.W. 275, and State v. Cameron, 254 Iowa 505, 512, 117 N.W.2d 816, 820.
V. Defendant vigorously attacks the Court’s instruction on alibi and the Iowa rule under which it was given. It has been admitted that the instruction as given is in, accord with well established Iowa law.
The Court instructed as follows:
“It is the claim of the defendant that at the time of the *1193shooting of Michael Daly referred to herein he was on the highway between Des Moines and Knoxville, Iowa, and consequently that he could not have committed the offense charged herein or either of the included offenses. He seeks to establish this claim by a witness or witnesses who have testified herein and also by his own testimony. This defense is commonly known as an alibi.
“The defendant has the burden of establishing this defense by the greater weight of the evidence bearing upon it, and before you can acquit the defendant by reason of this defense you must find that he has established it by a preponderance or greater weight of the evidence bearing upon it. If he has established by the greater weight of the evidence that he was on the highway between Des Moines and Knoxville, Iowa, at such a distance from Des Moines that he could not have committed the crime charged herein, you should return a verdict of not guilty.
“If the defendant has failed to establish this defense by a greater weight of the evidence you should still consider the evidence which has been introduced in support thereof, and if, after considering the case as made as a whole, including this evidence, you entertain a reasonable doubt as to his having committed the offense charged or either of the included offenses herein, you should return a verdict finding the defendant not guilty.
“You will understand that the burden of proof referred to in this paragraph rests upon the defendant only as to the proof that he was on the highway between Des Moines and Knoxville, Iowa, at the time the shooting occurred and at such a distance from Des Moines that he could not have been the person who did the shooting. By reason of this burden resting upon him, he is not bound or required to prove his innocence as to the whole case, for the burden of proof rests upon the State as to the ease as a whole to prove the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt before a verdict of guilty on any of the charges included herein can be returned against him.”
It has long been recognized in the law that the defense of alibi is one easily manufactured. State v. Blunt, 59 *1194Iowa 468, 13 N.W. 427; State v. Bowland, 72 Iowa 327, 33 N.W. 137; State v. Leete, 187 Iowa 305, 309, 174 N.W. 253; State v. Johnson, 221 Iowa 8, 20, 264 N.W. 596, 267 N.W. 91.
The ease with which an alibi defense can be manufactured would in the absence of proper safeguards enable an unscrupulous defendant to overwhelm the prosecution in almost every case where the defendant was not caught in the commission of the offense. In order to protect society against such easily manufactured surprise testimony our legislature enacted in 1941 what is now section 777.18, Code of Iowa. This statute provides that where a defendant pleads not guilty and relies on an alibi or that he was at some other place at the time of the alleged commission of the offense charged he shall give notice setting forth the names of the witnesses, together with the address and occupation of each, and the substance of what defendant expects to prove by each.
Defendant gave the notice required by the statute. His alibi witnesses were called and testified.
In the trial of a criminal case a defendant is not required to do anything*. Even though he elects to do nothing the prosecution in order to convict must establish defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. This burden on the prosecution never shifts. It remains throughout the trial as a shield for defendant. Even in the absence of the alibi notice required by section 777.18, Code of Iowa, defendant may take the witness stand and testify to all material and relevant matters. He may testify that he was so far away and at such a specified place that he could not have been present at the scene of the crime. Such testimony thus presents the question of credibility for determination by the jury with the burden still resting on the prosecution. If the defendant voluntarily elects to go further and call witnesses to testify in support of his alibi he must then give the notice required by statute. He assumes the offensive. He offers witnesses to testify that he could not possibly have committed the offense because he was too far away. This goes only to the testimony that he was at some specific place. If established it constitutes an absolute defense. To the extent that it may be an absolute defense it is affirmative in nature. Even though *1195not affirmatively established it is still defensive against the prosecution’s burden of establishing defendant's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
This is exactly what the trial court told the jury. It is in strict accord with the law of Iowa.
The issue of alibi is an affirmative defense and when asserted the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence rests upon the defendant. State v. Leete, supra; State v. Worthen, 124 Iowa 408, 413, 100 N.W. 330; State v. Rourick, 245 Iowa 319, 323, 60 N.W.2d 529.
Defendant did not have to prove his innocence. The State had to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. In order to do so the State had to prove that defendant was at the scene of the shooting at about 8:30 p.m. June 9, 1961. When defendant attempted to prove the impossibility of the State’s claim by showing that he was on his way to Ottumwa the burden was on him to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that he was actually on his way to Ottumwa.
Even though defendant did not meet this burden the evidence still inured to his benefit as the jury was instructed to consider it in connection with the whole case.
The Iowa law as outlined in the trial court’s instruction is well established by a long line of decisions from which there has been no deviation. The rule is logical and sound.
Defendant argues with skill and thoroughness that an alibi is not an affirmative defense. He points out the distinction between an alibi and insanity or self-defense. Authorities from many jurisdictions are cited. The rules of criminal procedure are not the same in all jurisdictions. Our rules are, as they should-be, designed for the protection of the innocent, without at the same time making the conviction of the guilty impossible. We are not disposed to deviate from our well established and in our opinion sound rules.
With all due respect for the pronouncements of other courts we adhere- to our own precedents as the sound answer developed from our own legal premises.
Our statutes and rules of evidence and procedure are not sacred. Neither are they immune from attack. It is well that *1196they be reviewed from time to time. It should, however, be kept in mind that a lawsuit whether it be civil or criminal is essentially a search for the truth. Our Rules of Procedure should be vehicles for and not barricades to the truth. Our rules are proper aids to juries in their ultimate responsibility and are neither oppressive nor suppressive.
YI. Defendant argues that the assistant county attorney was guilty of prejudicial misconduct in his closing argument to the jury. Excerpts from the argument appear in the record. What defendant’s counsel said in argument does not appear. In the record before us we find no error in the court’s rulings. Where the argument for the defendant is not before us the argument for the State is presumed to be in response thereto. If responsive it was not error. State v. Latham, 254 Iowa 513, 117 N.W.2d 840. See also State v. Thompson, 254 Iowa 331, 341, 117 N.W.2d 514, 519, 520.
In State v. Case, 247 Iowa 1019, 1029, 1030, 75 N.W.2d 233, 240, it is said:
“We have frequently held that where the arguments for defendant are not preserved it will be presumed, where nothing to the contrary appears, the reply argument was a legitimate response to argument for defendant. [Citations] * * *
“Misconduct of counsel does not require granting a new trial unless it appears to have been so prejudicial as to deprive defendant of a fair trial. [Citations]
“24 C. J. S., Criminal Law, section 1902a, pages 896 to 898, states: ‘A cause will not necessarily be reversed because of alleged misconduct of counsel. On the contrary, appellate courts are strongly inclined against setting aside convictions because of misconduct of counsel. * * * Misconduct of counsel is generally regarded as harmless and not cause for reversal .where it has not resulted in depriving accused of a fair trial, or in a miscarriage of justice * * *.’
“A fair trial does not necessarily mean an absolutely perfect one. * * *
“We have repeatedly pointed out the trial court is in a much better position than we are to judge whether claimed misconduct of counsel is prejudicial. At least considerable dis*1197cretion is allowed the trial court in passing on such a matter and we will not interfere with its determination unless it clearly appears there has been a manifest abuse of such discretion.”
Defendant’s contention is without merit. We do not agree with the statement of defendant’s counsel that “ this court has been a little weak-kneed on these matters in the past.” Counsel’s comment is perhaps inspired by appreciation of weakness in his own position. It is not unusual in the defense of felony cases for counsel to dislike all rules except those that lead inevitably to acquittal of the accused.
VII. Defendant claims error in sustaining section 777.18 (alibi statute) against constitutional attack; in failing to require the State to give defendant information about rebuttal evidence and in permitting certain rebuttal witnesses to testify. Defendant cites no direct authority in support of his position. The Iowa cases decided under the statute appear to assume rather than decide its constitutionality.
No presumption against constitutional validity can be indulged. Every reasonable presumption must be called to support the act. Iowa Hotel Association v. State Board of Regents, 253 Iowa 870, 114 N.W.2d 539, and citations.
The State cites Underhill’s Criminal Evidence, Fifth Ed., Volume 2, section 440, as follows:
“While the defense of alibi is ‘an institution of dignified age’, it is sometimes said that it is conducive to the manufacture of evidence, and a few states have passed statutes known as Alibi Acts. These provide in general that the defendant must give notice of his intention to rely on an alibi, and that if he fails to do so his evidence on the point may be rejected. Such statutes are constitutional, and it has been held that where the notice was not given the defendant’s alibi testimony was properly excluded.” (Emphasis added.)
Defendant in his Reply Brief and Argument attacks this citation as an omnibus, broad statement unsupported by judicial precedent.
We think the quoted statement is sound.
There is nothing essentially unconstitutional about requiring pretrial disclosure of the names of witnesses whose testi*1198mony the other side may be called on to refute. The modern trend in discovery is to broaden access to material facts and reduce belated surprise.
In Iowa the State must furnish defendant with the names of witnesses to be called in chief and defendant may obtain the substance of the evidence he must face. Unless defendant relies on insanity or alibi he need not disclose the names of his witnesses and then only as required by the alibi statute. To rebut the testimony of defense witnesses the State may call additional witnesses. Their testimony however must be limited to rebuttal. We see nothing \infair nor violative of due process of law in this procedure.
Vlil. Upon arraignment defendant filed a motion to set aside and quash indictment. The motion is in ten numbered paragraphs but is based primarily on the allegation that the names of all persons examined before the grand jury were not indorsed on the indictment and that unauthorized persons were in the grand jury room.
Many persons were examined before the grand jury. Not all of those examined were listed on the indictment.
Section 776.1, Code of Iowa, provides that a motion to set aside indictment can be made upon several grounds. One of the grounds is that the names of all witnesses examined before the grand jury are not indorsed on the indictment. Subsequent sections in chapter 776 provide for corrections to an indictment so attacked or resubmission. The practical effect of the statute is to prevent the calling of witnesses (except in rebuttal) without notice to defendant. Section 780.10.
We have held repeatedly that the law does not require the indorsement on an indictment of the name of a witness appearing before the grand jury, if, in their opinion, the testimony given was immaterial. Only the names of the witnesses on whose testimony the indictment is based need be indorsed thereon. State v. Stafford, 237 Iowa 780, 782, 23 N.W.2d 832; State v. Hasty, 121 Iowa 507, 511, 96 N.W. 1115; State v. Davis, 230 Iowa 309, 312, 297 N.W. 274; State v. Martin, 210 Iowa 376, 379, 228 N.W. 1.
IX. Defendant claims error in denying his application for *1199a bill of particulars, the production of books and papers, copies of statements and testimony before the grand jury.
The trial court did order production for examination all documents, photographs and exhibits used in conjunction with the testimony of any witness whose evidence was attached to the indictment, together with statements given to the police by Leanna Skultety. By agreement defendant was also authorized to examine photographs and a diagram.
We have examined defendant’s motions, the extensive minutes attached to the indictment and the trial court’s analysis and ridings thereon. Detailed discussion here would serve no useful purpose. Some of the information sought appears in the minutes. Some is nonexistent. The things to which defendant was entitled were furnished. Parts of the motions constituted an obvious “fishing expedition.” Our examination discloses no error.
Defendant cites, among other authorities, Jencks v. United States, 353 U. S. 657, 77 S. Ct. 1007, 1 L. Ed.2d 1103.
The significance and impact of the Jencks case on our law is considered in State v. Kelly, 249 Iowa 1219, 1221, 1222, 91 N.W.2d 562, 563. We quote:
“The defendant contends denial of these motions was error, basing his claim chiefly upon Jencks v. United States, 353 U. S. 657, 669, 77 S. Ct. 1007, 1 L. Ed.2d 1103. While the defendant’s motion first above referred to claimed a right to inspect the demanded writings under the ‘due process of law’, we are satisfied the United States Supreme Court has not placed its holdings upon that basis. It has adopted a rule of evidence. In Gordon v. United States, 344 U. S. 414, 420, 73 S. Ct. 369, 374, 97 L. Ed. 447, it is said: ‘The question to be answered on an application for an order to produce is one of admissibility under traditional canons of evidence * * *.’ Mr. Justice Clark, dissenting in the Jencks case, remarked: ■ ‘This fashions a new rule of evidence which is foreign to our federal jurisprudence.’ See page 680 of 353 U. S., page 1019 of 77 S. Ct. Reference is also made in the Gordon case, page 418 of 344 U. S., pages 372, 373 of 73 S. Ct., to opposite rules followed in some state jurisdictions, without any intimation that such courts are bound by the federal *1200holdings. In fact, the entire picture presented by the Jencks and Gordon cases is that under certain conditions and with certain limitations the defendant is entitled as a matter of procedural right to inspect documents for the purpose of possible impeachment.
“The significance of the foregoing discussion lies in the fact that if the Jencks case were based upon the due process clause of the Federal Constitution, as suggested by the defendant, it would be binding upon state courts; if based upon a rule of evidence or procedure it is not. As we view the matter we are not bound to follow the Jencks case, but may determine for ourselves, when the question is directly presented, whether we will do so.
“But this decision is not required at this time. Even under the Jencks case the ruling of the trial court was correct. The essential requirements for an order to produce documents for inspection are thus stated: ‘The necessary essentials of a foundation, emphasized in that opinion [Gordon v. United States, supra], and present here, are that “the demand was for production of * # * specific documents and did not propose any broad or blind fishing expedition among documents possessed by the Government on the chance that something impeaching might turn up. Nor was this a demand for statements taken from persons or informants not offered as witnesses.” ’ The emphasis was added by the court in the Jencks ease in quoting from the Gordon case. See Jencks v. United States, supra, pages 666, 667 of 353 U. S., page 1012 of 77 S. Ct. It also appears that the demand must be for documents shown to be in existence. Gordon v. United States, page 418 of 344 U. S., page 373 of 73 S. Ct. * # *
“We recognize the force of the statement quoted by the defendant from the majority opinion in the Jencks ease: * * the interest of the United States in a criminal prosecution “* # -* js not that it shall win a case, but that justice shall be done.” ’ This does not mean, however, that the scales must be weighted in favor of the defendant. The prosecution has certain rights which should be respected; it is equally entitled to a fair trial.”
*1201X. Defendant claims error in submitting second-degree murder to the jury. He argues that whoever shot Michael Daly was guilty of first-degree murder and must be so convicted or acquitted.
Defendant cites numerous decisions but only one Iowa case in support of his position. State v. Bertoch, 112 Iowa 195, 83 N.W. 967. That case is of little value here for it involved murder by poison. Murder by poison is by specific provision of the statute made murder in the first degree.
We agree with defendant’s counsel that whoever shot Michael Daly might under the evidence have been convicted of murder in the first degree. Under the record the jury might have found defendant guilty as charged.
Under the statute, section 690.1, whoever kills any human being with malice aforethought, either express or implied, is guilty of murder. Section 690.2 sets forth additional essential elements which if established would raise the murder to first degree. The basic charge is murder. If murder is established the question is whether the specific elements required by statute to raise the offense to first degree have been established. All murder except as specified in section 690.2 is second-degree murder. Section 690.3.
The jury obviously was convinced defendant was guilty of murder. There may have been some doubt, resolved in favor of defendant, as to some of the essential elements necessary for conviction of first-degree murder. The jury might even have been inclined to exercise some degree of leniency. We may not interfere in either event. In any event under the evidence as shown by the record murder in the second degree was necessarily an included offense in the charge of murder in the first degree.
Murder in the first degree and murder in the second degree are not separate offenses. They are different degrees of murder.
State v. Davis, 236 Iowa 740, 749, 750, 19 N.W.2d 655, 659, sets forth the rules and authorities as follows:
“In the case of State v. Brooks, 181 Iowa 874, 880, 165 N.W. 194, 196, we set forth the basis upon which included offenses should be submitted to a jury, and stated:
“ ‘On the other hand, included offenses should be submitted *1202if (1) there is any evidence of their commission; (2) if, under the evidence, “the jury might believe the defendant guilty” thereof (State v. Mitchell, 68 Iowa 116, State v. Atherton, 50 Iowa 189, State v. Trusty, 118 Iowa 498, at 500); (3) if there be some evidence from which a jury may believe the included offense only was committed (State v. Vinsant, 49 Iowa 241, at 244, State v. Woodworth, 168 Iowa 263, State v. Perkins, 171 Iowa 1, at 2).’
“Conceding but not holding that the included offense of larceny should not have been submitted, the error, if any, was not prejudicial to the appellant.
“In the case of State v. Haugh, 156 Iowa 639, 640, 137 N.W. 917, we made this pertinent statement:
“ We have never held that it constitutes prejudicial error to instruct with reference to an included crime, even though under the evidence a conviction for the crime charged, without an instruction as to the included crime, would have been sustained. It does not lie in the mouth of the defendant to complain that he has been convicted of a lower degree of crime than that which the evidence tends to establish. It is not to be presumed from the fact that the jury failed to convict of rape that they did convict of an assault with intent to commit rape without finding from the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was guilty of that crime. If the jury exercised undue leniency in their finding as to the degree of the crime committed, such error has resulted to defendant’s benefit, and he cannot complain. It is enough to say that, so far as the general sufficiency of the evidence is concerned, the verdict is not without ample support.’ ”
See also State v. Kramer, 252 Iowa 916, 920, 921. 109 N.W.2d 18.
XI. Not argued separately but injected into the argument on included offenses are post conviction affidavits. One juror attempts to impeach the verdict and says she was confused, misled and is regretful. She feels that the verdict was a compromise. Nine jurors by affidavit deny any confusion, misunderstanding or mistake in arriving at their verdict. They comment *1203on the fairness of the trial and the fairness and freedom from bias of the trial court.
Affidavits from seven regular or part-time members of the audience accuse the court of bias against the defendant. Affidavits from an alternate juror and nine others from the audience commend the fairness of the court.
Nothing appears that would justify interference by us. Curiosity, drama and audience partisanship usually present in the trial of a publicized felony case do appear but the case is not one for decision by affidavit, popular clamor or audience participation. It was in the trial court for decision by a jury under well established rules and laws. The jury after careful consideration rendered its verdict.
A verdict cannot be impeached or avoided in the manner attempted by affidavits of jurors that they misunderstood the instructions. The question of what influenced the verdict is a matter of opinion which inheres in the verdict itself. This question is carefully considered, definitely decided and authorities cited in State v. Hill, 239 Iowa 675, 683, 684, 32 N.W.2d 398.
XII. This case was tried before a carefully selected and impartial jury and a trial judge with years of experience. The charge was defended with vigor and intensity by experienced and resourceful counsel. All available defensive tactics were employed.
We repeat what we said in Division I. It is not for us to pass upon issuable questions of fact properly submitted to the jury.
The jury has spoken.
We have reviewed the record and find no reversible error.
The ease is — Affirmed.
Garfield, C. J., and Thompson, Peterson and Stuart, JJ., concur.
Thornton, Hays and Larson, JJ., dissent.
Moore, J., takes no part.

=== CASE 9738789 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:42.13506+00 ===

Thornton, J.
(dissenting) — Finding that I am unable to *1204agree with Division V of the majority opinion, I respectfully dissent.
My point of dissent is that Instruction No. 14, set out in full in the majority opinion, places the burden of proof of a defensive fact on the defendant, thus depriving the defendant of the presumption of innocence and relieves the State of the burden of proving the offense chai’ged beyond a reasonable doubt; and that the instruction is confusing and inconsistent.
The last time this court examined this question was in 1881 in State v. Hamilton, 57 Iowa 596, 11 N.W. 5. The instruction under consideration was approved by a three to two decision in these words at page 598 of 57 Iowa, page 6 of 11 N.W.:
“The court instructed the jury that the burden of proof was on the defendant to establish the fact that he was not present, by a preponderance of evidence. This instruction was correct and is now the settled law of the State. State v. Vincent, 24 Iowa, 570; State v. Hardin & Henry, 46 Id., 623; State v. Red, 53 Id., 69; State v. Kline, 54 Id., 183; State v. Northrup, 48 Iowa, 583.”
In State v. Hamilton, supra, at page 599 of 57 Iowa, page 6 of 11 N.W., Justice Adams wrote a dissent in which Justice Day concurred. He pointed out the burden to prove the defendant guilty was statutory (then section 4428, now section 785.3, Code of Iowa, 1962); that the instruction, as approved, relieves the State of this burden, and that it is inconsistent. In part, he said, at pages 599, 600 of 57 Iowa, pages 6, 7 of 11 N.W.:
“ ‘In my opinion, if the evidence introduced to show that the defendant was at another place when the robbery was committed, was such as to raise a reasonable doubt of his guilt, the jury would have been justified in acquitting. Code, § 4428. Now it is manifest that such doubt might be raised by evidence which could not be said to preponderate over the evidence leading to a different conclusion. This court has never undertaken to abrogate the rule that a reasonable doubt of guilt justifies an acquittal. It has, indeed, recognized this rule in the very eases relied upon by the majority as holding that when the defendant relies upon proving an alibi he must'prove it by a *1205preponderance of evidence. Both rules cannot be correct because they are inconsistent with each other. No jury can follow both. Let us suppose a case where the evidence of an alibi does not preponderate, but does raise a reasonable doubt of guilt. What shall a jury do? If they follow the instruction that the evidence of an alibi must preponderate they must convict and disobey the instruction as to reasonable doubt. On the other hand, if they follow the instruction as to reasonable doubt they must acquit and disobey the instruction as to the evidence of an alibi. * * *
.“‘But the rule adopted as to alibi appears to me to be wrong for another and still more cogent reason. In a civil action it is sufficient for the defendant to establish his defense by evidence which balances that of the plaintiff. According to the rule in question adopted by the majority, the defendant in a criminal action must prove his innocence by evidence which overbalances the evidence introduced to prove his guilt if the evidence of his innocence simply is that he was where he could not have committed the crime. The adoption of the rule in question requires a modification of the rule as to the presumption of innocence. The true doctrine under such rule would seem to be that the evidence of guilt is aided by a presumption of guilt, if the evidence of innocence relied upon is the evidence of an alibi.
“ ‘The majority, it appears to me, have been misled by reason of the fact that there is generally a well grounded suspicion attached to evidence of an alibi. It often comes from such sources that it should be greatly distrusted. The most direct and positive testimony may often very properly be regarded as entitled to but little if any weight. But to the extent that it does have weight, it should have the same effect which any other evidence of equal weight has. If it has weight enough to balance the evidence of guilt it should certainly be sufficient. And I think it should be sufficient if it raises a reasonable doubt.’ ”
The view expressed by Justice Adams in the Hamilton case has now become the majority view in this country. The defend*1206ant cites eases from 32 states1, the Federal Courts2, and text writers3 as supporting this view. The State does not contend the instruction given is other than a minority view.
An examination of the cases relied on by the majority opinion in the Hamilton case reveals, I believe, the mistaken view taken by this court.
In State v. Vincent, 24 Iowa 570, 578, 95 Am. Dec. 753, it is said:
“The alibi of the prisoner, and the existence in life of Claiborn Showers [the deceased] at the time of the alleged murder, are each independent propositions totally inconsistent with the guilt of the prisoner. It is evident the burden of proof of each rests upon the prisoner, for neither, against prima facie evidence of its corresponding inconsistent proposition of the prosecution, will be presumed. These defenses, then, must be sustained by the prisoner, and the evidence necessary to sustain either of them must be sufficient to outweigh the proof tending to establish its contradictory hypothesis.” No authorities are cited.
It cannot be denied the alibi is inconsistent with guilt, but *1207it is not an independent proposition. (I do not find the term “affirmative defense” used until 1927 in State v. McCumber, 202 Iowa 1382, 212 N.W. 137.) Where, as here, it is necessary for the State to prove the defendant present to commit the crime, the evidence for the State is, the defendant was present at the time and place in question. Defendant’s evidence of alibi is simply that he was not at the place in question but at another place, naming it, too remote for him to have been at the site of the crime. Defendant’s evidence is purely defensive. The fact to be proved by the State is, defendant was there, any evidence that shows he was not there negates that evidence. The effect of the evidence is the same of that of a witness, actually present at the scene of the crime, who testifies, “I did not see the defendant there at the time. I immediately drove a mile down the road and saw the defendant working in a field.” Certainly the first sentence of the witness’ testimony is not an independent proposition or an affirmative defense. The same should be true of the second, it merely explains and confirms the first.
The second sentence quoted above from State v. Vincent, supra, is a combination of inconsistency and non sequitur. Why is it evident the burden of proof of alibi rests on the prisoner? On all other matters it is on the State. From the quoted sentence we find this answer, it will not be presumed the defendant was not present when the State has offered evidence that he was. From this the opinion holds the defendant has the burden of proof. When the opinion (and the instruction in the case at bar) states the nonpresence of the defendant will not be presumed, the presumption of innocence has been denied him, and the State has been relieved of proving its case beyond a reasonable doubt. The defendant in the Vincent ease and this one had to be present to commit the crime as charged.
In State v. Hardin and Henry, 46 Iowa 623, 26 Am. Rep. 174, is the following quotation from Commonwealth v. Webster, 5 Cushing 295, 324, 52 Am. Dec. 711, 734 (Mass. 1850):
“ ‘In the ordinary case of an alibi, when a party charged with a crime attempts to prove that he was in another place at the time, all the evidence tending to prove that he committed the offense tends in the same degree to prove that he was at the *1208place when it was committed. If, therefore, the proof of the alibi does not outweigh the proof that he was at the place when the offense was committed, it is not sufficient.’ ”
The opinion then states this doctrine was simply recognized and approved in State v. Vincent, 24 Iowa 570. In the Webster case, supra, alibi is called an affirmative fact.
It should be noted in the opinion in State v. Hardin and Henry, supra, Justice Day pointed out the true rule at page 629 of 46 Iowa, as follows:
“For, if a reasonable doubt be created of the presence of the accused at the time and place of the commission of an offense which he could not commit when absent, a reasonable doubt is raised as to his guilt; and a reasonable doubt of guilt, all the authorities hold, entitles the accused to an acquittal.”
In State v. Northrup, 48 Iowa 583, 587, 30 Am. Rep. 408, we said:
“The jury were instructed that, to maintain the defense of alibi the burden was on the defendants, but that they were only required to prove it by a preponderance of the evidence. This is in accord with The State v. Vincent, 24 Iowa, 570.
“It is said there is a want of unanimity in the authorities on this question, and there are differences among the members of the court in relation thereto. The State v. Hardin et al., 46 Iowa, 623. But a majority of the court adhere to the rulings heretofore made, under the belief that the decided weight of authority is in accord therewith.”
In State v. Red, 53 Iowa 69, 70, 71, 4 N.W. 831, this court again cites the Vincent, Hardin and Northrup eases in approval of placing the burden of proof of alibi on the defendant. At page 71 of 53 Iowa is a paragraph attempting to justify the instruction in that it does not abrogate the doctrine of reasonable doubt. No attempt is made to explain the inconsistency pointed out by Justice Adams in his dissent in the Hamilton case.
To the same effect is State v. Kline, 54 Iowa 183, 185, 186, 6 N.W. 184.
The cases above examined are the entire basis for the five-line rejection of the views of Justice Adams in the Hamilton *1209case. It is submitted that the majority view was based on, 1, the thought this was the majority view, State v. Northrup, 48 Iowa 583, 587, 30 Am. Rep. 408; 2, that alibi was an independent or affirmative defense; 3, that so long as the instructions contained the statement the defendant’s guilt must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt and if a reasonable doubt arises from all the evidence or a lack thereof he is entitled to an acquittal, no harm is done; and 4, because an alibi might be fabricated with ease, whether the type of evidence warranted such assumption or not, it should be guarded at all cost.
Since the Hamilton case I do not find a case where we have re-examined the alibi instruction. See discussion in State v. Wagner, 207 Iowa 224, 227-232, 222 N.W. 407, 61 A. L. R. 882, bearing on whether the evidence raised the defense of alibi. At page 229 of 207 Iowa it is pointed out the defendant may prove “affirmatively” it was impossible that he could have been present and when he does the burden is on him, citing the same authorities as in State v. Hamilton, supra.
In State v. McCumber, 202 Iowa 1382, 1384, 212 N.W. 137, alibi is called an affirmative defense. The opinion did not deal with this instruction but the right of the State to use rebuttal testimony.
In State v. Johnson, 221 Iowa 8, 20, 264 N.W. 596, we find the instruction is approved, alibi is called an affirmative defense, and the non sequitur, that the instructions did not go as far as such rightfully may go in that a cautionary instruction was not given.
In State v. Dunne, 234 Iowa 1185, 1191, 15 N.W.2d 296, 299, 300, we approved a similar instruction in these words:
“Instruction 11 told the jury that defendant claimed an alibi. In language which has been approved, the instruction states that courts recognize the defense as one that can be easily manufactured; evidence in support thereof should be scanned with caution; the burden to- prove the defense by a preponderance of evidence rests upon defendant, but that if, upon the whole case, including- the evidence on the question of alibi, there was a reasonable doubt as to guilt, there should be an acquittal. See State v. Johnson, 221 Iowa 8, 20, 264 N.W. 596, 267 N.W. *121091, and cases cited; State v. Wagner, 207 Iowa 224, 230, 222 N.W. 407, 61 A. L. R. 882; 23 C. J. S. 764, section 1206; annotations 67 A. L. R. 122, 126; 124 A. L. R. 471.”
In State v. Rourick, 245 Iowa 319, 323, 60 N.W.2d 529, 531, dealing with the admissibility of evidence where notice of alibi testimony is not properly given, section 777.18, Code of Iowa, 1950; we find these statements:
“We start with the proposition that alibi is essentially an affirmative defense. * * * Whether technically so classifiable we need not determine here. * * * the notice required by section 777.18 is in the nature of a special plea in that it is required before the special issue or defense of alibi can be raised.”
In State v. Baker, 246 Iowa 215, 228, 66 N.W.2d 303, 310, in discussing* the necessity for an instruction in the absence of a request on the claimed defense the shooting was accidental, we said:
“* * # Strictly speaking, the claim of alibi is not a defense, since, in the prosecution of many crimes and particularly those of violence, the burden is on the State to establish the presence of the accused at the place of the crime at the precise time it was perpetrated, but this court for many years and by many decisions has held that in a defense of alibi, in the sense of being at a place so distant that participation in the crime was impossible, the burden is on the accused to establish such so-called defense by a preponderance of the evidence.” (Citing cases)
In the two cases cited last above this court recognizes that evidence of alibi is not an affirmative defense. The notice of alibi testimony required by section 777.18, Code of Iowa, 1962, does not create a new defense or a new plea. In the Eourick case Justice Smith states, “# * * the notice * * * is in the nature of a special plea in that it is required before the special issue or defense of alibi can be raised.” He was more than hesitant to call evidence of alibi an affirmative defense.
I have carefully examined the majority opinion to find a basis or reason for the statement, “The issue of alibi is an affirmative defense * * *.” None is given, in fact State v. Rourick, supra, is cited in support of it.
*1211The defendant does not confess and avoid the commission of the offense charged by offering evidence of his absence from the scene of the crime and explaining the absence by showing where he was and what he was doing at that time. It does not amount to admitting a crime was committed by someone, but merely denies that he committed the crime. Under his plea of not guilty defendant is entitled to offer any evidence that denies the charge made. When he shows he was not there he does just that.
That the instruction is inconsistent is well pointed out by Justice Adams in the Hamilton case at page 599 of 57 Iowa, page 6 of 11 N.W., in these words:
“No jury can follow both. Let us suppose a case where the evidence of an alibi does not preponderate, but does raise a reasonable doubt of guilt. What shall a jury do? If they follow the instruction that the evidence of an alibi must preponderate they must convict and disobey the instruction as to reasonable doubt. On the other hand, if they follow the instruction as to reasonable doubt they must acquit and disobey the instruction as to the evidence of an alibi. * * *.”
If the fact, evidence of an alibi may be readily manufactured, was ever a reason for placing the burden of proving alibi by a preponderance of the evidence on the defendant, that reason has now ceased to exist. Section 777.18, Code of Iowa, 1962, adopted by the Forty-ninth General Assembly in 1941, requires the defendant to file a written notice of his purpose to introduce alibi testimony, not later than four days before trial, setting forth the name, address and occupation of the witnesses he expects to call, and a statement of the substance of what he expects to prove by each witness. The purpose of the Act, chapter 314, Forty-ninth General Assembly, is, “An Act to provide for advance notice of the defenses of insanity or alibi in criminal cases.”
Compliance with section 777.18 gives the State an ample opportunity to investigate manufactured alibi testimony. The majority opinion concedes this.
The belief expressed in State v. Hamilton, 57 Iowa 596, 598, 11 N.W. 5, 6, and State v. Northrup, 48 Iowa 583, 587, *121230 Am. Rep. 408, that the decided weight of authority was iu accord with the view expressed is no longer true.
Defendant has cited cases from 32 states and the Federal Courts that sustain his position. It is unnecessary and impractical to quote from all of them. It is sufficient to illustrate the true rule to quote from four of the later cases.
In People v. Pearson, 19 Ill.2d 609, 614, 169 N.E.2d 252, 255, Justice Schaefer says:
“Logically, proof of an alibi is not proof of an affirmative defense because in order to establish its case the prosecution must show that the defendant was present at the scene of the crime, and evidence that the defendant was elsewhere is only one method of negativing the prosecution’s case. So where an instruction has unequivocally placed upon a defendant the burden of establishing an alibi, the conviction has been reversed. Hoge v. People, 117 Ill. 35, 44 [6 N.E. 796]; People v. Lacey, 339 Ill. 480, 488 [171 N.E. 544].
“To say that the burden is upon the defendant to establish an alibi can be accurate only if the term ‘burden’ is used in the sense of the requirement of going forward with evidence. But if that is all that is intended, any reference in an instruction to a burden upon the defendant is improper because it is never necessary or appropriate to- mention to a jury the burden of going forward with the evidence. Quite apart from the matter of instructions to the jury, to think or speak of alibi in terms of an affirmative defense can only cause confusion. The ease with which alibi testimony can be fabricated, and its obvious capacity to- surprise, may make appropriate some advance notice of the defense, but that is a different matter.”
Commonwealth v. Bonomo, 396 Pa. 222, 231, 151 A.2d 441, 446:
“* # * There is no- point in saying to a jury that the defendant must satisfy their minds of his innocence followed by a statement that he does not have to satisfy their minds but need only cause them to pause or hesitate as to his guilt. * * * The Commonwealth has the burden of proving every essential element necessary for conviction. If the defendant traverses one of those essential elements by evidence of alibi, his evidence *1213will be considered by the jury along with all the other evidence. It may, either standing alone or together with other evidence, be sufficient to leave in the minds of the jury a reasonable doubt which, without it, might not otherwise exist.”
Halko v. State, 175 A.2d 42, 49 (Del. 1961) :
“But we think it clearly erroneous. It is bottomed upon the theory that an alibi is an ‘affirmative defense’, similar to self-defense or insanity or former jeopardy. This is incorrect. An affirmative defense is one that admits the doing of the act charged, but seeks to justify, excuse, or mitigate it; or, as in former jeopardy, to invoke a bar arising out of the facts dehors the record.
“ ‘The defense of alibi * # * is not, properly speaking, a defense within any accurate meaning of the word “defense” but is a mere fact shown in rebuttal of the evidence introduced by the State.’ 1 Wharton’s Criminal Law § 381.
“Since an alibi is only a denial of any connection with the crime, it must follow that if the proof adduced raises a reasonable doubt of defendant’s guilt, either by itself or in conjunction with all other facts in the case, the defendant must be acquitted. 1 Wharton’s Criminal Law, § 381, citing* cases from nearly every state in the Union.”
United States v. Barrasso, 267 F.2d 908, 910, 911 (3d Cir. 1959), quotes with approval the following from United States v. Marcus, 166 F.2d 497, 503, 504 ( 3d Cir. 1948):
“ ‘By the weight of authority it is held that the instructions on the presumption of innocence of the accused, and of the necessity of fastening every necessary element of the crime charged upon the accused beyond a reasonable doubt, are not enough in cases involving the necessary presence of the accused at a particular time and place, when the accused produces testimony that he was elsewhere at the time. If the accused request an instruction as to the burden of proof on his alibi, an instruction on the subject must be given so as to acquaint the jury with the law that the government’s burden of proof covers the defense of alibi, as well as all other phases of the case.’ ”
In Wigmore’s Code of Evidence (Third Ed.) the burden is stated this way:
*1214“Art. 15. Criminal Acts. In all criminal issues as to the doing of the act charged,
“(1) the risk of jury-doubt is on the prosecution;
“(2) the duty of passing the judge does not shift to the defendant by any presumption of law; except as follows: * * *
“Par. (b). Alibi, as in Par. (c).
“Par. (c). Self-defense, on a charge of corporal violence; here the risk of jury-doubt remains on the prosecution, but the duty of passing the judge is on the defendant.”
It seems clear the only duty on a defendant claiming alibi is to go forward with evidence to raise the issue. He has no burden of proof, that is on the State.
The view expressed by Justice Adams in the Hamilton case, 57 Iowa 596, 599, 11 N.W. 5, 6, is now the law in a majority of states as well as recognized by the text writers. No- good reason appears why we should not change an erroneous view. Mark Twain is quoted as saying, “Loyalty to a petrified opinion never yet broke a chain or freed a human soul.” This court certainly has no loyalty to a mistaken view, no matter how long such has stood. In fact, our opinions do not indicate we have actually considered the instructions in alibi cases with the matters now considered in mind since the Hamilton opinion.
The pride and strength of this court has been its willingness to examine the majority view on any subject of law and to adopt the same where sound. That should be done in this case.
I would reverse this case for a new trial so the trial court will have the opportunity to instruct the jury on the issue of alibi in conformity with the views expressed herein.
Hats and Larson, JJ., join in this dissent.
Footnote 1. Ragland v. State, 238 Ala. 587, 192 So. 498; Schultz v. Territory, 5 Ariz. 239, 52 P. 352; People v. Hoosier, 24 Cal. App. 746, 142 P. 514; People v. Gist, 28 Cal. App.2d 287, 82 P.2d 501; McNamara v. People, 24 Colo. 61, 48 P. 541; State v. Ilorwitz, 108 Conn. 53, 142 A. 470; State v. Cianfione, 98 Conn. 454, 120 A. 347; Smith v. State, 4 Ga. App. 807, 61 S.E. 737; State v. Ward, 31 Idaho 419, 173 P. 497; State v. Woohworth, 148 Kan. 180, 81 P.2d 43; State v. Wright, 138 Kan. 31, 23 P.2d 475; Parsley v. Commonwealth, 321 S.W.2d 259 (Ky.); State v. Ardoin, 49 La. Ann. 1145, 22 So. 620, 62 Am. St. Rep. 678; State v. Molay, 174 La. 63, 139 So. 759; People v. Crofoot, 254 Mich. 167, 235 N.W. 883; People v. Marvill, 236 Mich. 595, 211 N.W. 23; State v. Stiel, 157 Minn. 461, 196 N.W. 490; State v. Armstead, 283 S.W.2d 577 (Mo.); State v. Taylor, 118 Mo. 153, 24 S.W. 449; State v. McClellan, 23 Mont. 532, 59 P. 924, 75 Am. St. Rep. 558; Hall v. State, 135 Neb. 188, 280 N.W. 847, 118 A. L. R. 1300; Peyton v. State, 54 Neb. 188, 74 N.W. 597; State v. Mucci, 25 N. J. 423, 136 A.2d 761; State v. Smith, 21 N. M. 173, 153 P. 256; Territory of New Mexico v. Tais, 14 N. M. 399, 94 P. 947; People v. Tapia, 11 App. Div. 2d 679, 201 N. Y. S.2d 984; People v. Russell, 266 N. Y. 147, 194 N.E. 65; State v. Foye, 254 N. C. 704, 120 S.E.2d 169; State v. Sheffield, 206 N. C. 374, 174 S.E. 105; State v. Nelson, 17 N. D. 13, 114 N.W. 478; Stevens v. State, 26 Ohio App. 53, 159 N.E. 834; Shoemaker v. Territory, 4 Okla. 118, 43 P. 1059; State v. Milosevich, 119 Ore. 404, 249 P. 625; State v. Mayfield, 235 S. C. 11, 109 S.E.2d 716; State v. McGhee, 137 S. C. 256, 135 S.E. 59; State v. Chancey, 136 S. C. 305, 132 S.E. 824; Odeneal v. State, 128 Tenn. 60, 157 S.W. 419; Nichols v. State, 91 Tex. Cr. Rep. 277, 238 S.W. 232; Ayres v. State, 21 Tex. App. 399, 17 S.W. 253; State v. Whitely, 100 Utah 14, 110 P.2d 337; State v. Parsons, 90 W. Va. 307, 110 S.E. 698; Fraccaro v. State, 189 Wis. 428, 207 N.W. 687; and Roen v. State, 182 Wis. 515, 196 N.W. 825.
Footnote 2. Goldsby v. United States, 160 U. S. 70, 16 S. Ct. 216, 40 L. Ed. 343; United States v. Vigorito, 67 F.2d 329 (2d Cir. 1933), certiorari denied, 290 U. S. 705, 54 S. Ct. 373, 78 L. Ed. 606; Falgout v. United States, 279 F. 513; McCool v. United States, 263 F. 55; Fielder v. United States, 227 F. 832; and Glover v. Unhpd States, 147 F. 426.
Footnote 3. 15 Am. Jur., Criminal Law, section 315; 20 Am. Jur., Evidence, section 154; 53 Am. Jur., Trials, section 657; Annotation, 124 A. L. R. 471; Annotation, 67 A. L. R. 138; Annotation, 29 A. L. R. 1127; 22 C. J. S., Criminal Law, section 40, page 130; and 22A C. J. S., Criminal Law, section 574, page 320.

=== CASE 2218114 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:41.278244+00 ===

8 Mass. App. Ct. 740 (1979)
397 N.E.2d 1115
SIDNEY COVICH
vs.
ANTHONY G. CHAMBERS & another.[1]
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Bristol.
October 17, 1979.
November 27, 1979.
Present: GREANEY, ROSE, & PERRETTA, JJ.
Frank L. Kozol (Joel A. Kozol with him) for the plaintiff.
*741 Charles E. Bennett for the defendants.
GREANEY, J.
In June, 1973, the plaintiff Sidney Covich purchased land owned by the defendants in Mansfield, intending to construct a housing development. His complaint sought cancellation of a note and mortgage given in connection with the financing of the sale on the ground of mutual mistake or fraud. He also sought rescission of the purchase and reimbursement for over-payments made on the note because of an error in calculating the land area conveyed by the deed. The defendants admitted an error in the description of the land conveyed, asked that the amount due on the note be reduced proportionately and counterclaimed for the proportional amount due and unpaid under the note.[2] The dispute was referred to a master (Mass. R. Civ. P. 53, 365 Mass. 817 [1974]), who concluded that the sale was not vitiated by mutual mistake or fraud and that the defendants were entitled to the sum of $84,716 as the adjusted amount still owing on the note. The master left the assessment of attorney's fees and costs under the note to the judge. The judge overruled the plaintiff's objections to the report, ordered it adopted, and, after an evidentiary hearing, made an assessment of costs and attorney's fees on the note. Judgment was entered accordingly. The plaintiff appeals, claiming that the master's general findings of no mutual mistake or fraud are not supported by the evidence, that the master applied the wrong standard of proof in reaching his result, and that the judge erred in the award of counsel fees. We affirm the judgment.
1. Procedural issue. The plaintiff has submitted as part of the appendix in excess of 150 transcript pages of *742 evidence before the master. He asks us to review this evidence and conclude that the master took an erroneous view of numerous questions of fact. This we decline to do. Peters v. Wallach, 366 Mass. 622, 626 (1975). Blakeley v. Pilgrim Packing Co., 4 Mass. App. Ct. 19, 20 n. 2 (1976). In view of the recurring frequency of the reproduction on appeal of evidence before a master with the request that the master's findings be measured against the evidence, we reiterate that "absent an order that a master file a transcript with his report, such a transcript is not part of the record on appeal."[3]Michelson v. Aronson, 4 Mass. App. Ct. 182, 186 (1976). The proper method by which a party may preserve his right to raise the question whether the evidence was legally sufficient to support a master's findings of fact is precisely set forth in Rule 49, § 7, of the Superior Court, as amended (1976).[4] So far as the record discloses no requests for summaries of evidence were filed as required by the rule, nor did the plaintiff observe the procedures described in the rule as prerequisites for obtaining summaries. Bare unsupported objections to findings or statements in the objections that certain of the master's findings did not conform to the plaintiff's requested findings of fact are insufficient. Failure to follow the requirements of the rule confines review to matters apparent on the face of the report. See generally Michelson v. Aronson, supra at 190 (decided under the 1974 version of the rule). Requests to act otherwise seek to impose unwarranted burdens on trial and appellate courts and clash with the purpose of a master's referral *743  "to have the facts settled ... and to put the case in a position where nothing remains to be done except for the judge to apply correct principles of law to the facts found." Shelburne Shirt Co. v. Singer, 322 Mass. 262, 265 (1948). Peters v. Wallach, supra at 626.
2. Master's findings. When the evidence is not reported or otherwise summarized, the master's findings of fact are conclusive unless "they are mutually inconsistent, contradictory, plainly wrong or vitiated in view of the controlling law." Wormstead v. Town Manager of Saugus, 366 Mass. 659, 660 (1975), quoting from Selectmen of Hatfield v. Garvey, 362 Mass. 821, 825 (1973). First Crestwood Corp. v. Building Inspector of Middleton, 3 Mass. App. Ct. 234, 235 (1975). In this light we summarize the master's material findings.
Anthony G. Chambers and his mother owned two parcels of agriculturally zoned land in Mansfield, the first containing 10.59 acres, the second containing approximately fifty acres. They had inherited the land from Chambers' father, who had entered a contract with a construction company for the sale of gravel from the fifty-acre parcel. The zoning board of appeals granted a permit with conditions[5] for the removal of the gravel, and the construction company filed a $40,000 performance bond. In 1968, upon completion of the gravel removal, the performance bond was released.
Chambers' mother lived on the smaller parcel, but Chambers himself was a Connecticut resident who only visited the site once or twice during the gravel removal operations. Chambers and his mother authorized a family friend, one Alpert, to act as a finder for the sale of the *744 fifty-acre parcel. Alpert was only authorized to convey offers, and he was given no authority to negotiate or bargain for the sellers.
Covich is an experienced builder and developer of commercial and residential properties who had previously developed a single-family residential subdivision in Mansfield. In the spring of 1972 Covich became interested in the Chambers property. He approached Alpert, who arranged a meeting between Covich and the sellers, at which time an offer to purchase was made by Covich but not accepted.[6] Ten months of negotiations ensued, culminating in the signing of a sale agreement on February 12, 1973, for the fifty-acre parcel at a price of $2,500 per acre.
Before he entered the agreement, Covich engaged a registered engineer and surveyor who had been a member of the Mansfield planning board during the period of the gravel excavation and who was aware of its removal. The engineer searched the records of the zoning board for the contour map referred to in the special permit (note 4, supra) but was unable to obtain it because the records had been destroyed by a fire. He also walked the perimeter of the land in early 1973 and knew on his first inspection that fill would be needed for certain lots. The engineer prepared a preliminary plan prior to the closing and discovered that the proposed form of deed overstated the area of the property by about five acres.[7] Prior to signing the sale agreement, Covich had also walked the *745 boundaries with his engineer and knew that gravel had been removed from the property. The master found that Covich made a conscious choice not to dig test holes or to perform percolation tests to determine the water table, although he had done so in other developments and would not have been prevented from so doing on this tract. The master also observed on his view a swamp in the southeast section of the land. The master found that Chambers knew that the performance bond had been released but that Covich was unaware of its release before he agreed to purchase the property. He also found that Chambers did not rely on the bond's release or performance of the conditions of the permit in entering the contract.
A closing took place on June 1 or 4, 1973, during which Chambers and his mother, for consideration of $137,875, sold to Covich a parcel of land "containing 55.15 acres more or less." Covich paid $39,984 including the original deposit in cash, and executed a promissory note for $97,891, secured by a mortgage on the land.[8]
In December, 1973 (six months after the closing), Covich dug test holes on the property. In the holes dug, the water table varied from six inches to thirty-four inches below the surface. This did not meet the minimum depth requirement of the State Sanitary Code that ground water disposal fields should not be constructed in areas where the maximum ground water elevation is less than four feet below the bottom of the disposal field. The parties stipulated that prior to the date of the agreement 497,168 cubic yards of gravel had been removed from the land and that Chambers was aware of this removal. Without considering the fill necessary for the roads, it was estimated that 150,000 cubic yards of fill would be necessary to make forty to forty-five buildable lots.[9]
*746 Although he concluded that Chambers knew about Covich's plan to develop the property prior to signing the sale agreement, the master found "no evidence that ... Chambers was aware of the water table problem or that he had enough knowledge so that he was put on notice that a water problem existed." He found that "it is good engineering practice to dig test holes to find the water table before purchasing land, a step which plaintiff failed to take." He detected no evidence that either Chambers or his mother made a false representation as to the property upon which Covich could have relied. He concluded that there was no evidence of reliance on the gravel permit or the bond prior to the parties' entering the contract and that no mutual mistake had occurred.
3. Standard of proof. Relying on certain gratuitous language in the report,[10] the plaintiff claims that the master erroneously replaced the usual preponderance standard with one of proof "beyond doubt" as the measure of evidence justifying rescission for mutual mistake. We reject this argument.
We note first that the plaintiff filed a list of specific objections to the report. None of the objections brought to the judge's attention the current claim as to the standard of proof. An objecting party has the duty of alerting the judge to those specific parts of the report he questions, because "[t]he report clearly [is] not objectionable as a whole ... [and the judge] could not be required to assume the burden of separating the good from the bad." Hill v. Associated Transp. Inc., 345 Mass. 55, 58 (1962) (defendant unsuccessfully sought to have the report expunged in its entirety on the ground that there was error in the standard of care applied by the auditor). The rules *747 governing master's reports in non-jury actions also specifically require that the objections "clearly" state their grounds, a requirement that forecloses objections that have not been expressed to the judge reviewing the report. Mass.R.Civ.P. 53(e)(2), 365 Mass. 820 (1975). See also Freitas v. Olson & Appleby, Inc., 4 Mass. App. Ct. 801 (1976). This misstep adversely affects the plaintiff's right to raise the claim here.
However, we think the master was correct in applying the stricter test of clear and convincing proof to the plaintiff's evidence.[11] When reformation of a written contract is sought for mistake, it is established that "[r]eformation will not be decreed unless the facts required for such a decree are proved convincingly and to the entire satisfaction of the court. A preponderance of the evidence is said not to be enough." 3 Corbin, Contracts § 615, at 743 (1960). Accord, Stockbridge Iron Co. v. Hudson Iron Co., 107 Mass. 290 (1871); Kidder v. Greenman, 283 Mass. 601, 614 (1933); Stone v. Essex County Newspapers, Inc., 367 Mass. 849, 870, n. 10 (1975); 9 Wigmore, Evidence § 2498(3) (3d ed. 1940). "And the principle applies where cancellation for such a mistake is sought." Kidder v. Greenman, supra at 613. Stone v. Essex County Newspapers, Inc., supra at 870 n. 10. As Professor Corbin points out, the rule derives from the fact that "[t]he document itself, duly executed and introduced in court, has weight as evidence of mutual agreement. If supported by one party's testimony that there was no mistake of the sort justifying reformation *748... the testimony of the other party must be well supported in order to overcome the weight of the evidence against him." 3 Corbin, Contracts, supra at 745-746. This is also generally the rule in the Restatement (Second) of Contracts.[12] All of these are expressions of standards designed in the last analysis to impress upon the trier of fact the special degree of attention, care, and scrutiny that he must bring to the evidence before finding for a party seeking nullification of a written agreement. See generally Stone v. Essex County Newspapers, Inc., supra at 876 (Quirico, J., dissenting in part).
The plaintiff claims that there was "a basic assumption on which the contract was made" concerning which both parties were mistaken. See Dover Pool & Racquet Club, Inc. v. Brooking, 366 Mass. 629, 633 (1975). This is tantamount to an assertion that the parties did not have a meeting of the minds. In such a case it was incumbent upon the plaintiff when faced with the fully integrated agreement to establish his theory by a measure of proof that convinced the master that the parties had never agreed on certain essential terms. The master's approach to the dispute displayed an adequate grasp and application of the principles governing the standard of proof.
*749 4. Elements of mutual mistake. The plaintiff claims that the master's conclusion that a mutual mistake had not occurred "was based upon a fundamental misconception and misunderstanding of the legal principles applicable" and that his subsidiary findings compel a general finding of mutual mistake. To the contrary, we conclude that the subsidiary findings inexorably lead to the result reached by the master: that any mistake was entirely unilateral and that the risk was assumed by Covich.
A recent distillation of the principles concerning the doctrine of mistake is contained in the Restatement. "A mistake is a belief that is not in accord with existing facts." Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 293 (Tent. Draft No. 10, 1975). "Where a mistake of both parties at the time a contract was made as to a basic assumption on which the contract was made has a material effect on the agreed exchange of performances, the contract is voidable by the adversely affected party unless he bears the risk of the mistake...." Restatement (Second) of Contracts, supra § 294. "A party bears the risk of a mistake when ... he is aware, at the time the contract is made, that he has only limited knowledge with respect to the facts to which the mistake relates, but treats his limited knowledge as sufficient...." Restatement (Second) of Contracts, supra § 296. Our cases are substantially in accord with these rules. See Spurr v. Benedict, 99 Mass. 463, 466 (1868); Kyle v. Kavanagh, 103 Mass. 356, 359-360 (1869); Jeselsohn v. Park Trust Co., 241 Mass. 388, 392 (1922); White v. White, 346 Mass. 76, 80 (1963); Dover Pool & Racquet Club, Inc. v. Brooking, supra at 632-634. While it is clear that a party seeking rescission need not show even an innocent misrepresentation of some material assumption which forms the basis of his bargain in order to make out a case of mutual mistake of fact (White v. White, supra at 80), it is also elementary that both parties must share the erroneous state of mind as to the basic assumption on which the contract was *750 made.[13]Dover Pool & Racquet Club, Inc. v. Brooking, supra at 632-633, and cases cited. See also Taylor v. Buttrick, 165 Mass. 547, 548-549 (1896). Avoidance is not permitted just because one party is disappointed in the hope that the facts accord with his wishes.
In this case the master's internally consistent subsidiary findings and reasonable inferences which we may draw therefrom (Bills v. Nunno, 4 Mass. App. Ct. 279, 283-284 [1976]) establish that it was Covich, not Chambers, who was an expert on land development; that Covich approached the finder and pursued the purchase of the land; that neither party relied upon the release of the performance bond as a basis for entering the contract; and that Covich was unaware of the release until after he offered to purchase the land. In light of his written offer, which would have required Mrs. Chambers to undertake percolation tests, we think two inferences are compelling: that Covich did not rely on anyone else's knowledge, representations or belief as to the controlling facts concerning the water table; and that in failing to insert a similar condition in the purchase and sale agreement, Covich voluntarily assumed the risk as part of his bargain that the land might not have adequate drainage for the necessary septic systems. Further findings which buttress the master's conclusion that the mistake, if any, was unilateral or the risk assumed, include ones to *751 the effect that Chambers would not have understood the importance of the water table had he known about it; that the presence of a swamp in one section of the parcel was readily apparent (which could have put both the engineer and Covich, but not Chambers, on notice of a high water table); that the engineer knew from his first inspection that at least some of the parcels required fill; that Covich himself usually took the precaution of making certain simple tests for water table level before purchasing land; that it was good engineering practice to make these tests; and that it was Covich who decided not to do so. This is not a case like Dover Pool & Racquet Club, Inc. v. Brooking, supra, where both parties recognized the importance of the zoning ordinance to the buyer's proposed use and were simply mistaken as to a change in applicable zoning regulation. Nor is it a case like White v. White, supra, where neither party intended the result that their choice of language produced. Neither party to a contract can rescind it "because the known and assumed risk turned out to be greater than either or both expected it to be." Cook v. Kelley, 352 Mass. 628, 632 (1967), quoting from Aldrich v. Travelers Ins. Co., 317 Mass. 86, 88 (1944). Leaving these contracts intact will not produce an unconscionable result, and Covich has not demonstrated that it is impracticable for him to perform or that the purpose of the contract has been frustrated in a sense sufficient to provide a remedy. See generally Restatement (Second) of Contracts §§ 281 and 285 (Tent. Draft No. 9, 1974). Both the master and the judge correctly concluded that this was a case of "conscious ignorance or deliberate risk taking on the purchaser's part" (Dover Pool & Racquet Club, Inc. v. Brooking, supra at 637), a situation which precludes relief. As Mr. Justice Sutherland observed, "whether the agreement was made reluctantly, or appellant got the worst of the bargain, are matters unnecessary to be considered. It is enough that, without fraud [mistake] or coercion, [he] did agree." Savage Arms Corp. v. United States, 266 U.S. 217, 221 (1924).
*752 5. Attorney's fees and costs. Covich's final argument challenges the validity of the judge's award of attorney's fees on the note. The note provides for attorney's fees incurred in the collection of any unpaid balance due. When the claims were brought, the first installment was not yet due; thereafter, it became due and was not paid. The counterclaim which sought payment of the unpaid balance on the note and fees and costs attributable to collection, although filed after the conclusion of the master's hearings, was fully tried before the master by agreement of the parties. We find no merit in the plaintiff's argument that because the counterclaim was filed after the hearings concluded, collection of the sums due under the note was not in issue. The argument overlooks the manifest purpose of permitting the evidence pertaining to the counterclaims to be heard with the merits of the original complaint  "to effectuate the settlement in one proceeding of controversies so closely connected as appropriately to be combined in one trial in order to prevent duplication of testimony, to avoid unnecessary expense to the parties and to the public, and to expedite the adjudication of suits." Potier v. A.W. Perry, Inc., 286 Mass. 602, 608 (1934). Stubbert v. Sergio, 335 Mass. 91, 93 (1956). We also conclude that fees attributable to the defense of the rescission and cancellation actions were properly awarded under the terms of the note because the successful resistance of these claims was intrinsic to establishing a default on the note as a predicate for its collection. Finally, there was competent evidence in support of the judge's assessment of the fees in keeping with standards set out in Cummings v. National Shawmut Bank, 284 Mass. 563 (1933), and Perkins v. Blake, 3 Mass. App. Ct. 415, 418 (1975), and the record reveals no arbitrariness, injustice or abuse of discretion in the amount of the award.
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Anne M. Chambers.
[2]  These claims and admissions were contained in the defendants' amended answer, which was filed and allowed by the judge after the completion of the hearings before the master. However, by agreement of the parties, the hearing was conducted as if the amended pleadings had been filed in a timely manner. Mass. R. Civ. P. 15(b), 365 Mass. 761 (1974).
[3]  The order of reference was in the usual form for a nonjury action and stated that the master "shall not file with his report a transcript of the evidence and of the proceedings." No motion was brought to permit the evidence to be reported. See Shelburne Shirt Co. v. Singer, 322 Mass. 262, 265 (1948), and cases cited.
[4]  The 1976 restatement of rule 49, § 7, eliminated the need for preliminary objections before the master at the draft report stage but preserved in all essential respects the requirements for obtaining summaries of the evidence contained in its 1974 predecessor.
[5]  The master incorporated the special permit decision in his report. In pertinent part it required that the grades be left at a level shown on a contour map and that "it shall be covered to a minimum depth of 2, with topsoil of sufficient quality to support vegetation. The whole area shall then be seeded to prevent dust and erosion so as to leave the land in a condition no less suitable for development than it was before the commencement of the operation."
[6]  The master incorporated into his report "a copy of a document that purports to embody an offer to purchase approximately 50 acres of land at $2,200.00 per acre ... signed by Covich July 2, 1972, but not by [Mrs.] Chambers who is described as the seller." This offer stated that it was subject to several conditions to be performed by seller, including "[p]ercolation tests adequate for the development of said property as a subdivision." The purchase and sale agreement between the parties, which was also incorporated into the master's report, did not contain this provision.
[7]  The parties agreed that the conveyance from the defendants to the plaintiff comprised 49.88 acres.
[8]  In recognition of the error in the acreage actually conveyed, the parties agreed that in the event of liability the correct amount due and unpaid on the note would be $84,716.
[9]  Covich had originally prepared a topographical plan which laid out fifty-eight lots and various roads for the proposed subdivision.
[10]  The report concluded with the following dicta: "Bills for fraud, cancellation, reformation and rescission require proof `beyond doubt'.... Proof must be `beyond a reasonable doubt' which is not the same as Criminal Standard ... `clear and convincing evidence.'" As to the propriety of this type of material in a report, see Ross v. Broitman, 338 Mass. 770, 771-772 (1959); Pietrazak v. McDermott, 341 Mass. 107, 109 (1960).
[11]  A close reading of the master's findings indicates that his comments on the standard of proof may have been extraneous to his decision. Having stated in the report that there was no evidence to support certain of the plaintiff's allegations, including the crucial issue of reliance by both parties on the release of the performance bond, the master concluded that the "[e]vidence does not warrant a finding of mutual mistake, especially where the proof must be more than a preponderance of evidence." The findings as a whole indicate that the master felt that the plaintiff did not prove his case under any legal standard, let alone the higher standard the master believed to be appropriate.
[12]  Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 297, Comment c (Tent. Draft No. 10, 1975) provides: "Proof Required. Because experience teaches that mistakes are the exception and not the rule, the trier of the facts should examine the evidence with particular care when it relates to a party's assertion of mistake as the basis for his claim or defense. Care is all the more necessary when the asserted mistake relates to a writing, because the law of contracts, as is indicated by the parol evidence rule and the Statute of Frauds, attaches great weight to the written expression of an agreement. This is commonly summarized in a standard that requires the trier of the facts to be satisfied by `clear and convincing evidence' before reformation is decreed. Each case must, however, turn on its particular facts, and the evidentiary weight to be attached to a writing will depend, in part, on its inherent credibility in the light of those facts. Once the court is convinced that the writing fails to express the agreement of the parties, the writing loses its usual evidentiary effect with respect to other matters, such as the ascertainment of the parties' actual agreement."
[13]  A party may avoid a contract for unilateral mistake only if he does not bear the risk of the mistake and the other party either knows of his mistake or the mistake has the effect of rendering the contract unconscionable. Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 295 (Tent. Draft No. 10, 1975). Historically, a bargain was considered unconscionable if it was "such as no man in his senses and not under delusion would make on the one hand, and as no honest and fair man would accept on the other." Hume v. United States, 132 U.S. 406 (1889), quoting Earl of Chesterfield v. Janssen, 28 Eng. Rep. 82, 100 (Ch. 1750). Later, a contract was determined unenforceable because unconscionable when "the sum total of its provisions drives too hard a bargain for a court of conscience to assist." Campbell Soup Co. v. Wentz, 172 F.2d 80, 84 (3d Cir.1948). See Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 234 (Tent. Draft No. 5, 1970).

=== CASE 2218117 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:41.344369+00 ===

397 N.E.2d 949 (1979)
Thomas WHITE, Appellant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee.
No. 179S12.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
December 13, 1979.
*950 Robert W. Hammerle, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Theodore L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., Stephen J. Cuthbert, Deputy Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
PIVARNIK, Justice.
Appellant was charged with Confinement While Armed With A Deadly Weapon and Unlawful Deviate Conduct. He was tried by a jury in Warren Circuit Court and found guilty on all counts. He appeals his conviction alleging errors in identification procedures and that consequently, errors in such procedures resulted in an insufficiency of the evidence to support the jury's verdict.
On June 5, 1978, at the Tippecanoe Mall, B.E. was abducted around 4:50 p.m. Her attacker forced his way into her car, and held a knife to her throat. He then put his arm around her and pushed her over. He tied her right leg with a rope telling her that if she ran he would break her leg. She was directed to drive and told not to look at him. After driving for some time they stopped at a dead end. She was forced to have oral sex and intercourse with him. She testified that she kept her eyes closed during part of this time and cried and had tears in her eyes. When they left, her assailant was sitting close to her in the front seat and she looked directly at him. He left the car around 6:00 p.m., and she sped away. B.E. drove to a nearby residence and police were summoned. She was treated at a hospital and then gave her statement to police.
I.
Appellant's first allegation of error concerns the overruling of his motion to suppress the in-court identification of appellant by Jim Hall. Hall was a farmer who testified that on June 5, 1979, between 6:00 and 6:30 p.m., he observed a white male walking on the road toward Boswell, Indiana. He described him as wearing glasses, an army type cap, a checkered shirt and as having light hair. On June 14, on a suggestion by an Indiana State trooper, Mr. Hall was taken to White's house by Harold Stone, Town Marshall of Boswell, Indiana, to see if Hall could identify White. Stone talked to White about a complaint he had received about White's dog. Hall got out of the car and walked to within six or eight feet of White. At the suppression hearing Stone said Hall told him that there was no doubt in his mind that White was the man he had seen walking. At the trial, Hall testified that when he observed the man walking on the road, he spoke and waved to him. He also noticed the man's particular walk. Hall then stated that, to the best of his knowledge, the appellant was the man he had seen walking down the road. Hall was careful to limit his testimony to these facts by saying:
"I am almost convinced that this was the boy that I saw walking. Whether or not he had anything to do with this case that is coming up or not, I don't know."
This testimony was significant as identification testimony because, if believed, it placed the appellant at the location at the time when, according to the victim her assailant left her car. Appellant claims that the state is required to present clear and convincing evidence of an independent basis *951 for Hall's in-court identification and that it failed in its burden because Hall expressed reservations about the identification. We do not agree.
Hall had observed a man in daylight at close range. He spoke and waved to him. Hall was wearing his glasses at that time. He described the man and his clothing and the fact that he was wearing glasses. When Hall was taken to White's residence he identified him there. He identified him at trial as above set out. Although this witness cautiously limited his identification at trial, such statements are not inadmissible because they are qualified. The jury was able to weigh Hall's statements. It was not error to admit this identification.
In regard to the appellant's claim that the view of the appellant at his home was improper, we have held that the presentation of a single suspect is inherently suggestive. Swope v. State, (1975) 263 Ind. 148, 325 N.E.2d 193, 198. However, the in-court identification is nevertheless permissible if the witness has a basis for the identification which was independent of the suggestive procedure. Young v. State, (1979) Ind., 395 N.E.2d 772; Love v. State, (1977) 266 Ind. 577, 365 N.E.2d 771. There was ample basis for the in-court identification which was independent of the view at White's house.
II.
Appellant next contends that it was error to overrule his motion to suppress the in-court identification by the victim, B.E., based on his claim that it was a product of a series of unduly suggestive pre-trial confrontations.
B.E. described her assailant to the police. She described his clothing and him personally as having facial acne, blond hair, large prominent eyes and as wearing black rimmed glasses. She described his expression and grin. B.E. testified that she viewed a couple of hundred or more mug shots and identified no one. She attempted to use the composite machine to produce a picture of him and was unable to do so to her satisfaction. Later an artist helped create a sketch from her descriptions. Two detectives picked B.E. up at her place of employment and she viewed three men who were in a car which the officers had stopped. She did not identify any of them. When they were driving through Boswell and while she was trying to further describe her attacker, they passed a car with a man and others in it. B.E. said "Like that." The car contained a man, a woman and children. It was later determined that these people were White and his family. At the suppression hearing the police officer testified that he and B.E. followed the car after she stated that the driver looked a lot like the person who had abducted and raped her. The car pulled into a drive at a mobile home residence and the officer stopped at an IGA store parking lot and let B.E. look through his binoculars. There was no testimony on what happened next or whether or not B.E. saw anything through the binoculars. Apparently B.E. never testified at trial about this incident. Later officers took her to National Homes to view the men going to their cars and she picked appellant out of the crowd, saying "There he is." Then she viewed a line-up of six men which included appellant White. She identified him and then the men were asked to speak the words, "move over" and she restated her identification.
Appellant claims that these confrontations were so arranged as to make the resulting identification virtually inevitable, citing Foster v. California, (1969) 394 U.S. 440, 89 S.Ct. 1127, 22 L.Ed.2d 402 and that therefore it was error to admit the in-court identification of the appellant White by the victim, B.E. This claim is without merit.
Appellant concedes that the victim's viewing of White as he passed in the automobile with his family was not unduly suggestive nor was it arranged by the police. He argues that the alleged viewing through the binoculars was unduly suggestive. There is no trial testimony on this incident and no testimony as to what, if anything, B.E. saw through the binoculars, or whether *952 or not an identification was made at that time. Regardless of whether or not B.E. saw or identified White at this time, such a procedure would not have been unnecessarily suggestive. Once the appellant became a suspect, the next reasonable step in the investigatory process was to determine if the victim could identify him. Appellant did not know he was suspected by the police and was not in police custody or restraint. He was in an automobile with his family. The officer followed him on the basis of the victim's comments. Under these circumstances, the procedure used was permissible. Zion v. State (1977) Ind., 365 N.E.2d 766.
The following identifications occurred at National Homes parking lot where B.E. picked appellant out of the group of people going to their cars saying, "There he is." Later she picked him out of a six man line-up. This situation is completely unlike Foster v. California, supra, which involved a suggestive line-up and show-up which had resulted only in tentative identifications. Here B.E. had initiated the view of appellant at his home by spontaneously recognizing him as he drove by. She identified him from a group of people and picked him from a line-up. There is no record of her having ever misidentified White, or of her having identified anyone other than White, or having failed to identify White. Compare Holt v. State, (1979) Ind., 396 N.E.2d 887.
Appellant also complains that only two of the men in the line-up wore glasses and that only one wore dark rimmed glasses. He complains that B.E. could not have seen her attacker clearly because she testified that during part of the time of the incident she had tears in her eyes and had her eyes closed. These comments by appellant do not render the identification procedures improper. The men in the line-up were of approximately the same age, height and general description and were similarly dressed. Two wore glasses. One of them, not White, also wore a cap which had also been part of the attacker's description. B.E. had observed the appellant in daylight and testified that she looked straight at him at one point. She was with him for over an hour. She described him in detail and helped create a sketch of him, noticed him in a passing car, had identified him from a group of people and picked him out of a line-up. It was not error to overrule appellant's motion to suppress her in-court identification.
III.
Appellant's final allegation of error is that because of the previously discussed alleged errors in identification procedures the evidence was insufficient to support the jury's verdict. He also argues that the jury should have therefore believed the alibi appellant offered.
This argument fails to argue the lack of evidence on the elements of the offenses and this issue is waived. Guardiola v. State (1978) Ind., 375 N.E.2d 1105. Appellant is asking this court to judge the credibility of witnesses which we will not do and to overturn the conclusions of the jury on that basis, which we will not do. It is the prerogative of the jury to believe whomever they choose, and to disregard the testimony of witnesses they do not believe. Sypniewski v. State, (1977) Ind., 368 N.E.2d 1359. As discussed in the previous issues, there was ample evidence presented upon which the jury could base its verdict.
Judgment affirmed.
All Justices concur.

=== CASE 9738918 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:05:18.997725+00 ===

HABHAB, Judge.
Appellant, Ricki Bradley, appeals a district court ruling denying his challenge to a decision of the prison disciplinary committee. Appellant first contends his due process rights were violated. Specifically, he argues his hearing was not timely. Additionally, he contends he should have been given his Miranda rights during the investigation of this matter. The appellant also challenges the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain the charges against him and further complains the disciplinary committee erred in considering the appellant’s refusal to take a polygraph examination. He contends the disciplinary committee wrongfully relied on confidential information. We affirm.
In October 1988, Bradley received a disciplinary report alleging he had violated several institutional rules at the reformatory by engaging in an ongoing campaign of threats and violence against a Dubuque woman. At the hearing, Bradley, who appeared without counsel or counsel substitute, denied the allegations. Relying on confidential information, the disciplinary committee found Bradley had violated rules concerning verbal abuse and threats/intimidation. Sanctions were imposed.
On July 7, 1989, Bradley received a second disciplinary notice alleging several rule violations based on his plans to escape from the reformatory and his threats against the Dubuque woman. During the investigation of this matter and prior to his *226receipt of notice, Bradley had initially agreed, then refused, to take a polygraph. Bradley was also not given Miranda rights. The hearing was originally scheduled for July 15, but the committee decided to add additional rule violations and reconvene on July 18. Following the hearing, the committee found Bradley guilty of several rules and imposed punishment. Appellant brought this postconviction action, after exhausting administrative remedies, in order to challenge the prison disciplinary committee’s decision. We affirm.
I.
Postconviction relief actions are treated as special proceedings at law and review is on assigned errors only. Morris v. Auger, 414 N.W.2d 858, 859 (Iowa App.1987). A prison disciplinary committee's findings of fact and decision are not subject to Monday morning quarterbacking upon judicial review if there is some evidence to support the committee’s decision. See Superintendent v. Hill, 472 U.S. 445, 454, 105 S.Ct. 2768, 2777, 86 L.Ed.2d 356, 364 (1985). Upon our review of the record, excluding consideration by the committee of the appellant’s refusal to submit to a polygraph examination, we find the prison disciplinary committee’s decision to be supported by some evidence. See Wilson v. Farrier, 372 N.W.2d 499, 501 (Iowa 1985).
II.
As it relates to the disciplinary committee’s consideration of appellant’s refusal to take a polygraph examination, both parties to this appeal cite us to Van Hoff v. State, 458 N.W.2d 876 (Iowa App.1990), for their discussion of this issue. Although it is one of our opinions, it was not published. Court of appeals cases which are not published cannot be relied on for precedent unless one of the conditions mentioned in Supreme Court Rule 10(f) exists. None of those conditions apply here.
To clarify our position, polygraph examination evidence should not be used as evidence in disciplinary cases unless the parties stipulate to its use. Cf. State v. Conner, 241 N.W.2d 447, 457 (Iowa 1976) (unstipulated polygraph evidence may not be submitted). It follows then that in its case-in-chief an inmate’s refusal to take a polygraph examination should not be used as evidence.
If this was the only piece of evidence relied on by the committee, error would undoubtedly follow. But from our examination of the record, we find there is some evidence, other than the polygraph evidence, which supports the decision of the disciplinary committee. Under the circumstances here, the consideration by the committee of the polygraph evidence is harmless.
III.
The appellant also alleges he was denied due process because he was not given Miranda warnings. In addition, he claims General Order 35 was violated when the prison authorities failed to inform him of his rights under that rule. We are unable to agree with either of these contentions.
This case involves an application of the Miranda rule in a prison setting. We assume that since applicant alleges a violation of his Miranda rights, he is taking the position that he was “in custody” at all times during his conversation with prison officials. “Custodial interrogation,” which must be preceded by Miranda warnings, is “questioning initiated by law enforcement officers after a person has been taken into custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom of action in any significant way.” Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 444, 86 S.Ct. 1602,1612,16 L.Ed.2d 694, 706 (1966).
The question that needs answering is whéther a prison inmate is automatically always “in custody” within the meaning of Miranda. The appellate courts of this state have not yet addressed this issue. The federal circuit courts have and to some extent are divided as to when a prison inmate is “in custody” for Miranda purposes.
The Fourth Circuit in United States v. Conley, 779 F.2d 970 (4th Cir.1985), rejected an argument that because a prison inmate is in custody, he or she is automatical*227ly entitled to Miranda warnings prior to any questions which ultimately may point to involvement in criminal activity. The Fourth Circuit disavowed any such per se approach to prisoner interrogations. In doing so, that circuit distinguished its result in Conley from that of Mathis v. United States, 391 U.S. 1, 88 S.Ct. 1503, 20 L.Ed.2d 381 (1968).
In Mathis the prisoner was questioned by a government agent about certain tax returns. He was not given Miranda warnings. The government argued that for Miranda to apply, an inmate must be in custody for the matter to which the questioning relates. The Supreme Court disagreed, holding that even though Mathis was questioned as to matters unrelated to his imprisonment, he nevertheless was entitled to Miranda warnings.
The defendant in Conley, relying on Mathis, sought reversal on the grounds that because he was in custody he was automatically entitled to Miranda warnings. The facts in Conley are as follows: The defendant was in prison when he was questioned about the murder of a fellow inmate. The inmate, along with others, was with the defendant when they left their cells for breakfast. The victim shortly returned to his cell bleeding from fatal knife wounds. A body search of other inmates, including the defendant, followed. The search revealed a two-inch wrist gouge-type wound on Conley. Conley was handcuffed and taken to a conference room in the prison to await transfer to the infirmary for medical treatment of his wound. When in the conference room, both before and after treatment, Conley discussed the assault on the victim. He initiated the first conversation. He was asked how he was injured. In the course of the discussion, Conley maintained that he had observed two inmates attack the victim and that he had been stabbed in the wrist during a rescue attempt. Later the prison officer asked Conley if “you are up to your same old s-t again.” He replied that the victim was a friend but that the victim had a bad attitude. When questioned about the identity of the assailants, he responded that he did not recognize them because they wore ski masks. Conley, relying on Mathis, sought to have his statements suppressed on the grounds he was in “custody,” thus entitled to Miranda warnings.
The Conley court concluded there was nothing in the Mathis opinion which suggested that an inmate is automatically “in custody” and therefore always entitled to Miranda warnings merely by virtue of his prisoner status. United States v. Conley, 779 F.2d at 972. The court concluded Conley was not in custody for Miranda purposes. It decided, because of the circumstances that existed at the time Conley made his statements, “Conley’s freedom of movement cannot be characterized as more restricted than that of other prisoners in transit to and from the facility either by virtue of his confinement or by nature of the questioning by prison personnel.” Id. at 974.
The Ninth Circuit was faced with a similar problem in Cervantes v. Walker, 589 F.2d 424 (9th Cir.1978), in which an inmate argued that because he was imprisoned he was automatically “in custody” within the meaning of Miranda. The inmate in Cervantes also relied upon the Mathis case.
As in Conley, the Cervantes court declined to give the per se effect to Mathis the defendant urged. The Cervantes court reasoned:
To interpret Mathis as Cervantes urges, would, in effect, create a per se rule that any investigatory questioning inside a prison requires Miranda warnings. Such a rule could totally disrupt prison administration. Miranda certainly does not dictate such a consequence. “Our decision is not intended to hamper the traditional function of police officers in investigating crime_ General on-the-scene questioning as to facts surrounding a crime or other general questioning of citizens in the fact-finding procedure is not affected by our holding.” Miranda v. Arizona, supra 384 U.S. at 477, 86 S.Ct. at 1629.
Adoption of Cervantes’ contention would not only be inconsistent with Miranda, but would torture it to the illogical posi*228tion of providing greater protection to a prisoner than to his non-imprisoned counterpart. We cannot believe the Supreme Court intended such a result. Thus, while Mathis may have narrowed the range of possible situations in which on-the-scene questioning may take place in a prison, we find in Mathis no express intent to eliminate such questioning entirely merely by virtue of the interviewee’s prisoner status.
Cervantes, 589 F.2d at 427.1
The Eighth Circuit, in evaluating this type of situation used the following analysis:
“Miranda warnings are required for official interrogations only where ‘a person has been taken into custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom of action in any significant way.’ ” United States v. Helmel, 769 F.2d 1306 1320 (8th Cir.1985) (quoting Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 444, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 1612, 16 L.Ed.2d 694 (1966)). While Miranda may apply to one who is in custody for an offense unrelated to the interrogation, see Mathis v. United States, 391 U.S. 1, 4-5, 88 S.Ct. 1503, 1504-05, 20 L.Ed.2d 381 (1968), incarceration does not ipso facto render an interrogation custodial, Cervantes v. Walker, 589 F.2d 424, 427 (9th Cir.1978), cited in Flittie v. Solem, 775 F.2d 933, 944 (8th Cir.1985) (en banc). In all cases, we must consider the totality of the circumstances, including the individual’s “freedom to leave the scene and the purpose, place and length” of the questioning. Helmel, 769 F.2d at 1320. The relevant inquiry is whether a reasonable man in the suspect’s position would have understood himself to be in custody. Berkemer v. Mc Carty, 468 U.S. 420, 442 & n. 35, 104 S.Ct. 3138, 3151 & n. 35, 82 L.Ed.2d 317 (1984); United States v. Jones, 630 F.2d 613, 616 (8th Cir.1980) (per curiam); but see United States v. Rorex, 737 F.2d 753, 756 (8th Cir.1984) (decided before Berkemer). When an individual is incarcerated for an unrelated offense, this requires some restriction on his freedom of action in connection with the interrogation itself. See Cervantes, 589 F.2d at 427-28.
Leviston v. Black, 843 F.2d 302, 304 (8th Cir.1988).
We likewise hold that we must look to the totality of the circumstances surrounding the interrogation to determine whether the inmate is subject to more than the usual restraint on a prisoner’s liberty to depart. This is so for in a prison setting the entire group is under restraint of free movement. As the Cervantes court stated: “ ‘Restriction’ is a relative concept and that, in this context, it ‘necessarily implies a change in the surroundings of the prisoner which results in an added imposition on his freedom of movement.’ ” Cervantes v. Walker, 589 F.2d at 428. We conclude, as did the Eighth Circuit in Leviston, the Fourth Circuit in Conley, and the Ninth Circuit in Cervantes, that incarceration does not ipso facto render an interrogation custodial.
By this ruling we do not hold that a prison inmate is not entitled to Miranda warnings. We merely ,decide the question must be resolved on a case-by-case basis focusing on the totality of the circumstances, including the individual’s “freedom to leave the scene, and the purpose, place, and length” of the questioning. As pointed out in Leviston, the relevant inquiry is whether a reasonable person in the suspect’s position would have understood himself to be in custody. Helpful in this determination, along with considering the totality of the circumstances, are four detailed factors set out in Cervantes. Those four factors are the language used to summon the individual, the physical surroundings of the interrogation, the extent to which the inmate is confronted with evidence of his guilt, and the additional pressure exerted to detain him. Id.
*229These factors also bear on the final determination as to whether a reasonable person would believe there had been a restriction of his freedom over and above that in his normal prisoner setting. Id.
When we consider the totality of the circumstances, and apply the factors aforesaid to the questioning of the appellant, the appellant was not “in custody” for Miranda purposes. Thus Miranda warnings were not necessary. In this respect, it cannot go unnoticed that the appellant has not in his brief called to our attention any circumstances that he relies on that even remotely calls for Miranda warnings.
As it relates to General Order No. 35 at 11B6, the rule that requires certain warnings somewhat similar to Miranda, we agree with the applicant that the general order was not followed. However, we conclude that even if we assume that those warnings should have been given, the applicant was not prejudiced in any respect. It cannot go unnoticed that no criminal charges were filed against the applicant nor were any contemplated at the time of his questioning. It is also clear that if indeed he made any incriminating statements, there are no criminal proceedings pending in which they would be used.
IV.
We must also consider appellant’s due process arguments. The appellant contends the institution violated his rights by failing to hold his hearing in a timely manner. We conclude the hearing was timely held and in accordance with applicable rules. We affirm on this issue.
We have considered all statements of issues advanced by the appellant, whether mentioned in the opinion or not, and find them to be without merit. We affirm the district court in all respects.
AFFIRMED.
All Judges concur except SCHLEGEL and SACKETT, JJ., who dissent.
. The Cervantes court held that the questioning that took place was an instance of on-the-scene questioning enabling the prison official to determine whether a crime was in progress. The court held Miranda warnings were not required. It applied a reasonable person standard and four factors which we refer to in a later paragraph of this opinion. These factors were applied when determining whether there was an added imposition on Cervantes’ freedom of movement.

=== CASE 2217654 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:32.090232+00 ===

119 N.W.2d 145 (1963)
In re OPINION OF THE JUDGES.
No. 10064.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
January 23, 1963.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY, ARCHIE GUBBRUD, GOVERNOR OF SOUTH DAKOTA:
In a communication dated January 22, 1963 you have requested an advisory opinion of the judges of this court as to the effect of the recently approved amendment[1] to Sections 6 and 7, Article III of the Constitution of the State of South Dakota relating to annual sessions of the legislature. The question propounded relates to the exercise and coordination of your executive powers with the legislative department of our state.
The pertinent portions of the above amendment to our constitution read as follows:
"A regular session of the legislature shall be held in each odd-numbered year and shall not exceed forty-five legislative days, excluding Sundays, holidays and legislative recess, except in cases of impeachment, and members of the legislature shall receive no other pay or perquisites except salary and mileage."
"A regular session of the legislature shall be held in each even-numbered year beginning with the year 1964 and shall not exceed thirty legislative days, excluding Sundays, holidays and legislative recess, except in cases of impeachment, and members of the legislature shall receive no other pay or perquisites except salary and mileage."
"The legislature shall meet at the seat of government on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of January at 12 o'clock m. in the year 1963 and in the year 1964 and each even-numbered year thereafter, and on the first Tuesday after the third Monday of January at 12 o'clock m. in the year 1965 and each odd-numbered year thereafter, and at no other time except as provided by this constitution."
*146 Our legislature is authorized to meet only at "regular"[2] or "extraordinary"[3] sessions. Broadly speaking, the effect of the foregoing constitutional amendment is to replace "regular" biennial[4] sessions with "regular" annual sessions. The relationship between regular sessions has not been changed. Each is separate and independent from the other in the same sense that biennial sessions were separate and independent. Therefore, one regular annual session cannot be considered as an adjourned or a so-called "split" session having connective continuity with another regular annual session.
Respectfully submitted.
E.D. ROBERTS,
ALEX RENTTO,
CHARLES S. HANSON,
FRANK BIEGELMEIER,
FRED J. HOMEYER,
Judges
NOTES
[1]  Proposed by Ch. 296, L.1961; Approved Nov. 6, 1962.
[2]  See Art. III, Secs. 6 and 7, S.D. Constitution.
[3]  By Art. IV, Sec. 4, the Governor may convene the legislature on "extraordinary occasions".
[4]  Art. III, Sec. 2.

=== CASE 9738790 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:45.06483+00 ===

*254Carr, C. J.
Plaintiff herein was struck by defendant’s car at the intersection of Caniff and Gallagher streets in the city of Hamtramck and sustained substantial injuries. The accident occurred on March 1, 1958, at approximately 8 o’clock in the evening. Traffic at said intersection was controlled by red, amber, and green lights, and the intersection was lighted, at least to some extent, by streetlights.
It was the claim of the plaintiff on the trial of the case in circuit court that he was walking in a westerly direction on the south side of Caniff street and started across Gallagher street with the green light in his favor. When he was near the west curb he was struck by defendant’s automobile, which, according to his' testimony, he had not previously noticed. There was also testimony in the case indicating that plaintiff was walking with his head down. Defendant, as a witness in his own behalf, claimed that his headlights were on, that he entered the intersection, driving in a southerly direction, with the green light in his favor, and that at least 2 other vehicles proceeding in a northerly direction traversed the intersection at- the same time that defendant was undertaking to pass through it. The right front fender of defendant’s automobile struck plaintiff approximately 2 feet from the west curb.
The issues raised as to the negligence of the defendant and the claimed contributory negligence of the plaintiff were submitted to the jury for determination by the charge of the trial judge. Verdict was returned in favor of the defendant and plaintiff moved for a new trial, asserting as grounds thereof that the trial court was in error in denying plaintiff’s motion for a directed verdict as to liability, that defendant had not borne the burden of proof of establishing contributory negligence on the part of plaint*255tiff,  that the verdict was against the preponderance of the evidence, and that counsel for defendant in his closing argument to the jury had implied that defendant did not have insurance. Defendant filed answer to said motion, in substance denying that it was well-founded. In passing on the questions raised the trial judge expressed the conclusion that there was a question as to plaintiff’s contributory negligence and pointed out that the jury, following the submission of the case, had returned to the courtroom for further instructions on such issue. The instructions were given, and thereafter the verdict of the jury was returned.
The claim that the question of insurance had been injected into the case by counsel for defendant in his closing argument to the jury was based on the following statement in the course of such argument:
“I wish to point out to you that this case means as much to my client as it does to Mr. Herman.”
It was the position of counsel for plaintiff on the argument of the motion for a new trial that the jury might have interpreted said statement as meaning that defendant did not carry insurance. On behalf of the latter it is insisted that such construction was not permissible. It does not appear that any direct reference to insurance was made by counsel, and it is argued that conjecture and speculation are not allowable in the consideration of the possible interpretation placed by the jury on the remark. The trial judge, however, concluded that the statement might have caused the jury to believe that counsel meant to say that defendant was not protected by insurance and, hence, that any judgment rendered against him would be his sole responsibility. Apparently it was argued also in support of the motion *256for a new trial that the fact that defendant’s wife was in the courtroom as a spectator might have been known to the jurors and have aroused a feeling of sympathy of some kind. It does not appear, however, that there was anything improper in the conduct of Mrs. Ploszczanski or that the jury, in fact, took any note of her presence. We are impressed that plaintiff’s claim in this respect was untenable.
The question at issue in the case is whether the trial judge improperly concluded that plaintiff might have been prejudiced by the remark of counsel for defendant, above quoted. It is contended on behalf of plaintiff that the judge was vested with discretion in the matter and that his action did not constitute an abuse thereof. Reference to insurance in the trial of a case of the character here involved is prohibited by CLS 1956, § 500.3030 (Stat Ann 1957 Rev § 24.13030). Said section continues the inhibition contained in the insurance code of 1917, as amended,  which has been considered in numerous prior decisions of this Court. See, also, Michigan Court Rule No 1, § 3 (1945), and Darr v. Buckley, 355 Mich 392.
In Morris v. Montgomery, 229 Mich 509, 512, the following significant statement was made:
“Plaintiff testified to a conversation with defendant at a hospital and stated an insurance adjuster was present. The testimony about an insurance adjuster was struck out. This cured the error. The time has come when probably a majority of persons on every jury own automobiles and the policy of carrying insurance is so common that it is not surprising if jurors sense the fact. The rule of exclusion, perhaps, ought to continue, even though everyday affairs have moved beyond its original reason, but it ought not to be employed to set aside judgments except in cases of flagrant violation.”
*257It may be noted that in the instant case the trial court did not find that there was a “flagrant violation” of the rule against reference to insurance in cases of this type. Neither did he find affirmatively that the plaintiff had been deprived of a fair and impartial trial because of the remark made by defendant’s counsel. Apparently the new trial was granted on the theory that such result might have followed, dependent on the interpretation that the jury placed on the remark in the closing argument.
It has been repeatedly indicated by this Court that the action of a trial judge in granting a new trial will not be set aside unless there is an “abuse of discretion.” However, such an order for a new trial must be based on the facts involved in a particular situation and may not be predicated on conjecture or mere possibilities. As pointed out in Brookdale Cemetery Association v. Lewis, 342 Mich 14, 18, the term “discretion”. means a “sound judicial discretion.” See, also, Kellom v. City of Ecorse, 329 Mich 303; Reardon v. Buck, 335 Mich 318. The general subject of a showing as to liability insurance in certain cases is considered at some length in an annotation in 4 ALR2d 761, in which it is stated (p 774) that:
“A rule that defendant will not be permitted to convey to the jury the information that he is not insured will not be extended so as to bar language which may merely convey a certain impression that defendant is not insured. Thus, in Crowley v. Mailman (1937), 88 NH 388 (190 A 273), it was held that a statement by defendant’s counsel to the jury that if the defendant is not at fault the plaintiff is not entitled to recover damages, that it is not counsel’s money, or the jury’s money, but the defendant’s money, is not inadmissible as telling the jury that the defendant does not carry insurance.”
*258Counsel for defendant, insisting that he was not guilty of any flagrant violation of the rule forbidding the injection of the matter of insurance into cases where it is forbidden, and that the language used by him may not properly be given the interpretation claimed by counsel for plaintiff, argues that the statement emphasized must be considered in the light of the context. He points out that counsel for plaintiff had argued to the jury that the proofs in the case justified a verdict in the sum of $25,000 or $26,000, that the attention of the jury was called to the fact that the ad damnum clause of the declaration was $75,000, and that the return of a verdict in favor of plaintiff “in the vicinity of $25,000 or $26,000” was expressly requested. The alleged objectionable statement was contained in the following excerpt from the argument in which defendant’s counsel was apparently endeavoring to reply to remarks made by the attorney for plaintiff:
“I would like to point out to you, which you already know, under the court rules, I get this 1 opportunity to talk to you. Mr. Grillis, under the court rules, gets to sum up with his closing argument. If I have forgotten, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, I will have to rely on you to remember and weigh it in your judgment. I wish to point out to you that this case means as much to my client as it does to Mr. Herman and as I pointed out before, there are duties both ways, all the duties are not on the defendant, all are not on the plaintiff, but each has certain duties and you must judge, you must judge them from the positions at the time of the accident, you must picture yourself in the position of these parties the night the accident occurred..
“In summation, we ask that you bring back a judgment of no cause for action in behalf of the defendant for the reasons that there has been no — absolutely no showing of negligence on the part of this defendant; that all of the testimony as far as the conduct *259of the plaintiff is concerned is that Mr. Herman was not acting as a reasonable and prudent man and that, as unfortunate as it may be, his conduct bars him from recovery; that these unfortunate injuries and damages are the sole result of his own negligence. Also, that the damages, as far as we view them, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, are between $2,500 and $3,000, as far as his out-of-pocket expenses are concerned. I call your attention, $26,000 or $75,000 is one lot of money.”
Counsel for plaintiff did not at the time make any objection to the argument nor did he request that the trial court charge the jury to disregard it. Neither did the judge on his own motion suggest the impropriety of the statement in question or direct the jury to refrain from giving consideration thereto. The record before us fairly suggests that at that time the statement, now claimed to have been prejudicial to plaintiff, did not impress either court or counsel as subject to the interpretation that it is now contended the jury may have given it. The fact that further instructions were requested on the subject of contributory negligence, as pointed out by the trial judge in his opinion, would indicate that the members of the jury considered that issue to be the controlling one in the determination of the ease.
On the record before us it may not be said that the plaintiff was deprived of a fair and impartial trial. There was evidence supporting the verdict returned by the jury. We do not think that the remark of counsel for defendant as to the latter’s interest in the outcome of the case was in such form that it could be construed by the jury as meaning that he was not carrying insurance. In view of the argument of plaintiff’s counsel as to the amount of the verdict that the jury should return, defendant not only had a concern of a financial nature, assuming that the maximum amount of insurance coverage *260was $10,000 as counsel suggests, but he might well have been affected adversely in other respects. In view of the context it is a fair conclusion that counsel was seeking to remind the jury that the rights and duties of both parties to the case were involved. The factual situation presented was not such as to require the granting of a new trial in the interest of justice. The order entered was not in accord with “sound judicial discretion.”
The case is remanded to the circuit court with directions to set aside the order from which the appeal has been taken. Appellant may have costs.
Dethmers, Kelly, Souris, and Otis M. Smith, JJ., concurred with Carr, 0. J.

=== CASE 9738791 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:45.069093+00 ===

Black, J.
(dissenting). I am unable to agree that the trial judge abused the relevantly broad discretion the law confides to those who preside where things happen that are visible to the human eye yet never find their way into typed or printed pages. I am concerned, to be perfectly frank about it, that 1 very broad rule of discretion applies — or at least seems to apply — in this Court when the plaintiff new trial seeker has lost in the juryroom, and another more restricted rule of “sound” judicial discretion applies when the defendant new trial mover has lost in that room. Compare the current opinion of the Chief Justice with that of the Court in Patzke v. Chesapeake & Ohio R. Co., 368 Mich 190.
The rule should be the same whether a plaintiff or a defendant succeeds below with his motion for new trial. I therefore vote to affirm this order for new trial on strength of principles approved by unanimous vote in Patzke, supra.
Kavanagh, J., concurred with Black, J.
O’Hara, J., took no part in the decision of this case.

=== CASE 9738792 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:45.809659+00 ===

Peterson, J.
— This is a divorce action decided in favor of plaintiff. The issues are: 1st: Defendant asks for new trial, and alleges the trial court abused its discretion in refusing to continue the case when defendant’s attorney, with the court’s approval, withdrew from the ease in the middle of the trial. 2d: The trial court committed error in rendering a decree unfair to defendant as to support money for the four children of the parties.
On these issues defendant appealed.
I. Plaintiff and defendant were married January 10, 1951. Plaintiff was 28 and defendant was 39. They have four children who ranged in ages from 6 to 11 at time of trial in December 1961.
Defendant was a farmer. He rented and lived on a farm of 120 acres southeast of Cedar Rapids. In connection with the farm work defendant was exceedingly dilatory. He habitually refused to get out of bed in the morning until 10:30 or 11 o’clock. It became necessary for plaintiff to do all the chores in the morning. In addition thereto she worked regularly in the field. She continuously used a tractor and did much of the plowing, planting and harvesting of crops. At one .time when she was six months pregnant with one of the children it became necessary for her to plant beans.
*794Another difficult part of the situation was defendant’s cruel and inhuman treatment. He had an uncontrollable temper and on more than one occasion struck plaintiff. He once knocked her to the ground and pounded her face, arms and legs so hard that she was black and blue for a long period of time. After she realized that her life was in danger and that she could not take a chance of remaining with defendant, she left him and moved to her parents’ home in a little town near Cedar Eapids called Ely. Later she rented a small house in Ely into which she moved with her children.
Plaintiff was only 17 when she married.' She only reached eleventh grade in school, and did not secure an extensive education. She found a menial job at Mercy Hospital in Cedar Eapids at wages of $160 per month. She hired an elderly lady to take care of the children while she worked. It was necessary that she drive back and forth a few miles every evening and morning to perform her work.
Defendant’s disposition was- surly, quarrelsome and mean in all other personal contacts, as well as in the home.
Plaintiff thought defendant’s actions denoted a serious mental and psychological condition. She filed an information against him before the Insanity Commission. After hearing, he was discharged. Later his brother and sister filed an information against him and he was committed to the State Hospital for a period of about 90 days. He was then discharged as normal. Because of this history and his general actions the two attorneys in the case decided he should be sent to the Medical Department at the University of Iowa for an examination prior to trial of the case. It was stipulated that- the doctors making the examination should make a report direct to the trial court with a copy to each attorney. The report stated he was mentally and psychologically able to continue with the litigation and to defend himself in court.
It was very difficult for plaintiff to secure any assistance from defendant as to support money., Defendant also refused to let plaintiff have any of the household goods for herself and the children.
*795On hearing, the Judge divided the household goods between the parties and ordered payment of support money. Defendant announced he would hold a public sale of all personal property on the farm. He was dilatory in proceeding. The court finally appointed a receiver to sell the property.
The father and mother of defendant had recently departed this life, and their children, consisting of defendant, one other son, and one daughter, inherited the farm. Since defendant did not purchase their share and did not rent it again, it was rented to another tenant and it became necessary for defendant to vacate. During all this time, running over a period of approximately two years, defendant made continuous resistance to the trial of the divorce case. He had retained one attorney, Mr. Thomas L. Woods, who withdrew because defendant would not cooperate. Defendant then retained Mr. John Randall, an attorney of the Cedar Rapids Bar who represented him for several months.
This is a brief statement of the salient facts, as a background for consideration of the two issues in the case.
It has been recognized not only in this jurisdiction, but in many others, that a divorce case is peculiarly dependent upon the facts of the particular case. It is difficult to find two eases exactly alike. Bach ease must be considered and decided on the basis of the facts of the case under consideration. Black v. Black, 200 Iowa 1016, 205 N.W. 970; Klepper v. Klepper, 234 Iowa 1138, 15 N.W.2d 213; Bosveld v. Bosveld, 232 Iowa 1199, 7 N.W.2d 782. More facts relevant and material to the issues in this case will be outlined as the issues are considered.
II. After two attempts, in the course of almost two years, to get a trial of her case it was finally set for hearing on the morning of December 27, 1961. It appears that during the forenoon of said day the able attorneys for both plaintiff and defendant had been negotiating and working on a fair settlement between the parties, with special attention to the care of the children. There was never any controversy about the sufficiency of plaintiff’s grounds for divorce, nor about plaintiff having custody of the children. •
*796During the forenoon each attorney was consulting from time to time with his respective client. Between eleven and twelve o’clock they arrived at what they considered a fair adjustment of, property rights. Plaintiff accepted the recommendation of her attorney. Defendant said he desired to talk to his aunt during the noon hour. This met with the approval of his attorney. However, between 1 and 1:30 p.m., defendant telephoned his lawyer that the settlement was not agreeable and that he would not accept or approve it. His lawyer advised him very clearly that it would be necessary for him to be in court in the ease by two o’clock.
Defendant did not appear in court. Plaintiff, with her witnesses and her lawyer, was present, and ready for trial, for the third time since the case was started. By defendant’s arbitrary action Mr. Randall was left without a client present in court. Defendant had refused to accept his recommendation. Mr. Randall made a lengthy statement to the court, emphasizing defendant’s absence, and his actions about a possible settlement, and requested permission to withdraw as his attorney. Attorney for plaintiff also made a statement corroborating, as far as he knew, the difficulties encountered by Mr. Randall. We will state fully what took place in court, as revealed by the record:
“The Court: The Court grants permission of John D. Randall to withdraw from this case and if the Court feels it necessary to call upon Mr. Randall in further proceedings he will get in touch with him.
“Mr. Randall: Thank you, Your Honor, and with Your Honor’s permission I will leave.
“(At this time Mr. Randall left the courtroom.)
“The Court: It is the further position of the Court and the Court makes 'a further ruling that this cause having been delayed for various reasons at various times, that the matter should proceed to hearing at the present time. As the file in this ease shows, the original petition in this case was filed January 13, 1960, and that the Court makes a further finding that any delay in presenting this matter for hearing has not been the fault of the plaintiff but has been due to continuances granted the de*797fendant. So you may proceed to introduce your testimony, Mr. Claassen.”
Plaintiff’s testimony was then taken. At 3:45 p.m. the Defendant personally appeared in Court and the following record was made:
“(At this point Mr. Neiderhiser, the defendant, entered the courtroom.)
“The Court: You are Mr. Neiderhiser, aren’t you?
“Mr. Neiderhiser: Yes.
“The Court : Just come up and sit down. I want to explain what is going on here. Let the record show that Mr. Neiderhiser, the defendant in this case, appeared in Court at quarter of four. Your attorney, Mr. Randall, has previously appeared in Court and has withdrawn from the case, and this case has been continued so many times that we are proceeding to a hearing at the present time.
“Mr. Neiderhiser: Well Mr. Woods is out of town today but he should be back tomorrow, maybe today.
“The Court : Of course Mr. Woods is the attorney I understand whom you had previously employed in this case and had discharged and employed Mr. Randall in his place, is that not correct?
“Mr. Neiderhiser: Yes, I have a right, I still have a right to hire another attorney.
“The Court : Mr. Neiderhiser, you have a right to hire an attorney, that is true. However, this case has been continued on several different occasions at the request of your counsel, and because of the length of time involved I felt that we were required, or at least justified to proceed to a hearing whether you had an attorney here or whether you didn’t have an attorney here.
“Mr. Neiderhiser: I see.
“The Court: And the case has been filed for nearly two years and I regret that you were not able to be represented by counsel. But I think at the present time I will continue with this hearing and we will just have to see what develops; that is all.
*798“Mr, Neiderhiseb : Wei], could I be excused to use the phone for a minute?
“(At this time Mr. Neiderhiser left the courtroom.)
“Mr. Claassen: We will wait until he returns?
“The Court: Yes.
“(Recess — 3:50 p.m. to 4:10 p.m.)
“The Court: The Court had a recess and it is now ten minutes after four, and Mr. Neiderhiser is back in the courtroom but without counsel. Do you wish to make a statement, Mr. Neiderhiser ?
“Mr. Neiderhiser : Could I ask for a continuance until I may obtain counsel?”
Plaintiff’s attorney made a statement at this point, reciting the troubles of plaintiff to secure hearing and stating that the case should be tried. Thereafter, the proceedings were as follows:
“Mr. Neiderhiser: May I say something, Your Honor?
“The Court: Yes.
“Mr. Neiderhiser : Mr. Woods will be back in the morning but he is not here today.
“The Court : One difficulty we have in this district at this time is the fact that two of the Judges are ill and are unable to hold Court. We have had outside Judges coming in to assist us; and I had this day set aside and I originally thought I could have all day tomorrow set aside to hear this case, but I find that the County Attorney has some business for me in Cedar County tomorrow morning. But I can be up here tomorrow afternoon. After that time my schedule is filled unless something comes up — I mean unless something is settled — until probably the 11th or 12th of January. Well, it is almost quarter after four today. I will continue the matter until 1:30 tomorrow afternoon, and we will proceed with as much evidence as we can get in at that time. * * * [Following statement was addressed to Mr. Neiderhiser.]
“The Court: If you will be present with your counsel tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 we will continue until that date.
“Mr. Claassen: But in the event he is not present.with counsel, then what is to be the proceeding ?
“The Court: Well, I expect to proceed with the trial *799whether he is here with counsel or isn’t here. With or without counsel. Yes, sir. And I might further state, Mr. Neiderhiser, that I expect to proceed and any motion for a continuance will be severely frowned upon. I won’t say that I won’t grant it under any circumstances, because I have had some experience along that line, but I hope to proceed to the trial of it.
“(Court was adjourned at 4:19 p.m. until 1:30 p.m. the following day.)”
Court convened the afternoon of December 28, 1961. The Defendant was not present, neither personally nor with or by counsel. The rest of plaintiff’s evidence was then taken.
In order to carry out the orderly work of a court it is necessary that the trial court have some control over procedure. If either party in a case can ignore the wishes and work of a court it will only be a short time until we have utter chaos in our legal procedure.
A tidal court has the right to control and conduct its court in an orderly, dignified and proper manner. It is not obligated on the basis of failure to be represented by counsel, to be subject to the whims, surliness, idiosyncrasies and indignity of litigant. 5 Am. Jur., Attorneys at Law, sections 39, 40; 45 A. L. R. 1142; 48 A. L. R.2d 1160; 53 Am. Jur., Trial, sections 24, 25 and 34.
The action of the trial court was not based altogether on the proceedings taking place on December 27 and 28. There was a history of two years of not only dilatory action on the part of defendant, but on affirmative violation of court orders and disregard and disrespect as to court procedure.
In the case at bar the trial court had knowledge on December 27 and 28 of the following delinquencies of defendant with reference to his actions: 1. He refused, and never explained such refusal, to be present in the courtroom at one time when he was cited in contempt of court for failure to return the children after visitation, and in tearing out the ignition system of plaintiff’s car. He was fined $50 by Judge Penningroth of the same district and ordered to restore the ignition in the ear. 2. The instant ease was set for trial two times before the District Court proceeded in this ease to a hearing upon the merits. *800It was set for hearing the first time on October 25, 1961, and plaintiff subpoenaed her witnesses for trial. At that time defendant’s first attorney, Mr. Woods, withdrew from the case and it was continued to be assigned later. At the beginning of the September 1961 term the case was listed for dismissal if not tried in said term of court.
Defendant secured his new attorney, John D. Randall, thereafter and he filed answer December 18. It was then set for trial on December 19 and plaintiff subpoenaed her witnesses. On that date her attorney requested the psychiatric examination of defendant at Iowa City, to which plaintiff and her attorney agreed. It was then set for hearing on December 27 and plaintiff again subpoenaed her witnesses. The procedure as heretofore outlined then took place.
We hold the trial court did not abuse its discretion in the procedure followed. We approve the order of the court in denying a new trial.
III. The second question in the case at bar is whether or not the trial court erred in its decree as to support for the children of the parties.
Section 598.14, Code of l'owa, states:
“Alimony — custody of children — changes. When a divorce is decreed, the court may make such order in relation to the children, property, parties, and the maintenance of the parties as shall be right.
“Subsequent changes * *
A divorce court may take into consideration whatever property both or either party owns in arriving at a proper division of the property between the parties, and especially in fixing a formula for the care and support of minor children. Here again the peculiar facts of each case have an important bearing on the matter. Davison v. Davison, 182 Iowa 1116, 165 N.W. 44, 45; Black v. Black, 200 Iowa 1016, 205 N.W. 970; Parizek v. Parizek, 210 Iowa 1099, 229 N.W. 689, 690; Brett v. Brett, 191 Iowa 262, 182 N.W. 241; Closz v. Closz, 184 Iowa 739, 169 N.W. 183, 185; Brannen v. Brannen, 237 Iowa 188, 21 N.W.2d 459, 462; Mitchell v. Mitchell, 193 Iowa 153, 185 N.W. 62.
This is particularly true as to the case at bar where' the ages *801of the children are such that they need many years of care before maturity. The record does not disclose the day and month of the children’s birth, but stating the fact in years the following is now their approximate ages: John 12; Ralph 9; James 8 and Nancy 7.
In the instant case the following money was before the court in connection with fixing fees and to establish proper care and support of the four minor children: the money in the bank under attachment as proceeds of sale of the personal property, computing the interest to January 1, 1962, was $9081.50. It should be said in connection with the personal property that defendant surreptitiously sold some cattle and hogs after the receiver had been appointed to sell the personal property on the farm. Such sale by defendant was made in violation of an injunction granted against him. This was another deliberate action taken by defendant contrary to a court order. Plaintiff moved to have this money placed in the receivership fund. On a hearing as to the sale of the property in violation of the injunction Judge Penningroth found as follows: “That upon the trial of the case on its merits there shall be taken into account that he [defendant] had wrongfully procured this $4111.10 which had been received from the sale of animals and which had been attached and which he had sold in violation of an injunction. * * *»
The next item of money held under attachment pending final disposition of the case was a sum of $12,000 which had been distributed from the sale of the real estate by the referees. According to the record there still remained in the hands of the referees, after the distribution and after payment of about a dozen items of expense, the sum of $970.55. We find a small apparently unpaid claim filed in the partition action. Defendant was the owner of one third of such balance. His share in round figures would be $300. These items create a total fund before the trial court, for its consideration, of $21,381.50.
Under the decree of the trial court the following attorney fees and court costs were ordered paid: Carl F. Becker, one of the attorneys for plaintiff, $200; Thomas L. Woods, formerly *802attorney for defendant, who had withdrawn from the case, balance of attorney fees, $427.15; John Randall, defendant’s attorney, who also withdrew from the case, balance of attorney fees, $775; George G. Claassen, plaintiff’s attorney, balance of attorney fees, $1300; court costs, $236.16; total, $2938.31.
After the decree and modification of decree were filed in January 1962, motion for new trial and amendment thereto were filed by defendant’s new attorneys. These attorneys appear for defendant in this court. Plaintiff filed resistance to the motion and amendment. On January 31 the motion was overruled. Thereafter, application for modification of the decree and resistance were filed upon which order was duly made.
During the filing, hearing and orders upon these proceedings, plaintiff and defendant entered into a stipulation of settlement as to certain matters, which was signed by both plaintiff and defendant and by their present respective counsel of record. Under this stipulation it was ordered that money be paid out of the trust fund in following amounts: to defendant toward defraying expenses of procuring transcript, printing the record, and brief and argument in an amount not exceeding $300; to plaintiff to defray her expense of printing brief and argument in an amount not exceeding $100. The transcript and printing costs of defendant exceeded $300. We assume defendant paid the remainder. Plaintiff’s printing cost amounted to only $70.
In the stipulation it was also agreed defendant should have the right to withdraw from the trust money the sum of $1399.31 principal and $22.39 interest to pay his 1960 federal income taxes.
It was further stipulated that a hospital bill at the University of Iowa in the amount of $650 should be paid from the trust funds. These additional items total $2441.70. There was paid out of the trust funds as itemized above a total sum of $5380.01, leaving a balance in January 1962 on deposit of $16,001.49. The trial court provided that there should be plaeed in the trust department of Merchants National Bank of Cedar Rapids the sum of $18,000 and that any balance remaining in the' fund above said amount should be divided one half to plaintiff and *803one half to defendant. After payment of all items allowed by the court this provision became meaningless.
As stated, supra, Judge Penningroth provided in his order, upon the application of plaintiff, to place $4111.10, proceeds of sale of personal property by defendant, in the receiver’s account, the disposition of said item should be postponed until the case was tried on its merits. Ten months after he received this money defendant filed an application for payment of his 1960 income tax item out of the trust fund and alleged in the application he had no funds with which to pay the income tax. The trial court made no order as to this item in its final decree. Because he did contribute some ability and some work to accumulate the personal property, we will not order repayment made. He either has the item or has wasted it.
IV. Appellant complains about the trust fund being placed in Merchants National Bank without bond. This complaint is made in connection with appellant’s argument that, in fact, the trial court placed defendant under guardianship. We do not consider defendant under guardianship, nor on the present state of the record is he required to have a guardian. Under section 598.14, supra, and decisions of this court heretofore cited, these funds, part of which in fact belong to plaintiff and part to defendant, were subject to the jurisdiction of the trial court in this action. The court had a right to fix the disposition of same for the benefit of either or both parties or the children. It was not necessary that defendant be placed under guardianship to accomplish this pui-pose.
Appellant alleges that, at any rate, the trust fund in the bank should be secured by a bond issued by a recognized bonding company. The trial court held a bond was not necessary and we approve this provision. The fund is deposited in Merchants National Bank of Cedar Rapids, Iowa. This is one of the larger banks in our state. It has capital stock of one million dollars,seven million dollars surplus; over one hundred thirteen million dollars in deposits; over twenty-five million dollars in cash and over forty million dollars in United States bonds. Deposits and savings in the bank are insured in the F.D.I.C. up to ten thou*804sand dollars. As a matter of. gross assets and of net worth the bank is no doubt as safe as any bonding company which might be selected. Payment of bond premiums would be a waste of the children’s money.
We will modify slightly the provisions of the trial court as to investment of the trust fund. The trustee may invest the trust money in municipal, state or federal bonds, always keeping in mind the best interest of the trust. It may, at its discretion, place not more than $10,000 in the savings department of the bank. We are assuming the bank will pay at least four percent interest on balances.
V. We will modify the decree of the trial court by fixing a small distribution to defendant. Only a modest amount can be paid because of the necessity of monthly payments for support of the children.
We hereby provide that $1500 be paid from the trust account to defendant. We do this with a certain amount of fear and trepidation. Defendant’s record for judicious and careful expenditure of money is not good. As we read the history of his married life he was very dilatory in connection with his farming operations. In spite of defendant’s delinquency the parties accumulated more than $13,000 worth of personal property on the farm. Defendant appropriated over $4100 of the money, leaving the balance, as heretofore, shown, of $9081.50 in the trust account. We are allowing defendant this additional $1500 in the hope that if he did squander the $4100 he can start out now at 41 years of age and live a reasonably successful life, first to earn the support money decreed by the trial court and second to make a proper living and life for himself.
VI. The trial court fixed a support money payment by defendant to plaintiff through the office of the Clerk of the District Court of $80 per month for the seven summer months, from April through October, until John becomes 18 years of age; then $60 per month until Ralph becomes 18; then $40 per month until James becomes 18; then $20 per month until Nancy becomes 18. This starts out at an average of $46.66 per month for the year with a gradual reduction .as above stated. We hold *805this provision of the decree of the trial court is reasonable and fair and shall remain in force and effect.
In the figures we have heretofore shown, the trustee on or about January 15, 1962, had in its possession $16,001.49. We have provided that out of this sum there be paid to defendant the amount of $1500. We realize this diminishes the amount in the trust fund on behalf of the children, but it is also for the benefit of his children that he be rehabilitated with an opportunity to earn a living and the support money for his children.
This left a balance in the hands of the trustee in January of 1962 of $14,501.49. Under the temporary order of the District Court issued in the modification of decree in February 1962 the trustee was instructed to pay to the Clerk of the District Court of Linn County, toward support money for the children, the sum of $215 on the 15th day of each month during the pendency of this action in the Supreme Court. This means the trustee has paid out $2580 during 1962. This leaves a balance in the trust fund of $11,921.49. During the year the trustee has invested the balance bn hand either in savings account or through purchase of bonds. There was at the end of 1962 some fees payable to the trustee. We estimate the dividends or interest less the fees of trustee has slightly increased the balance in the account. We assume defendant has paid his support money during the year in the amount of $560.
VII. It is necessary to simplify and modify the decree of the trial court as to payment of support money to plaintiff. We must approach the matter of support for the children from a realistic standpoint. It is elementary that there is no use allocating support money to be paid after the trust fund has been depleted.
If we read the trial court’s decree correctly, it provides defendant’s support money be paid by the Clerk to the trustee Merchants National Bank. The trustee is then to pay all support money into the office of the Clerk of the District Court. We cancel the step of payment of defendant’s money by the Clerk tb the trustee. It is an unnecessary gesture. The Clerk should pay it direct to plaintiff after it has been paid in by defendant. *806We also desire to preserve, without question, the benefit of the provisions of law as to collection of support money from defendant by plaintiff so she can take action, if it becomes necessary, for its collection.
As we read the record under the decree of the trial court the trustee has paid during* the past year $215 per month. The provision of the trial court is that this amount be paid per month for three years more. Then the item is to be increased to $260 per month until John is 18. This would be three years more at this rate. This would amount to $17,100 and would exhaust the trust fund in less than six years, leaving nothing to be distributed while Ralph, James and Nancy are reaching their respective ages of 18 years. We realize the money paid in by defendant of $560 per year should be considered, but it would not make sufficient difference to justify the amount fixed by the trial court. At any rate as a help to plaintiff and the children, we have held that hereafter defendant’s money be paid to the Clerk and by the Clerk direct to plaintiff.
We hold it is better for plaintiff and the children that the ti*ust fund be distributed toward their support on a basis running through the next eleven years, until Nancy becomes 18 years of age, than to distribute it in larger amounts in approximately one half of such time.
We modify the support decree of the trial court to provide that commencing January 15, 1963, the trustee shall pay to the Clerk of the District Court $125 per month from the years 1963 to 1968 inclusive; John will then be 18 years of age. For the years of 1969 and 1970, $100 per month, .at which time Ralph will become 18. For 1971 and 1972, $75 per month. At this time James will become 18. In the year 1973 the sum of $50 per month on the 15th of each month. At the end of that time Nancy will become 18 years of age. This makes total payment by the trustee for support of the children of $13,800. All such payments shall be made by the Clerk to plaintiff, toward support of the children, on or about the 15th of each month.
We recognize this depreciates plaintiff’s income for herself and her children in the crucial years just ahead. However, with *807her earned income of $160 per month and this allotment of $125 per month and defendant’s payments of $80 per month for seven months the amount totals $365 per month for seven months, with a smaller amount during the other five months. As the children become 18 years of age they can and no doubt will render valuable assistance to the family.
There will be some dividends or interest collected by the trustee through the years. This will depreciate fast as the support payments are made. There will be some fees in accordance with the modification of decree entered by the trial court, but on the basis we have set out above, and in view of the provision we will make hereinafter as to defendant, there will be sufficient in the fund to run through the remaining years. There may be a slight surplus at the end of the support payments in 1973. Under the decree of the trial court this surplus is to be paid to defendant. If plaintiff had appealed or if we were fixing this item in its inception we would have divided it equally between plaintiff and defendant. However, we cannot order a situation more favorable to plaintiff than as decreed by the trial court. We approve the percentage of fees to be paid the trustee, which percentage was apparently agreed to by the trustee. It is modest and very reasonable.
VIII. The trial court provided if defendant was sick, payments for his hospital expense could be made from the trust fund. The trial court also provided if defendant could not earn a living wage during the wintertime, under certain restrictions, payments could be made from the trust fund toward his living expenses. We are cancelling these provisions. It is an unknown factor which should not be paid out of the children’s support money. Defendant is approximately 41 years of age. He is a strong able-bodied man. According to the report of the psychiatrist at the State University he has recovered from his slight mental aberrations. We are starting him out with a small nest-egg. There is no reason why he cannot support himself and pay the modest amount he is required to pay for the support of his children during the next ten years.
IX. The trial court provided defendant should have *808the four children for visitation on Saturday of each month and that every other month he should have the right to take them on Saturday, keep them overnight, and return them to plaintiff on Sunday. • On the basis of the complete record it is our conviction and holding that this visitation arrangement is more generous to defendant than it should be. Taking the welfare of the four children, and of both plaintiff and defendant, into consideration, we hold that defendant shall only have the children on every other Saturday. He shall get them at their home, and return them. The hours fixed in the decree of the trial court are reasonable and are approved.
X. Since there is no reference in the stipulation entered into between the parties and their present counsel, as to certain payments to be made and certain rights of the parties, we are assuming the cost of the transcript and the fees of the respective attorneys in the litigation in this court will be assumed personally by the two parties respectively. At any rate, we hold no further allowances as to the present litigation shall be made by the trial court from the trust fund.
Outside of the modifications we have provided herein, we approve and affirm all other provisions in the decree of the trial court. We provide the court enter supplemental decree in accordance with this decision.
The ease is — Modified and affirmed.
Garfield, C. J., and Hats, Thompson and Snell, JJ., concur.
Moore, Larson, Thornton and Stuart, JJ., dissent.

=== CASE 2217661 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:32.300941+00 ===

264 Minn. 500 (1963)
119 N.W. (2d) 731
IN RE WELFARE OF BABY BOY ZINK.
No. 38,670.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
February 8, 1963.
Hall, Smith, Hedlund, Juster, Forsberg & Merlin and L. Howard Bennett, for appellant.
*501 George M. Scott, County Attorney, and Douglas X. Juneau, Gerard Snell, and William S. Posten, Assistant County Attorneys, for respondent Hennepin County Welfare Department.
Mackall, Crounse, Moore, Helmey & Holmes and Floyd E. Nelson, for respondent Children's Home Society of Minnesota.
Harvey E. Skaar, for respondent Audrey Zink.
Walter F. Mondale, Attorney General, and Galen M. Cadle, Assistant Attorney General, for Department of Public Welfare, amicus curiae.
Walter U. Hauser, for Lutheran Children's Friend Society of Minnesota, amicus curiae.
James D. Kempf, for Lutheran Welfare Society of Minnesota, amicus curiae.
James H. Levy, for Jewish Family Service, amicus curiae.
Robert L. Speeter, for Catholic Welfare Association of Minneapolis, Catholic Charities Diocese of Winona, Inc., and Diocesan Catholic Charities Archdiocese of St. Paul, amici curiae.
ROGOSHESKE, JUSTICE.
This is an appeal from an order of the juvenile court denying the putative father's motion for a new hearing in a proceeding to terminate parental rights pursuant to Minn. St. 260.221.[1]
The essential facts taken from the affidavits and transcript of the testimony establish the following: Baby Boy Zink is an illegitimate child born on July 3, 1961, to Mrs. Audrey Zink, aged 40, who, it is established, had lived apart from her husband, Robert Zink, for some time prior to the birth. There is no question that Robert Zink is not the father of the child. When the baby was a little more than a month old, on August 15, 1961, the mother executed a written affidavit of consent whereby she agreed to the commitment of her child to the guardianship and legal custody of the Children's Home *502 Society, a licensed child-placing agency, for the purpose of placing the child for adoption. The affidavit also included the consent to adoption, as provided by § 259.25, subd. 1,[2] and waiver of notice of hearing upon a petition to adopt a child, provided for by § 259.26, subd. 1.[3]
Prior to the execution of this consent agreement a petition had been filed by a representative of the Hennepin County Welfare Department on August 2, 1961, in the Juvenile Court of Hennepin County for an order terminating the mother's parental rights to the child in accordance with the provisions of §§ 260.221 and 260.231 of the Juvenile Court Act.[4] At the hearing in juvenile court, an attorney representing Thomas McDonald appeared and disclosed that his client claimed to be the father of the child and desired to participate at the hearing for the purpose of urging that the custody of the child be granted to him. Thereupon, a motion was made to continue the matter for the purpose of preparing for the hearing and to present a plan supporting the putative father's request that he be appointed guardian and be granted custody. Upon objection of the attorneys for *503 the welfare department and for the mother, the court denied the motion and proceeded with the hearing.
While the putative father, by his counsel, was permitted to remain at the hearing, he was not permitted to present evidence or to cross-examine any witnesses who testified. The testimony presented established the facts essentially as stated above; and furthermore, it established that Thomas McDonald was the father but that paternity had not been adjudicated nor his fatherhood acknowledged in writing, and that he had recently married Frances Camille McDonald. The mother of the child acknowledged her execution of the document giving her consent to a termination of parental rights and expressed her wish that the Children's Home Society be appointed guardian of the child, and also that under no circumstances should the putative father receive custody. Upon this proceeding the court determined that the Children's Home Society should be appointed guardian and be granted custody of the child, and that the mother's parental rights should be terminated.
Thereafter the putative father moved the court for a new hearing in the matter of termination of parental rights or, in the alternative, for an order discharging the guardianship and custody of the Children's Home Society and placing the child under the guardianship and custody of the putative father. This motion was supported by affidavits which included a written acknowledgement by Thomas McDonald that he was the father of the child. According to his counsel he had previously refused to sign an admission because the request to do so by the Hennepin County Welfare Department required that he waive any and all rights to notice and that he consent to the placing of the child in the custody of a child-placing agency for the purpose of having the child adopted. The motion was further supported by an affidavit executed by petitioner's wife, Frances Camille McDonald, who expressed her earnest desire to join with her husband in the adoption of the child. It appeared that movant and his wife were 45 and 58 years of age, respectively.
No testimony was offered or received at the hearing on the motion, the agreed issue being whether or not the putative father had *504 any standing to participate in a hearing to terminate parental rights or any rights to custody upon termination of the parental rights of the mother. Upon arguments of counsel, the court denied the motion and the putative father appeals.
Contrary to the contentions of the interested parties to this proceeding, the issue is not whether appellant here has a right to custody of the child, but solely whether or not a putative father, voluntarily appearing and openly acknowledging paternity at a hearing to terminate parental rights, is entitled to be heard, to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses, and to offer his own plan with respect to the custody and guardianship of such child. It is clear that appellant was not afforded such an opportunity either at the termination hearing or at the hearing on his motion thereafter although he requested permission to so participate.
The proceedings here are governed by the provisions of the Juvenile Court Act and our adoption statute. Neither the proceeding to terminate parental rights, as authorized by § 260.221, nor adoption was known at common law. In re Adoption of Zavasky, 241 Minn. 447, 63 N.W. (2d) 573. Therefore, in determining the rights of a putative father to be heard at a proceeding such as this, we must examine the statutory provisions.
Section 260.221 authorizes the juvenile court, upon petition, to terminate all rights of parents to a child in the case of "written consent of parents who for good cause desire to terminate their parental rights."[5] Since plural words of a statute must be construed to include the singular,[6] the written consent and desire of one parent is sufficient to initiate the filing of the petition. It may be filed by any reputable person having knowledge of the circumstances, but termination can be ordered only after notice and hearing.[7] In the case of a petition to *505 terminate the parental rights to an illegitimate child, a summons specifying time, place, and purpose of the hearing, reciting the substance of the petition or attached to a copy of it, must be served upon the person having custody or control of the minor and the mother unless such persons voluntarily appear.[8] There is no requirement that such notice be served on the putative father. Rather, the adoption laws as well as the termination of parental rights sections of the Juvenile Court Act  which should be construed together to effect the over-all purpose  especially negative the necessity of such notice. These provisions also negative any requirement that the putative father give his consent as a prerequisite to adoption.[9] Thus, there should be no question that a putative father cannot challenge the validity of an order terminating parental rights on the ground that he failed to receive notice. Further, an order terminating such rights, initiated upon the consent of a mother, effectually terminates any rights that the putative father may have in the same way that the rights of a nonconsenting father of a legitimate child would be terminated where there has been compliance with procedural requirements as to notice and hearing.
It is specifically required by § 260.231, subd. 2, that the hearing be conducted "in the manner provided in section 260.155," the general provisions relating to hearings in juvenile court. Especially pertinent to our problem is the requirement of subd. 6 of the latter section which provides that:
"The minor and his parent, guardian, or custodian are entitled to be heard, to present evidence material to the case, and to cross examine witnesses appearing at the hearing." (Italics supplied.)
The Juvenile Court Act defines parent as "the natural or adoptive parent of a minor."[10] In In re Welfare of Shady, 264 Minn. 222, 118 N.W. (2d) 449, we construed this to include the putative father. While this definition is at variance with the suggestion made by child welfare *506 agencies,[11] a natural parent unmistakably includes the acknowledged father of an illegitimate child.[12]
From the explicit language of these statutes, it is clear that the legislature intended that a putative father be considered a parent in proceedings to terminate parental rights. As such, when he appears at the hearing, he has the right to be heard, to cross-examine, and to present evidence directed at the primary and all-pervading issue  the welfare of the child. Although it may be so argued, this right does not arise from the fact of parentage or from any recognition of a claim that he has a right to custody secondary only to the mother, but simply because the statute is declaratory of the policy of this state. We know of no restriction on the power of the legislature to remove this right. It could be as forcefully argued that the right to receive notice of such a proceeding arises out of the fact of parentage or of a claimed right to custody; but it is conceded by all that no such right exists under our statutory procedures. Arguments concerning the mischief created by granting a right to be heard at the hearing should, therefore, be directed to the legislature.
It is urged that a judicial recognition of this right would be contrary to the strong public interest in the welfare of illegitimate children and would result in placing unreasonable burdens upon effective and adequate planning for the adoptive placement of such children. While we agree that it is of the utmost importance that these unfortunate *507 infants be placed for adoption as soon as possible (because it is true that a baby quickly identifies itself with those who care for it and nurture it), we fail to see how a putative father's right to be heard would jeopardize the status of such children. The proceeding is in the nature of an investigation rather than a trial within the concept of the adversary tradition. When a proceeding to terminate parental rights is properly initiated and a hearing held, the applicable statutes grant the putative father a right to be heard only if he appears at the hearing. Since notice is not required, any failure to appear at the hearing can be regarded as a waiver of this statutory right. It may be that the best welfare of illegitimate children would support a declaration that the putative father has no legal right to notice or to be heard at a proceeding to terminate parental rights or to custody; but such assertion, however sound, does not permit us to rewrite the definition of the word "parent" to exclude a putative father.
It is reasonable to assume that one of the reasons for granting the acknowledged father the right to be heard is to foster and encourage the establishment of paternity so that the consequent duty to support can be fixed and enforced.[13] A determination of paternity usually serves the best interest of an illegitimate child;[14] accordingly, an enactment granting such right following acknowledgment is not devoid of purpose and cannot be regarded as an unreasonable exercise of legislative power.
The issue presented by this appeal does not require a determination of the putative father's right to custody or a declaration of any other rights which the parties may urge or argue. Our decision is not intended to express any views regarding such matters. It is undisputed that appellant was denied the statutory right to be heard when he appeared at the hearing. We hold that where a putative father in fact *508 appears at such hearing and acknowledges his paternity he must be afforded the rights specifically granted by § 260.155, subd. 6, to the end that his contentions, availability, or plan regarding the best welfare of the child may be considered by the court, in contrast to any other plan or proposal urged by the mother, any child welfare agencies, or interested parties.
It is undisputed that the mother's consent initiating this proceeding was mistakenly based on her understanding that under no circumstances was the acknowledged father to be given custody. Since there is a possibility, however remote, that his plan may serve the child's best interest, her consent should be vitiated. Any rehearing pursuant to the order of this court can, therefore, only occur if reinitiated under authorized statutory procedures without any effect being given to the mother's prior consent.
Reversed and remanded.
MR. JUSTICE SHERAN, not having been a member of this court at the time of the argument and submission, took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.
NOTES
[1]  § 260.221 provides in part: "The juvenile court may, upon petition, terminate all rights of parents to a child in the following cases:
"(a) With the written consent of parents who for good cause desire to terminate their parental rights; * * *."
[2]  "The parents and guardian, if there be one, of a legitimate child may enter into a written agreement with the commissioner of public welfare or an agency, giving the commissioner or such agency authority to place the child for adoption. The mother of an illegitimate child also may enter into such written agreement, * * *. Such agreement and consent shall be in the form prescribed by the commissioner. The agreement shall be executed by the commissioner or agency, or one of their authorized agents, and all other necessary parties, and shall be filed, together with the consent, in the proceedings for the adoption of the child."
[3]  "Except as provided in subdivision 3, notice of the hearing upon a petition to adopt a child shall be given to the parents and guardian, if any, of any legitimate child and the mother and guardian, if any, of an illegitimate child, unless they have consented to the adoption or waived notice of the hearing. The notice of the hearing may be waived by a parent, guardian or other interested party by a writing executed before two competent witnesses and duly acknowledged. * * *"
[4]  Section 260.231 outlines the procedure to be followed in initiating a termination proceeding, and subd. 2 thereof provides for termination "only after a hearing before the court, in the manner provided in section 260.155."
[5]  A petition to terminate such rights may also be filed and termination ordered in case of abandonment, unconscionable deprivation of parental care and protection, gross neglect, or if the parents are found unfit to retain custody. § 260.221(b) (1, 2, 3, 4).
[6]  § 645.08(2).
[7]  § 260.231, subds. 1 and 2.
[8]  § 260.135.
[9]  §§ 260.135, subd. 2; 259.24; 259.25; and 259.26.
[10]  § 260.015, subd. 11. This definition is identical with the definition of parent in our adoption laws. § 259.21, subd. 3.
[11]  Compare the suggestion of the U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare in its 1961 edition of "Legislative Guides for the Termination of Parental Rights and Responsibilities and the Adoption of Children," at page 4:
"In termination and adoption legislation it is essential to include the definitions which follow.
"`Parent' means (1) the mother, (2) a father as to whom a child is legitimate, (3) a person as to whom a child is presumed to be a legitimate child, or (4) an adoptive parent; but such term does not include a parent as to whom the parent  child relationship has been terminated by judicial decree." See, also, Katz, Judicial and Statutory Trends in the Law of Adoption, 51 Georgetown L.J. 64.
[12]  In re Adoption of a Minor, 81 App. D.C. 138, 142, 155 F. (2d) 870, 874.
[13]  § 257.18; State v. Johnson, 216 Minn. 427, 13 N.W. (2d) 26, 155 A. L.R. 23.
[14]  It should be noted that a written acknowledgment not only renders the father of an illegitimate child liable for confinement expenses of the mother and support of the child (§ 257.18, et seq.), but it also confers upon the child the right to inherit from him. § 525.172.

=== CASE 2217668 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:32.42186+00 ===

119 N.W.2d 509 (1963)
174 Neb. 747
MIDWEST LAUNDRY EQUIPMENT CORP., a Corporation, Appellee,
v.
Maurice BERG and June Berg, Appellants.
No. 35349.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
February 1, 1963.
*510 Ginsburg, Rosenberg & Ginsburg, Norman Krivosha, Lincoln, Thomas E. Brogan, Norfolk, for appellants.
Young, Denenberg & Mullery, Omaha, Moyer & Moyer, Madison, for appellee.
Heard before WHITE, C. J., and CARTER, MESSMORE, YEAGER, SPENCER, BOSLAUGH, and BROWER, JJ.
BOSLAUGH, Justice.
This is an appeal from an order of the district court overruling the defendants' motion to join an additional party as a defendant and an order dismissing the cross-petition of the defendants.
The amended petition alleged that the defendants, Maurice Berg and June Berg, entered into a written contract to purchase equipment from the plaintiff, Midwest Laundry Equipment Corporation, to be used in the operation of a coin-operated laundry; that the plaintiff had advanced $7,346.57 to the defendants by the payment of rent upon the property in which the laundry was to be operated, the expense of remodeling the rented property, and the first installment payment due under the contract; and that the defendants had agreed to reimburse the plaintiff for the amounts that had been advanced. A copy of the contract was attached to and made a part of the petition.
The defendants filed an answer and a cross-petition. The plaintiff moved to strike the answer for the reason that it was not properly verified. The defendants then filed an amended answer and cross-petition and a motion to join Industrial Credit Company as an additional party defendant. The motion alleged that the contract for the purchase of the laundry equipment was held by Industrial Credit Company. The plaintiff moved to dismiss or strike the cross-petition for the reason that its subject matter did not pertain to or directly relate to the indebtedness alleged in the petition. The trial court overruled the motion to join the additional party defendant and dismissed *511 the cross-petition but granted the defendants 10 days in which to plead further. The entry made in the trial docket at that time indicates that the trial court intended to sustain the motion to strike rather than dismiss the cross-petition. However, the entry in the journal is controlling and it recites that the cross-petition was dismissed. See, s. 25-1318, R.R.S.1943; Hornick, Hess & Moore v. Maguire, 47 Neb. 826, 66 N.W. 867.
The defendants filed a motion for new trial. The plaintiff moved to strike the motion for new trial. At the hearing upon the motion for new trial the plaintiff withdrew its objections to the sufficiency of the verification of the original answer and cross-petition. The trial court overruled the motion to strike the original answer and cross-petition, sustained the motion for new trial as to the original answer and cross-petition, and overruled the motion for new trial as to the order dismissing the cross-petition contained in the amended answer and cross-petition. The defendants then appealed to this court.
The assignments of error are that the trial court erred in overruling the motion to join an additional party defendant, and in dismissing the cross-petition.
At the time the motion for new trial was heard, an amended answer and cross-petition had been filed. An amended pleading supersedes the original pleading, and thereafter the original pleading ceases to perform any office as a pleading. Woodworth v. Thompson, 44 Neb. 311, 62 N.W. 450; Smith v. Wigton & Whitham, 35 Neb. 460, 53 N.W. 374. Thus, the effect of the order of the trial court upon the motion for new trial was to leave the order dismissing the cross-petition in effect.
The amended answer contained a general denial and a specific denial that the defendants were indebted to the plaintiff for any amounts advanced as rent. It further alleged that the plaintiff falsely represented that the installation costs would not exceed $2,500; that no payments upon the contract would be required until 60 or 90 days after the laundry had begun operations; and that the first installment payment due under the contract, and paid by the plaintiff to Industrial Credit Company, could be repaid to the plaintiff at the end of the contract period. The amended cross-petition incorporated the allegations of the amended answer and further alleged that the contract for the purchase of the laundry equipment was not a time sales contract but was in fact a direct loan made by Industrial Credit Company and was void because it was in violation of the Installment Loan Act; that the plaintiff had falsely represented to the defendants that the down payment and installation costs would not exceed $4,394.98; that the total cost of the laundry would not exceed $20,461.30; that the receipts per month would average not less than $2,000; that the operating expenses per month including payments of $611 upon the contract would not exceed $1,386; that the defendants would receive an average profit of $614 per month; and that the defendants had been induced to enter into the contract by the false representations of the plaintiff and that the defendants had been damaged thereby. There were other allegations in the amended answer and cross-petition but the foregoing is a sufficient summary for the purpose of this opinion. The defendants prayed for judgment in the amount of $19,946.75 against the plaintiff and Industrial Credit Company and that the contract be canceled.
The statute authorizes an answer to include a counterclaim when the counterclaim is one existing in favor of a defendant and against a plaintiff between whom a several judgment might be had in the action, and arising out of the contract or transaction set forth in the petition as the foundation of the plaintiff's claim, or connected with the subject of the action. Sections 25-812, 25-813, R.R.S.1943. One who has been induced by fraud to enter into a contract may affirm the contract and maintain an action to recover the damages he has sustained *512 or may set up such damages by way of defense or counterclaim. Rankin v. Bigger, 128 Neb. 800, 260 N.W. 202. "The adjustment of defendant's demand by crossclaim in plaintiff's action, rather than by independent suit, is favored and encouraged by law. Such practice serves to avoid circuity of action, multiplicity of suits, inconvenience, expense, unwarranted consumption of the court's time, and injustice." Indiana Harbor Belt R. R. Co. v. Alpirn, 139 Neb. 14, 296 N.W. 158. See, also, Louis Hoffman Co. v. Western Smelting & Refining Co., 150 Neb. 524, 34 N.W.2d 889.
The transaction involved in this case was the sale and installation of laundry equipment in a rented building for the purpose of operating a coin-operated laundry. The defendants allege that they were induced to enter into the transaction by false representations of the plaintiff and that they have been damaged as a result of the false representations. The defendants had a right to assert their claim for damages as a counterclaim.
The defendants further allege that the contract for the purchase of the laundry equipment is in fact a direct loan by the Industrial Credit Company and is void. The defendants ask that the contract be canceled and that they recover certain amounts which they have paid to the Industrial Credit Company. A complete determination of the rights and liabilities of the defendants arising out of the contract for the purchase of the laundry equipment cannot be made unless the Industrial Credit Company is brought into the action as a party defendant.
Any person "who is a necessary party to a complete determination or settlement of the question involved" in an action may be made a defendant. Section 25-317, R.R.S. 1943. "The court may determine any controversy between parties before it, when it can be done without prejudice to the rights of others, or by saving their rights; but when a determination of the controversy cannot be had without the presence of other parties, the court must order them to be brought in." Section 25-323, R.R.S.1943. "When it appears that a new party is necessary to a final decision upon the counterclaim, the court may either permit the new party to be made, by a summons, to reply to the counterclaim, or may direct the counterclaim to be stricken out of the answer and made the subject of a separate action." Section 25-815, R.R.S.1943.
The trial court should not have dismissed the counterclaim, but could have directed that the counterclaim be stricken from the answer and made the subject of a separate action. In that event, the Industrial Credit Company would not be a necessary party to this action. But, unless the counterclaim is made the subject of a separate action, the Industrial Credit Company is a necessary party and should be brought into the action.
The judgment of the district court is reversed and the cause remanded for further proceedings in conformity to this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9738794 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:50.164491+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE ROMITI delivered the opinion of the court: John Creach and Thomas Ruppert, the defendants, were charged with the murder and armed robbery of Delores Irion. Following their joint trial before a jury, defendant Creach was found guilty of murder and armed robbery and defendant Ruppert was found guilty of armed robbery. Creach was sentenced to 35 to 70 years on each charge, to run concurrently, and Ruppert was sentenced to 4 to 12 years for armed robbery. On appeal the following issues are raised: (1) both defendants contend they were arrested illegally and without probable cause; (2) both defendants contend statements they made should have been suppressed because they were not fully warned of their rights; (3) defendant Ruppert advances two additional reasons for suppression of his statements: (a) the police made no attempt to notify his parents of his arrest, and (b) he did not knowingly and intelligently waive his rights; (4) both defendants contend the trial court erred in failing to suppress evidence obtained as a result of what they assert were illegal arrests; (5) defendant Creach contends the trial court also erred by allowing into evidence statements made by defendant Ruppert which implicated Creach where Ruppert did not testify and thus was not available to Creach for cross-examination; (6) both defendants assert that their guilt was not established beyond a reasonable doubt, although on two distinct grounds: (a) Creach argues his sanity was not proven, and (b) Ruppert argues that his accountability for the acts of Creach was not proven; (7) finally, defendant Ruppert contends the trial court erred in refusing to give his tendered instructions on compulsion, accountability, and accessories after the fact. We reverse and remand for a new trial. The body of Delores Irion was found lying near the CTA tracks in Evanston at about 7 a.m. on September 25, 1973. Detective Carlos Mitchem of the Evanston Police Department spoke that day to Dolly Moore, defendant Creach’s mother, who lived at 5717 North Magnolia Street in Chicago. She told Mitchem that her son had been living with the victim in the victim’s apartment for the last four weeks. During that time he had driven the victim’s car, and had been driving the victim to and from work. Mrs. Moore had spoken to her son in Ohio by telephone. He told her that he was there with a friend named Tom, and that he had last seen Irion alive when he left for Ohio in her 1966 Cadillac. The police investigation had already revealed that the automobile was missing. Detective Mitchem related this conversation to Detective Douglas Glanz of the Evanston Police Department on the evening of September 25. The next morning at about 8 a.m. Glanz and his partner, Detective John Birkenheier, went to Creach’s residence. They spoke to Mrs. Moore, who related what she had told Detective Mitchem, also stating that she had told Creach to come home and he said he would do so right away. The officers told Mrs. Moore that when the defendants returned, they intended to take them to the Evanston police station for questioning. Mrs. Moore asked if she could accompany them and they agreed to let her do so. Mrs. Moore showed them a photograph of Creach. Earlier Detective Mitchem had described Ruppert to Glanz as a short youth with fair hair. At about 9:30 a.m. on September 26 the officers observed Creach and Ruppert approaching Creach’s home on foot. The officers got out of their unmarked squad car, approached the defendants, identified themselves as police officers, and told them they were going to return them to Evanston for questioning. They also frisked the defendants for weapons. Defendants were ultimately transported to the Evanston station and questioned. The statements obtained from them constituted the major evidence used against them at trial. 1. The State contends that defendants were not arrested at the time of their encounter with the police at the Magnolia Street location. By statute in Illinois “[a]n arrest is made by an actual restraint of the person or by his submission to custody.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 107—5(a).) Because the existence of restraint or of a custodial situation is not always unambiguously clear, the courts of this State have found it necessary to elaborate some of the elements of an arrest. A common listing of elements includes: (1) authority to arrest; (2) assertion of that authority with intention to effect an arrest; and (3) restraint of the person to be arrested. (People v. Mirbelle (1934), 276 Ill. App. 533; People v. Howlett (1971), 1 Ill. App. 3d 906, 274 N.E.2d 885; People v. Robbins (1977), 54 Ill. App. 3d 298, 369 N.E.2d 577.) Our supreme court has recently focussed on two elements involving the perceptions of the parties in determining whether a police encounter constituted an arrest: the intent of the officer and whether a reasonable innocent man in the defendant’s situation would have considered himself under arrest. (People v. Wipfler (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 158, 368 N.E.2d 870.) In Wipfler the defendant’s mother relayed a police request to talk to him about some burglaries. Defendant went to the police station after school. He was asked to come into a sergeant’s office where, with the door closed, he was questioned by two police officers. The supreme court, applying the second of the two tests set out above, found that defendant went to the police station voluntarily, knowing that the police had wanted to reach him and knew where he was but had not attempted to take him into custody. At the station he was not searched, booked or fingerprinted. Under these circumstances the court concluded: “A reasonable, innocent man * * would have been cognizant that this did not amount to arrest, in light of the total lack of compulsion by the police either in obtaining or retaining his presence at the station.” (Emphasis added.) (68 Ill. 2d 158, 167, 368 N.E.2d 870, 873.) The court stated that because of their determination of this factor the intent of the police did not have to be established. The court did, however, note that “the manner in which defendant’s presence was obtained, and the information the police had about defendant prior to interrogation, lends [sic] credence to the testimony of [the officer] that defendant was not, in [the officer’s] mind, under arrest at the time and that he could have left without police permission because there was ‘nothing to hold him for.’ ” (Emphasis added.) 68 Ill. 2d 158, 167, 368 N.E.2d. 870, 873.  It is clear from this summary that the relevant perceptions of the police pertain to whether coercion exists and whether defendant is in custody or is free to leave. This focus comports with the statutory definition of an arrest we have cited. In this cause the testimony of the arresting officers was they did not intend to “arrest” the defendants, but did intend to take them into custody for questioning. They also testified that defendants would not have been free to leave. It is evident the distinction made by the officers was not a legal one: their intention to take the defendants into custody constituted the essence of an arrest. Therefore the testimony of these officers establishes their intent to arrest the defendants within the meaning of the term as construed by Illinois courts. The second facet of this test, the perception of an innocent man in the defendant’s position, also establishes that there was an arrest. Defendants were approached by two officers, informed that they were to be transported to the police station for questioning, and then were searched for weapons. They were then transported in a police car to the police station and separately questioned. This is not analogous to the situation in Wipfler where a defendant received a police request to come to the station for questioning and voluntarily acquiesced on his own. Defendants were given no choice in the matter. Under these circumstances we conclude defendants were arrested when the police took them into custody on Magnolia Street. Because we have determined that defendants were arrested at this initial police encounter, the issue becomes whether the officers had probable cause to make these arrests. The arresting officers, Douglas Glanz and John Birkenheier, testified at the motion to suppress hearing. Our review of that testimony indicates that the officers had the following information at the time of the arrests: Delores Irion was found dead at about 7 a.m. in Evanston on September 25, 1973. It had rained the night before but the victim’s clothes were dry, suggesting she had been killed some time after midnight. The victim’s automobile, a 1966 Cadillac, was missing. Defendant Creach was the victim’s boyfriend and had been living off and on with her for four weeks. He had been driving her car, taking her to work on occasion. Creach’s mother had talked to him by telephone in Ohio. He told her he had the victim’s 1966 Cadillac and had last seen her alive at about 1:30 on the morning of September 25, when he had left for Ohio in her car. He was in Ohio with a friend named Tom. When Creach was informed by his mother of Delores Irion’s death he told her he would drive back to Chicago right away. The officers were shown a picture of Creach by his mother, but the only description they had of Tom was that he was a short youth with fair hair.  This information was manifestly insufficient to establish probable cause. The officers knew that defendant Creach had seen the victim at about 1:30 a.m. on the night she was killed and subsequently had driven to Ohio in her car, but they also knew he was her boyfriend, had been living with her, and had been driving her car in the past. They also knew that when informed of the murder he voluntarily returned to Illinois. At most the police had reason to question Creach concerning his activities, but mere suspicion is insufficient to establish probable cause. (People v. Jones (1959), 16 Ill. 2d 569, 158 N.E.2d 773; In re Brewer (1974), 24 Ill. App. 3d 330, 320 N.E.2d 340.) And the police knew much less concerning defendant Ruppert. They knew only that he had been in Ohio with Creach. Certainly this information would not warrant a man of reasonable caution in the belief that the defendants had robbed and murdered Delores Irion. Brinegar v. United States (1949), 338 U.S. 160, 93 L. Ed. 1879, 69 S. Ct. 1302; People v. Riszowski (1974), 22 Ill. App. 3d 741, 318 N.E.2d 10. At the motion to suppress hearing the trial judge initially concluded that there was probable cause to arrest the defendants. However defendants then filed a motion to reconsider and in denying this motion the judge indicated his belief that the police acted properly despite a lack of probable cause-. “At this point there is a serious question as to whether or not there was probable cause for arrest. There is, however, no question that the persons last seeing the victim alive were the two defendants. There is also argument, and reasonable men can differ as to whether or not there was what I might refer to as a chargeable arrest. And by that I mean whether or not were ready to charge either or both defendants with the crime of murder at that point. There is in the law a provision as cited by defense, and although I believe it does not go as far as the facts in this case went, whereby a fellow citizen may be removed from whatever location to the police station for the purpose of making inquiry about the facts and circumstances of any crime that was in fact, that the police knew in fact to have been committed. In this case there was no question that a crime had in fact been committed. The victim’s body had been recovered, and the police had already made an examination of the scene where the body was located. Therefore, in summation on the question of the right of the Evanston police to detain or take into custody or arrest, as you will, the defendants in this case I believe that they have the authority under those exigent circumstances to do that which they did. There is further argument or may be further argument although the boys were patted down prior to their being taken by police vehicle to first the scene where they suggested the vehicle had been left, and then on to Evanston to the Evanston Police Department. Whether that constituted an arrest is debatable. Some may argue that they were merely asking, requesting the defendants to proceed with them for the purpose of further interrogation since they were the last persons to see the victim alive. They also had possession of a substantial item of property belonging to that victim. Be that as it may, however, I have found that there is in my judgment an in custody deliverance of both defendants from the homse [sic] at 5717 North Magnolia to the Evanston Police Department. It seems to me that what the Courts are trying to do, and as usual the facts don’t fit into prior cases, each case being and rightly so considered separate and apart on its own factual situation, that under these circumstances the police officer acted as we would have them act. It was not certain that either or both of the boys were involved in the homicide of the victim at that point. It was known that they were the last parties to have seen the victim alive, that they did have an item of her property, and that they had proceeded out of state at approximately the same time that the police believed that the victim’s life had been taken. I believe what they did was they were investigating the commission of a crime, that they did have the power to seek the fruits of the crime, and as here I believe that their actions and conduct were open and sincere. If we are to find á better alternative I could not suggest it. I don’t believe that there was appropriate evidence for — appropriate evidence for a warrant to issue because it still was not clear that these boys were in any way related to the crime. They did have items in their possession which may very well lead the police to the determination of someone who may have been involved in the crime. So they may be very serious suspects and at the same time material witnesses. In my judgment I am concluding that the police officers acted reasonably and that because of the exigent circumstances they had the right, that the City of Evanston police did have the right to act as they did within the city limits of Chicago which is in fact an adjacent municipality, and therefore part of the same police district.” (Emphasis added.) Of course we have determined that defendants were arrested at this point, and the absence of probable cause renders those arrests illegal. The State asserts on appeal that other information, adduced at trial as having been obtained by other members of the Evanston police department, was within the knowledge of the Officers Glanz and Birkenheier at the time they arrested the defendants and provided them with probable cause. That additional information was that the victim had been shot with a .25-caliber automatic pistol, a box for a .25-caliber pistol was found in the victim’s apartment, and the apartment had been locked with a key when the police reached it. We do not find that this evidence, even when coupled with the knowledge of Officers Glanz and Birkenheier that defendant Creach had lived with the victim, provided them with probable cause. There was, of course, no indication that the victim’s pistol, if she in fact owned one, was the weapon used to kill her. Nor was there any reason to suspect that the gun had been taken from the apartment by anyone other than the victim. Furthermore, the ordinary presumption that for purposes of probable cause the knowledge of one officer is imputed to the others involved in the cause (People v. Peak (1963), 29 Ill. 2d 343, 194 N.E.2d 322), does not apply here, for at the motion to suppress hearing Officer Glanz was specifically asked whether the knowledge he had described at that hearing was all the information on the case that he possessed concerning the involvement of defendant Creach, and he stated that it was. And the only testimony concerning communication with other officers about the case prior to the arrests was that of Glanz, who had spoken to Detective Mitchem and received from him some of the information he related at the hearing. There was no evidence that the additional information cited by the State was communicated to the officers. Because we have determined that the arrests of the defendants were illegal for lack of probable cause, we need not determine the defendants’ contention that the Evanston police lacked authority to arrest them in Chicago.  When a defendant has been arrested without probable cause, statements by the defendant and other evidence obtained as a result of that arrest are inadmissible at trial unless the State can establish the existence of intervening circumstances which dissipated the taint of the illegal arrest. (People v. Williams (1977), 53 Ill. App. 3d 266, 368 N.E.2d 679; Brown v. Illinois (1975), 422 U.S. 590, 45 L. Ed. 2d 416, 95 S. Ct. 2254; Wong Sun v. United States (1963), 371 U.S. 471, 9 L. Ed. 2d 441, 83 S. Ct. 407.) Defendants assert that their statements and other evidence used against them at trial should have been suppressed on this ground and, as independent bases, because of alleged violations of Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 86 S. Ct. 1602, and, as to defendant Ruppert, because he did not intelligently and voluntarily waive his rights. In order to properly evaluate these claims it is necessary to review the sequence of events following the arrest of the defendants. Defendants were arrested at about 9:45 a.m. Earlier, when the police had spoken to Mrs. Moore and informed her of their intention to take defendants into custody, she asked to accompany them, and the police agreed. Accordingly she got into the police car with the defendants and the two officers. In the car Mrs. Moore asked defendant Creach where the car was, and he said it was at Broadway and Belmont. Officer Glanz asked what the best way to get there was and Ruppert gave directions. When they reached that location and found the Cadillac there, Officer Birkenheier asked who had the keys to the car and Creach handed them to him. Defendants were then transported to the Evanston police station, arriving there at about 11:30 a.m. Creach was taken into one “interview room” with Officer Glanz, and Ruppert was taken into another with Officer Birkenheier. It was at this point that the defendants were advised for the first time of their Miranda rights. Officer Glanz testified that he fully advised Creach of his rights and that Creach stated he understood them. Officer Birkenheier, utilizing a form, informed Ruppert of all his rights under Miranda, except that in advising him of his right to an attorney he failed to specifically advise him that he had a right to the presence of an attorney during questioning. Ruppert also stated that he understood his rights, according to Birkenheier’s testimony. After Creach was advised of his rights, he told Officer Glanz that on September 25, 1973, at about 1:30 in the morning, he and Ruppert decided to go to Ohio in the victim’s Cadillac. They went to her apartment and she gave them permission to use the car as well as *50 for the trip. She' also gave Creach the title and registration documents for the car so he could sell it for her there. Creach intended to find work in Ohio. During the questioning Officer Glanz observed blood spots on Creach’s jacket and he asked him to remove the jacket. Creach told Glanz that he was wearing the same clothes as he had on when he left for Ohio. Subsequently at trial the jacket was admitted into evidence. At this point Detective Kirkham arrived and told Officer Glanz that Ruppert was cooperating and that they were going to recover the gun. Glanz told Creach of this, but he persisted in his version of what had taken place, showing Glanz the title and registration papers he said Irion had given him. However, when the gun was recovered and brought to the station at about 2:30 p.m., Glanz showed it to Creach and Creach began crying, saying “I killed her, I killed her. She would not let me use her car to go to Ohio.” Creach then related a different version of what had occurred. He and Ruppert went to the victim’s apartment to get her Cadillac for the Ohio trip, but she refused. Creach argued with her and attempted to remove a gun from a night stand where he knew she kept it. She saw him, managed to take it from him, but then he recovered it. They decided to take a ride in the car, something Creach said they often did when they argued. Irion did not want Ruppert to go along but Creach insisted that he be allowed to come. Irion drove them to the location between the railroad tracks where they had parked many times before. She stopped the car and she and Creach began to argue again. In the course of the argument Irion grabbed Creach’s neck and began choking him. His throat was very tender from prior throat operations and he became enraged. He took out a pocket knife and slashed Irion’s throat. She got out of the car and he followed her, stabbing her several times in the back. She walked away but Creach again approached and she began to choke him again. He stabbed her several times in the front part of her body and she fell to the ground. She called to him that she loved him and he told her that he would take her to the hospital. As he bent over her she again began to choke him. Creach pulled out his gun and fired it until it would not fire anymore. He jumped back in the car and drove with Ruppert to. Ohio. They did not discover the purse in the car until they had left the scene, and Creach threw the purse into a river in Ohio. Creach explained a bandage on his finger, stating that he had cut himself while stabbing Irion. Glanz received from Creach *45, which had been taken from Irion’s purse, and a small pocket knife. Creach told Glanz that this was not the knife he had used to stab Irion; he had dropped that knife near the stabbing location. The currency, the small pocket knife, and the title and registration papers were all introduced into evidence at trial. After making this statement Creach asked to speak to his mother, who was at the station. Glanz brought her in and she said to Creach “Did you kill her?” He responded “She should have never touched my neck.” Creach’s mother called a lawyer and after he arrived Creach declined to give a written statement. This was at about 3 p.m. Later that evening Glanz brought Creach fresh clothes so his clothes could be inventoried. While changing, Creach rubbed a small wound on his shin, commenting that he thought one of the bullets had ricocheted and hit him in the leg. Glanz asked if he meant off her head and Creach responded “no, off of one of the railroad tracks.” The questioning of Ruppert also began at about 11:30 a.m., after Officer Birkenheier had read him his rights from the preprinted form, which Ruppert then signed. Ruppert stated that he went with Creach to Delores Irion’s apartment. Ruppert stayed outside and Creach went up to the apartment, returned, and went up again. Ruppert and Creach then got into Irion’s Cadillac and went to Ohio. They bought a tire and gasoline on the way. Between 12:15 and 12:30 p.m. Officer Hennegan came in to question Ruppert, and Officer Birkenheier left. Hennegan advised Ruppert of all his Miranda rights and Ruppert stated that he understood them. Hennegan asked Ruppert how they had gotten the victim’s car. Ruppert first stated that she had voluntarily loaned Creach and him the car and currency for the trip to Ohio. Hennegan told Ruppert he did not believe him, to which Ruppert responded “Danny did it.” He then related that at 11 p.m. on September 24 he went to the area of Delores Irion’s home with Creach. She had a 1966 Cadillac parked in Creach’s garage at 5717 N. Magnolia in Chicago. Ruppert waited in that car while Creach went to Irion’s apartment. A short time later Creach returned and said he tried to steal money from Irion but she had caught him and he had to return it. Creach went back to the apartment and returned with a .25-caliber automatic pistol he said he had taken from Irion. At that time they parked Irion’s car in an alley. Ruppert stayed with the car and Creach went to the apartment for a third time, returning with Irion. Ruppert and Creach told her they needed a ride and she agreed to take them. The three entered the car, Irion at the wheel, Creach beside her and Ruppert in back. They directed her to an area in Evanston. When they reached the vicinity of South Boulevard and Chicago in Evanston Creach told Irion to drive up a CTA right-of-way. She refused and drove past the location. Creach told her to drive there or he would kill her. She drove four blocks north to the northern entrance of the right-of-way and then drove onto it, stopping the car some distance into the road. Creach produced a pocket knife, reached over and cut the victim on the throat. She got out, as did Creach and Ruppert. She held her throat asking for a rag. Ruppert found one in the car, handed it to her and she held it to her throat. She asked to be taken to a hospital and Creach and Ruppert agreed. They all got into the car, this time with Creach at the wheel, Irion beside him and Ruppert again in the back. Creach reached over and put his arm around Irion’s shoulders and stabbed her in the back. All three exited the car and Irion asked for help, saying she wanted to be taken to the hospital. Creach and Ruppert agreed. Irion got in behind the wheel and Ruppert got in beside her. But Creach walked to the driver’s side and began firing a pistol through the open window in Irion’s direction. As he began to fire Ruppert got out on the passenger’s side and Irion followed him out and began to run down the right-of-way. Creach pursued and caught up with her a short distance from the car. There was a short struggle, Creach fired another shot, and Irion fell to the ground. Creach and Ruppert got back in the car and drove from the area. (On cross-examination Hennegan recalled that Ruppert told him that before they got in the car at this point Creach told him to get in.) The victim’s purse was in the back seat and from it they took a Master Charge credit card and *140, which they divided evenly. They bought gasoline with the credit card on the way to Hamilton, Ohio, where they stayed overnight. The next day they returned to -Chicago, parking the car near the CTA tracks at Belmont where they secreted the pistol, a box of .25-caliber ammunition, and a man’s wristwatch in the support beam of the tracks. They then took the elevated train to Creach’s home. Hennegan asked Ruppert if he would take him to where these items were hidden, and Ruppert agreed to do so. On the way Hennegan asked Ruppert why he had taken the victim onto the CTA right-of-way. Ruppert stated that he intended to rob her at that location. Hennegan also asked about Ruppert’s activities in Ohio. He said they had spoken to two of Creach’s relatives, Delbert Smith and Albert Smith. Creach had showed Delbert Smith the .25-caliber automatic. Creach told Albert Smith that he had hit a woman the night before, but later said he was only kidding. In Ohio they had used Irion’s credit card in an attempt to purchase stereo equipment and jewelry but a department store manager took the card from them. After this conversation Ruppert led the police to the location of the hidden items and they were recovered. At trial Irion’s former boyfriend, Sander Hollabeck, identified the gun and the wristwatch as items he had bought and had last seen in the victim’s apartment in September 1973. Those items and the box of ammunition were admitted into evidence at trial. Ruppert was returned to the station where Hennegan informed Assistant State’s Attorney, John Divane, of the developments. Divane testified at the motion to suppress that at this time, about 3 p.m., he spoke to Ruppert, advising him of his Miranda rights, which Ruppert said he understood. Ruppert then made an oral statement to Divane. That statement was not introduced at trial, but Divane did state during the suppression hearing that it was substantially the same as a statement subsequently taken from the defendant and transcribed by a court reporter in the presence of Officer Hennegan. At trial that written statement was introduced into evidence. It was taken at about 3:15 p.m. Divane again advised Ruppert of his Miranda rights before he took this second statement, and then a third time as he began to take the statement, except that the third warning did not include the advice that his statement could be used against him. Ruppert then gave a statement which was substantially the same as that he gave to Officer Hennegan, with the following additions. Delores Irion’s home was at 5709 Magnolia. They intended to take her car without her permission. When Irion came out of the apartment with Creach she told Ruppert to get out of the car and he did so. Creach told Irion Ruppert was coming, and told Ruppert to get in. Ruppert first refused but Creach kept telling him to get in and he ultimately did so. Creach told Irion he wanted her to drive him some place. She did not want to but then got in and started driving. After Ruppert gave Irion the rag for her throat, Creach “made us all get back in the car.” And after Creach first stabbed Irion and all three got out of the car, Ruppert told Creach he should take her to the hospital because she was bleeding badly, but Creach refused. During the trip to Ohio Creach kept the gun on the front seat. When they bought gasoline with the credit card, Ruppert signed for it. In Hamilton, Ohio, Creach told Ruppert to “put a rock on the purse.” He did so and gave it to Creach, who threw it into a lake. Creach took half the money in Irion’s purse and gave the other half to Ruppert. In the written statement Ruppert identified a gun as the one recovered from the elevated tracks and used before that by Creach to kill Irion. After Ruppert gave this statement Hennegan asked Ruppert if he had any of the money left that was taken from Irion. He said he had *24 left, and gave it to Hennegan. This money was introduced into evidence at trial. 2.  Defendant Creach contends that because he was not warned of his Miranda rights prior to his statement concerning the location of the Cadillac, that statement should have been suppressed along with any evidence concerning the Cadillac and evidence found in it. Although we agree that derivative evidence obtained as the result of a Miranda violation should be suppressed along with any statements made (Michigan v. Tucker (1974), 417 U.S. 433, 41 L. Ed. 2d 182, 94 S. Ct. 2357; U.S. ex rel. Hudson v. Cannon (7th Cir. 1976), 529 F.2d 890), we find no Miranda violation on these facts. Creach’s statement came in response to a question from his mother, who was in the police car because the police had granted her request to accompany her son to the station. There is no basis in the evidence to support defendant’s speculation that the police had intentionally used defendant’s mother to obtain this information, consequently this was not a police or police-directed question which would require a prior Miranda warning. (People v. Hawkins (1972), 53 Ill. 2d 181, 290 N.E.2d 231; People v. Brooks (1972), 51 Ill. 2d 156, 281 N.E.2d 326; compare Commonwealth v. Bordner (1968), 432 Pa. 405, 247 A.2d 612.) Creach was given all the Miranda rights at the police station prior to police questioning and he makes no contention on appeal concerning the voluntariness of his statements made there.  But when defendant Ruppert was initially advised of his rights at the station he was not specifically advised that he had a right to counsel during any questioning. His rights were read to him from a form which stated: “I, Thomas A. Ruppert, have been advised of my rights by officers of the Evanston, Illinois, Police Department. I have been told that I have the right to remain silent and that anything I say can and will be used against me in a court of law, and I have the right to the presence of an attorney to assist me prior to any questioning if I so desire, and also, that if I cannot afford an attorney, I have the right to have an attorney appointed for me prior to any questioning. Having been advised of those rights, I, Thomas A. Ruppert, agree to waive those rights and to answer the questions that the officers ask of me.” Defendant Ruppert correctly points out that the court in Miranda made clear that the right to counsel, of which a defendant must be warned before questioning, includes the right to have a lawyer present during any interrogation. The better practice would be to explicitly advise a defendant of that facet of his right to counsel, but our examination of the case law convinces us that the warnings given here were sufficient when viewed as a whole and not in isolated context. Thus in People v. Gazic (1975), 30 Ill. App. 3d 1063, 336 N.E.2d 73, a general warning that defendant had a right to consult with a lawyer was held sufficient to warn him of his right to counsel at the interrogation. In People v. Ward (1976), 37 Ill. App. 3d 960, 347 N.E.2d 381, informing defendant of his right to obtain the services of a lawyer was deemed sufficient to warn him of his specific right to counsel during questioning. And in People v. Walker (1974), 18 Ill. App. 3d 351, 309 N.E.2d 716, it was held that advising defendant that he had a right to an attorney and further advising him that he should obtain one was found to clearly convey to him his right to the presence of an attorney during questioning. Finally, in People v. Hoffman (1975), 32 Ill. App. 3d 785, 336 N.E.2d 209, adequate advice of the right to counsel was found where defendant was told he had a right to have an attorney present before any questions were asked and was also told that he could exercise any and all of his Miranda rights at any time he wished. In the instant case, defendant was told that he had a right to the assistance of counsel before being questioned and that if he could not afford one, counsel would be appointed before questioning. We find that this did suffice to inform defendant of his right to counsel under Miranda. Contra, People v. Green (1973), 14 Ill. App. 3d 972, 304 N.E.2d 32, cert. denied (1974), 417 U.S. 972, 41 L. Ed. 2d 1143, 94 S. Ct. 3179 (dictum, relying on United States v. Fox (2d Cir. 1968), 403 F.2d 97; but see United States v. Lamis (2d Cir. 1970), 429 F.2d 373, cert. denied (1970), 400 U.S. 907, 27 L. Ed. 2d 146, 91 S. Ct. 150; United States v. Cusumano (2d Cir. 1970), 429 F.2d 378, cert. denied (1970), 400 U.S. 830, 27 L. Ed. 2d 61, 91 S. Ct. 61).  Defendant Ruppert also asserts that because his written statement, taken by Assistant State’s Attorney Divane, indicated that Divane did not at that time advise him the statement could be used against him, Miranda was violated and the statement should have been suppressed. However, by this point defendant had already been given his Miranda warnings four times and there was no requirement that any of them be repeated, consequently the omission of one element in this fifth warning was not error. People v. Hill (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 125, 233 N.E.2d 367, cert. denied (1968), 392 U.S. 936, 20 L. Ed. 2d 1394, 88 S. Ct. 2305; People v. Beamer (1978), 59 Ill. App. 3d 855, 376 N.E.2d 368. 3(a)  When the police took Ruppert into custody, they did not attempt to notify his parents, nor did they advise him that he had a right to such notification. Ruppert was 17 years old at that time. He contends that the police had the duty to attempt to notify his parents that they had taken him into custody. Section 3 — 2 of the Juvenile Court Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 37, par. 703—2) requires a reasonable attempt at such notification when a minor is taken into custody under section 3 — 1. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 37, par. 703—1.) Section 3 — 1, in conjunction with section 2 — 1 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 37, par. 702—1), empowers law enforcement officers to take into temporary custody minors whom they deem to be delinquent, otherwise in need of supervision, neglected, or dependent, as well as for other reasons not relevant here. The State argues that the only potentially relevant status would be delinquency and that even that was not applicable because the statutory definition of a delinquent minor is restricted to those violating a law before their 17th birthday. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 37, par. 702—2.) Therefore, they contend that notification requirements were not apphcable. We need not determine the validity of this argument, however, because it is clear that violation of this notice requirement does not mandate suppression of evidence obtained following that violation. (People v. Steptore (1972), 51 Ill. 2d 208, 281 N.E.2d 642; People v. Zepeda (1970), 47 Ill. 2d 23, 265 N.E.2d 647.) At most, such a violation constitutes a factor in determining whether subsequent statements were voluntarily made. In re Stiff (1975), 32 Ill. App. 3d 971, 336 N.E.2d 619. 3(b) Defendant Ruppert also contends that his statements were not voluntarily made because he did not knowingly and voluntarily waive his rights. Defendant’s own suppression-hearing testimony on this point was conflicting. He testified that he understood the rights contained on the form we have cited. But on direct examination he testified he was not aware that his statements could be used against him in court. He also testified that he understood all of the questions asked of him by Assistant State’s Attorney Divane, and that he read and understood the written statement he gave to Divane. Ruppert claimed that Officer Hennegan told him he could go home if he told what happened and that if he did not tell, a “lie detector machine” would be used on him. It was stipulated that Hennegan would deny both these assertions. Dr. Edward Kelleher, a certified psychiatrist and director of the Psychiatric Institute of the circuit court of Cook County, examined defendant Ruppert prior to trial, and testified at the motion to suppress hearing. He found that defendant had an I.Q. of 78, that of a borderline mental retardant individual. Dr. Kelleher testified that this classification meant that a person is slower to learn, though such a person should be able to reach the second year of high school, assuming a good school situation. Dr. Kelleher also stated that an electro-encephalogram showed the defendant had organic brain damage, but that this would not affect learning ability nor I.Q.; the only possible effect he found in the defendant was a possible connection with defendant’s tensions, excitability, or a complaint of a rapid heartbeat. During Kelleher’s examination of Ruppert, Ruppert understood the questions and made coherent responses. He found no mental illness or psychosis, and it was his opinion that a person of defendant’s intelligence level would understand the Miranda warnings. Alfred Kirberg, a special-education teacher, testified that he taught Ruppert from 1969 to 1971 in a special class for 4th to 6th graders. He stated that Ruppert had reached his peak learning capacity at that time, that of a fifth grader or 10-year-old. However, he also testified that he had not seen Ruppert since 1971 and had no opinion regarding his academic level on the date of the death of Delores Irion.  The question of whether defendant Ruppert knowingly and voluntarily waived his Miranda rights was for the trial court to determine based on the totality of the evidence. That determination should not be overturned unless it is contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. (People v. Wipfler (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 158, 368 N.E.2d 870, 11 Ill. Dec. 262.) We recognize the special care and scrutiny required where a juvenile, especially one classified as a borderline mental retardant, is involved. (People v. Simmons (1975), 60 Ill. 2d 173, 326 N.E.2d 383.) But in this cause there was direct expert testimony indicating that this factor did not affect the voluntariness of Ruppert’s waiver. Furthermore, the trial court had the opportunity to observe the testimony of the defendant. The court concluded: “Insofar as Mr. Ruppert is concerned I would find that from my evaluation of his testimony, having seen him in fact testify from the stand, respond to questions, the method and mode of his response, his ability to respond, his coherence and conciseness in responding, he impressed me to the extent that I would have to find under these facts that he could in fact knowingly and intelligently waive his constitutional rights.” The court found that defendant Ruppert did knowingly and intelligently waive his Miranda rights, and we find that determination to have ample support in the record. 4. Both defendants and the State find support in Brown v. Illinois (1975), 422 U.S. 590, 45 L. Ed. 2d 416, 95 S. Ct. 2254, for their contentions concerning the exclusion of their statements and other evidence as the fruit of their illegal arrests. In Brown the defendant was arrested without probable cause and without a warrant by police who first broke into his apartment and searched it and then waited there for him to arrive. Defendant was taken to the police station, given his Miranda warnings and then questioned. Within two hours of his arrest he had given the police a signed statement concerning his involvement in the murder for which he had been arrested, and later that evening he gave a second statement. The police testimony was that they arrested the defendant so as to question him concerning the murder. Defendant’s conviction was affirmed by the Illinois Supreme Court on the ground that the giving of the Miranda warnings broke the causal connection between the illegal arrest and the statements, thus permitting their introduction into evidence. The United States Supreme Court reversed, holding that the giving of Miranda warnings did not automatically establish that a subsequent confession was not obtained through exploitation of an illegal arrest. The court identified four factors which it deemed relevant to this inquiry: where the Miranda requirements were satisfied, the temporal proximity of the arrest and the confession, the presence of intervening circumstances, and the purpose and flagrancy of the official misconduct. It was undisputed in Brown that the Miranda warnings were given and defendant understood them, but the court held this to be insufficient. It noted that less than two hours elapsed between the arrest and the first statement, and found that the second statement was clearly the fruit of the first. It noted that there were no significant intervening circumstances such as those in Wong Sun, where defendant Wong Sun’s confession was admitted despite his illegal arrest because the confession came only after he had been arraigned and released on his own recognizance. And it held that the illegality of the arrest was purposeful, as the arresting officers admitted that they made the arrest for investigation or questioning. The court also found that the manner of the arrest was apparently calculated to cause surprise and confusion. In this case it is also clear that the purpose of the arrests of the defendants was for questioning; this was the police testimony. There was not the flagrant action of breaking into a home or making a surprise arrest with guns drawn, but nonetheless the fundamental misconduct remains the same as in Brown, making an arrest not on probable cause but only for purposes of taking a suspect into custody for questioning. Nor were there any significant intervening circumstances between the arrests and the statements. An example of what the court in Brown envisioned as an intervening circumstance is found in Johnson v. Louisiana (1972), 406 U.S. 356, 32 L. Ed. 2d 152, 92 S. Ct. 1620, cited in Brown. There the defendant contended that his line-up identification was the product of his illegal arrest. The court found that because the defendant was brought before a magistrate where bail was set and he was advised of his rights and then had an attorney present during his line-up identification, there existed intervening circumstances breaking the causal connection between the allegedly illegal arrest and the identification. As for temporal proximity, defendant Creach’s first statement after his arrest, concerning the location of the Cadillac, came only moments after his arrest. The defendants’ first substantive confessions were within several hours of their arrests, and all their statements admitted at trial were made on the same day as their arrest. This situation is analogous to that in Brown, and differs from cases cited in Brown to illustrate what would constitute a time sequence establishing attenuation: United States v. Owen (5th Cir. 1974), 492 F.2d 1100, cert. denied (1974), 419 U.S. 965, 42 L. Ed. 2d 180, 95 S. Ct. 227 (four days after release from custody defendant voluntarily returned and spoke to the authorities), and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania ex rel. Craig v. Maroney (3d Cir. 1965), 348 F.2d 22, cert. denied (1966), 384 U.S. 1019, 16 L. Ed. 2d 1042, 86 S. Ct. 1966 (five days between the arrest and the confession, during which time defendant was arraigned and was specifically advised by his attorney not to make any statements). Nor was the court concerned strictly with the passage of time in evaluating this factor, for it cited the case of Hale v. Henderson (6th Cir. 1973), 485 F.2d 266, cert. denied (1974), 415 U.S. 930, 39 L. Ed. 2d 489, 94 S. Ct. 1442, where a defendant’s confession made 42 hours into the period of his custody was excluded even though he had talked privately with his wife during that time, because there was no break in custody and little break, if any, in his custodial interrogation.  Thus, the only factor tending to support the admissibility of the evidence obtained by questioning the defendants is that they were given their Miranda rights before statements were taken at the police station. We find that this factor by itself was not sufficient to break the causal connection between the illegal arrests and the defendants’ statements. Accordingly, the statements of the defendants and the evidence obtained as the result of those statements should have been suppressed. This includes defendant Creach’s statement in the police car concerning the location of the Cadillac. Even though we have found no Miranda violation as to this statement, the absence of any prior Miranda warnings provides support for our finding that the statement was the product of defendant Creach’s illegal arrest. Nor do we find the fact that the questioning was initiated by Creach’s mother to be a sufficient intervening cause. The police joined in this questioning by asking how to get to the address given, and once there they asked who had the keys.1 They thus provided the opportunity for Creach to make statements to his mother in their presence without warning him of possible consequences, and when that questioning was initiated they participated in it. This constituted exploitation of the illegal arrest and required suppression of the statement obtained as well as the evidence provided by the Cadillac itself. At trial the defendants’ statements constituted the basis of the evidence against them. Physical evidence obtained as the result of their statements, such as the gun and other evidence hidden by the defendants, the money they obtained from the victim’s purse, their fingerprints from the Cadillac, and other evidence found in that car were used to corroborate those statements. We believe the admission of this evidence was prejudicial error, and it requires that defendants’ convictions be reversed and the cause remanded for a new trial without the use of this evidence. 5.  Defendant Creach also contends that the admission of his co-defendant Ruppert’s statement, containing matters incriminating to Creach, constituted a Bruton violation (Bruton v. United States (1968), 391 U.S. 123, 20 L. Ed. 2d 476, 88 S. Ct. 1620), because Ruppert was not available at trial for cross-examination. But where, as here, the jury also hears defendant’s own incriminating statements, amounting to a confession of the crime, there is no prejudicial error (People v. Rosochacki (1969), 41 Ill. 2d 483, 244 N.E.2d 136), and perhaps not even harmless error. People v. Bassett (1974), 56 Ill. 2d 285, 307 N.E.2d 359. 6(a) Creach’s defense at trial was insanity, and he contends that the State failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he was sane at the time he committed the offenses at issue. Defendant presented the testimony of six lay witnesses on this issue. His mother testified that he was frequently beaten by his father and step-father and that she, too, was regularly beaten by his father in his presence. She also stated that Creach had taken drugs since he was in the second grade. Defendant Creach’s cousin recalled two incidents in which Creach had intentionally driven a car into a garage wall and had thrown a dart into the cousin’s leg; his opinion was that Creach was crazy. A neighbor testified that she had once attempted to intercede in an argument between Creach and his mother, and Creach struck the neighbor repeatedly. It was the neighbor’s opinion, when asked of Creach’s sanity, that he was “extremely angry.” A female friend of the defendant testified to defendant’s frequent drug usage, stating that when he took “speed” he drove his car wildly and would sometimes pass out. Her opinion was that Creach was not sane. Defendant’s brother testified that Creach took drugs and “sniffed” glue frequently; his opinion was that around September 1973 defendant was “getting kind of crazy.” Another friend of the defendant testified that on one occasion Creach could not remember what he had done earlier, and on another occasion she rode in a car with him when he drove recklessly, striking several cars and running through a fence; when she ran away he chased her and struck her. Her opinion was that in the summer of 1973 Creach was “nuts.” Dr. Walter Feldman, a psychiatrist and attorney, examined Creach on three occasions in October 1974, and directed psychological tests of him. In response to a hypothetical question which included the incidents to which the lay witnesses had testified as well as the facts of the murder of Delores Irion, Dr. Feldman testified that in his opinion, the hypothetical subject of the question was, on September 25,1973, suffering from a mental disease or defect and as a result was unable to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law. Dr. Feldman equated a mental disease or defect with “impaired function.” In rebuttal the State presented the testimony of Dr. Kelleher, who examined the defendant twice in January 1975 and administered a number of psychological tests. Dr. Kelleher found no psychoses, no neuroses and no mental illness, though he did believe defendant attempted to feign amnesia concerning the killing of Delores Irion. Dr. Kelleher’s opinion was that defendant was sane at the time of the killing. The State also presented the lay testimony of Officers Birkenheier, Glanz, and Kirkham, and Assistant State’s Attorney Divane, that based on their observation of Creach the day after the killing they believed him to be sane.  This question of defendant’s mental condition at the time of the crime was for the jurors to determine as the triers of fact. (People v. Ford (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 318, 235 N.E.2d 576.) They were at liberty to accept or reject the testimony of the various lay and expert witnesses. (People v. Sims (1976), 35 Ill. App. 3d 401, 342 N.E.2d 256.) The evidence tending to establish defendant Creach’s sanity is ample and the jury’s resolution of that question is not so improbable or unsatisfactory as to raise a reasonable doubt as to defendant’s sanity; for that reason we will not disturb that determination. People v. Ward (1975), 61 Ill. 2d 559, 338 N.E.2d 171. 6(b)  Nor do we find merit in defendant Ruppert’s contention that his guilt as to the armed robbery was not established beyond a reasonable doubt. Defendant’s conviction was based on a theory of accountability, as codified by Sections 5 — 1 and 5 — 2 of the Criminal Code. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, pars. 5—1, 5—2.) Section 5 — 2 states in relevant part: “A person is legally accountable for the conduct of another when: # # # (c) Either before or during the commission of an offense, and with the intent to promote or facilitate such commission, he solicits, aids, abets, agrees or attempts to aid, such other person in the planning or commission of the offense. ° Some useful principles in determining accountability were set forth in People v. Morgan (1977), 67 Ill. 2d 1, 364 N.E.2d 56, quoting from the appellate court decision which the supreme court was affirming: “Mere presence or negative acquiescence is not enough to make one a principal to a crime. [Citations.] However, a person may aid or abet without actively participating in the overt act and if the proof shows that he was present at the commission of the crime without disapproving or opposing it, the trier of fact may consider this conduct in connection with other circumstances and thereby reach a conclusion that such person assented to the commission of the crime, lent to it his countenance and approval, and was thereby aiding and abetting it. [Citations.]” (67 Ill. 2d 1, 8-9, 364 N.E.2d 56, 60.) In Morgan several people agreed to rob the victim. The defendant agreed, according to his own statement, to do nothing but accompany the others to the scene. No evidence was introduced as to what defendant did during the robbery, but there was evidence that afterward he divided the proceeds with the others. This evidence was found sufficient to convict the defendant of armed robbery as well as the murder of the victim, who was killed in the course of the robbery. In this cause there was testimony that defendant admitted he intended to rob Delores Irion when he went to Evanston with her and Creach. There was also evidence showing that Ruppert admitted that he and Creach were planning to take the victim’s car to Ohio without her permission. During the killing of Irion defendant Ruppert stood by and did nothing to attempt to intercede. By his own admission he took half of the victim’s money when Creach offered it to him, and he used the victim’s credit card to make purchases. This evidence, if believed by the jury, was sufficient to establish defendant Ruppert’s accountability for the armed robbery of Delores Irion. 7. But defendant Ruppert also alleges error in the refusal of the trial court to instruct the jury on the affirmative defense of compulsion. The instruction requested by Ruppert states: “It is a defense to the charge made against a defendant that he acted under the compulsion of threat or menace of the imminent infliction of death or great bodily harm, if he reasonably believed death or great bodily harm would be inflicted upon him if he did not perform the conduct with which he is charged.” (Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 24.21 (1968).) As we have noted, compulsion is an affirmative defense. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, pars. 7—11, 7—14.) By statute, unless the State’s evidence raises the issue, the defendant must raise it by presenting “some evidence”; once the issue is raised the State must prove defendant guilty as to this issue along with the other elements of the crime. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 3—2.) The case law in this State is conflicting as to the quantum of evidence necessary to raise such an affirmative defense. Generally an instruction is justified even where only very slight evidence supporting it is in the record. (People v. Kalpak (1957), 10 Ill. 2d 411, 140 N.E.2d 726.) And this standard has been applied to instructions on affirmative defenses. (People v. Adcock (1975), 29 Ill. App. 3d 917, 331 N.E.2d 573 (compulsion); People v. Cruz (1978), 66 Ill. App. 3d 760, 384 N.E.2d 137 (self-defense); People v. Looney (1977), 46 Ill. App. 3d 404, 361 N.E.2d 18 (self-defense).) However, in People v. Redmond (1974), 59 Ill. 2d 328, 320 N.E.2d 321, the Illinois Supreme Court held that the affirmative defense of insanity was raised only where evidence on the issue was sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt as to the defendant’s sanity. Although that opinion specifically concerned only insanity, the court relied on the Committee Comments relating generally to affirmative defenses (Ill. Ann. Stat., ch. 38, par. 3—2, Committee Comments, at 192-93 (Smith-Hurd 1972)), wherein it was noted that unless the evidence was sufficient to warrant submitting the issue to the jury and to raise a reasonable doubt as to the defendant’s guilt, it would be of little benefit to the defendant.  We need not determine which standard is applicable, for even under the stricter standard of Redmond we find that an instruction on compulsion was warranted. There was evidence indicating that from the time Creach emerged with Delores Irion from her apartment, he was armed with a gun. According to Ruppert’s statements, which the State introduced into the record, when Irion and Creach first came out of the apartment, Irion told Ruppert to leave the car, and he complied. But then Creach told him to get back in; after first refusing, Ruppert finally got back in when Creach repeatedly told him to do so. In Ruppert’s statement he also recalled that after Irion’s throat had been cut and he had given her a rag, Creach made them both get back in the car. And after Creach had shot and apparently killed Irion, he again told Ruppert to get back in the car, and Ruppert complied. Finally, it was part of Ruppert’s statement that on the way to Ohio, Creach kept the gun out on the front seat of the car. These factors could have been sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt in the minds of the jurors as to defendant’s accountability; certainly they were “some evidence” of compulsion. The failure to give this instruction was error and constitutes an independent basis for the reversal of defendant Ruppert’s conviction and remandment for a new trial.  Finally, we find no merit in defendant Ruppert’s contention that the trial court erred in failing to give his proposed instructions on accountability and accessories after the fact. The court properly gave the IPI instruction on accountability. That instruction specified that accountability was to be based on defendant’s actions or intent before and during the offense; thus the jury was made aware that Ruppert could not be held accountable for Creach’s actions because he had acted to conceal the crime or to help Creach escape. Because the jury was adequately instructed on this defense theory by the IPI instruction on accountability, the court did not err in refusing Ruppert’s instruction which covered the same issue in a different manner. People v. Stringer (1972), 52 Ill. 2d 564, 289 N.E.2d 631. Accordingly, for the reasons set forth in this opinion, the convictions of the defendants are reversed and the cause is remanded for retrial. Reversed and remanded. JOHNSON, J., concurs.   Defendants have not raised the issue of whether these questions, which followed defendant Creach’s statement to his mother, should have been preceded by Miranda warnings. Most of the information concerning these questions and the responses to them was adduced only at the hearing on the motion to suppress. At trial the testimony indicated only that someone in the car gave directions on how to get to Broadway and Belmont; there was no testimony that the car keys were demanded or produced. We need not consider the issue here, for any such testimony, as well as the car keys, would be inadmissible as the fruit of the illegal arrests, without regard to whether Miranda was also violated.

=== CASE 9738795 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:50.171537+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE LINN, dissenting: I must respectfully dissent from the majority’s holding: (1) that defendant, John Creach, was arrested without probable cause;1 (2) that Creach’s inculpatory statements, as well as certain other evidence presented against him, must be suppressed as fruit of the poisonous tree; and (3) that the trial court erred in not instructing the jury on the affirmative defense of compulsion with regard to defendant Ruppert. I The majority correctly concludes that defendant Creach was placed under arrest by Evanston police officers at the Magnolia Street location. (See, e.g., People v. Pruitt (1967), 79 Ill. App. 2d 209, 216-17, 223 N.E.2d 537, 541-42.) The constitutional validity of his arrest focuses upon whether the police officers had probable cause to believe Creach had committed an offense. Henry v. United States (1959), 361 U.S. 98, 4 L. Ed. 2d 134, 80 S. Ct. 168; Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 107—2(c); People v. Wright (1974), 56 Ill. 2d 523, 309 N.E.2d 537. At the conclusion of lengthy hearings on the motions to suppress, the trial court found that the Evanston police officers did have probable cause to arrest Creach.2 This finding may be disturbed on appeal only if it is “manifestly erroneous.” (People v. Clay (1973), 55 Ill. 2d 501, 505, 304 N.E.2d 280, 282.) It must also be remembered that Creach had the burden of proving that his arrest was based on less than probable cause. (People v. Ross (1978), 60 Ill. App. 3d 857, 377 N.E.2d 230.) I cannot conclude that Creach met this burden or that the trial court’s finding is manifestly erroneous. Probable cause to arrest refers to that quantum of information which would lead a reasonable and prudent police officer to believe the defendant probably committed an offense. (People v. Robinson (1976), 62 Ill. 2d 273, 342 N.E.2d 356.) This information need not be sufficient to establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt (Draper v. United States (1959), 358 U.S. 307, 3 L. Ed. 2d 327, 79 S. Ct. 329), nor must it be sufficient to prove guilt is more probable than not. All that is necessary, is that the information, upon which the arrest is based, constitute reasonable grounds for believing that guilt is more than a mere possibility.3  Probable cause should be viewed from the vantage point of a police officer’s training and experience, and “must be judged on the basis of [his] responsibility to prevent crime and to catch criminals.” (People v. Robinson (1976), 62 Ill. 2d 273, 277, 342 N.E.2d 356, 358.) As our supreme court recently stated in People v. Blitz (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 287, 292-93, 369 N.E.2d 1238, 2140-41, quoting from United States v. Davis (D.C. Cir. 1972), 458 F.2d 819, 821: “Probable cause does not emanate from an antiseptic courtroom, a sterile library or a sacrosanct adytum, nor is it a pristine ‘philosophical concept existing in a vacuum,’ Bell v. United States, 102 U.S. App. D.C. 383, 386, 254 F.2d 82, 85 (1958), but rather it requires a pragmatic analysis of ‘everyday life on which reasonable and prudent men, not legal technicians, act.’ Brinegar v. United States, 338 U.S. 160, 175, 69 S. Ct. 1302, 1310, 93 L. Ed. 1879 (1949). It is to be viewed from the vantage point of a prudent, reasonable, cautious police officer on the scene at the time of the arrest guided by his experience and training. Jackson v. United States, 112 U.S. App. D.C. 260, 302 F.2d 194 (1962). It is ‘a plastic concept whose existence depends on the facts and circumstances of the particular case.’ Bailey v. United States, 128 U.S. App. D.C. 354, 357, 389 F.2d 305, 308 (1967). See McCray v. Illinois, 386 U.S. 300, 304, 87 S. Ct. 1056, 18 L. Ed. 2d 62 (1967); Beck v. Ohio, supra, 379 U.S. [89] at 91, 85 S. Ct. 223, [13 L. Ed. 2d 142]; Brinegar v. United States, supra, 338 U.S. at 175-176, 69 S. Ct. 1302. Because of the kaleidoscopic myriad that goes into the probable cause mix ‘seldom does a decision in one case handily dispose of the next.’ Hinton v. United States, 137 U.S. App. D.C. 388, 391, 424 F.2d 876, 879 (1969). It is however the totality of these facts and circumstances which is the relevant consideration. Davis v. United States, 133 U.S. App. D.C. 172, 173, 409 F.2d 458, 459 (1969); Dixon v. United States, 111 U.S. App. D.C. 305, 306, 296 F.2d 427, 428 (1961). Viewed singly these factors may not be dispositive, yet when viewed in unison the puzzle may fit.” A well-trained professional utilizes the unique talent and experience gained through his work. The professional police investigator is no exception. He will apply his skill and technical knowledge in carefully analyzing and evaluating all available data relating to the criminal activity which is the subject of his inquiry. The police investigator’s experience-honed power of analytical conceptualization often “glues” together stray pieces of a particularly difficult puzzle, thereby giving rise to a reasonable probability that the crime involved was committed by a known suspect. When the court applies legal standards to the probable cause issue presented by a particular case, it must remain aware of and give due deference to the police investigator’s professionalism and experience and also his ability to decipher meaning from what may superficially appear to be innocent facts and circumstances. Furthermore, since many of the situations which law enforcement officers confront are more or less ambiguous, courts, by necessity, permit them broad discretion in determining whether probable cause to arrest does exist. Brinegar v. United States (1949), 338 U.S. 160, 176, 93 L. Ed. 1879, 1891, 69 S. Ct. 1302, 1311; People v. Wright (1974), 56 Ill. 2d 523, 529, 309 N.E.2d 537, 540; see, e.g., People v. Coleman (1978), 63 Ill. App. 3d 814, 380 N.E.2d 829. In this case, the Evanston police officers possessed the following information at the time they arrested defendant Creach: Delores Irion’s body was found in Evanston at approximately 7 a.m. on September 25, 1973. She had been shot three times with a .25-caliber automatic pistol, twice in the head and once in the back, and also stabbed 12 times, in the back, chest, abdomen and knee. An empty box for a .25-caliber automatic pistol was found in Delores Irion’s apartment. The apartment had been locked with a key when the police reached it. Despite having rained heavily the night before, Delores Irion’s clothing was dry, suggesting she had been killed sometime after midnight. The victim’s automobile, a 1966 Cadillac, was missing. The police were informed that John Creach, the son of Mrs. Dolly Moore, the victim’s next door neighbor, had been living with Ms. Irion for the past month. During this time, Creach had been driving Delores Irion’s automobile. Mrs. Moore informed police that Creach had called her from Ohio. Creach told his mother he had Delores Irion’s 1966 Cadillac and had last seen her alive at 1:30 a.m., the morning of September 25, when he had left for Ohio in her car. Creach was in Ohio with a friend named Tom. When Creach was informed by his mother of Delores Irion’s death, he told her he would drive back to Chicago right away. No explanation was offered as to why Creach had suddenly taken the victim’s automobile and left for Ohio at 1:30 a.m. The police department’s investigation indicated that Creach was the last person to see Delores Irion alive. Although these factors viewed individually may not be dispositive of the probable cause issue, their sum total dictates only one conclusion: the Evanston police officers had a reasonable basis for their belief that Creach probably murdered Delores Irion. Consequently, their arrest of Creach was legally justified. It must be borne in mind that probability is the touchstone, not certainty. Based upon this information, I readily conclude that the trial court’s finding of probable cause was proper. The majority questions whether certain factors listed above may properly be considered in our review of the probable cause to arrest issue. Although not revealed at the motion to suppress hearing, it was later disclosed at trial that the Evanston police department had obtained the following information, prior to arresting Creach: (1) Delores Irion had been shot with a .25-caliber pistol; (2) a box for a .25-caliber pistol had been found in her apartment; and (3) the apartment was locked with a key when the police reached it. According to the majority, the two arresting officers were not personally aware of this information when they took Creach into custody. I believe that even without this information the police officers had probable cause to arrest Creach. Additionally, although this information was not presented at the motion to suppress hearing, it may properly be considered by us in reviewing defendant’s contention that the trial court erred in finding probable cause to arrest did exist. People v. Braden (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 516, 216 N.E.2d 808; People v. Glanton (1975), 33 Ill. App. 3d 124, 338 N.E.2d 30. The fact the arresting officers may not have had this information within their personal knowledge, at the time Creach was taken into custody, is irrelevant. Probable cause must be evaluated on the basis of the collective information possessed by the law enforcement agency or particular investigative unit involved, rather than solely upon the information possessed by the officers who actually make the arrest. (People v. Parks (1971), 48 Ill. 2d 232, 269 N.E.2d 484, cert. denied (1972), 404 U.S. 1020, 30 L. Ed. 2d 669, 92 S. Ct. 692; People v. Beard (1976), 35 Ill. App. 3d 725, 342 N.E.2d 343; United States v. Stratton (8th Cir. 1972), 453 F.2d 36, cert. denied (1972), 405 U.S. 1069, 31 L. Ed. 2d 800, 92 S. Ct. 1515; Smith v. United States (D.C. Cir. 1966), 358 F.2d 833.) As one court stated: “Defendant argues that because the arresting officer did not have sufficient knowledge or information to establish probable cause, the arrest was illegal. This is not the correct test. The test is whether the law-enforcement agency as a corporate body possessed sufficient information to establish probable cause. (Citations.) In this case probable cause was established by all (the) information possessed by the police as a unit and therefore the arrest was lawful.” State v. Stark (1970), 288 Minn. 286, 290-91, 179 N.W.2d 597, 600, cert. denied, 402 U.S. 930, 91 S. Ct. 1529, 28 L. Ed. 2d 864; accord, Johnson v. State (1977), 75 Wis.2d 344, 249 N.W.2d 593. The record in this case discloses that several officers of the Evanston police department were working in close concert with one another in investigating Delores Irion’s murder. The record also demonstrates that information was freely exchanged among these officers during the course of that investigation. Consequently, in light of the above principle, the knowledge of each officer involved in the investigation should be imputed to the rest. Nevertheless, the majority holds unpersuasively that the above principle is not applicable to this case: “[The] ordinary presumption that for purposes of probable cause the knowledge of one officer is imputed to the others involved in the cause [citation], does not apply here, for at the motion to suppress hearing Officer Glanz [one of the arresting officers] was specifically asked whether the knowledge he had described at that hearing was all the information on the case that he [personally] possessed concerning the involvement of defendant Creach, and he stated that it was.” Glanz’s statement, however, does not contradict and the majority does not challenge, the testimony later adduced at trial that additional information, at the time of Creach’s arrest, was possessed by other police officers involved in the investigation. Indeed, Glanz’s statement does not even indicate that the other arresting officer, Birkenheier, was ignorant of this additional information. In any event, the above principle correctly demonstrates that the arresting officers need not have been personally aware of all the information possessed by their investigative agency as a unit. Therefore, I fail to understand how Glanz’s statement — which merely indicates that he, and possibly his partner, were not personally aware of additional information possessed by other police officers involved in the investigation — renders this principle inapplicable. Viewing the total circumstances from the vantage point of a police officer’s training and experience, I am of the opinion that there was a reasonable basis for the belief that Creach probably murdered Delores Irion. I would, therefore, conclude that his arrest was based upon probable cause, and that the inculpatory statements, as well as the other evidence attributable to his arrest, were properly admitted. II Creach contends that even if probable cause did exist, the Evanston police lacked authority to arrest him in Chicago. I disagree. The common law rule limited the authority of police officers to the territorial boundaries of the municipality. (People v. Carnivale (1975), 61 Ill. 2d 57, 329 N.E.2d 193.) This rule was later modified by sections 7 — 4— 7 and 7 — 4—8 of the Illinois Municipal Code: “The territory which is embraced within the corporate limits of adjoining municipalities within any county in this State shall be a police district.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 24, par. 7—4—7. “The police of any municipality in such a police district may go into any part of the district to suppress a riot, to preserve the peace, and to protect the lives, rights, and property of citizens. For these purposes the mayor of any municipality in the district, and the chiefs of police therein, shall use the police forces under their control anywhere in the district.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 24, par. 7—4—8.4  We take judicial notice that Chicago and Evanston are adjoining municipalities within the same county, and, therefore, are part of the same police district. (See People v. Lawson (1976), 36 Ill. App. 3d 767, 345 N.E.2d 41.) The question presented is whether the arrest of Creach in Chicago, was within the extraterritorial power bestowed on the Evanston police by section 7—4—8. The Evanston police were investigating the brutal and savage murder of Delores Irion, a Chicago female resident, whose dead body was found within the municipal boundaries of Evanston. The serious nature of this crime posed a very real threat to the physical safety of the other residents within the police district. The concern generated by this vicious crime was evidenced by the manpower immediately assigned to the case by the Evanston police department. Early in its investigation, the Evanston police acquired reasonable grounds to believe that defendant, Creach, had murdered Delores Irion. They also had reason to believe that Creach had fled to Ohio following the culmination of his act. Creach’s mother informed them that when her son had called from Ohio and was informed of Delores Irion’s murder, he volunteered to return to Chicago “right away.” Creach was expected to return to Chicago the night of September 25. He did not show. In the early morning hours of September 26, Officers Glanz and Birkenheier were patrolling the Chicago neighborhood where Creach and the victim had lived in search of Delores Irion’s automobile. At approximately 9:30 a.m., they spotted Creach walking down the street toward his mother’s home. In my view, the arrest of Creach at this time was necessary “to preserve the peace, and to protect the lives, [and] rights, * * * of citizens.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 24, par. 7—4—8.) It would have been absurd and dangerous for the Evanston police officers, under the facts presented by this case, to have dropped everything, and awaited the arrival of a Chicago police officer before placing Creach under arrest. I would, therefore, conclude that the Evanston police had authority to arrest Creach in Chicago. Ill The majority holds that the trial court erred, with regard to defendant Ruppert, in refusing to instruct the jury on the affirmative defense of compulsion (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, pars. 7—11, 7—14). I disagree. Confusion has been generated with regard to the quantum of evidence which must be introduced to raise the issue of an affirmative defense (see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 3—2), and, thereby, to warrant the submission of an instruction to the jury on that defense. Most cases indicate that a jury instruction on an affirmative defense is warranted even though only slight evidence is presented in support thereof. (See, e.g., People v. Looney (1977), 46 Ill. App. 3d 404, 361 N.E.2d 18.) The State contends, however, that in People v. Redmond (1974), 59 Ill. 2d 328, 320 N.E.2d 321, the Illinois Supreme Court intimated a stricter standard: that a jury instruction on an affirmative defense should be submitted only where the evidence presented in support thereof is sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt of defendant’s guilt. While I have serious reservations with regard to the State’s broad interpretation of Redmond, I find it unnecessary to determine which standard is applicable to this case. For, in my view, the evidence presented was insufficient, under either standard, to warrant submitting an instruction to the jury on the defense of compulsion. The evidence presented at trial demonstrates that Ruppert and Creach had planned to steal money from Delores Irion, Creach’s girlfriend, and then drive to Ohio in her car. Ruppert waited in Delores Irion’s Cadillac while Creach entered the victim’s apartment. When Creach returned a short time later he told Ruppert Ms. Irion had caught him trying to steal some of her money. Creach then returned to the apartment and emerged with a .25-caliber pistol he had taken from the victim. Creach went back to the apartment yet a third time, and returned with Delores Irion. In finding that an instruction on compulsion was warranted, the majority relies on the following evidence: “[Wjhen Irion and Creach came out of the apartment, Irion told Ruppert to leave the car, and he complied. But then Creach told him to get back in; after first refusing, Ruppert finally got back in when Creach repeatedly told him to do so. In Ruppert’s statement he also recalled that after Irion’s throat had been cut and he had given her a rag, Creach made them both get back in the car. And after Creach had shot and apparentiy killed Irion, he again told Ruppert to get back in the car, and Ruppert complied. Finally, it was part of Ruppert’s statement that on the way to Ohio, Creach kept the gun out on the front seat of the car.” This evidence merely indicates that Creach was the leader of the two men with regard to the armed robbery and murder scenario. There is no evidence to support Ruppert’s claim that his conduct was compelled under threat of death or great bodily harm. Creach never threatened Ruppert, verbally, physically, or even by implication, with the .25-caliber pistol. Furthermore, Ruppert never mentioned in or out of court that he participated in the armed robbery and murder of Delores Irion because he feared Creach. Considering the fact that Ruppert admitted he had intended to rob Delores Irion all along, that Ruppert waited in the victim’s car for Creach to return, knowing Creach was armed with a dangerous weapon, and that there was no testimony, or evidence whatsoever from which it could be inferred, that Ruppert was in fear for his own safety, the trial court properly refused to instruct the jury on the affirmative defense of compulsion. There was no evidence to support such a defense. Accordingly, for the reasons stated and to the extent noted, I dissent.   Since I agree with the majority that the Evanston police officers lacked probable cause to arrest defendant, Ruppert, I will not discuss that aspect of the case in this dissent.    The majority contends that on a subsequent “motion to reconsider” the trial court recanted its holding and found that the Evanston police officers did not have probable cause to arrest Creach. I cannot agree. A reading of the motion to reconsider, the memorandum of law submitted in support thereof, and the corresponding arguments of counsel demonstrates that neither defendant requested a reconsideration of the trial court’s earlier finding that probable cause to arrest did exist. Rather, in light of what were then recent cases, each defendant asked the trial court to reconsider its earlier finding that the Evanston police officers did have jurisdiction to arrest them in Chicago. Despite the statements of the trial court quoted by the majority, in my view, the trial court’s denial of the motion to reconsider left intact its earlier holding which denied the defendants’ motions to suppress and found that probable cause and jurisdiction to arrest did exist.    “ ‘The substance of all the definitions’ of probable cause ‘is a reasonable ground for belief of guilt.' (Citations.)” (Brinegar v. United States (1949), 338 U.S. 160, 175, 93 L. Ed. 1879, 1890, 69 S. Ct. 1302, 1310.) “The test is essentially one of reasonableness.” People v. Payne (1972), 6 Ill. App. 3d 378, 380, 286 N.E.2d 35, 36.    The court’s statement in People v. Clark (1977), 46 Ill. App. 3d 240, 242-43, 360 N.E.2d 1160, 1162-63, that the “hot” pursuit theory is the only exception to the common law rule limiting a police officer’s authority to the boundaries of his own municipality, is clearly erroneous.

=== CASE 2217674 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:32.627785+00 ===

19 Wis.2d 141 (1963)
ROGERS, Respondent,
v.
ADAMS and others, Appellants.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
January 11, 1963
February 5, 1963.
*143 For the appellants there was a brief by Byrne, Bubolz & Spanagel of Appleton, and oral argument by Edward J. Byrne.
For the respondent there was a brief by Robert R. Gavic and C. L. Gaylord, both of Spring Valley, and oral argument by Mr. Gavic.
CURRIE, J.
Appellants attack the jury's answer of $21,250 to subdivision (c) as being excessive and not supported by the evidence. They also contend that the trial court erred in refusing to give a requested instruction that there was no evidence of future disability or future pain and suffering.
At the time of the accident Rogers was forty-five years of age and employed as a welder by the Chicago & North Western Railway Company at its shops at Clinton, Iowa. He resided on an 80-acre farm which he owned in St. Croix county. Rogers formerly worked in the railroad company's shops at Hudson, but when those shops were closed, he was transferred to the Clinton shops. At the time of the accident, Rogers and some fellow workmen were returning to their homes after work on a Friday afternoon.
As a result of the collision, Rogers, who was riding in the rear seat, was thrown over the front seat, and then flew back. He got out of the car and walked around, but at the time felt no pain. A short time later, when entering another car to be taken to the hospital at Lancaster to be checked, he noticed pain in his right side. This pain got worse and a man had to help him out of the car and into the hospital. When he tried to cough he got a "terrific" pain in his side and could not cough. He was examined by Dr. Becher, a practicing physician at Lancaster, who found that Rogers had a marked pallor and was perspiring profusely. Rogers complained of *144 pain about his right lower ribs. The doctor diagnosed his injury as a contusion of the liver. X rays were taken which disclosed no fractures. The prescribed treatment was bed rest with ice packs placed about the area of contusion. Rogers was considerably improved the following morning, and he was discharged from the hospital Sunday morning. That afternoon a neighbor accompanied by Rogers' wife called for him and drove him home to St. Croix county. He has been up and around ever since.
The ride caused him pain in the right back and side. The next morning he consulted Dr. Grassi of the River Fall's Clinic. Dr. Grassl found that Rogers walked with difficulty and carried himself rigidly favoring his right side. The doctor found the liver "very tender" and a marked tenderness over the right upper part of the abdomen. He noted considerable muscle spasm of the lumbar back. Dr. Grassl's diagnosis was a contusion to the liver and right kidney. He prescribed medicine to relieve the spasm and advised rest. Some days later when Rogers again consulted Dr. Grassl, he felt somewhat improved but complained of pain in upper part of chest. The ribs were X-rayed but the report thereon was negative. Dr. Grassl set up a course of diathermy treatments, prescribed another medication to relieve the spasm, and told Rogers to continue to take it easy.
Dr. Grassl became dissatisfied with the progress Rogers was making, and noted that he was complaining of pain higher up in his back than that previously complained of. Thus on July 30, 1959, Dr. Grassl sent Rogers to the Hudson hospital to have X rays taken of his spine from the neck down to the pelvis. These X rays disclosed an osteoarthritis (degenerative arthritis) condition of the dorsal and lumbar spine which was rather severe considering Rogers' age. Dr. Grassl further testified that he felt there was a fracture of the transverse process of the right lumbar 3 vertebra, basing this conclusion upon his examination of the X rays. Such a *145 fracture of the transverse process is significant only as an indication of the force brought to bear on Rogers as a result of the accident. On September 2d, Dr. Grassl sent Rogers to an orthopedist in St. Paul for examination but this orthopedist was not called as a witness and his deposition was not taken. On September 19th, Dr. Grassl cleared Rogers for work, having fitted him with a lumbar sacral belt to wear.
Rogers then returned to Clinton, Iowa, and worked one week at his old job as a welder. He experienced difficulty in performing this work because of pain in his back. He could bend and stop but only with difficulty. At the end of the week the railroad company laid off a group of employees, including Rogers, because of lack of work. Upon returning home he again saw Dr. Grassl who gave him more heat treatments and some pills to take. In September, 1960, Rogers was recalled for work by the railroad company. When he reported for work at Clinton, the company sent him to Dr. O'Donnell, a Clinton physician, for a physical examination. Upon the basis of this examination the company refused to permit Rogers to return to work. Dr. O'Donnell's deposition was read in evidence. In this deposition he stated that Rogers was disqualified for work on the basis of discomfort and pain from osteoarthritis of the spine.
This action was tried in late January, 1962, more than two and a half years after the accident. Rogers testified at one point that he had not attempted to get other work because of, "My backI just can't stand it." Nevertheless, he also testified that he tried unsuccessfully to find light work around River Falls. Rogers did contact the state rehabilitation center at Eau Claire in an attempt to get light work but failed to obtain any. He never registered at the local employment office. Before the accident he tilled about 10 of his 80 acres but discontinued this after the accident. He pastured cattle owned by others on his land both before and after the accident. He does some light work in connection *146 with this pasturing such as turning on the windmill to water the cattle and driving staples in fence posts to repair fences. The railroad company has given him an extended leave of absence. Rogers testified that the pain in his back interferes with his sleeping, that he uses an electric heating pad on his back nearly every night, and that he takes aspirin every day for pain. Prior to the accident, Rogers had had no trouble with his back although his job with the railroad had required heavy lifting.
Before an award can be made for future pain, suffering, and disability there must be competent medical testimony to support the same. Diemel v. Weirich (1953), 264 Wis. 265, 268, 269, 58 N. W. (2d) 651. Dr. Grassl gave the sole medical testimony with respect to future pain and suffering and future disability. He testified, "I feel here is a man that has had rather marked osteoarthritis for his age; that the accident aggravated it. I feel that it has accelerated the process and probably will in the future over what you would expect if the patient had not been in an accident." The use of the phrase "I feel" by an expert medical witness has been held sufficient to make statements following use of such phrase an expression of the witness' professional opinion. Unruh v. Industrial Comm. (1959), 8 Wis. (2d) 394, 401, 402, 99 N. W. (2d) 182.
Dr. Grassl was also asked these questions and gave these answers thereto:
"Q. Now, based upon the history that you have taken from time to time of Willis Rogers, and also based on your examination and findings, do you have an opinion that you can state to a reasonable degree of medical certainty as to whether or not Willis Rogers at the present time is able to do physical manual labor? Do you have an opinion, Doctor? A. I do have an opinion.
"Q. And that opinion is what? A. I would have to advise on the basis of the findings that I would recommend that Mr. Rogers would not do heavy manual labor."
*147 The reasonable inference to be drawn from the answer, "I would recommend that Mr. Rogers would not do heavy manual labor," is that his back condition would not permit it as of the date of trial more than two and a half years after the accident. It is unfortunate that Dr. Grassl was not asked the further question of whether or not in his opinion this condition was permanent. Nevertheless, as noted above, he did testify that the acceleration of the osteoarthritis process in Rogers' back would probably continue in the future. Therefore, if the accident accelerated and aggravated the osteoarthritis condition so as to prevent Rogers from doing heavy manual work even by the time of trial, and the continuance of such acceleration of this degenerative process is probable in the future, it would be reasonable for the jury to draw the conclusion that Rogers' injuries resulting from the accident will probably prevent his doing heavy work in the future. A medical opinion expressed in terms of reasonable probability, as distinguished from mere possibility, is sufficient. Hallum v. Omro (1904), 122 Wis. 337, 342-344, 99 N. W. 1051; State v. Industrial Comm. (1956), 272 Wis. 409, 419, 76 N. W. (2d) 362; and Michalski v. Wagner (1960), 9 Wis. (2d) 22, 27, 100 N. W. (2d) 354.
We conclude that the jury was presented with a minimum of evidence sufficient to permit it, in making an award for Rogers' personal injuries, to include the element of future disability to do heavy work such as he did prior to the accident. This minimum of evidence would also permit an award for future pain and suffering. Therefore, the trial court properly refused to give the requested instruction that there was no evidence of future disability or future pain and suffering. Since the jury was justified in making an award for probable future disability and probable future pain and suffering, the award of $21,250 in subdivision (c) of the verdict is not excessive on the basis of the record before us.
*148 The wording of subdivision (c), considered alone, was such as to warrant the jury's awarding damages for future disability and future pain and suffering. Appellants contend, however, that the wording of subdivision (b) of the damage question, together with the trial court's instructions, precluded the jury from including the element of future disability in answering subdivision (c). If appellants are correct in this contention, we concede that $21,250 would be an excessive amount to award plaintiff for past and future pain and suffering alone. In such event, it would be proper for this court to fix a reasonable sum for such damages and grant Rogers the option of remitting the excess or of having a new trial confined to the issue of damages. Cf. Powers v. Allstate Ins. Co. (1960), 10 Wis. (2d) 78, 102 N. W. (2d) 393. The jury, in finding under subdivision (b) that Roger's wage loss was $1,331.20, only awarded the exact amount of wages he lost between the date of the accident and the date about three months later when the railroad company recalled him to work. Appellants contend that this finding of wage loss ruled out any allowance for future wage loss and, consequently, any damages for future disability.
Subdivision (b) of the damage question required the jury to determine such sum of money as would fairly compensate Rogers "for loss of wages." The pertinent portion of the charge to the jury which relates to this subdivision was as follows:
"In connection with subdivision (b) which inquires as to loss of wages, you are instructed that you should allow the plaintiff as damages for his loss of earnings such sum as he was reasonably capable of earning at his usual trade or occupation during such period as he was unable to perform his usual work or carry on his usual occupation as a natural consequence of the personal injuries received at the time in question, and not attributable to other causes." (Italics supplied.)
*149 The use of the word "was" in the above instruction clearly implies reference to a wage loss which had occurred before trial and not one which might possibly occur in the future. The jury may well have concluded that the only wage loss before trial which had been proved in dollars and cents was the sum of $1,331.20. Although Rogers was capable of performing light work after September, 1959, no proof was offered as to the difference in pay between such light work and the heavier work he had performed prior to the accident as a car welder. Thus the jury may well have though that damages for impaired earning capacity due to the accident could be included in the answer to subdivision (c) of the damage question.
Among the instructions given by the trial court with respect to subdivision (c) were these:
"Subdivision (c) inquires as to compensation for his injuries. In your determination of your answer to this question, you cannot award any damages for any pre-existing disease or condition, except insofar as you are satisfied that such disease or condition has been aggravated by the injuries received as a natural result of the collision in question. If you find that the plaintiff had a pre-existing disease or condition before the collision in question, but that such disease or condition was aggravated as a natural result of the injuries received in the collision in question, then you should include an amount which will fairly and reasonably compensate the plaintiff for such damages as he suffered as a result of such aggravation of his condition.
"In answering subdivision (c) you should name such sum of money as you are satisfied to a reasonable certainty by the greater weight of the credible evidence will, in your honest and deliberate judgment, fairly and reasonably measure the total or entire amount of such true and just damages as were sustained by Willis H. Rogers for any discomfort, pain, and suffering which are the natural consequences or results of the injuries sustained at the time in question, excluding all physical conditions or infirmities attributable to other causes. *150 It is for you, ladies and gentlemen, to determine the amount that should be inserted as damages for injuries."
Although pain and suffering alone are stressed in the second-quoted paragraph above, the first paragraph above would fully warrant the jury's considering the element of future disability in determining its award under subdivision (c).
It was the trial court's understanding, as shown by the following statement from its memorandum decision, that the $21,250 awarded by the jury in answering subdivision (c) included future disability as well as future pain and suffering:
"The court is of the opinion that there is credible testimony which the jury could use and consider on the question of future pain and disability and that such testimony is not so indefinite or speculative that it would not support the jury's finding."
Since $21,250 is not an excessive award for Roger's injuries because the element of future disability could reasonably be included therein, the judgment must be affirmed.
By the Court.Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9738796 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:51.375042+00 ===

Kavanagh, J.
Emory Scbian, as administrator of tbe estate of bis son, Carl Scbian, deceased, began this action under the death act against defendants Lorenz Bierlein and Milton Schian. He alleged Bierlein was guilty of negligence and Schian was guilty of gross negligence, each being a proximate cause of the death of his son. Each defendant by answer denied any neligence or gross negligence. Each denied any negligence that was a proximate cause of the accident. The case was tried in the Tuscola county circuit court without a jury. At the conclusion of plaintiff’s proofs, defendants each moved for a judgment of no cause for action.
The trial judge granted the motions. In so doing he found there was no proof on the record of gross negligence on the part of defendant Schian. As to defendant Bierlein, he found there was no proof of negligence that was a proximate cause of this accident. Judgment of no cause for action was thereupon entered.
Plaintiff is here on appeal, claiming the trial court erred in granting defendant Bierlein’s motion. No appeal is taken from the order and judgment of the trial court in the ease of defendant Schian.
The following facts relative to the accident are necessary to a discussion of the case:
On September 12, 1959, plaintiff’s 11-year-old son Carl was en route to defendant Milton Schian’s farm near Brown City, Michigan. He was a passenger in *221Milton Schian’s 1958 Dodge automobile driven by Milton Schian’s son Leo. They were proceeding south on Bradford road. Leo came to a complete stop for the stop sign at M-81. About 3/4 of a mile south of M-81 Leo drove his father’s car, with apparent great force, into the rear of southbound defendant Bierlein’s tractor.. Leo remembers nothing after stopping for the stop sign at M-81. Testimony does not disclose the exact time the accident occurred, but following the accident an ambulance driver drove back to plaintiff’s home and arrived there at approximately 5:55 a.m.
Defendant Bierlein’s tractor was equipped with 3 lights — 2 in the front, 1 in the rear — shining “mostly” downward; the lights were white or yellow. It is admitted the tractor was not equipped with a rear red taillight.
Plaintiff’s position is that the testimony, viewed in the light most favorable to plaintiff, presents an issue of fact as to whether defendant Bierlein was actionably negligent. The question of fact depends upon the determination of the issue of the need for Bierlein to have a red light displayed on the rear of the tractor clearly discernible 500 feet to the rear, in accordance with paragraph (a) of section 6861 and paragraph (a) of section 6842 of the Michigan vehicle *222code. Sunrise on the- day in question was 6:09 a.ni. Plaintiff contends that if the accident occurred after 5:39 a.m., the duty to have such a red light might have been statutorily imposed if atmospheric or other conditions were present making display of such red light necessary; and that if the accident occurred before 5:39 a.m., the duty to have such light was statutorily imposed, since the accident occurred more than 1/2 hour before sunrise.
While the precise moment of the accident is not disclosed, plaintiff contends the following facts establish the time: Plaintiff’s wife testified the time of departure of plaintiff’s decedent and Leo Schian from the home was 5:20 a.m. Leo Schian testified they left at 5:30 a.m., with the car headlights on. He further testified it was that time of day when lights were needed and as far as he could recall he did not turn them off prior to the accident. The point of the accident was only 1-1/4 miles south from the point of departure.
Defendant Bierlein’s tractor was proceeding south on Bradford road with 2 lights on the front and a rear light shining downwards.
Leo Schian, who was injured in the accident, was back at plaintiff’s house via ambulance at approximately 5:55 a.m. The ambulance was called by an unidentified person and came from Beese, Michigan, some 3 miles west of Bradford road. It had traveled to the scene of the accident, picked up Leo Schian and en route to the hospital stopped at plaintiff’s house to notify plaintiff of the accident at approximately 5:55 a.m.
The trial judge did not make a factual determination there was no proof of negligence on this record on the part of defendant Bierlein. He merely found there was no proof of negligence on the record that was a proximate cause of the accident. The trial court at this stage of the trial is required to consider *223motions for judgment in the same fashion as it would had there been a jury. Stolt v. Shalogian, 326 Mich 435.
The testimony and favorable inferences therefrom, viewed in the light most favorable to plaintiff, presents an issue of fact as to whether defendant Bierlein was negligent in failing to have a red light displayed on the rear of his tractor in accordance with the statute.
In the case of O’Grady v. Rydman, 347 Mich 606, this Court approved a finding of fact of a causal connection made by the trial court based upon the following (pp 610, 611):
“ ‘The court is also going to find the truck insofar as CLS 1954, § 257.688 (Stat Ann 1952 Rev § 9.2388), which required him to have 2 clearance lights on the front, 1 on each side, the testimony is undisputed that he did not have such lights, the court is going to find he was negligent in that regard as a matter of law, because the facts are undisputed that he did not have them, so now we come to the question of proximate cause. * * * Parking lights are small lights, possibly an inch, or an inch and a half in diameter, whereas headlights are large lights, the lights are maybe 6 or 8 inches in diameter and they have power behind them so the court feels that these headlights should have been on and these clearance lights should have been on, that would have made 4 lights on the front of this truck, and the court finds as a matter of fact that is negligence on the part of the defendant Isaacs, that it was a proximate cause, a proximate cause and concurring cause with the negligence of the driver of the defendant Rydman car, a concurring cause which caused the accident and resulting injuries. The court feels that the Rydman car driver could have seen the truck at a considerable greater distance had the lights been on, the headlights been on, headlamps as required by the law and if the clearance lights had been on, and the court is going *224to find that the plaintiff is not guilty of any contributory negligence.’ ”
The same reasoning certainly could be applied to defendant Bierlein’s failure to have a red light displayed in accordance with the terms of the applicable statute in the instant case.
The record discloses competent evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to plaintiff, that the negligence of defendant Bierlein in not having a red light displayed on the rear of his tractor was a proximate cause of the accident.
The trial court erred in concluding that, as a matter of law, the question of the causal connection between the statutory violation and the injury was not proven. Such question is usually one of fact for the trier or triers of the facts. 1 Cooley on Torts (4th ed), § 50, pp 120, 121; Prosser on Torts (2d ed), § 50, p 281; Spencer v. Phillips & Taylor, 219 Mich 353; Beebe v. Hannett, 224 Mich 88; Arvo v. Delta Hardware Co., 231 Mich 488; Dunn v. City of Detroit, 349 Mich 228.
We conclude, therefore, the trial court erred in entering the judgment of no cause for action.
We note that under the new Court Rules effective January 1, Í963, GCR 1963, 504.2, the foregoing practice will be changed.
The judgment of the lower court is reversed, and a new trial granted. Plaintiff shall have costs.
Black, Souris, and Otis M. Smith, JJ., concurred with Kavanagh, J.
Paragraph, (a) of section 686 of the Michigan vehicle eode (OLS 1956, § 257.686 [Stat Ann 1960 Eev § 9.2386].), reads:
“Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole-trailer and any other vehicle which is being drawn in a train of vehicles shall be equipped with at least 1 rear lamp mounted on the rear, which, when lighted as hereinbefore required, shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear.”
Paragraph (a) of section 684 of the Michigan vehicle code (OLS 1956, § 257.684 [Stat Ann 1960 Eev § 9.2384]), reads:
“Every vehicle upon a highway within this State at any time from a half hour after sunset to a half hour before sunrise and at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on, the highway at a distance of 500 feet ahead shall display lighted lamps and illuminating devices as hereinafter respectively required for different classes of vehicles, subject to exceptions with respeet to parked vehicles as hereinafter stated.”

=== CASE 9738797 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:51.379314+00 ===

Kelly, J.
(dissenting). This case illustrates the advisability of the new Michigan General Court Rule 504.2 (effective January 1, 1963), which provides:
“For failure of the plaintiff to comply with these rules or any order of court, a defendant may move *225for dismissal of an action or of any claim against him. After the plaintiff has completed the presentation of his evidence to the court in any action tried without a jury, the defendant, without waiving his right to offer evidence in the event the motion is not granted, may move for a dismissal on the ground that upon the facts and the law the plaintiff has shown no right to relief. Thereupon, the court as trier of the facts may determine them and render judgment against the plaintiff, or may decline to render any judgment until the close of all the evidence. If the court renders judgment on the merits against the plaintiff, the court shall make findings as provided in Rule 517. Unless the court in its order for dismissal otherwise specifies, a dismissal under this subdivision and any dismissal not provided for in this rule, other than a dismissal for lack of jurisdiction, operates as an adjudication upon the merits.”
As plaintiff closed in this Schian Case, after calling 4 witnesses, the trial judge could justifiably conclude he had heard from all witnesses who could offer any testimony that would be helpful in arriving at a decision.
Plaintiff and his wife, who had not witnessed the accident, had testified as to what time of day their son had left their home in defendant Milton Schian’s automobile.
Leo Schian, son of defendant Milton Schian, who drove his father’s automobile, was called under the statute  for cross-examination, and we quote the following from plaintiff’s statement of facts and brief in regard to Leo Schian’s testimony:
“Leo Schian drove his father’s car with apparent great force, and without apparent effort to avoid it, into the rear of southbound defendant Bierlein’s green and yellow tractor. Both vehicles were on the proper side of 2-lane blacktop Bradford road which is straight and level._
*226“Carl was killed thereat; Leo remembers nothing after stopping for the stop sign at M-81 and seeing no traffic, crossing M-81. * * *
“The front of defendant Schian’s car struck the rear of defendant Bierlein’s tractor with sufficient force to cause Bierlein to fly high enough in the air to permit the Schian car to pass below him, stopping south of where he alighted, and with enough force to demolish both vehicles. * * *
“In this case, Leo Schian has no memory after crossing M-81. We do not know if the accident happened because he was asleep; because he was not looking; or looking, not seeing; because it was deliberate; or whether he saw the white or yellow light on the rear, shining mostly downward.”
Appellant in his statement of facts summarizes the testimony of the last of the 4 witnesses, namely defendant Bierlein, who was called for cross-examination under the statute,  as follows:
“According to defendant Bierlein, upon impact he was knocked up into the air, the Schian car passed underneath him, and he landed on the pavement behind the car and tractor, which were ‘tight’ together.”
It is apparent from the record that the court heard argument of counsel before passing upon defendant’s motion and there is no intimation that plaintiff made known that he desired to call or cross-examine any additional witnesses.
The circuit judge’s opinion relating to the motion for directed verdict, delivered from the bench, follows :
“I have read completely the O’Grady [v. Rydman] Case in 347 Mich 606 and the Stevens [v. Stevens] Case in 355 Mich 363, and I point out on the record that it is the opinion of this court that neither case is applicable to the situation before this court for this reason. In each of those cases, the trial court, as trier of the fact, found certain facts to be true on *227the record before it, and the Supreme Court did not disturb those findings of fact. If on the record before this court, similar findings of fact could be made, I would have to deny the motion.
“Certainly counsel are aware of the fact that the court sitting without a jury and as trier of the fact is in the same position as the jury and under the same obligations and at this step of the proceedings, certainly the facts and all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom must be taken in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. I believe I have so viewed the record and it is the opinion of this court that viewed in that light, this record sustains the following findings:
“With respect to Lorenz Bierlein, that there is no proof of negligence on this record that was a proximate cause of this accident.
“As to defendant Schian, there is proof of his negligence which was a proximate cause of the accident, and again with respect to defendant Schian, there is no proof on this record of gross negligence on his part.
“Because of those findings, it is the opinion of this court that the motion of defense counsel must be granted and it is granted.”
If the defense had announced that defendant rested instead of moving for a directed verdict, I do not believe there would have been any opinion from any member of this Court that we should reverse Hon. Timothy C. Quinn’s conclusion and judgment that verdict should be for defendants. We are, of course, in this appeal concerned only with the judgment in re defendant Lorenz Bierlein, as plaintiff did not take an appeal from the court’s judgment in favor of defendant Milton Schian.'
Justice Kavanagh states that even though the case was tried without a jury, “The trial court at this stage of the trial is required to consider motions for *228judgment in the same fashion as it would had there been a jury,” and decides that the trial court was forced to conclude the testimony and favorable inferences therefrom in the light most favorable to plaintiff, and then quotes the finding of facts in the case of O’Grady v. Rydman, 347 Mich 606.
The lower court’s opinion discloses that he gave consideration to the case referred to by Justice Kavanagh and concluded that the facts in that case were so different from the facts before him that they were not applicable. It is the writer’s opinion that the record sustains the trial judge’s conclusion.
The trial court used the “viewed in the light most favorable to plaintiff” rule and concluded that the evidence and inferences therefrom sustained the finding that there was proof of defendant Schian’s “negligence, which was a proximate cause of the accident,” although no proof of Schian’s gross negligence, and, “With respect to Lorenz Bierlein, that there is no proof of negligence on this record that was a proximate cause of this accident.”
We find nothing in the record that causes a belief that the trial court, even after viewing the evidence under the rule that came to an end on December 31st, last, and who saw and heard the witnesses, erred and was not justified in finding that plaintiff had failed to prove defendant Bierlein guilty of negligence that was a proximate cause of the accident and, therefore, dissent with Justice Kavanagh’s conclusion that “The judgment of the lower court is reversed, and a new trial granted. Plaintiff shall have costs.” To the contrary, we find that the judgment of the lower court should be affirmed. Costs to appellee.
Carr, C. J., concurred with Kelly, J.
Dethmers, J., concurred in result.
O’Hara, J., took no part in the decision of this case.

=== CASE 2217680 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:32.728207+00 ===

69 Ill. App.3d 748 (1979)
387 N.E.2d 1061
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
DIANE KOSANOVICH, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 77-1931.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District (2nd Division).
Opinion filed March 27, 1979.
*749 Ralph Ruebner and David Mejia, both of State Appellate Defender's Office, of Chicago, for appellant.
Bernard Carey, State's Attorney, of Chicago (Lee T. Hettinger, J. Johnathan Regunberg, and Paul C. Gridelli, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel), for the People.
Affirmed in part, and vacated in part and remanded.
Mr. JUSTICE DOWNING delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant Diane Kosanovich and co-defendant John Malaszenko were charged by a two-count information with the offenses of armed robbery (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 18-2) and theft (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 16-1(a)(1)). Following a jury finding of guilt on both counts and a hearing in aggravation and mitigation, the defendant was sentenced to concurrent terms of 10 to 15 years for armed robbery and 3 1/3 to 10 years for theft.
*750 On appeal the defendant contends (1) that the trial court erred in entering judgment and sentence on the theft conviction; and (2) that the cause must be remanded for resentencing on the armed robbery conviction due to the taint of the invalid theft conviction and the excessiveness of the sentence.
On August 2, 1976, at approximately 5 p.m., the defendant and Malaszenko entered the Howard Art Gallery in Glencoe, Illinois. After about 30 minutes, the defendant told Howard Kodner, one of the owners of the store, that she wanted to purchase a specific Chinese rug. As Kodner began to write an invoice for the purchase, Malaszenko pointed a flintlock pistol at him and said, "You are dead." The defendant then placed a long silvery object which Kodner believed to be a knife to his neck and said, "Don't push any panic buttons or alarm buttons, put your hands in front of you and start to get up from your chair slowly."
As the defendant and Malaszenko tied Kodner with rope and tape, emptied his pockets, and forced him to lie face down on the floor of a back room, the defendant kept the long silvery object at his neck. The defendant and Malaszenko then took various items through the back door, pausing every few minutes to check Kodner's bonds. At one point, Malaszenko again threatened to kill him.
On the following day, the defendant sold to the Graf Coin Company in Chicago several items which Kodner identified at trial as having been taken from his store. Thereafter, a flintlock pistol was found hanging on Malaszenko's bedroom wall which Kodner testified" could have been" the same weapon used in the robbery. The defendant was identified at trial by Kodner, as well as the owner and an employee of the Graf Coin Company.
I.
 1 We agree with the parties that the armed robbery count and the theft count of the information were founded on a single act of the defendant. We therefore find that the trial court erred in entering judgment and imposing sentence for the theft charge. Accordingly, the judgment on the theft conviction must be vacated. See People v. Lilly (1974), 56 Ill.2d 493, 495, 309 N.E.2d 1; People v. King (1977), 66 Ill.2d 551, 566, 363 N.E.2d 838, cert. denied (1977), 434 U.S. 894, 54 L.Ed.2d 181, 98 S.Ct. 273.
 2 The record shows that the trial judge considered the two offenses separately and sentenced the defendant separately on each count of the information. Under these circumstances, we find no reason to remand for resentencing on the armed robbery conviction predicated on the alleged taint of the invalid theft conviction. See People v. Carmickle (3d Dist. 1977), 46 Ill. App.3d 112, 114-15, 360 N.E.2d 794.
*751 II.
However, although the trial court is normally the proper forum in which a suitable sentence is determined and the trial judge's decision in regard to sentencing is given great weight and deference, we believe that the sentence imposed for the armed robbery conviction is excessive. At the time applicable to this conviction, armed robbery was punishable by a maximum term of imprisonment for "any term in excess of 4 years" (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 1005-8-1(b)(2)) and by a minimum term of "4 years unless the court, having regard to the nature and circumstances of the offense and character of the defendant, sets a higher minimum term" (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 1005-8-1(c)(2)). The defendant contends that the imposition of the higher minimum term of 10 years constitutes an abuse of the trial court's discretion. We agree.
 3, 4 A reasoned judgment as to the proper sentence must be based on the particular circumstances of each individual case. (People v. Bolyard (1975), 61 Ill.2d 583, 589, 338 N.E.2d 168.) Such a judgment depends on many factors including the defendant's demeanor, general moral character, mentality, social environment, habits, age, inclination to commit crimes, and the stimuli which motivated his conduct (People v. Dukett (1974), 56 Ill.2d 432, 452, 308 N.E.2d 590, cert. denied (1974), 419 U.S. 965, 42 L.Ed.2d 180, 95 S.Ct. 226), in addition to the defendant's past criminal record (People v. Hart (1st Dist. 1971), 132 Ill. App.2d 558, 563, 270 N.E.2d 102) and his degree of activity and participation in the crime (People v. Colone (1st Dist. 1978), 56 Ill. App.3d 1018, 1022, 372 N.E.2d 871). Moreover, both the Illinois Constitution and the design of the Unified Code of Corrections require that penalties be determined not only according to the seriousness of the crime but also according to the rehabilitative potential of the offender with the intent to restore him to useful citizenship. Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 11; Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 1001-1-2.
The record shows that the defendant had a very unstable family life, completed three years of high school, and began using heroin in 1969. On several occasions she voluntarily sought medical help for her drug addiction and unstable mental condition. During one voluntary hospital admission, the defendant attempted suicide. Although she had not been employed during the year prior to the sentencing hearing, the defendant had previously held two jobs from which she had been discharged. The defendant's prior criminal record indicates convictions for marijuana and heroin possession for which she successfully completed her probation, and a conviction for unlawful use of weapons for which the record does not indicate a disposition. Twenty-eight years of age at the time of the sentencing hearing, the defendant is married, but separated from her *752 husband, and has no children. On the day of the robbery, the defendant had found her brother-in-law dead in his apartment and had "copped out." We find no factors contraindicative to the defendant's potential for drug rehabilitation. Moreover, we do not believe the record indicates that the defendant used excessive force or physical violence during the commission of this offense. Naturally the use of any weapon during the commission of a crime presents a potential threat which must be considered.
Although the defendant's drug addiction cannot justify the commission of this crime, it is our opinion that long periods of confinement have little, if any, value in a rehabilitative strategy. Considering the defendant's relatively young age, her need for health care, her potential for rehabilitation, and the circumstances surrounding this offense, we believe that the imposition of the higher minimum sentence of 10 years serves no useful purpose to society.
 5 We believe the trial court, rather than the appellate court, is better able to re-evaluate the evidence concerning aggravation and mitigation. Accordingly, we vacate the theft conviction and sentence. We affirm the armed robbery conviction, vacate the sentence of 10 to 15 years for armed robbery and remand for resentencing for armed robbery.
Affirmed in part and remanded for resentencing; vacated in part.
STAMOS, P.J., and HARTMAN, J., concur.

=== CASE 9738798 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:53.121138+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE RYAN delivered the opinion of the court: These consolidated cases again present the problem of attempted-murder instructions which we considered recently in People v. Harris (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 16, People v. Trinkle (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 198, and People v. Muir (1977), 67 Ill. 2d 86. Both defendants here, Arthur R. Roberts and Chester L. Grizzle, were convicted at jury trials of attempted murder in violation of section 8—4 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 8—4). The appellate court consolidated these appeals — Roberts’ on direct appeal from a conviction entered by the Logan County circuit court, Grizzle’s on appeal from a denial of a petition under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 122—1 et seq.) in the Jersey County circuit court. The appellate court reversed the trial courts and remanded for new trials, holding that the trial judges erred in their attempted-murder instructions. (56 Ill. App. 3d 667.) Both the majority and the concurring opinions in our recent Harris case support the appellate court’s finding of error in the instructions given. We granted the People leave to appeal and now reverse the appellate court. The issue before us is whether a criminal defendant can raise on direct appeal, or on appeal from the dismissal of a petition for a post-conviction hearing, alleged error in jury instructions when that error was not objected to at trial and not preserved in the post-trial motions. A jury in Logan County found Arthur Roberts guilty of attempted murder. At his trial, the complaining witness, a truck driver, testified that he had been driving on the interstate highway near Lincoln on the night of the incident. Late that night his truck had jockeyed for highway position for a considerable length of time with a car driven by Roberts, a car in which Carla Rackers rode as a passenger. About 2 a.m., the truck came alongside the driver’s side of the car in an attempt to pass. Suddenly the truck driver heard an extremely loud crashing sound against the passenger door of his truck, and the car then accelerated rapidly away from the truck. Both the driver of the car and his passenger were seen to be in the car’s front seat. Moments later at a truck stop, the complaining witness found a large bullet hole in the truck’s door directly in line with his body. He called the police. State patrol officers arrested Roberts shortly thereafter, searched his car and found, among other guns, a 357 Magnum Colt revolver — a powerful handgun. At trial, the prosecution proved that the bullet which pierced the truck door’s outer panel, and severely dented the inner panel, had been fired from that revolver. Defendant Roberts, and his 17-year-old passenger, Carla Rackers, also testified at trial. Both admitted the gun was fired from the car, but both said Carla Rackers fired from the rear seat, where she had been taking a nap when she was disturbed by the truck. She had not been charged with attempt. The State contended that she handed the gun to Roberts and was thus tried only for conspiracy. The court’s instructions to the jury included the following mandatory instructions on the offense of attempted murder: “To sustain the charge of attempt, the State must prove the following propositions: First: That the defendant performed an act which constituted a substantial step toward the commission of the crime of murder; and Second: That the defendant did so with intent to commit the crime of murder. If you find from your consideration of all the evidence that each of these propositions has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt, then you should find the defendant guilty. If, on the other hand, you find from your consideration of all the evidence that any of these propositions has not been proved beyond a reasonable doubt, then you should find the defendant not guilty.” The court also gave the following instruction defining murder: “A person commits the crime of murder who kills an individual if, in performing the acts which cause the death, (1) he intends to kill or do great bodily harm to that individual; or (2) he knows that such acts create a strong probability of death or great bodily harm to that individual.” As we held in Harris, it was error to give this instruction defining murder. Since attempted murder requires a specific intent to commit the offense of murder, which necessarily involves a killing, it is obvious that the offense of attempted murder cannot be construed as incorporating the alternative definitions of murder contained in section 9—1 (a) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 9—1 (a)), which incorporates a state of mind other than an intent to kill. (People v. Harris (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 16, 24.) Roberts did not object to the giving of this instruction and did not raise that issue in his post-trial motion. An incident of shooting also resulted in Grizzle’s conviction of attempted murder in Jersey County. Witnesses testified at his trial that Grizzle had experienced a great deal of trouble with a car recently purchased from the complaining witness. On the day of the shooting a heated conversation occurred between the two men regarding that car. Late that evening 10 to 12 shots were fired into the complaining witness’ house, many of those shots narrowly missing the witness, his wife, and his small child as they moved around the house seeking safer locations. The jury instructions given in Grizzle’s case were quite similar to the instructions given in Roberts’ case, and contained the same error. Grizzle’s trial also occurred before this court’s series of attempted-murder decisions. As in Roberts’ case, the defendant did not object to the instructions at the trial and did not preserve the objection in a post-trial motion. On direct appeal from his conviction, Grizzle did not raise the point and his conviction was affirmed. In a subsequent petition for a post-conviction hearing, Grizzle’s counsel again did not raise the issue and relief was denied. However, on appeal from this denial, new counsel for Grizzle raised the issue of the instructions, and the appellate court considered this issue. On this appeal, we are not concerned with the correctness of the appellate court’s action in doing so. See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 122—3. In People v. Goerger (1972), 52 Ill. 2d 403, this court was faced with an issue similar to that raised in Grizzle’s appeal. In that case the defendant had not objected to the giving of an instruction at trial and there had been no direct appeal. The error in the giving of the instruction was raised in a petition under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act. This court noted that the error was one that could have been raised on direct appeal and that the defendant’s failure to raise the issue on direct appeal constituted a waiver. Also, the court noted that the giving of a defective instruction did not effect the substantial denial of constitutional rights cognizable under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act. This court also held in People v. Johndrow (1968), 40 Ill. 2d 288, that the failure to give a tendered instruction did not constitute a denial of a constitutional right or present a question which would justify relief under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act. Merely alleging that the trial error, or the error in the giving of an instruction, constituted a constitutional violation does not elevate these errors to constitutional status, qualifying them for review under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act. We will reserve for discussion below the question of whether the failure to object to the instruction at trial waived the defendant’s right to raise as error on review the giving of the defective instruction. We need not consider that issue in connection with Grizzle’s post-conviction petition. His failure to raise the question on direct appeal prevents him from raising it in the post-conviction petition. The affirmance on direct appeal is res judicata as to all issues that were raised or that could have been raised on appeal. (People v. Rose (1969), 43 Ill. 2d 273, 279; People v. Ashley (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 402, 408; ABA Standards, Post-Conviction Remedies sec. 6.1 and Commentary, at 88-89 (1968).) Also, the giving of this defective instruction did not constitute the denial of a constitutional right cognizable under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act. The concept of waiver presents the primary question for resolution in Roberts’ case. A fundamental concept of our adversary system is that counsel must object at trial to errors. Thus, we must necessarily recognize that counsel may “waive” the right to raise certain errors in later proceedings by failure to object to those errors at trial. People v. Coles (1979), 74 Ill. 2d 393; People v. Precup (1978), 73 Ill. 2d 7, 16-17; People v. Pickett (1973), 54 Ill. 2d 280. See generally, Spritzer, Criminal Waiver, Procedural Default and the Burger Court, 126 U. Pa. L. Rev. 473 (1978). Our cases hold that failure to make an objection at trial to an error in jury instructions waives the issue for appeal. (People v. Underwood (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 124, 130, and cases cited therein (Underwood involved the failure to define “reasonably believes”); People v. Mallett (1970), 45 Ill. 2d 388 (instruction on evaluation of confession); People v. Lyons (1967), 36 Ill. 2d 336 (instruction on justifiable use of force).) In this context, we observe that the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals has rigidly enforced the waiver rule, even under the broad Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 52(b) standard. Rule 52(b) corresponds to our Rule 615. United States v. Jackson (7th Cir. 1978), 569 F.2d 1003 (waived possible error in self-defense instruction); United States v. Knippenberg (7th Cir. 1974), 502 F.2d 1056 (waived error on failure to define “wilfully”); United States v. Cantu (7th Cir. 1972), 501 F.2d 1019 (waived error regarding elements of the offense). The reason for this waiver rule, as stated in many of our appellate court cases, is that timely objections to defective instructions permit the court to correct the defects before the instructions are given, and do not therefore permit a party failing to object to gain the advantage of obtaining a reversal based upon his own failure to act. See Finfrock v. Eaton Asphalt Co. (1976), 41 Ill. App. 3d 1020; Dean v. Keith’s & Ralph’s Tavern, Inc. (1975), 25 Ill. App. 3d 970; Boone v. Baker (1972), 9 Ill. App. 3d 509. The waiver rule is not absolute. Our Rule 451(c) (58 Ill. 2d R. 451(c)), which requires that instructions in criminal cases be tendered, given and settled as provided in section 67 of the Civil Practice Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 110, par. 67), also provides: “[B] ut substantial defects are not waived by failure to make timely objections thereto if the interests of justice require.” Thus the waiver rule does not apply to substantial defects in instructions if the interests of justice require. In applying this exception, this court has not broadly interpreted its provisions. In People v. Joyner (1972), 50 Ill. 2d 302, an error regarding the failure to instruct on a lesser included offense was not waived because, as noted by the court: “This was a close case factually and it was possible for the jury to find the defendants guilty of murder, not guilty by reason of self-defense, or guilty of manslaughter.” (50 Ill. 2d 302, 307.) The court felt that by not instructing on manslaughter the option to find the defendants guilty of manslaughter was not open to the jury. The court also noted that the defendants’ failure to tender the appropriate instruction was not as important to the fundamental fairness of their trial as the requirement that the jury be properly instructed. In People v. Cesarz (1969), 44 Ill. 2d 180, the defendant was convicted of murder and was sentenced to 70 to 90 years in prison. No instruction was given advising the jury that the burden was on the State to establish the defendants guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. The court noted it could refuse to consider this question on the ground that the defendant waived the giving of the instruction by his failure to tender it, but in view of the seriousness of the offense and the severity of the sentence, the court elected to consider the claim. In People v. Jenkins (1977), 69 Ill. 2d 61, the defendant was found guilty of attempted murder. The People tendered a mandatory instruction which omitted an essential element of the case, the justifiable use of force, although that had been an issue. The defendant tendered a mandatory instruction which included the element of justifiable use of force. This court held that the giving of two contradictory instructions, each mandating the jury to find the defendant guilty or not guilty based on the required findings stated in each instruction, constituted error that was not waived and which could be. considered under our Rule 451(c). This court stated that where there are “such grave errors in instructions so as to affect that very important consideration, justice, Rule 451(c) provides for a relaxation of [the waiver doctrine].” (69 Ill. 2d 61, 66.) In People v. Underwood (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 124, 130, this court noted that the “object of this limited exception to the waiver rule is to ensure that a defendant is not denied his right to a fair and impartial jury trial.” The United States Supreme Court has also recently expressed a reluctance to read exceptions to the waiver rule broadly, particularly in the context of jury instructions. In Henderson v. Kibbe (1977), 431 U.S. 145, 52 L. Ed. 2d 203, 97 S. Ct. 1730, the court held that it was not reversible error when the element of causation was omitted from jury instructions in a trial for second degree murder. Mr. Justice Stevens said: “It is the rare case in which an improper instruction will justify reversal of a criminal conviction when no objection has been made in the trial court.” 431 U.S. 145, 154, 52 L. Ed. 2d 203, 212, 97 S. Ct. 1730, 1736. Section 4.6(c) of the ABA Standards, Trial By Jury (1968), provides in part: “No party should be permitted to raise on appeal the failure to give an instruction unless he shall have tendered it, and no party should be permitted to raise on appeal the giving of an instruction unless he objected thereto ***. However, if the interests of justice so require, substantial defects or omissions should not be deemed waived by failure to object to or tender an instruction.” The committee commentary to this section states that notwithstanding the existence of the waiver rule the Federal courts, and most State courts, have taken the position that in criminal cases the trial judge has a responsibility to ensure that certain essential instructions are given. “Certain basic instructions, essential to a fair determination of the case by the jury (e.g., burden of proof, elements of offense charged), must be given, and the concept of waiver will not be employed to bar reversal if a defendant has been convicted in the absence of these instructions.” ABA Standards, Trial By Jury, Commentary, at 116 (1968). The commentary concludes by stating that the last sentence in section 4.6(c) is based upon our Rule 451. Thus, where there is a failure to object to an instruction, waiver is the rule, and the provision of our Rule 451(c) constitutes an exception which, under the prior decisions of this court, is a limited exception (People v. Underwood (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 124, 129-30), to be used to correct “grave errors ” (People v. Jenkins (1977), 69 Ill. 2d 61, 66), or to be applied where the case is close factually and fundamental fairness requires that the jury be properly instructed (People v. Joyner (1972), 50 Ill. 2d 302, 307). In discussing exceptions to the waiver rule as it relates to the failure to raise an issue in the trial court, this court stated in People v. Burson (1957), 11 Ill. 2d 360, 370, that the rule “will not operate to deprive an accused of his constitutional rights of due process.” The court also stated that it may, as a matter of grace, take notice of errors appearing upon the record which deprived the accused of substantial means of enjoying a fair and impartial trial. (11 Ill. 2d 360, 370-71.) In People v. Pickett (1973), 54 Ill. 2d 280, 283, this court noted that the plain error exception to the waiver rule will also be applied in criminal cases in which the evidence is closely balanced. In Roberts’ case the instruction defining murder was erroneous when considered in the context of the crime of attempted murder. The instruction was bad in that it told the jury that a person may commit the crime of murder when he has not only the intent to kill, but also when he has certain mental states other than an intent to kill. However, the inclusion of these other mental states in the nonmandatory definitional instruction does not constitute “grave error” contemplated by the cases cited, which have applied the limited exception to the waiver rule provision of our Rule 451(c). In this case it is not necessary “as a matter of grace” to apply this limited exception to assure the defendant a substantial means of enjoying a fair trial, and the evidence in this case is not “closely balanced.” Also, the giving of this erroneous instruction does not constitute a denial of due process of law. These strict tests, previously applied by this court and which are recognized by the ABA Standards, demonstrate that the exception to the waiver rule is limited and is applicable only to serious errors which severely threaten the fundamental fairness of the defendant’s trial. The error in the giving of the instruction in this case does not fall within the purview of the limited exception as heretofore recognized by this court. In a sense, every error in the giving of an instruction impinges upon the right of a party to a fair trial. For this reason, when the instruction is objected to and the error called to the court’s attention, the giving of an erroneous instruction over an objection will warrant the reversal of a conviction and the granting of a new trial. However, in the absence of such an objection the defects are waived unless they are “substantial” and the “interests of justice require” the court to consider them. Nothing in People v. Harris (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 16, mandates a different conclusion. Although in Harris this court discussed instructional error in the context of Rule 451(c), we granted leave to appeal in that case to resolve the attempted-murder problem resulting from our decisions in People v. Muir and People v. Trinkle, and not to deal with the question of waiver. Harris, in fact, objected at trial to the instruction but failed to raise the question in his post-trial motion (72 Ill. 2d 16, 20). Roberts’ appeal raises one final point. Both Roberts and the People invite us to decide whether reckless conduct is a lesser included offense in attempted murder. We decline the invitation. We have carefully examined the record in Roberts’ trial and find that neither the People nor Roberts presented any evidence that would lead to a finding of reckless conduct. It is the well-established rule in this State that there must be evidence to support the request for an instruction. (People v. Cox (1930), 340 Ill. 111.) No such evidence exists here. In addition to this lack of evidence, we note that the trial judge asked Roberts’ counsel several times whether there were any cases on the included-offense point; when none were produced, the judge refused the instruction. No cases on point have been cited to us either. Under the circumstances of this case, we feel that no error occurred. In conclusion, we hold that these defendants are barred by the procedural-default rule of waiver from raising the issue of instruction error. Neither defendant can meet the requirements of the Rule 451(c) exception. As we emphasized in People v. Precup (1978), 73 Ill. 2d 7, 16, in the context of Rule 615 plain error, our exceptions to the waiver rule do not operate in the nature of a general saving clause preserving for review all errors affecting substantial rights whether or not they have been brought to the attention of the trial court. That observation in Precup applies with equal validity to claimed error in jury instructions. Finally, in addition to the waiver barrier, Grizzle has not demonstrated a trial error of such magnitude that constitutional standards require the granting of a new trial under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act. The appellate court opinion states: “Other complaints of error cited by defendant Roberts involved circumstances that are not likely to arise in a subsequent trial for the same offense. We need not discuss them.” (56 Ill. App. 3d 667, 674.) The opinion does not state nor have we been informed what these other claims of error are. However, it appears from the quoted language that there may have been issues raised in the appellate court that were not determined. Therefore, in the case of defendant Grizzle, the judgment of the appellate court is reversed and the judgment of the circuit court of Jersey County is affirmed. In the case of defendant Roberts, the judgment of the appellate court is reversed and the cause is remanded to that court for consideration of other issues that have been raised but not considered by that court in the cause from which this appeal was taken. Appellate court reversed; circuit court of Jersey County affirmed; cause remanded in part, with directions.

=== CASE 9738799 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:02:53.126006+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE MORAN, concurring in People v. Grizzle and dissenting in People v. Roberts: The majority, sua sponte, relies on the procedural rule of waiver to reverse the appellate court and reinstate defendant Roberts’ conviction for attempted murder. This was done despite the well-established rule that an issue not raised in the court of review is deemed waived. Nowhere in its petition for leave to appeal, its brief, or its reply brief does the State contend that Roberts waived any error by his failure to object to the giving of the instructions in question. Neither party considers waiver to be an issue here, and with good reason, for the question of waiver, in the context of such instructions on attempted murder, was argued and disposed of by this court in People v. Harris (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 16. Harris was the consolidation of two cases appealed by the State, the defendants being Harris and Shields. Each involved charges of attempted murder and jury instructions similar to those involved in the instant case. At trial, Harris objected to the giving of the questioned jury instructions but the objection was overruled. He failed to raise the same objection in his post-trial motion. Shields, on the other hand, failed to object to the giving of such instructions at both the trial and his post-trial hearing. The briefs in both cases disclosed that in Harris’ case, as here, the State did not raise the waiver issue, but did so in Shields’ case. In both, this court determined that the instructional errors were so “substantial” that the waiver rule should not bar consideration on the merits. People v. Harris (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 16, 28. The majority attempts to distinguish Harris on the ground that “we granted leave to appeal in that case [Harris] to resolve the attempted-murder problem resulting from our decisions in People v. Muir and People v. Trinkle, and not to deal with the question of wavier.” (75 Ill. 2d at 15.) This statement is unfounded, since reasons for allowing a petition for leave to appeal are unrecorded. The opinion in Harris evidences that we applied the waiver rule because the instructions on the elements of the offense of attempted murder were so substantially defective that, in the interests of justice, defendant was allowed to raise the issue on appeal. To now deny defendant Roberts the same right — to have his case decided on the merits — especially when the State has not urged us to do so, is not only patently unfair to the defendant but casts doubt on the sincerity of our recent efforts to correct the errors which heretofore prevailed in this area of criminal law. At issue in both People v. Trinkle (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 198, and People v. Harris (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 16, were the proper instructions to be given the jury when the offense is attempted murder. In Trinkle, we held that a conviction cannot stand if the jury was instructed that it could find a defendant guilty of attempted murder “sans specific intent to kill.” (People v. Trinkle (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 198, 201.) In Harris, we upset the convictions of both Harris and Shields, and affirmatively resolved, “An instruction must make it clear that to convict for attempted murder nothing less than a criminal intent to kill must be shown.” (People v. Harris (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 16, 27.) The instructional defect in the cases of Trinkle, Harris and Shields was precisely the same as the defect in the present case. The prejudicial impact of such improper instructions was acknowledged by the holding in Trinkle and Harris. Other than absolute-Hability offenses, every criminal offense requires one of four mental states. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 38, pars. 4—3 through 4—7.) Under sections 9—1 (a)(1) and 9—1 (a)(2) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 38, pars. 9—1 (a)(1) and 9—1 (a)(2)), the offense of murder requires either of two mental states — intent or knowledge. On the other hand, only one mental state will suffice for the offense of attempt. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 38, par. 8—4 (a). Also see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 38, par. 4—3 (b), and W. LaFave & A. Scott, Criminal Law sec. 59, at 428-29 (1972). As noted by the majority, the jury in the case at bar was instructed that, to convict defendant of attempted murder, defendant must have acted with intent to commit the crime of murder. The jury was then given the foHowing instruction defining murder: “A person commits the crime of murder who kills an individual if, in performing the acts which cause the death, (1) he intends to kill or do great bodily harm to that individual; or (2) he knows that such acts create a strong probability of death or great bodily harm to that individual.” Under this instruction, the jury could convict the defendant of attempted murder if it found that defendant intended to do great bodily harm, knew that his acts created a strong probability of death, or knew that his acts created a strong probability of great bodily harm. (As hereafter noted, defendant was not charged in the verbiage of (1) of the instruction.) Under Trinkle and Harris, this instruction was erroneous in that it permitted the jury to convict the defendant upon a finding that he had a mental state other than a specific intent to kill. An indictment and jury instructions must make it clear that the specific intent to kill is a prerequisite to a conviction for attempted murder. Mr. Justice Ryan’s dissent in Harris commences by stating, “Considerable amount of uncertainty seems to prevail in courts and among members of the bar as to what language is permissible or impermissible in charging attempted murder and in instructing the jury on this offense.” (72 Ill. 2d at 29.) To rectify the uncertainty, I believe the body of the indictment and the necessary instructions regarding attempted murder should contain the following: INDICTMENT On or about the____day of______at and within________ County, Illinois,________ committed the offense of ATTEMPT MURDER, in violation of section 8 — 4(a) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Illinois Revised Statutes 19__, chapter 38, section 8— 4(a)) in that [he] [she] did, with the intent to commit the offense of murder of____[victim]_________ take a substantial step toward the commission of said offense, in that [he] [she] did, without lawful justification, ______________________________ with the intent to kill_____[victim]_______ in violation of section 9 — 1(a)(1) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Illinois Revised Statutes 19__, chapter 38, section 9— 1(a)(1)). JURY INSTRUCTIONS FOR ATTEMPTED MURDER A person who kills an individual without lawful justification commits the crime of murder if, in performing the acts which cause the death, he intends to kill that individual. A person commits the crime of attempted murder if, with intent to commit the crime of murder, he does any act which constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of the crime of murder. The crime attempted need not have been committed. To sustain the charge of attempted murder, the State must prove the following propositions: First: That the defendant performed an act which constituted a substantial step toward the commission of the crime of murder; and Second: That the defendant did so with the intent to kill_______[victim.]_________ If you find from your consideration of all the evidence that each of these propositions has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt, then you should find the defendant guilty. If, on the other hand, you find from your consideration of all the evidence that any of these propositions has not been proved beyond a reasonable doubt, then you should find the defendant not guilty. According to the majority, we need not “as a matter of grace” consider the instructional defect, sub judice, to assure the defendant a fair trial. (75 Ill. 2d at 14.) The majority bases this assertion on its conclusion that “the evidence in this case is not ‘closely balanced.’ ” (75 Ill. 2d at 14-15.) Iam convinced that, in reaching this conclusion, the majority considered whether the defendant committed the acts aEeged, but failed to consider the intent which was the subject of the instructional error. The inquiry should have been directed to the defendant’s mental state: Did defendant fire a shot into the adjacent truck with specific intent to kill the driver? The facts pertinent to this question certainly leave considerable doubt as to whether defendant Roberts had the specific intent to kill. The action taken by the grand jury supports this statement. The indictment presented to the grand jury charged Roberts with two counts of attempted murder. Count I stated: “*** the defendant, with the intent to commit the offense of Murder in violation of Section 9 — 1(a)(1) of the Criminal Code of 1961, did perform a substantial step toward the commission of that offense in that he did, with the intent to kill or do great bodily harm to Bemie L. Larson, aimed [«c] a gun and shoot said gun at Bemie L. Larson ***.” Count II stated, “*** the defendant, with the intent to commit the offense of Murder in violation of Section 9 — 1(a)(2) of the Criminal Code of 1961, did perform a substantial step toward the commission of that offense in that he aimed and fired a gun at the passenger compartment of a truck occupied and driven by Bernie L. Larson, knowing that such acts created a strong probability of death or great bodily harm to Bernie L. Larson ***.” Count I charged defendant with the specific intent to kill or do great bodily harm. On this count, the grand jury returned a no bill. Count II charged the defendant with knowledge that his acts created a strong probability of death or great bodily harm, and on this count a true bill was returned under which the defendant was subsequently convicted. Therefore, it can only be concluded that the grand jury specifically found a lack of probable cause that Roberts had acted with intent to kill. There is no doubt that the error in this case, identical to the error in Harris, was “substantial” — the determination also reached in Harris. This, coupled with the grand jury’s finding on count I, leads me to but one conclusion: the interest of justice requires that defendant Roberts’ conviction be reversed and the cause remanded for a new trial. I would, therefore, affirm that portion of the appellate court judgment which reversed the conviction of Roberts.

=== CASE 2217693 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:32.982828+00 ===

369 Mich. 129 (1963)
119 N.W.2d 591
BUZYNSKI
v.
BUZYNSKI.
Calendar No. 20, Docket No. 49,665.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided February 6, 1963.
Marie Coy, for plaintiff.
Joseph E. Mihelich and Robert P. Dank, for defendant.
OTIS M. SMITH, J.
The parties were married January 24, 1943. During the course of the marriage, 3 children were born. On September 6, 1960, the husband filed for divorce. Thereafter, the wife filed answer and a cross-bill. The matter was brought on for trial October 4, 1961. When the case was called, it was indicated that a property settlement had been reached amicably and that plaintiff would offer no proof on his bill. Appellant's attorney dictated a property settlement on the record which had the approval of appellee and the express confirmation on the record by appellant personally. Before proofs were taken on appellant's cross-bill the court called attention to the absence of the report of the friend of the court. However, proofs were offered on the cross-bill. After hearing the testimony, the court entered a finding for the wife for divorce. The court also affirmed the property settlement which had been outlined and provided that the matter of custody and support would be held in abeyance until a final report had been received from the friend of *131 the court. At that time, a decree could be presented for signature.
The report of the friend of the court was not filed for some time. Immediately upon receipt of the report, the attorney for the husband prepared a proposed decree which was submitted to the wife for approval. When she refused to approve it, a motion to settle terms of decree was filed. A substitution of counsel for the wife then took place and objections were made to the proposed decree, but after modification, it was approved and entered by the trial judge.
Appellant claims that there were irregularities in the procedure which void the decree. These are alleged to be violations of Michigan Court Rule No 51, § 4 (1945)[1], and the local court rule covering the same material. These claimed irregularities relate to pro confesso cases. This case was brought on for trial as can be seen from the following excerpt from the transcript.
"The Court: I think the record should indicate that, since you are the plaintiff, this case is called for trial. You are not presenting any testimony?
"Miss Coy: That is right. I so make the statement on the record."
It was also alleged that the local court rule was violated.[2] The rule itself states that such report is advisory only. Since the court did not enter the decree until after the report was filed, and then only after a hearing on the motion to settle the decree, appellant suffered no injury nor injustice.
*132 In view of the fact that this case was called for trial, and therefore was not pro confesso, it would have been hardly possible, and unnecessary, to present a decree to the court to comply with Court Rule No 51, § 4. Further, appellant was the moving party at the trial. She chose to put in her proofs on the cross-bill and take a decree of divorce. By her actions, she must be deemed to have waived the alleged irregularities in procedure.
Appellant also contends that the trial judge abused his discretion in entering the decree because the property settlement was not consented to on the record and the provisions were incomplete, vague and incapable of defining the rights of the parties. At the trial, appellant was examined by her counsel as follows:
"Q. You have accumulated certain and real property during the period of your marriage?
"A. Yes.
"Q. And, as you heard this morning, you entered into a property settlement with your husband?
"A. Yes.
"Q. You are fully cognizant of that settlement and are satisfied therewith?
"A. Yes."
Appellant unequivocally consented to the property settlement. Such property settlements are not only lawful but are to be commended. Palmer v. Fagerlin, 163 Mich 345. Appellant was represented by counsel throughout the proceedings. She stated she was cognizant of the settlement and satisfied with it. Its terms were plain and unambiguous. The law in Michigan is clear that decretal provisions for adjustment of property rights in a suit for divorce cannot be set aside, modified or altered in the absence of a showing of fraud, necessity for clarification, or ambiguity. Greene v. Greene, 357 Mich 196.
*133 The decree of the trial court is affirmed. Costs to appellee.
CARR, C.J., and DETHMERS, KELLY, BLACK, KAVANAGH, SOURIS, and O'HARA, JJ., concurred.
NOTES
[1]  Michigan Court Rule No 51, § 4:
"No proofs in pro confesso cases shall be taken unless there has been deposited with the clerk of the court the amount of the lawful decree fee, and unless there has been tendered to the judge presiding at the hearing the proposed decree in the cause."
[2]  16th Judicial Circuit Court Rule No 14.14:
"Such case shall not be heard until a final report from the friend of the court is filed. * * * Such report is advisory only."

=== CASE 2217696 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:33.057584+00 ===

377 Mass. 682 (1979)
387 N.E.2d 559
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
FRANK E. IMBRUGLIA.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
December 5, 1978.
April 2, 1979.
Present: HENNESSEY, C.J., BRAUCHER, KAPLAN, LIACOS, & ABRAMS, JJ.
Dyanne Klein Polatin for the defendant.
Barbara T. Shurpin, Special Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
LIACOS, J.
The defendant was convicted on two indictments of receiving stolen securities and one indictment of possession of counterfeit currency with intent to pass the same as true. On appeal, transferred here on our own *683 motion (G.L.c. 211A, § 10 [A]), he argues two assignments of error: (a) that a two-year pre-indictment delay denied him his right to due process, and (b) that the admission of evidence of other crimes was prejudicial. Finding no error, we affirm.
The three indictments stem from an undercover investigation of the defendant's activities by the United States Secret Service. In late August, 1973, Secret Service Agent Francis Searle received a tip from an informant, Guy Sylvestro, that the defendant was allegedly fencing stolen securities. Sylvestro apparently was a long-time acquaintance of the defendant. As a result of the tip, a meeting was arranged at which Sylvestro would introduce a Frank Cetti to the defendant. In reality, Cetti was Searle.
During the next six weeks, Searle obtained from the defendant and others stolen securities worth a substantial sum and fake United States currency. The first transactions were for relatively small sums and appear to have been preliminary to a later, larger transaction. From the record, it is apparent that the Secret Service planned to have Searle gain the defendant's confidence and then impress on the defendant and others that he could "move" or convert into cash large quantities of stolen securities. The key element of the plan was Searle's acquaintance with an allegedly corrupt loan officer at The First National Bank of Boston. In meetings and conversations with the defendant and the defendant's partner, Robert Donati, Searle explained that the loan officer could approve loans of $100,000 without obtaining authorization from any other bank official. Searle further explained that this loan officer was in some sort of financial trouble and, for a share of the booty, would be willing to process loans accepting the stolen securities as collateral. Like Searle, the would-be loan officer was a Secret Service agent. The defendant went for the bait and began to acquire securities worth a considerable sum.
*684 It appears in the record, but not in the evidence submitted to the jury, that as a result of the bank scheme, Federal agents arrested the defendant on October 17, 1973, with Donati and four others for receiving, concealing, bartering, and disposing of stolen securities of the value of $5,000 or more which were part of interstate commerce (18 U.S.C. § 2315 [1970]). A charge of conspiracy was later added (18 U.S.C. § 371 [1970]). The securities which apparently were the subject of these charges were five $100,000 treasury notes and one $15,000 treasury note passed to Searle on the day of arrest. In December, 1975, the defendant was convicted in Federal District Court of both offenses and sentenced to concurrent terms of five and seven years. Part of the same series of events resulted in indictments by the Commonwealth. A Suffolk County erand jury indicted the defendant on October 29, 1975, for receiving 144 Series E United States Savings Bonds of a value in excess of $100 stolen from John and Evelyn Concannon, for possession of nine counterfeit ten-dollar bills, and for receiving twenty-six[1] Series E Savings Bonds of a value in excess of $100 stolen from Gertrude Haggerty. The indictments alleged that these offenses occurred respectively on September 4, 1973, on or about October 1, 1973, and on October 16, 1973.[2]
At the trial of these indictments, the prosecution introduced a stipulation of the parties that the Concannon and Haggerty bonds had been stolen. In dispute then was the defendant's possession of the bonds and counterfeit bills and his knowledge and intent with respect to their status. The Commonwealth's case rested largely on the testimony of Secret Service Agent Searle, who purportedly received *685 the stolen bonds and counterfeit money from the defendant. The other government witnesses were also Secret Service agents, and their testimony corroborated various aspects of Searle's testimony.
The defendant asserted prior to trial that he would claim entrapment as a defense. He did not, however, produce any witnesses to substantiate this claim and did not himself take the stand. Indeed, the only witness called by the defendant was Agent Searle and then only for impeachment purposes.
1. Pre-indictment Delay.
Two years elapsed between the commission of the alleged offenses charged and the State indictments. Claiming that this delay had denied him due process, the defendant filed a pretrial motion to dismiss.[3] In support of this motion, the defendant filed an affidavit which states in essence that before the instant charges issued, the defendant was arrested on Federal charges arising from the same series of transactions. The affidavit further states that the defendant was ultimately convicted of the Federal charges and sentenced to a term of seven years in Federal prison to be served on and after a State sentence he was then serving on unrelated charges at the Massachusetts Correctional Institution at Norfolk. The affidavit also states that as a result of the delay before the State indictments the defendant was prejudiced in his defense and prejudiced in the possibility of obtaining a concurrent sentence with the Federal sentence imposed for essentially the same series of transactions.
At a pretrial hearing the defendant in argument elaborated on the prejudice to his defense allegedly caused by delay. He suggested that the delay would generally weaken *686 his ability to recall events accurately, and had deprived him of Sylvestro's testimony, which he claimed was crucial to his defense of entrapment. He further suggested that the delay served no legitimate law enforcement purpose.
The defendant called two witnesses in support of these claims: Secret Service Agents Francis Searle and James Monahan. Searle explained Sylvestro's participation in the investigation and his relationship to the Secret Service. Sylvestro introduced Searle to the defendant and continued on occasion to supply the agency with pertinent information during the course of the investigation. For his participation, Sylvestro received a sum of money from the agency. Searle testified that his last contact with Sylvestro was by telephone in 1974; according to Searle, Sylvestro had telephoned from Florida. Monahan also testified that he had had no contact with Sylvestro since 1974.
From Agent Monahan, defense counsel elicited testimony that the Federal investigation of the defendant was complete as of the defendant's arrest on October 17, 1973. He and Searle testified, however, that the investigation was not a joint effort between State and Federal law enforcement agencies, nor did a liaison exist between the two sovereignties on the matter. On October 16, Monahan spoke with Detective Walsh of the Boston police department and asked him to help identify an individual who had come within the scope of the agency's investigation of the defendant. On October 17, Detective Walsh and Detective Connolly were present at the arrest of the defendant by request of Agent Monahan. Monahan explained that it was normal practice to inform local police of a planned arrest. Monahan further testified that when he spoke with Detective Walsh he did not suggest that the defendant's activities involved possible violations of State law. Monahan claimed that in fact he first became aware of a possible violation of State law in a conversation with Boston police Detective Robert Patenaude in April, 1975. *687 Monahan testified that he had mentioned the approaching Federal trial of the defendant and had expressed regret that the Federal code did not permit prosecution of the defendant for some of the packages of securities passed to Searle. When Patenaude informed Monahan that some of the securities obtained could serve as the basis for a State prosecution, Monahan supplied the Suffolk district attorney with the relevant evidence. The Suffolk indictments were then issued in October, 1975.
The prosecution introduced no evidence of its own at the pretrial hearing. It argued, however, that the evidence already adduced established that the Commonwealth had not sought the indictments sooner because State law enforcement officials were unaware until April, 1975, that the Federal investigation had uncovered possible violations of the State criminal law. The prosecution maintains that delay in such circumstances does not warrant dismissal. It also denied that the defendant had suffered actual prejudice due to the delay. Without making any findings, the trial judge denied the defendant's motion to dismiss.
This court has followed the Supreme Court of the United States[4] in analyzing the due process consequences of a pre-indictment delay. See Commonwealth v. Canon, 373 Mass. 494, 498-499 (1977), cert. denied, 435 U.S. 933 (1978); Commonwealth v. Horan, 360 Mass. 739, 740-742 (1972). The Supreme Court has acknowledged that the applicable statute of limitations, which is the primary safeguard against being compelled to answer overly stale criminal charges, see Commonwealth v. Jones, 360 Mass. 498, 501-502 (1971), "does not fully define [a defendant's] rights with respect to the events occurring prior to indictment." United States v. Marion, 404 U.S. 307, 324 (1971). *688 Even when the indictment issues within the statutory period, pre-indictment delay may violate those "`fundamental conceptions of justice which lie at the base of our civil and political institutions,' Mooney v. Holohan, 294 U.S. 103, 112 (1935), and which define `the community's sense of fair play and decency,' Rochin v. California, [342 U.S. 165,] at 173 [(1952)]." United States v. Lovasco, 431 U.S. 783, 790 (1977). The acknowledged remedy for delay is dismissal of the indictments. United States v. Marion, supra at 324-325. Commonwealth v. Horan, supra at 741-742.[5]
Due process inquiry must first focus on whether the defendant has suffered actual prejudice due to the delay. On the record before us, the trial judge could conclude that the defendant had not sustained his burden to show prejudice. See Commonwealth v. Jones, supra at 502. Cf. Commonwealth v. Gilbert, 366 Mass. 18, 22 (1974) (speedy trial). The defendant's claim of prejudice seems based largely on the unavailability of Sylvestro as a witness for the defense, coupled with the claim that Sylvestro would assist materially in the defendant's claim that he was entrapped.[6]
This argument fails on two grounds. The defendant offered no evidence that the absence at trial of Sylvestro was due to delay. The defendant did not allege or prove that Sylvestro had died before trial, see, e.g., Commonwealth v. Horan, supra; United States v. Lovasco, 431 U.S. 783 (1977); United States v. Brand, 556 F.2d 1312 (5th Cir.1977), cert. denied, 434 U.S. 1063 (1978); United States v. Norton, 504 F.2d 342 (8th Cir.1974), cert. denied, 419 U.S. 1113 (1975), or that his whereabouts or identity had *689 become unknown, see United States v. Quinn, 540 F.2d 357 (8th Cir.1976). In a colloquy with the judge, the defendant himself acknowledged that he knew where Sylvestro lived and worked.[7] Defense counsel apparently sought to show that Sylvestro was under the control of the prosecution and would not comply with his summons, but the judge found at trial that Sylvestro was not under the control of the prosecution, and that the defendant had not shown that Sylvestro had ever received a summons to appear.[8] Second, and more significantly, the judge found that Sylvestro was not crucial to the defendant's case. The defendant offered no evidence to prove that Sylvestro would exculpate him.[9] Moreover, although Sylvestro set the investigation in motion, he was not present when any of the transactions in the State indictments transpired.
Additionally, "[t]he likelihood that the loss was prejudicial is eased by the reliability of the evidence presented by the government." United States v. Norton, supra at 344. Here, there was overwhelming evidence of the defendant's predisposition to commit the crimes charged. Consequently, even if Sylvestro's absence had resulted *690 from the delay, it did not so prejudice the defendant as to support dismissal.
The defendant's claim that the delay had dimmed his memory represented only the possibility of prejudice at the time of the hearing, and is inadequate to trigger the protection of due process. United States v. Marion, 404 U.S. at 323-324. Given that he did not take the stand, this possibility never became an actuality.
The defendant also claims prejudice in losing an opportunity to receive concurrent State and Federal sentences.[10] We acknowledge that if the trial below had occurred before the Federal trial, the defendant might have received a Federal sentence that ran concurrently with the State sentences arising from the convictions for related offenses. 18 U.S.C. § 4082 (1976). See United States v. Johnson, 563 F.2d 362, 364 (8th Cir.1977). See also ABA Standards Relating to Sentencing Alternatives and Procedures § 3.5 (Tent. Draft 1967). Even accepting for purposes of argument the defendant's contention that the State court could not make its sentence run concurrently with the Federal sentence, but see Annot., 18 A.L.R.2d 511, 512-514 (1951 & Supp. 1973), the lower court was not, however, without power to fashion a disposition equally as favorable to the defendant as concurrent sentences. See generally United States v. Cabral, 475 F.2d 715, 720 (1st Cir.1973); Commonwealth v. Delgado, 367 Mass. 432, 438 (1975); G.L.c. 276, § 87. Accordingly, the legitimate exercise of judicial discretion may have determined the defendant's sentences as much as the order of trials.[11]
*691 In any event, the possibility of prejudice at disposition does not weigh heavily in favor of dismissal on a pretrial motion to dismiss because it does not affect the defendant's ability to mount a defense. It is protection of this capability which we view as the primary purpose of preindictment due process analysis. Compare United States v. Marion, 404 U.S. at 324-325, with Smith v. Hooey, 393 U.S. 374, 378 (1969).
Even if the defendant had made a persuasive showing of actual prejudice, dismissal would not be required. Proof of prejudice is a necessary, but not sufficient element of a due process claim. United States v. Lovasco, 431 U.S. at 790. "Actual prejudice to the defense of a criminal case may result from the shortest and most necessary delay; and no one suggests that every delay-caused detriment to a defendant's case should abort a criminal prosecution." United States v. Marion, supra. Accordingly, the due process inquiry must also consider the reasons for delay. United States v. Lovasco, supra. If, in addition to causing prejudice, delay has been intentionally undertaken to gain a tactical advantage over the accused or has been incurred in reckless disregard of known risks to the putative defendant's ability to mount a defense, dismissal is appropriate. Id. at 795 & n. 17. Cases suggesting that a delay due to negligence may justify dismissal are distinguishable. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Beckett, 373 Mass. 329, 343-344 (1977) (Liacos, J., concurring) (speedy trial case); Commonwealth v. Dabrieo, 370 Mass. 728, 736-737 (1976) (same); United States v. Quinn, 540 F.2d 357, 360 n. 2 (8th Cir.1976) (decided before Lovasco); United States v. Cabral, 475 F.2d at 718 (speedy trial case). But cf. United States v. Brand, 556 F.2d 1312, 1317 n. 7 (5th Cir.1977).
*692 There was no evidence that the delay at issue was reckless or intended to gain a tactical advantage. Instead, the evidence suggests that as in Commonwealth v. Canon, 373 Mass. 494, 498-499 (1977), the delay resulted from the district attorney's lack of knowledge of the defendant's criminal activities.[12] Once the prosecution was in possession of the evidence, it moved expeditiously. In such circumstances, there has been no deviation from elementary standards of fair play and decency, and dismissal is unwarranted.
The defendant's view of the events does not require a contrary result. He suggests that by assisting in the Federal investigation and arrest, Detectives Walsh and Connolly were engaged in a cooperative effort with the Secret Service. Citing the doctrine that when police are engaged in a cooperative effort the knowledge of one is the knowledge of all, see Commonwealth v. Ballou, 350 Mass. 751, 757 (1966), cert. denied, 385 U.S. 1031 (1967); Commonwealth v. McDermott, 347 Mass. 246, 249 (1964), the defendant argues that the knowledge possessed by the Federal agents as to his allegedly illegal activities must be imputed to Detectives Walsh and Connolly and hence to the Commonwealth.
The defendant's argument is unpersuasive. Detectives Walsh and Connolly were not engaged in a cooperative effort with the Secret Service. Their involvement  identifying an individual who had come within the scope of the Federal investigation, and maintaining a presence at the defendant's arrest  was determined by Agent Monahan, and was limited and supplementary to the over-all effort. The purpose of their presence at the arrest was quite distinct from the purpose of those Secret Service agents in attendance; according to Agent Monahan's testimony, Walsh and Connolly were there to protect the *693 public and not to effect the arrest. It does not appear that these officers were aware of any violations of State law, nor was there evidence that the district attorney's office was aware of the investigation conducted by the Secret Service until April, 1975.
We note also that delay after the prosecution has acquired sufficient knowledge to begin proceedings does not require a judge to conclude that the delay was improper even when another prosecutorial unit in possession of the same evidence has gone ahead without delay. See United States v. Mejias, 417 F. Supp. 585 (S.D.N.Y. 1976), aff'd 552 F.2d 435 (2d Cir.), cert. denied sub nom. Padilla-Martinez v. United States and Navas v. United States, 434 U.S. 847 (1977).[13] It was not error to deny the motion to dismiss.
2. Evidentiary Issues.
The prosecutor, over the defendant's objections, motions for mistrial, and motions to strike, introduced evidence of the defendant's fencing activities other than those which were the subject of the indictments tried. This evidence included testimony that the defendant had sold to Searle a package of stolen savings bonds from New York at their initial meeting on August 29, 1973, that on numerous occasions before October 2 the defendant and Donati offered to sell counterfeit United States currency, that on August 31 the defendant and Donati had claimed *694 access to packages of stolen bonds, stolen stocks, and counterfeit American Express checks, and that the defendant had asked Agent Collins, who posed as the corrupt loan officer, to explain how, after delivering the stolen bonds to the bank, he would get the phony loan out of the bank. It was offered also to show that on October 16, 1973, Donati had said that he had sent somebody by airplane to pick up the bonds for the bank deal and that the bonds had been brought back by car, that at a later meeting on October 16, 1973, the defendant had shown Searle a $100,000 treasury note, and that at the same meeting, Richard Shocker, introduced by the defendant as his partner Jerry, offered to provide disguises to those who would deliver the bonds to the bank. The prosecution also introduced recorded telephone conversations between Searle and the defendant, and Searle and Donati, in which the defendant and Donati referred to various stolen property and generally exhibited interest in Searle's professed ability to move large quantities of such property. This evidence is the subject of a catchall assignment of error, argued on appeal, in which the defendant claims that such evidence is irrelevant and prejudicial. The claimed error is twofold: first, that the judge erred in admitting the evidence, and second, that the prosecutor erred in ignoring the judge's frequent requests to limit introduction of such evidence even though relevant.
At the outset, we note that not all the evidence referred to in the assignment of errors or the defendant's brief need concern us. Although the judge initially permitted the prosecutor to introduce evidence of the August 29 transaction, he later instructed the jury to disregard any reference to it. He also sustained the defendant's objection to the admission of the physical evidence of that transaction, and although the judge permitted the prosecutor to elicit testimony about statements by Shocker in the defendant's presence, the judge struck the response which referred to disguises. We also note that the conversations about counterfeit currency occurring before *695 the date on which the defendant is charged with wrongful possession were precedent to a contemplated sale of such currency to Searle, and thus were part of the transaction described in the indictment.
We now turn to the remaining evidence challenged. The principle on which the defendant rests his first argument is well established: commission of an independent crime cannot be admitted to show commission of the crime charged. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Baldassini, 357 Mass. 670, 677-678 (1970); Commonwealth v. Stone, 321 Mass. 471, 473 (1947). When, however, the evidence is not too remote in time, or is connected with the facts of the case, it may be admitted to establish "knowledge, intent, motive, method, material to proof of the crime charged." Commonwealth v. Murphy, 282 Mass. 593, 598 (1933). See Commonwealth v. Baker, 368 Mass. 58, 85-86 (1975). See generally W.B. Leach & P.J. Liacos, Massachusetts Evidence 302-303 (4th ed. 1967). The evidence offered meets both these criteria. The evidence in issue relates to the six-week period during which the crimes charged allegedly occurred. See Commonwealth v. Baldassini, supra at 679. Moreover, the evidence tended to show that the defendant and his partners frequently handled stolen property and counterfeit currency of the type described in the indictments. It thus bore on a proposition crucial to the Commonwealth's case: that the defendant knew that the Haggerty and Concannon bonds were stolen and that the ten-dollar bills passed to Searle were counterfeit. See Commonwealth v. Segal, 3 Mass. App. Ct. 732, 733 (1975). See also Commonwealth v. Baldassini, supra at 677-679.
We cannot say that the trial judge abused his discretion in concluding that testimony on the defendant's other fencing activities was more probative than prejudicial. In addition, the judge was careful to keep the trial focused on the specific crimes charged. See Commonwealth v. Cepulonis, 374 Mass. 487, 498-499 (1978). The judge warned the jury, see Commonwealth v. Clifford, 374 *696 Mass. 293, 298 (1978), that the evidence suggesting the commission of other crimes had been admitted for the limited purpose of proving the defendant's knowledge and intent with respect to the crimes charged; he requested the prosecutor not to retry the Federal cases; he excluded some of the evidence offered; and he repeated his cautionary comments to the jury in his charge.
Finally, we find no merit in the defendant's contention that the prosecutor engaged in prejudicial excesses. The evidence offered was not plainly inadmissible and therefore we cannot say that the prosecutor "should have ... anticipated" adverse rulings. Commonwealth v. Redmond, 370 Mass. 591, 596 (1976). We also cannot say that the prosecutor disregarded the judge's directives relative to evidence of other crimes.
Judgments affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  This indictment was amended at trial to refer to twenty-four savings bonds. The value of the stolen property remained over $100.
[2]  The defendant argued before trial that, in light of the Federal trial these indictments subjected him to double jeopardy, and he moved for dismissal. The judge denied the motion. See Commonwealth v. Cepulonis, 374 Mass. 487, 490-497 (1978). The defendant does not argue this issue on appeal.
[3]  In arguing the motion below, defense counsel also suggested that, once Federal agents had arrested the defendant, he had become an accused for purposes of the State charges and therefore qualified for the remedies afforded by constitutional and statutory speedy trial provisions. The defendant does not pursue this argument on appeal. See Commonwealth v. Gove, 366 Mass. 351, 358-361 (1974).
[4]  The Supreme Court has considered pre-indictment delay in the context of Federal and not State criminal prosecutions. Its analysis has relied therefore on the due process clause of the Fifth Amendment.
[5]  Once a person stands accused, he may demand a speedy trial under art. 11 of our Declaration of Rights, the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution, or G.L.c. 277, § 72A (if applicable). There is little that an unwitting suspect can do either to hasten his arrest or dispel suspicion.
[6]  This defense was not pursued at trial.
[7]  According to the defendant, his attorney in the Federal trial had Sylvestro under surveillance in October, 1975.
[8]  The defendant's only effort to procure Sylvestro was to leave a summons at Sylvestro's last known address with a woman who was purportedly Sylvestro's wife. There was no evidence that in fact the woman was Sylvestro's wife or that, whoever she was, she gave the summons to Sylvestro. Although the defendant claimed to know Sylvestro's place of business, he made no effort to serve Sylvestro there. Lastly, at the urging of defense counsel, the trial judge ordered a summons to issue to Sylvestro's last known home address. Finding the house vacant, the server left the summons.
[9]  The following colloquy occurred at the pretrial hearing:
THE DEFENDANT: "[W]ithout him [Sylvestro] I have no defense at all."
THE JUDGE: "He could also hurt you."
THE DEFENDANT: "I don't care. I will take that chance, Your Honor."
And in arguing a motion to enlist the Commonwealth's assistance in procuring Sylvestro, defense counsel said: "I have never talked to [Sylvestro]. Maybe he would not support my entrapment defense."
[10]  Defense counsel argues that delay denied the defendant an opportunity for concurrent sentences in two respects; because the trial below occurred after the Federal trial, the Federal court could not make its sentence concurrent with the later State sentences for related offenses, and the State court could not make its sentence concurrent with an earlier State sentence imposed before the Federal trial for an unrelated offense. The latter allegation is advanced for the first time on appeal, has no support in the record, and thus need not concern us.
[11]  It is not without significance that the judge below, who was familiar with the defendant's record, declined to impose the minimum from and after term of imprisonment as requested.
[12]  The defendant makes no suggestion that the Secret Service wrongfully withheld from the State prosecution evidence of his activities.
[13]  In United States v. Mejias, State and Federal law enforcement officials cooperated in a drug investigation in which both State and Federal charges were contemplated. The Federal prosecution did not go forward, however, until the State prosecution foundered because of a successful motion to suppress. The court held "that the federal government can in no way be bound by the action of state prosecutorial authorities, absent a clear showing of federal intrusion into, and control over state decision-making processes. To hold otherwise would require that the government rush headlong into a federal prosecution whenever a defendant had been arrested on state charges as the result of federal participation in an ongoing investigation. Such a requirement would severely restrict sound prosecutorial discretion, [and] would undermine fundamental doctrines of dual sovereignty ..." (footnote omitted). Id. at 591. See also id. at 598.]

=== CASE 2217702 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:33.172112+00 ===

119 N.W.2d 114 (1963)
NORTHWEST REALTY COMPANY, a corporation, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
Leonard J. PEREZ, Defendant and Respondent.
Leonard J. PEREZ and Virginia Perez, Plaintiffs and Respondents,
v.
NORTHWEST REALTY COMPANY, a corporation, and Sheldon F. Reese, Defendants and Appellants.
Nos. 9987, 9988.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
January 8, 1963.
Rehearing Denied February 5, 1963.
*115 Morrill & Morrill, Sturgis, for appellants.
Sieler & Brady, Rapid City, for respondents.
BIEGELMEIER, Judge.
These appeals involve the authority of an attorney at law to compromise and settle claims and causes of action in favor of, and those made against, his client. At the time of the employment of John C. Searle to handle their legal affairs, two actions were pending: one by Northwest Realty Company against Perez to replevin the property covered by, and foreclosure of, a conditional sales contract; the other a counter suit by Perez and his wife against Northwest Realty and Reese, its president, for actual and exemplary damages claiming the unlawful conversion of personal property attached and garnisheed in the first action. The two challenged stipulations were signed by Searle. One of these settled the replevin suit by agreeing that action be dismissed with prejudice and the property described in the complaint to be "returned" to plaintiff Northwest Realty pursuant to the stipulation in the conversion action. The other stipulation provided for dismissal of the conversion action with prejudice, the release of the articles garnisheed in the hands of a storage company and "defendants agree to pay to the plaintiffs the sum of $2,500"; other details are hereafter mentioned. Both stipulations were dated October 27, 1961. The replevin stipulation was filed November 16, 1961 and an order entered thereon dismissing that action with prejudice and releasing the garnishment. The stipulation in the conversion action was filed November 21, 1961 but no judgment or order was then entered. Searle never reported to Reese the execution of these stipulations or his settlement of the actions. While he received amounts in excess of $1,000 monthly, for services rendered on itemized statements for over three months after his employment, differences arose between Searle and Reese over claimed failure to give status reports of matters he was handling, which resulted in Searle's terminating his relationship as his attorney by telegram November 9th. Searle, Reese and Northwest Realty offices were all located in the same city.
Reese learned of the settlements by having his employees and one David Morrill, another attorney employed by him in some other legal affairs, check the records. On November 24 he promptly moved to set aside both stipulations and the order of dismissal. In addition to affidavits, the circuit judge heard oral testimony. From orders denying the relief requested and a judgment entered after that hearing for the Perez plaintiffs in the conversion action for $2,526.26 based on the stipulation, Northwest Realty and Reese appeal.
The rule is almost universal that an attorney who is clothed with no other authority than that arising from his employment in that capacity has no implied power by virtue of his general retainer to compromise and settle his client's claim or cause of action. Dwight v. Hazlett, 107 W.Va. 192, 147 S.E. 877, 66 A.L.R. 102 and note page 107; 30 A.L.R.2d 945; 7 C.J.S. Attorney and Client § 105; 5 Am.Jur., Attorneys at Law, § 98. It applies to an agreement to accept less than the amount due or claimed by his client. Dwight v. Hazlett, supra; Weidenfeld v. Olson, 132 Neb. 303, 271 N.W. 806; or discharge or terminate the right of action by a dismissal with prejudice (the modern name for a retraxit) without special authority. Robinson v. Hiles, 119 Cal.App.2d 666, 260 P.2d 194; see also Mongeon v. Burkebile, 79 N.D. 234, 55 N.W.2d 445, 452 and Radosevich v. Pegues, 133 Colo. 148, 292 P.2d *116 741. An attorney employed to obtain a change of venue and serve an answer has no authority to withdraw the answer or consent to judgment by default and a judgment so entered must be vacated. Emerson-Brantingham Implement Co. v. Olson, 56 S.D. 132, 227 N.W. 567. The general principle that an attorney, merely by virtue of his employment, has no implied authority to release his client's claim or cause of action or compromise or settle his claim was recognized by this court, but held not to apply to the attorney's agreement that the sheriff hold a car under a levy pending final disposition of the action; this for the reason the resulting damage due to depreciation "was no part of the original claim, but a mere incident arising out of the proceedings * * *." Schievelbein v. Boos, 74 S.D. 428, 54 N.W.2d 172. The attorney is in effect a special agent limited in duty to the vigilant prosecution and defense of the rights of the client and not to bargain or contract them away. His employment to prosecute, defend or manage the cause for his client as an officer of a court of justice is inconsistent with the power to dismiss or agree to make payment of the claim and it is reasonable to require those added powers to be specially delegated. 66 A.L.R. 112; Bank of Glade Spring v. McEwen, 160 N.C. 414, 76 S.E. 222; Nothem v. Vonderhaar, 189 Iowa 43, 175 N.W. 967, 974. Mindful of their relationship as special agents with their professional and official status, the requirement is not only reasonable, as the Iowa Supreme Court described it, but one that comports with the high standard to which the bar must adhere. The attorney may negotiate for and advise settlement of the controversy (Rules of Professional Conduct, No. 8) but the decision is the client's. The client, not the lawyer, is the litigant. Rule No. 17. The client owns the cause of action or owes the obligation. The powers of counsel are limited to those affecting the remedy and incidental proceedings. As to the exercise of those powers Rule 25 states "As far as possible, important agreements, affecting the rights of clients, should be reduced to writing * * * ". This is not to say authority from a client to compromise need be in writing. Prudence, avoidance of misunderstanding and liability may make it advisable in many instances. The agreements here were not insignificant as the one case in small claims court which was settled by express authorization. The disputed stipulations were complex and important. They agreed to accept title to the household goods, release Perez from personal liability, pay storage and shipping charges of an unspecified amount, cancel the contract and stated this was in no way to reflect on Perez' credit rating by Northwest Realty and Reese. Some of these items were clearly outside the scope of the actions.
An examination of a number of opinions cited in the A.L.R. note indicates, in the main, counsel there had not transgressed beyond that authority to the extent here apparent. They support the custom followed by attorneys in this state as observed by the author of this opinion in over thirty years in the practice. It seldom appears an attorney alone has entered into an agreement binding his client to pay money to another. How this may happen is shown by the isolated instance described in Jones v. Noble, 3 Cal.App.2d 316, 39 P.2d 486. There attorneys of record representing several defendants in a personal injury action made a written offer to compromise the action for $5,000 based on authority from the insurance carrier of one defendant. Plaintiffs accepted the offer and delivered a written stipulation of dismissal with prejudice to plaintiffs' attorneys. The insurance carrier then handed the $5,000 draft to defendants' attorneys (evidently its counsel) who notified plaintiffs thereof. A day or two later when the draft was called for by plaintiffs' attorneys, they were informed the insurance company had told them not to deliver it. Plaintiffs then sued all defendants in the personal injury action and the carrier on the agreement. The trial court entered judgment against all defendants. On appeal the court affirmed as to *117 the insurance carrier. However, in accord with settled law, it reversed as to the other defendants as they had not specially authorized the agreement, saying, "mere employment of an attorney to represent a client in litigation does not carry with it the power to compromise such litigation." It appears Cohen v. Goldman, 85 R.I. 434, 132 A.2d 414, agrees with the foregoing authorities but under the facts there present relegated the client to a suit against the defaulting attorney. His liability may also result but it does not affect the client's right to relief in this proceeding.
A reading of the evidence compels the conclusion Searle had no special authority to settle these actions. The conversations were all vague and general; there was no "full" or "extensive discussion", punitive damages were "probably mentioned", but "no final details" agreed on. It is difficult to balance the testimony that in the middle of October Searle felt he had authority to settle the Perez case "in any amount he could settle for" against his statement to Reese about that time that as soon as he was able to get some firm commitments he would visit with him about them and his statement to counsel for Perez on October 23 or 24 that he would "have to check with Mr. Reese again" and the evidence that he never reported any of this to Reese even after he executed the challenged settlements. This conclusion was shared by the circuit judge who stated "it is quite apparent that counsel * * * did not have actual authority, either specific or general, to settle this lawsuit * * *." It appears from the judge's observations in the transcript that, because the attorneys for Perez may have relied on Searle's keeping his clients advised and being authorized to settle as they were by their clients, coupled with Reese's general knowledge and associations with prior counsel on other matters, he was charged with making more inquiries with reference to the status of the Perez litigation. Therefore he did not feel Reese and Northwest Realty should be relieved from the stipulations. These facts do not affect appellants' rights, for after a controversy is in court it is in the attorney's hands and his duty to keep the clients advised of its status, time of trial and other appropriate action. Clients may rely on this. They moved promptly to vacate and set them aside. This is an appropriate remedy. Dwight v. Hazlett, supra. Respondents are not injured in any way; they are placed in the same situation as before the stipulations were made, except they have benefited by having their property released from the garnishment. Each side will be required to prepare for trial as would have been necessary at that time. Huston v. Mitchell, 14 Serg. & R. 307, 16 Am.Dec. 506, quoted in Dwight v. Hazlett, supra.
Respondents' motion to dismiss the appeal in #9987 on the ground of insufficiency of assignments of error is denied. The relief prayed for by appellants should have been granted and the orders and judgments are reversed.
All the Judges concur.

=== CASE 9738800 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:02.573902+00 ===

Rogosheske, Justice.
Appeal from an order dismissing an election contest proceeding upon jurisdictional grounds.
At the November 6, 1962, general election, contestant, Gerald W. Christenson, and contestee, Claude H. Allen, were opposing candidates for the office of state senator from the 43 rd legislative district. As a result of a canvass of the votes by the Ramsey County Canvassing Board, completed on November 13, 1962, the board declared *396contestee elected by a vote of 13,694 to 13,628, a margin of 66 votes. Within 10 days after this action by the canvassing board and on November 20, 1962, contestant served and filed a verified instrument entitled “Notice Of Election Contest.” After reciting the facts above set forth, except for disclosing the total number of votes cast for each candidate, the instrument, which must be regarded under our election laws as a pleading essential to invoke jurisdiction,1 contained the following:
“3.
“After final votes or ballots in said election had been counted and approved by the County Canvassing Board, duly appointed under the election laws of the State of Minnesota, above named Plaintiff was declared to have been defeated by 66 votes.
“4.
“Plaintiff has reason to believe that possible errors could have occurred in counting of ballots in said election for Senator of the 43rd Legislative District and the only question is as to which of the Parties in said Senatorial Contest received the highest number of votes legally cast at the election on November 6, 1962 and as to who is entitled to receive the Certificate of Election.
“5.
“Plaintiff urges above named court who have jurisdiction in this matter to order the withholding of the Certificate of Election of Senator of the 43rd Legislative District until a recount of ballots can be made under Section #209.06 of the Election Laws of the State of Minnesota.
“6.
“Plaintiff has filed with Clerk of District Court a Bond of $250.00 as required under Section 209.06(2) of the Election Laws of the State of Minnesota.”
Simultaneously, contestant’s original attorney signed and served an unverified petition requesting the court to allow the inspection of ballots in certain specified precincts.
*397When the matter came on for hearing on November 28, 1962 (after adjournment from November 26, 1962), contestee appeared specially and moved to dismiss on .the ground that the court lacked jurisdiction in that a notice of election contest which fails to set forth the points upon which the contest will be made, and fails to allege that irregularities complained of would change the result, is a nullity. At a continued hearing on December 3, 1962, contestant moved to amend his notice by alleging in substance that votes were improperly tabulated; that some were improperly marked, defaced, and identifiable; that errors were made in counting the votes and in recording the names of voters in the election registration; and that if such errors had not been made, contestant would have received a plurality of the votes cast. His amended petition for inspection of ballots, verified by contestant, was served and filed December 10, 1962, on which date contestant substituted new attorneys to represent him in further proceedings below and on this appeal. On December 5, 1962, the court entered an order dismissing the proceeding on the ground that the court “did not acquire jurisdiction of this proceeding' because the Notice of Election Contest did not comply with the applicable statutes relating to election contest proceedings.” Contestant’s motion to amend was denied on the same ground. He appeals from both holdings.
The problem presented is whether the notice of contest complied with the requirements of applicable statutes and, if not, whether it was so fatally deficient as to prevent the court from acquiring jurisdiction to permit amendments subsequent to the expiration of the period prescribed for serving and filing notice.
Contestant contends that where only a recount is sought, and there is no claim of corrupt practice or irregularity in the conduct of the election itself, the jurisdictional requirement is met if the notice apprises the contestee that contestant believes there may have been errors in counting and desires a recount. He argues that to require an affirmative allegation of errors in counting before the ballots are unsealed and inspected is wholly unrealistic. Contestee contends that there must be strict compliance with the statutes and that the notice must specify, as points upon which the contest will be made, some irregularity in *398the conduct of the election or canvass of votes, or some error in the result declared by the canvassing board, or some violation of the election laws requiring a determination that the contestant, rather than the contestee, was duly elected. He argues that contestant, by his pleading, did not apprise him of anything more than a mere suspicion of irregularity in counting the votes and of a desire to secure a recount; and that, therefore, the notice was insufficient to invoke the jurisdiction of the court.
It is elementary that both the right to contest an election and the authority of courts to hear and determine an election contest are purely statutory; and, absent statutory compliance, courts are powerless to entertain such proceedings.2
Minn. St. 209.02, subd. 1, authorizes a candidate or any voter who had a right to vote for the candidate to contest the election of any person declared elected. This subdivision further provides:
“* * * The contest may be brought over an irregularity in the conduct of an election or canvass of votes or on the grounds of deliberate, serious, and material violations of the provisions of the Minnesota election law.”
Subd. 2 provides:
“The contestant shall file a written notice of contest specifying the points upon which the contest will be made with the clerk of the district court of the county in which the candidate whose election is contested resides; * * *.”
Subd. 3 provides that the notice of contest in a general election must be filed and served within 10 days after the canvass is completed.
The applicable part of § 209.04 provides:
“The notices shall be treated as the pleadings in the case, and may be amended in the discretion of the court. * * * The matter shall be tried by the court in the manner provided for the trial of civil actions so far as practicable.”
*399Section 209.06, subd. 1, provides:
“After a contest has been instituted, either party may have the ballots inspected before preparing for trial. The party applying for such inspection shall file with the clerk of district court in which the contest is brought a verified petition, stating that he cannot properly prepare his case for trial without an inspection of such ballots and designating the precincts in which he desires to have ballots inspected, * * (Italics supplied.)
Subd. 2 thereof provides that the party applying for the inspection shall file a bond in the sum of $250 on condition that he shall pay the costs and expenses of the inspection in case he fails to maintain his contest.
Addressing ourselves to the contestant’s pleading in the light of the statutes, it is difficult indeed to characterize it as being more than a mere surmise that errors may have occurred in counting the ballots. In the light of the size of the vote and the margin of victory, this says no more than what any interested voter might also suspect. Under the most liberal application of our rules, it cannot be characterized as a proper pleading for it is not a statement of a claim which, if established by proof, would entitle the pleader to relief. A fair implication is that no investigation — other than a perusal of the declared results— has been made to determine whether any facts exist upon which the contestant can base a reasonable belief that errors did in fact occur. Although this may be commendable candor where no such investigation is in fact made and pleadings are required to be certified under Rule 11 of Rules of Civil Procedure, such candor can hardly supply the basis upon which a court can assume jurisdiction over the proceedings.
If we disregard the speculative nature of the notice and imply from it that contestant contended that a recount would result in his being declared the victor, we might say that he has specified, as a point upon which the contest will be made, a possible “irregularity” in the counting of the votes. But, even then, it falls far short of alleging, directly or upon information and belief as required by the clear language of § 209.02, subd. 1, any grounds upon which the contest can be
*400brought. Nor could it be said to comply with Rule 8.01 of Rules of Civil Procedure as being “(1) a short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief and (2) a demand for judgment for the relief to which he deems himself entitled, * * Modern rules of pleading condemn technicalities and, we believe, justifiably require a disregard for the niceties worshipped under the common-law rules of pleading;3 but we have not yet reached the point where a mere written surmise is regarded as sufficient to invoke jurisdiction.
Contestant correctly asserts, under Moon v. Harris, 122 Minn. 138, 142 N. W. 12, that all that need be done is to apprise the adversary of the grounds of the contest so that he may be given a fair opportunity to meet asserted claims.4 The proposed amendments to contestant’s notice are a good illustration of how this can be accomplished and also of the varied attacks which may be made in a contest limited only to a recount of votes. Doubtless the general language of the proposed amendments could bring before the court many problems not specifically set forth because realistically all of them cannot be known until the ballots are inspected. But the deficiency in the language of this notice is manifest since it does not give the least intimation to contestee of even one error in counting or tabulating the votes or registering the voters known or reasonably believed to exist, much less even suspected to exist.
Clearly under the statutes, an election contest could be limited to one ground or one specified point. One of these could be errors in counting the votes, mathematical in nature or otherwise. However, when § 209.02, subds. 1 and 2, and § 209.04 are read in conjunction with § 209.06, subd. 1, it is clear that the legislature did not intend that such an allegation alone would entitle a contestant as of right to an inspection of the ballots. The plain language of § 209.06 presupposes a contest already instituted and, therefore, allows inspection only upon the court’s acquiring jurisdiction of the contest and then only upon a showing that an inspection is needed to prepare for trial. O’Gor-man v. Richter, 31 Minn. 25, 16 N. W. 416. Contestant apparently *401misperceives this requirement, for his notice is more in the nature of a petition for inspection of ballots than a pleading instituting an election contest designed only to secure such inspection. There may be little question that the fact of the close vote alone would compel a court to grant an inspection if it had acquired jurisdiction to exercise such discretion. But it takes little imagination to visualize a case where a recount could be resorted to as a mere “fishing expedition.”5
If the legislature desired to provide for a recount of votes independent of an authorized election contest, as has been done in some states, it could easily have done so, vesting supervision of such a recount in a court or a commission. That the legislature has not done so is a recognition of the facts that a recount is inextricably interwoven with problems other than a mere retabulation and that the most superficial inspection would trigger questions which could best be resolved in a judicial proceeding. To invoke a court’s jurisdiction, open the ballots, and subject to scrutiny the acts of sworn officials, to expose the contestee to considerable expense, and to affect the public interest by preventing the declared winner from taking office during the delay occasioned by the proceeding is surely too great a price to pay for honoring a defeated candidate’s desire to inspect the ballots in order to marshal evidence upon which to justify instituting an election contest. This principle should not lose its force, even though the election is extremely close, under the guise of extolling an equally important principle that all should be done to ascertain the true vote so as to give effect to the will of the voters. Most important, it would be contrary to the express intention of the legislature.
We adhere to our declaration in Moon v. Harris, 122 Minn. 138, 140, 142 N. W. 12, 13, primarily relied on by contestant, that the notice should be “an aid, not a hindrance, to a fair investigation.” That case, however, is clearly distinguishable in that the pleader did allege that he was entitled to be declared elected and did allege the fact that ballots cast were erroneously counted and returned in favor of his opponent. To say he was pleading what he did not, or could not, *402know is to make an assumption not supported by the decision or by the common experience of pleading ultimate facts in cases where such facts are frequently unascertainable before suit is started. It is still not at all uncommon to plead many facts or claims on information and belief.
Finally, each house of the legislature possesses the constitutional prerogative under Minn. Const, art. 4, § 3, of being the ultimate judge of who shall be seated as a member. A judicial review of an election contest for a legislative office is but an intermediate aid to the exercise of that plenary power. Contrary to contestant’s view, the senate, in the exercise of that power, could order a recount denied by a court in the same way that it could seat one who was judicially declared to have received the highest votes and to be entitled to the certificate of election. In delegating to the courts authority to entertain election contests for a legislative office, the legislature has a right to demand, and certainly to expect, that there be strict adherence to any statutory restrictions placed upon the jurisdiction of the courts. It is only by scrupulous adherence to expressed legislative intent that the decision of the courts in this special type of proceeding finds acceptance by the branches of our legislature. In this way such judicial review becomes an aid and not a hindrance to the proper exercise of final authority by the senate and the house in resolving election contests by candidates for legislative office. To uphold this notice of election contest, which could hardly allege less by way of grounds for challenge of a declared result, would be to disregard the plain jurisdictional limits placed on the exercise of delegated power.
Much as we regret to decide any case on a question of pleading, we are constrained to hold that a notice of contest designed to limit the contest to a recount of the votes cast, which fails to allege any irregularities either in the conduct of the election or the canvass of votes, or any violation of the election law, by a plain statement showing that the contestant is entitled to a decree changing the declared result of the election, is a nullity and insufficient to invoke the jurisdiction of the court. It is to be emphasized that we are not declaring what must be alleged but that what was alleged is insufficient.
*403Section 209.04 does authorize amendments of the notice but we take it as conceded by contestant on argument that jurisdictional deficiencies in the notice of contest cannot be supplied by amendment after the time for filing the original notice of contest has expired. We are committed to the rule, universally followed, that where amendments to a pleading allege jurisdictional grounds not previously alleged in the initial pleading, the court cannot appropriate to itself jurisdiction which the law does not give by permitting such amendments after the time for initiating the proceeding has expired. In other words, a sufficient statutory notice of election contest must exist before the power to grant an amendment can be exercised. Strom v. Lindstrom, 201 Minn. 226, 275 N. W. 833.6
Affirmed.
Minn. St. 209.04.
Phillips v. Ericson, 248 Minn. 452, 80 N. W. (2d) 513; 18 Am. Jur. Elections, § 275.
See, e. g., Soper v. County of Sibley, 46 Minn. 274, 48 N. W. 1112.
See, also, Taylor v. Taylor, 10 Minn. 81 (107).
Mr. Justice Mitchell in O’Gorman v. Richter, 31 Minn. 25, 28, 16 N. W. 416, 417.
See, also, Doelling v. Board of Education, 17 Ill. (2d) 145, 160 N. E. (2d) 801; Williams v. O’Neill, 142 Ohio St. 467, 52 N. E. (2d) 858.

=== CASE 9738801 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:02.579337+00 ===

Otis, Justice
(dissenting).
I agree with the majority of the court that authorizing an election contest affecting legislative office is a right which may be granted or withheld at the will of the legislature; that a recount is merely ancillary to the judicial proceedings; and that as a matter of public policy contests which are based on pure speculation should be discouraged. However, taking the statutes by their four corners, I am not persuaded that the legislature intended to limit a recount to the precincts where a contestant shows concrete, tangible evidence of error.
Minn. St. 209.02 requires only that the contestant specify the points on which the contest is to be made. However ineptly drafted, the notice in the instant case specifies that—
“* * * the only question is as to which of the Parties in said Senatorial Contest received the highest number of votes legally cast * * * »»
It seems clear that the contestant Christenson claims only mathematical errors. The contestee Allen seems to concede that had such errors been alleged on information and belief rather than by asserting that “[pjlaintiff has reason to believe that possible errors could have *404occurred in the counting of ballots,” the court would have had jurisdiction. In my opinion the distinction is entirely one of form and not of substance.
In order to marshal the kind of substantial evidence of error which would justify an unqualified allegation conforming to Rule 11 of Rules of Civil Procedure, a candidate would ordinarily be required to invoke § 204.16 and furnish a challenger in every precinct in his district in order to conduct an independent canvass contemporaneously with that undertaken by the official members of the canvassing board.1 This I submit is wholly unrealistic and a complete departure from existing practice.
That it is not a matter of legislative policy that recounts be conducted only where a candidate has tangible evidence of error is apparent from the language of § 209.06. That statute authorizes an inspection of the ballots in whatever precincts either party desires to designate, regardless of whether they are precincts in which a party in his original petition has alleged that errors occurred. For example, it is not my understanding that the contestant in the current gubernatorial contest was obliged to allege irregularities in every precinct of the state in order to secure the statewide recount which is now in progress. If it was the intention of the legislature to permit a total recount under these conditions, it occurs to me that logically they did not intend to preclude this procedure in initiating an original action where there is manifestly an equal probability of error.
For us to determine judicially that there is no basis for alleging the likelihood of an erroneous determination of an election result, where a change of 34 votes or 1/10 of 1 percent would reverse the outcome, is to blind ourselves to all the realities of the election processes, particularly where a great many paper ballots are used. I believe we can take judicial notice that in the situation confronting us there were sufficient errors to justify a contest.
*405As we said, in Moon v. Harris, 122 Minn. 138, 140, 142 N. W. 12, 13:
“* * * This court has never been averse to the allowance of a fair opportunity of ascertaining the actual result of an election. The important thing is that the truth be ascertained and the will of the voters be given effect; * *
K it had been the purpose of the legislature to confer jurisdiction only where specific errors in specific precincts have been ascertained and alleged, it seems to me the statute would have been so drafted. However, having sanctioned a recount in precincts where no allegation of error is required, the legislature, I believe, has indicated an intention to give the statute a liberal construction so that doubts in the outcome of an election may be judicially resolved and the true vote of the people determined.
Minn. St. 204.16, subd. 2. “At any election each nonpartisan candidate may appoint by written certificate, and the judges shall permit, one voter for each precinct to be in the polling place while the election is being held and to remain with the election board until the votes are canvassed and the results declared, to act as challenger of voters.”

=== CASE 2217711 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:33.346032+00 ===

264 Minn. 234 (1962)
119 N.W. (2d) 180
JANE ANN LIEBERMAN, A MINOR, BY NORTON C. LIEBERMAN, AND ANOTHER
v.
HARRY KORSH AND OTHERS.
No. 38,506.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
December 7, 1962.
*235 Phillips & Gross, for appellants.
Carroll, Thorson, Anderson & Cronan and Herbert C. Davis, for respondents Korsh.
Diessner, McEachron, Wurst, Bundlie & Carroll and John A. McEachron, Jr., for respondents Bellman.
MURPHY, JUSTICE.
This case is before us on appeal from an order of the district court denying plaintiffs' motion for a new trial. It involves a claim for personal injuries sustained in an automobile accident and a claim for medical expenses incurred as a result. The plaintiffs complain that the verdict is inadequate in that the jury denied damages for asserted permanent injuries. Numerous errors are assigned, the principal one of which is that the court's instructions were erroneous and prejudicial.
The action is brought by Norton C. Lieberman as the father of his minor daughter, Jane. At the time she sustained her asserted injuries she was 14 years of age and a guest in an automobile owned by the defendant Harry Korsh, which was operated with his permission by his son, Ronald Korsh. The accident occurred on August 16, 1958, at about 11:30 p.m. when the Korsh automobile collided with a *236 telephone pole at a street corner in the city of St. Louis Park. It seems to be conceded that the accident occurred through the negligence of the driver.
It appears from the record that at the time of the accident Jane occupied the front seat, and when the collision occurred, she was thrown against the front of the automobile and suffered bruises to her chest and to her left knee, one of her front teeth was chipped, and she suffered a laceration of the lower right lip. There was no evidence that she was rendered unconscious, and beyond the injuries already described the record establishes no more than that she was left in a dazed condition due to the injury and shock following the collision. After the accident she was taken to the hospital in an ambulance. She remained there overnight and was attended by the family physician. No internal injuries were found and she was accordingly discharged the next day. While she was in the hospital, no examination was made for head injuries. She stayed at home for a week following the accident because she didn't feel well. She testified, "I was tired, and I had kind of a headache and everything, and my lip looked ishy." Her mother called the family physician several times and reported that Jane was having occasional headaches. Simple headache remedies were prescribed. Jane stated that on October 22, 1958, while at the home of a friend who had been ill, she felt dizzy and she lost consciousness and fell. A witness testified, "She fell straight down, * * * stiffly * * *, her eyes kind of blinked and her cheek twitched." Although two other persons witnessed this incident, which is characterized by the plaintiffs as an epileptic seizure, the record does not indicate that they were called to testify.
After the incident of October 22, her parents consulted Dr. Shapiro, a neurologist. Dr. Shapiro testified that he took Jane's past medical history, from which it appeared that she commenced to complain of headaches about September 3, 1958. These headaches occurred daily but were not severe. They were described as being mainly frontal and temporal in location and were relieved by aspirin. She had dizzy spells of brief duration. In these spells she experienced the phenomena of Deja Vu, which the doctor described as a feeling of familiarity or past experience in situations where she had been for the first time. *237 She complained of intermittent low back and shoulder pains. Dr. Shapiro concluded that the spell or seizure of October 22, when she apparently fainted and lost consciousness, resulted from a disordered brain condition. He was of the belief that aside from the injury sustained in the accident there was nothing in her past medical history which could account for this condition. She was accordingly hospitalized at Mount Sinai Hospital from October 24, 1958, to November 1, 1958. During this time certain tests, including electroencephalographic studies and X-rays, were made. It appears that the electroencephalogram is one of a number of recognized tests used in the detection of brain injuries. By use of small metal discs or needles which are applied to the scalp in places which correspond to different parts of the underlying brain, the brain waves are electronically recorded by an ink writer on a chart. It appears that by this process abnormal functioning of the brain may be detected. On the basis of the tests given, Dr. Shapiro came to the conclusion that Jane suffered from post traumatic epilepsy, which accounted for the headaches, sensations, and spells of which she complained. After making this diagnosis, Dr. Shapiro prescribed a course of treatment calculated to prevent a recurrence of the episode of October 22. Anticonvulsant medicine was prescribed. The patient was advised to avoid emotional stress, keep regular hours, to abstain from the use of alcohol, and not to engage in such physical activities as swimming or driving an automobile.
In the course of the examination and treatment Jane visited Dr. Shapiro's office on 31 occasions. During that interval the medication was varied from time to time. Dr. Shapiro was of the view that the continued use of anticonvulsant medication has prevented the recurrence of the spell or seizure experienced on October 22. He expressed the opinion that the brain injury, which he characterized as post traumatic epilepsy, was a direct result of the injury sustained in the automobile accident of August 16, 1958. He was of the opinion that the condition was "persistent and permanent." He explained that her epilepsy was of the temporal lobe type which manifests itself in an abnormal discharge of a group of nerve centers and that in this type of epilepsy there may be transient attacks of dizziness or it may result in a psychic phenomena which would account for her experience *238 of Deja Vu. The medication prescribed was calculated to "keep down the amount of abnormal discharges so the discharge doesn't spread and produce unconsciousness." He explained that as a result of the trauma certain tissues in the nervous system had been destroyed, leaving scar tissue which irritates the surrounding nerve cells. This condition, he said, was permanent, and as to future medical expense he predicted, "Well, assuming that she runs a most favorable course, it would be a minimum of about $100 a year."
Dr. Fernando Torres, assistant professor of neurology and head of the electroencephalography laboratory at the University of Minnesota, also testified in behalf of the plaintiffs. He examined the electroencephalograms introduced in evidence and expressed the opinion that they ranged from abnormal to markedly abnormal. He expressed the opinion that Jane was suffering from an illness. He said, "I don't think I can say what the illness is; I don't think I can tell what the illness is. I know the patient has something abnormal, I can tell from that." He further expressed the opinion that the abnormalities were caused by the accident.
The defense vigorously attacked the conclusions of the plaintiffs' medical experts. This attack was directed to the absence of evidence of a trauma to the head of sufficient force to cause a concussion which would produce the grave injury of which the minor plaintiff complains.[1] Moreover, the defense emphasizes that aside from the medical history testified to by the plaintiffs' expert there is a paucity of evidence bearing upon the spells or seizures of which the girl complained. Two neurologists who testified for the defense discounted the value of the electroencephalographic tests. They agreed that while the results of these tests showed some abnormality, they were nevertheless within the range which might be expected from a test taken of a girl of Jane's age. One of the doctors testified:
"First of all, the head injury was minor, did not produce any loss of consciousness. Secondly, the picture we see in the electroencephalogram is not consistent, as far as I am concerned, with a head injury *239 of the magnitude that she had. The electroencephalogram showed changes in all areas, which would not be consistent with a blow to the head or a blow to the jaw to drive a tooth through the jaw. It would be even difficult to subscribe to this to even a severe head injury because of the multiple changes all over the head from side to side from different times. * * * It is my feeling that this represents the 15% of people that have abnormal electroencephalograms. To some degree or another, it varies in some studies as high as 40% that certain types of individuals have abnormal EEGs. And I do not believe that these represent an abnormality as a result of the accident."
He expressed the opinion:
"* * * It is my feeling that this simply represents Jane's electroencephalogram. These abnormalities often appear in the individuals that are going to have the abnormalities about the time of puberty. * * * they are related to hormonal changes within the body, affecting the * * * electrical chemical changes within the brain, because the entire body is changed at that time and the brain is changed at that time, too."
The jury returned a verdict in favor of Jane in the sum of $750. The jury also returned a verdict in favor of her father, Norton C. Lieberman, in the sum of $400.05. This included the sum of $104 for services of Dr. Perlman, the family physician; $250 to Dr. Chesler, who performed surgery on Jane's lip; and $46.05, the original hospital bill. It is apparent from the verdict that the jury rejected as special damages the claim for services of Dr. Shapiro and the cost incurred in connection with the electroencephalograms and other tests and treatment relating to the alleged epileptic condition. It is also apparent that general damages for the asserted epilepsy were also denied. The verdict in Jane's favor for $750 obviously would not go beyond compensating her for pain, suffering, bruises, and the disfigurement to her lip.
It is plaintiffs' contention that the verdict is manifestly contrary to the evidence and that the jury failed to return a verdict for the actual special damages and for general damages resulting from the asserted *240 epileptic condition because of the erroneous instructions given by the trial court.
1. Preliminary to discussion of the trial court's instructions in this case it should be noted that an appellate court should view the instructions as far as possible from the standpoint of the total impact or impression upon the jury. The real test is "what might the jury have understood from the language of the court?" Mailand v. Mailand, 83 Minn. 453, 455, 86 N.W. 445; Geddes v. Van Rhee, 126 Minn. 517, 148 N.W. 549. In Zurko v. Gilquist, 241 Minn. 1, 5, 62 N.W. (2d) 351, 354, we said:
"* * * in construing a jury charge as a whole, it must be scrutinized and tested from the standpoint of its total impact or impression upon the jury. If as a whole its impact gives the jury an erroneous conception of the controlling principles of law, then it cannot be defended and found sufficient as a whole by a careful analysis of the technical relations of its various provisions to each other when such technical relationships would not reasonably have been apparent to the jury."
With these principles in mind we have carefully examined the court's instructions. After correctly charging the jury on the subject of negligence, the court went on to discuss the subject of damages as bearing upon the elements of pain and suffering and disfigurement. The jury was told that the father would be entitled to recover for expenditures made in connection with "care by doctors reasonably required and actually given in the treatment * * * including * * * X-ray pictures, if any, the reasonable value of hospital accommodations and care, if any, reasonably required and actually given in the treatment of said plaintiff." The trial court then instructed on the issue of damages for permanent injuries and correctly told the jury that plaintiffs were required to prove by a fair preponderance of the evidence to a reasonable certainty that the injuries were permanent and the direct and proximate result of the accident. The jury was then told:
"In that connection, I will point out to the jury that mention was made by counsel for the plaintiff in his closing argument that this would be a barrier to employment, and a problem in marriage. That is not properly a question for consideration, in the consideration of *241 damage in this particular case, because it has not been revealed by the evidence as being a question involved in this particular case."
It is the foregoing instruction that the plaintiffs contend is responsible for the fact that the jury did not return a verdict which might compensate the plaintiffs for permanent injuries and future medical expense.
2. It was not necessary for the plaintiffs to introduce specific evidence bearing upon the loss of future earning capacity. We must conclude that it was error to instruct the jury that no recovery could be had even though, as the court expressed it, the girl's injuries would be a "barrier to employment," because "it has not been revealed by the evidence as being a question involved in this particular case." It would be unlikely that a girl 14 years of age, without a record of past earnings, would be able to introduce specific evidence as to impairment of earning capacity, which is an item of general damages. We held in Wilson v. Sorge, 256 Minn. 125, 97 N.W. (2d) 477, and Zaikaner v. Small, 256 Minn. 275, 98 N.W. (2d) 247, that recovery may be had for impairment of future earning capacity notwithstanding the absence of evidence to show what the injured person could or would have earned if he had not been injured. In the Wilson case we said (256 Minn. 132, 97 N.W. [2d] 483):
"* * * impairment of earning capacity is an item of general damages. It permits recovery for a loss or diminution of the power to earn in the future and is based upon such factors as the plaintiff's age, life expectancy, health, habits, occupation, talents, skill, experience, training, and industry."
If the jury had found that the injuries complained of were proximately caused by the accident, they could determine under the circumstances of this case the amount of damages after considering the elements above stated.
It is conceded by counsel for defendants that on the basis of the record a question of fact was presented as to whether or not Jane sustained a post traumatic epilepsy which would entitle her to damages for permanent injuries. If the jury in fact believed the medical experts who testified for the injured girl, they would, in fixing damages, be entitled to consider the effects of the injury as bearing upon impairment *242 of her future earning capacity. Moreover, if they chose to believe Jane's claims as to the nature of the injury, they could consider how it would affect her future life, both in employment and social relationships. We cannot escape the conclusion that the effect of the instruction was not only to remove from consideration by the jury an important element of damages but to lead the jury to believe as well that other items of permanent damage, including impairment of mental capacity and future medical expense, were also removed from their consideration.
It is the contention of the defendants that the verdict definitely establishes that the jury rejected Jane's theory that her condition was caused by the accident. This claim is based upon the fact that the jury did not include in its verdict those special damages which related to the care and treatment of Jane's epileptic complaints. While this fact is self-evident, we cannot safely assume that the jury's action in so finding was prompted by their belief that the plaintiffs' claims were so farfetched as to be unworthy of credence. The jury's action could have been prompted by the instruction to the effect that no recovery could be had for impairment of her capacity to make a living or impairment of her prospects of marriage. The jury could well have understood from such an instruction that the entire issue of permanent damage was out of the case. We cannot say from an examination of the charge as a whole that the plaintiffs were not prejudiced by this instruction. Since the instruction was erroneous and we are unable to determine its effect, a new trial must be granted.
Reversed.
NOTES
[1]  The record does not contain information as to the speed of the car or force of the collision at time of impact.

=== CASE 2217715 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:33.429154+00 ===

387 N.E.2d 440 (1978)
Robert Lee JONES, Appellant (Defendant below),
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee (Plaintiff below).
No. 1077S770.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
December 21, 1978.
Harriette Bailey Conn, Public Defender, K. Richard Payne, Sp. Asst. Public Defender, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Theo. L. Sendak, Atty. Gen., Rollin E. Thompson, Asst. Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee.
HUNTER, Justice.
The defendant, Robert Lee Jones, was charged by grand jury indictment on alternative counts of felony murder and second-degree murder in 1973. At the arraignment proceeding, the defendant was permitted to plead guilty to the second-degree murder charge in exchange for a dismissal *441 of the felony murder charge and a separate cause for armed robbery. He was sentenced to life imprisonment and filed a petition for post-conviction relief in December, 1975. The hearing on this petition was held in August, 1976, and the petition was denied.
The defendant was then granted permission to file a belated appeal, and he has now raised the issues of ineffective representation of counsel at the time of entering his guilty plea and his failure to meet his burden of proof at the post-conviction relief hearing.
The incident which was the basis of these charges was the shooting death of Kenneth Hegerfeld which occurred during the robbery of a tavern in Ft. Wayne. At the time of the guilty plea proceedings, the defendant stated that he participated in the robbery with his sister and another man. He stated that while he was in the tavern, he saw the front door open and fired at a man who was leaving. He then ran outside and shot again at the fleeing man. Hegerfeld was killed by a shot in the back of the head. This account of the incident was corroborated by the investigating police officer. There were around thirty witnesses to these events, including Hegerfeld's wife who was in the tavern at the time of the robbery. Police statements from these witnesses all indicated that defendant was the one who did the shooting.
Defendant first contends that he was denied his constitutional right to the effective assistance of counsel because his court-appointed counsel did not fully explain the consequences of the guilty plea, did not thoroughly interview him, and allowed his mother to help him make critical decisions. It has long been established that there is a presumption that counsel is competent and that strong and convincing evidence is required to rebut the presumption. McFarland v. State, (1978) Ind., 381 N.E.2d 1061; Roberts v. State, (1977) Ind., 360 N.E.2d 825.
Incompetency of counsel revolves around the particular facts of each case and the actions or inactions of the attorney must have made the proceedings a mockery of justice before incompetence will be found. This Court will not speculate as to what may have been the most advantageous strategy in a particular case. Cottingham v. State, (1978) Ind., 379 N.E.2d 984; Dull v. State, (1978) Ind., 372 N.E.2d 171.
The record in the instant case shows that defendant's attorney had several conferences with the defendant, his mother, his sister's attorney, and the prosecutor's office in connection with this case. The attorney was careful to include defendant's mother in the conferences because defendant was only sixteen at the time of the robbery. This protection of defendant's rights as a juvenile cannot now be claimed as a denial of other constitutional rights. Defendant's attorney also went over the statements of all the witnesses present in the tavern at the time of the robbery and found that these statements were consistent in describing defendant as the one who did the shooting.
The attorney arranged for defendant to be examined by two psychiatrists and discussed their reports with the defendant and his mother. He discussed the guilty plea arrangements with both the defendant and his mother and carefully pointed out that the state would accept a plea to second-degree murder but would insist on the full penalty of life imprisonment and not the alternative penalty of fifteen to twenty-five years. The record shows more than adequate investigation, consultation, and careful explanation of the guilty plea arrangements by defendant's attorney and does not support defendant's claim of ineffective assistance.
Defendant further urges this Court to change the existing "mockery of justice" standard for ineffective assistance of counsel. As we have pointed out in Cottingham, supra, we have already modified this standard in Thomas v. State, (1969) 251 Ind. 546, 242 N.E.2d 919, where we held:
"It is reversible error not to provide a defendant in a criminal prosecution with *442 adequate legal representation at each stage of the proceeding...." 251 Ind. at 557, 242 N.E.2d at 925.
The "mockery of justice" standard, modified with the "adequate legal representation" of Thomas, supra, insures that defendants will receive competent legal representation.
The defendant also alleges that his guilty plea was involuntary because of the ineffective representation of his counsel. This contention is not persuasive since we have already found that defendant had more than adequate representation. Furthermore, the record shows that the trial court conducted a very lengthy and careful discussion with defendant before he accepted the guilty plea. All requirements of Ind. Code § 35-4.1-1-3 to § 35-4.1-1-5 were carefully met by the court. There is nothing in the record to support defendant's claim of an involuntary plea.
The defendant's final contention of error is that his post-conviction relief petition should not have been denied for failure to carry his burden of proof. However, defendant did not cite any authority or present any argument on this issue and it is therefore waived. Ind.R.Ap.P. 8.3(A)(7); Murphy v. State, (1977) Ind., 369 N.E.2d 411; Ballard v. State, (1974) 262 Ind. 482, 318 N.E.2d 798. It is also obvious that his self-serving story that he was paid to take the blame for someone else in this incident had been investigated at the time of the original guilty plea and no substantial new evidence was presented at the post-conviction relief hearing.
For all the foregoing reasons, there was no trial court error and the judgment of the trial court should be affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
GIVAN, C.J., and DeBRULER, PRENTICE and PIVARNIK, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9738803 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:03:07.881409+00 ===

Thompson, J.
— The plaintiffs are beneficiaries in a policy of insurance issued by the defendant upon the life of their son, LeRoy Leo Bill, who died on January 12, 1961. Liability being denied by the insurer, this action was brought by the plaintiffs. *1217The defendant alleged that the death of the insured was the result of' suicide, which raises the only substantial question in the case. There is no denial of the issuance of the policy or that it was otherwise in effect on the date of LeRoy Bill’s death; nor is there any contention that the policy was not voided under its terms if death was brought about by suicide. The trial court held that the question of suicide was for the determination of the jury and submitted it accordingly. The jury returned its verdict for the plaintiffs, judgment was rendered on the verdict, and we have this appeal. The defendant contends it was entitled to a peremptory verdict; it raised the question in various ways, and also challenges certain rulings on evidence and instructions given the jury.
The evidence disclosed that LeRoy, a 17-year-old boy approximately five feet eleven inches tall, weighing about two hundred and eight pounds, had been employed as a farmhand by Howard Niedert, a farmer residing near Riceville, Iowa, since September 21, 1960. He did chores and all types of fieldwork, usually working with Mr. Niedert. He was furnished a room of his own and spent his weekends at home. He was a good and willing worker and was careful with machinery and good to the stock. He got along well with the Niedert children and was treated like one of the family. He appeared happy and content with his work. He was exceptionally strong, and liked to display feats of strength, such as breaking binder twine and boards with his hands. He sometimes tried to do tasks Mr. Niedert himself had been unable to do. While he did not have many close friends, no one disliked him and he enjoyed his family and friends. On the day of his death he stopped at a neighbor’s home and asked them over to play cards. They could not come but made tentative arrangements to come over the next night. He had recently purchased his first automobile and, although it was a used model, was very proud of it. His health had been very good and he was not in debt. He had two or three guns and liked to hunt and fish. At a family gathering a few days before his death he made plans to do some ice fishing with his uncle.
On the late afternoon- of January 12, 1961, he was engaged in doing the chores and, when Mrs. Niedert arrived home about *1218five o’clock she talked with him. She observed nothing unusual about him and he went on about his tasks. She later saw him riding a saddle horse driving the cattle from the pasture, and that was the last anyone saw him alive. Apparently all the chores had been done except for the task of throwing down some hay or straw from the barn loft.
When Mr. Niedert arrived home about six o’clock that evening, LeRoy had not returned to the house for his evening meal. When the lad had not appeared by 6:30 Niedert went to look for him and observed a light on in the barn. Upon entering the door he saw LeRoy’s legs extending through a small opening 22"x20" in the floor of the haymow, used to lower bales of hay and straw for the stock. He thought LeRoy was sitting on the loft floor asleep, until he climbed the ladder in another chute to the floor above. Then “he could see the string to him and went over to him.” The “string” was a piece of binder twine tied to an overhead two- by eight-inch beam some five feet and eleven inches above the floor, and attached to LeRoy’s neck by a noose. Mr. Niedert felt the boy’s neck, realized it was too- late to give him aid and returned to the house. The authorities and LeRoy’s parents were called and arrived a short time thereafter.
LeRoy’s parents, the plaintiffs herein, arrived first but only Mr. Bill entered the barn. He went no1 closer than the top of the ladder to the second floor and then returned to the house. When Deputy Sheriff Don L. Powers and Dr. Willis K. Dankle, the county medical examiner, arrived they went to the bam loft and found LeRoy’s body as Mr. Niedert had discovered it. They cut the twine and laid the lad on the loft floor to await the undertaker. When they did so there was a sudden expulsion of air from the lungs indicating LeRoy had held his breath until a stricture on the windpipe caused by the twine prevented its escape. The noose was tied with a square knot, not a slipknot. The body was almost straight with the legs extending through the opening in the floor, and the hands to the side on or near the loft floor as though he had pushed' off from a sitting position. The body from approximately the knees -up was above the bottom' part of the opening. The noose around his head was 29 inches in circumference and the knot was against *1219bis cap, which was still on, not against his head or neck. There was no indication of a struggle and the chaff around the hole was not disturbed.
It also appeared there was another piece of binder twine attached to the same beam. It had been broken, and nearby was a piece of twine with a noose tied with a slipknot, which plaintiffs maintain disclosed a prior ^unpleasant experiment terminated by LeRoy’s ability to break the twine with his hands.
It further appeared many pieces of twine were hung in the loft, for the bales of hay and straw were usually opened there. No rope was kept in the loft but some was in the barn, and Le-Roy knew where it was and how to use it. Thus plaintiffs contend if he had wished to hang himself he would not have depended upon small binder twine, but would have used a strong rope and a larger opening to have accomplished the deed.
The medical examiner testified the twine would have broken had LeRoy stepped off into the hole, and that he had to let himself down carefully, that death was caused by asphyxiation, that the asphyxiation was due to the constricting twine around the neck, that pressure on the throat applied in this manner “could cause practically immediate unconsciousness”, and that if the immediate unconsciousness had not ensued, there would have been a gradual strangulation, with ■ a struggle resulting. This a resolute will could overcome, but normally a person would struggle. It was the examiner’s opinion “that the injury involved was self-inflicted.”
The evidence further disclosed that LeRoy had finished the eighth grade with some difficulty, that intelligence tests showed him below average, that he desired to follow farm work, was a member of the Alta Yista Lutheran Church, and drank neither beer nor alcohol. He was a happy-go-lucky fellow, liked to watch television, and seemed to all witnesses who observed him near the date of this tragedy to then be his normal self. Mr. Niedert and Mr. and Mrs. Bill testified they knew of no reason why LeRoy might intentionally take'his'life.
I. Thé defendant contends that the record facts make such a clear case of suicide that it was entitled to a directed *1220verdict. The burden was upon it to support its affirmative defense, and it thinks it did so. We have held in proper cases that suicide may be so clearly shown that the trial court should hold it established as a matter of law. Inghram v. National Union, 103 Iowa 395, 72 N.W. 559; Beverly v. Supreme Tent, 115 Iowa 524, 88 N.W. 1054; Gavin v. Des Moines Life Ins. Co., 149 Iowa 152, 126 N.W. 906; Warner v. Equitable Life Ins. Co., 219 Iowa 916, 258 N.W. 75,
But generally the question of suicide has been held to be for the jury. The plaintiffs’ case is fortified by the presumption against suicide. We have said “The presumption against suicide is a strong one.” Brown v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 233 Iowa 5, 10, 7 N.W.2d 21, 24. We have also held that it has the effect of evidence. Brown v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., supra; Allison v. Bankers Life Co., 230 Iowa 995, 999, 299 N.W. 889, 891; Reddick v. Grand Union Tea Co., 230 Iowa 108, 119, 296 N.W. 800, 805.
The presumption is based on inferences arising from the known love of life and the instinct of self-preservation, the fact that suicide is opposed to- the general conduct of mankind and that it involves moral turpitude. While the presumption is not conclusive and may in exceptional cases be overcome as a matter of law, this is not ordinarily so ; and it may be strengthened by other evidence tending to show lack of motive for suicide or other facts which would make it unlikely.
We have discussed this question often. Holloway v. Bankers Life Co., 248 Iowa 517, 527, 81 N.W.2d 453, 459; Brown v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., supra; Michalek v. Modern Brotherhood of America, 179 Iowa 33, 42, 43, 161 N.W. 125, 129; Tackman v. Brotherhood of American Yeomen, 132 Iowa 64, 68, 106 N.W. 350, 351, 8 L. R. A., N. S., 974. In the latter case the facts were to a considerable extent similar to those in the case at bar. There the decedent-insured was found hanging in the barn from a harness strap. There was some evidence that he had some financial and health difficulties; but we held the question of suicide was for the jury.
In the -instant case, the facts would undoubtedly support a verdict of suicide; but they do not require it. No motive *1221for suicide appears. There is evidence that LeRoy Bill was proud of his strength; that he had made plans for the ensuing evening; he had no worries, financial or otherwise; he seemed to enjoy or at least be satisfied with his work. An inference that he was trying some sort of experiment to test and prove his strength in breaking the twine placed around his neck, and that it in some manner went wrong, is not too remote. To strengthen this there is the medical testimony that it would be possible the pressure on the throat could have caused instant unconsciousness. And it is also a fair argument that if he had intended suicide he would have used a stronger rope rather than the binder twine. All of these things strengthen the presumption against suicide, and support the trial court in its submission of the case to the jury. We find no error at this point.
II. Further error is assigned upon the refusal of the trial court to admit the testimony of the medical examiner, Dr. Willis K. Dankle, as to a conversation he had with plaintiff Ernest Bill in the presence of the other plaintiff, Norma Bill. Doctor Dankle testified that he had such a conversation at the Niedert farm on the evening after the death of LeRoy Bill. To the question “What was said at that time?” he answered “I asked him if there were any doubt in his mind that his son committed suicide.” Then came a motion from plaintiffs’ counsel to strike “as a conclusion and opinion on his part, in no way binding on this plaintiff, and certainly improper in a civil suit, what the man said at the time, what the doctor said.” The court said: “Well, I think that originated with this witness and not with the plaintiffs. I think under the — ”. Taking this as an expression of intent to sustain the motion to strike, defendant’s counsel said “Your Honor, we would like to make an offer of proof in chambers.” This was agreed to by the court, and later, in chambers, Doctor Dankle was interrogated in this way:
“Q. Doctor, did you have a conversation with Ernest Bill in the presence of Norma Bill at the Niedert farmhouse just before you left on the night of January 12th? A. Yes. Q. What did that conversation consist of m your part and on his? A. I said to Mr. Bill, Ts there any doubt in your mind that your son committed suicide?’ and if I might describe the sitúa*1222tion, lie and his wife were sitting at the table, mourning and tearful, and he just shook his head. Q. In what direction, Doctor, if you will say it so that the record can pick it up? A. A lateral motion of the head. Q. That is commonly interpreted as a negative sign? A. Which I interpreted as a negative sign.”
No objections were lodged by the plaintiffs until all of the foregoing questions had been asked and answered. Then counsel for plaintiffs said:
“We object to the proposed offer because there is no question that he died by his own hand. The issue in the case is whether his death was intention or unintentional.”
After some discussion not material here, the court ruled:
“Well, I will tell you, I am going to follow my judgment on this. I think that if the plaintiff had volunteered that there wasn’t any doubt in his mind the boy committed suicide that would be perfectly admissible but here we have got an entirely negative approach; somebody puts this subject of suicide out there in the form of a question; he doesn’t make any audible answer to it at all. I think there is too much ground for conjecture there on the part of the jury as to the implications they can draw from that. If this goes into the record it surely would be argued to the jury that he admitted that it was suicide and I don’t believe that is a fair inference to draw from this sort of thing. Now, if he had said, ‘No, there isn’t any doubt in my mind but what the boy committed suicide, everything tends to show that’, then I think you would have a different situation but here he doesn’t say anything. He shakes his head; maybe it was a negative shake, but he was under stress and strain here. The record shows that there was some mourning; there was some crying going on there at the table where the husband and wife sat. I just don’t believe that is enough that I dare let that go to the jury.
“My ruling is going to be that it is not going to be admitted.”
' It will be noted that no objections were made until all of the questions put to Doctor- Dankle had been asked and answered. There is no' doubt that the matter inquired into was *1223a proper one, and the doctor should have been permitted to answer all of the questions with the possible exception of the final one, which dealt with his interpretation of the negative sign, the headshake. That plaintiff Ernest Bill had no doubt his son had committed suicide was an admission against interest ; and the error of the court in excluding it was further compounded by the fact that both plaintiffs were permitted to testify, over objection, that they knew of no reason why their son should have intentionally taken his life. The excluded testimony would not only have shown an admission against interest, but would have tended to counter and contradict the testimony last above referred to.
Neither the plaintiffs’ motion to strike nor their objection made after all the offered questions had been answered raised any real or substantial question as to the validity of the testimony. Neither raised the point decided by the court, which seems to have been that the lateral motion of the head made by Ernest Bill was too uncertain in its meaning and so was so speculative the jury should not have been permitted to pass upon it. With this we do not agree. A nod of the head is universally understood to be an affirmative or “yes” answer; a shake of the head is equally well understood to mean a negative or “no” reply. It is true the lateral motion might in some circumstances mean merely bewilderment or confusion, an “I don’t know” answer. But this was an interpretation to be made by the jury.
However, although the point was not considered by the trial court and is not raised or argued by the plaintiff's here, it is suggested in this court that the offer of proof was an offer in bulk; and so, there being one question and answer ■ — -the last one — which was not competent, the entire offer was properly refused. It is true that although no proper objection is made, and even though the trial court gives a wrong reason for excluding evidence, if there is a valid basis for denying it admission, its exclusion is not reversible error. It is also correct that when an offer of proof is in bulk and some parts are improper, all may be excluded. Vandell v. Roewe, 232 Iowa 896, 898, 6 N.W.2d 295, 296, 297; Bates v. Brooks, 222 Iowa 1128. 1142. 270 N.W. 867. 874. 109 A. L. R. 1371.
*1224But in the instant ease the offer was by question and answer. Each question was tendered separately, and no objection was made until all had been offered. We know of no way in which the tendered evidence could have been further separated. The plaintiffs had their opportunity to object to each question as it was asked and before it was answered; and the court had the same opportunity to make its ruling on each question and answer, instead of excluding all of them as it did. It may be true that in Vandell v. Roewe, supra, the testimony was offered also by question and answer, and we said it was an offer in bullí; but we do not now agree with this holding. The evidence here was offered by separate questions and answers, readily subject to separate objections and separate rulings by the court.
The evidence was on an important point, and we cannot say it was not sufficiently prejudicial to require reversal. An admission by one of the plaintiffs, in the presence of the other, who made no objection or comment, that he had no doubt his son committed suicide, if so interpreted by the jury, would certainly have been an important matter for its consideration. Error appears at this point.
III. Further error is assigned by the defendant upon the giving of Instruction No. 3. The material part of the instruction is this: “In this connection you are instructed that in order to overcome the legal presumption against suicide the defendant must show, by a preponderance of the evidence, the existence of such circumstances and conditions concerning the death of the insured that every other cause of death than suicide has been excluded by the testimony and that no other reasonable hypothesis or theory as to the cause of death exists, among reasonable minds, except suicide; or, in other words, the testimony or proof produced by the defendant in order to overcome the legal presumption against suicide must be such that among reasonable minds every reasonable hypothesis or theory of death inconsistent with suicide has been excluded by the preponderance of defendant’s testimony.”
That the court was here following a rule of law laid down in several cases of this nature, involving defenses of suicide in *1225actions on life insurance policies, cannot be doubted. Stephenson v. Bankers Life Association, 108 Iowa 637, 641, 79 N.W. 459, 460; Wood v. Sovereign Camp of W. O. W., 166 Iowa 391, 399, 147 N.W. 888, 891; Michalek v. Modern Brotherhood of America, supra, loc. cit. 179 Iowa 40, 161 N.W. 128; Green v. New York Life Ins. Co., 192 Iowa 32, 39, 182 N.W. 808, 811 ; Wilkinson v. National Life Association, 208 Iowa 246, 248, 225 N.W. 242, 243. The frustration of a trial Judge who meticulously follows the law as laid down in the books, and then meets with reversal because the appellate court has changed its mind, is understandable. The rule of stare decisis, usually a dependable support for the trial court, on occasion proves to be a snare and a delusion. But this is an occupational hazard for trial Judges. Such is the situation here.
It will be noted that the evidence of suicide produced by the defendant, under this instruction and the last-cited cases, must be such as to exclude every reasonable hypothesis or theory of death inconsistent with suicide. Evidence tending to show suicide is in almost all cases circumstantial; and our general rule has been for many years that one who seeks to establish his case by such evidence is not required to exclude all other reasonable theories or hypotheses; only to prove his theory by evidence which makes it reasonably probable, and more probable than any other hypothesis based on such evidence. Almost innumerable cases might be cited on this point; but see Brower v. Quick, 249 Iowa 569, 575, 88 N.W.2d 120, 123; Bokhoven v. Hull, 247 Iowa 604, 607, 75 N.W.2d 225, 227; Soreide v. Vilas & Co., 247 Iowa 1139, 1150, 78 N.W.2d 41, 47; Hackman v. Beckwith, 245 Iowa 791, 795, 64 N.W.2d 275, 278; Allison v. Bankers Life Co., 230 Iowa 995, 1001, 299 N.W. 889, 893; and Latham v. Des Moines Electric Co., 229 Iowa 1199, 1207, 296 N.W. 372, 375.
The rule laid down by the court’s Instruction No. 3 seems to have come into our law first as a general rule of circumstantial evidence in Asbach v. The Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railway Co., 74 Iowa 248, 250, 37 N.W. 182, 184. It has long been abrogated in all civil cases involving circumstantial evidence, except in those involving the defense of suicide in actions on *1226life insurance policies. Why it has remained here is not clear, except that the question has apparently not been raised or considered. We see no reason why the insurer defending against a claim on a policy of life insurance on the ground that death resulted from suicide should be held to a rule so much stricter than any other litigant who relies on circumstantial evidence. In all other eases the circumstantial evidence need show only a hypothesis which is reasonably probable, not merely possible, and which is more probable than any other hypothesis based on such evidence; but the insurer in this class of cases must entirely exclude every other reasonable hypothesis.
The injustice of such a situation is apparent. The burden thrown on the defendant-insurer is much heavier than any other litigant is compelled to bear in establishing a theory by circumstantial evidence. We now overrule the holding of the Asbach case, supra; and the cited cases holding that an insurer defending on the ground of suicide must prove its theory by circumstantial evidence which excludes every other reasonably probable theory rather than by evidence which makes its theory not only reasonably probable, but more probable than any other theory based on such evidence.
IV. The offered certificate of the medical examiner should have been admitted in evidence, under Code section 339.9. It is true we held in Holloway v. Bankers Life Co., supra, loc. cit. 248 Iowa 528, 81 N.W.2d 460, that a coroner’s report was not admissible. But this was before the enactment of the County Medical Examiners law by the Fifty-eighth General Assembly. This Act went into effect on January 1, 1961, and is now found in chapter 339 of the Code. Section 339.9, supra, expressly provides that reports of investigations by the county medical examiner, and records and reports of autopsies made under his authority, shall be received in evidence. The trial court was of the opinion that any error arising from the denial of admission in evidence of the report offered here was not prejudicial, because the medical examiner testified that death was caused by asphyxiation, due to the constricting rope around the deceased’s neck; and “It is my opinion that the injury involved was self-inflicted.” We do not have the offered medical *1227report in evidence, and so cannot say whether it was in substantially the same terms as the admitted testimony, as the trial court thought. But in view of a possible retrial of the case, we deem it proper to say that a “self-inflicted injury” is not necessarily the same as an “intentionally self-inflicted injury.”
V. We have reviewed the other errors assigned, and do not find them meritorious. For the reasons set out in Divisions II and III the judgment is reversed and the cause remanded for further proceedings. — Reversed and remanded.
Garfield, C. J., and Thornton, Moore and Stuart, JJ., concur.
Snell, J., concurs except to Division I to which he dissents.
Larson, Hays and Peterson, JJ., dissent.