=== CASE 2220293 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:39.169264+00 ===

741 N.W.2d 402 (2007)
STATE of Minnesota, Appellant,
v.
Mark Robert WEBER, Respondent.
No. A07-1218.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
November 20, 2007.
Lori Swanson, Attorney General, St. Paul, MN, and Mark A. Ostrem, Olmsted County Attorney, Eric M. Woodford, Assistant County Attorney, Rochester, MN, for appellant.
Jed J. Hammell, Rippe, Hammell & Murphy, P.L.L.P., Caledonia, MN, for respondent.
Considered and decided by HALBROOKS, Presiding Judge; TOUSSAINT, Chief Judge; and HARTEN, Judge.
OPINION
HARTEN, Judge.[*]
Appellant State of Minnesota challenges the district court's pretrial order granting respondent's motion to amend jury instructions on possession of a firearm by a felon to include as elements of the crime that the defendant must be discharged from sentence and from court supervision.
FACTS
In February 2005, respondent Mark Weber was sentenced for second-degree *403 criminal sexual conduct, a crime of violence. In August 2005, while he was on probation for his February 2005 conviction, probation agents discovered a shotgun during a search of his home. He was charged with possession of a firearm by an ineligible person in violation of Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subds. 1(b) and 2 (2004).
The matter was called for jury trial in June 2007. The relevant pattern jury instruction, CRIMJIG 32.17, contained two elements of that crime: the defendant "knowingly shipped, transported, possessed or received a firearm" and "had been convicted of a crime of violence." Respondent moved to amend the instruction to add two more elements of the crime: that the defendant had been discharged from sentence and from court supervision. The inclusion of respondent's two elements would compel a not-guilty verdict for respondent because he was on probation for the sexual conduct crime when the gun was found. The district court granted respondent's motion. The state appealed, and district court proceedings were stayed pending the result of the appeal.
ISSUE
Does the prohibition on the possession of firearms imposed on those convicted of a crime of violence by Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subd. 1(b) (2004), begin at conviction and last for life except for those whose prohibition ended, under a prior law, before 1 August 2003?
ANALYSIS
Statutory construction is a question of law, which this court reviews de novo. Brookfield Trade Ctr., Inc. v. County of Ramsey, 584 N.W.2d 390, 393 (Minn.1998).
Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subd. 1 (2004), provides that "[t]he lifetime prohibition on possessing . . . firearms for persons convicted . . . of a crime of violence . . . applies only to offenders who are discharged from sentence or court supervision for a crime of violence on or after August 1, 1993." Respondent relies on this provision to argue that, since he was not discharged from court supervision for his February 2005 conviction when the shotgun was found in August 2005, the lifetime prohibition did not yet apply to him, and he was entitled to a jury instruction to that effect.
Respondent's reading of the statute would entitle those convicted of violent crimes to possess firearms as long as they remained incarcerated or on probation. Further, his reading presumes that the legislature intended the lifetime prohibition from possessing firearms to begin only after the discharge from sentence or court supervision. Particularly in light of the legislature's obvious desire to restrict firearms from those convicted of violent crimes, that intention would be absurd, and we must presume that "[t]he legislature does not intend a result that is absurd. . . ." Minn.Stat. § 645.17(1) (2006).
Respondent argues that the result would not be absurd because those convicted of violent crimes would already be prohibited from possessing firearms under Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subd. 1(j)(1) (2004), providing that those who have "been convicted in any court of a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year" are ineligible to possess firearms. But this argument ignores the effect of three other statutory provisions: (1) Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subd. 2(b) (2004), providing that those convicted of a crime of violence who possess firearms are guilty of a felony and subject to 15 years' imprisonment and/or a fine of $30,000; (2) Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subd. 2(c) (2004), providing that those convicted of a crime (other than a crime of violence) punishable by a term exceeding *404 one year who possess firearms are guilty only of a gross misdemeanor; and (3) Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subd. 3(a) (2004), requiring a court convicting a defendant of a crime of violence to inform the defendant upon conviction that the defendant is prohibited for life from possessing firearms and that possession is a felony offense. These provisions demonstrate that the legislature did not intend to treat those convicted of violent crimes and those convicted of other felonies equally in regard to the possession of firearms, nor did it intend to treat more leniently those convicted of violent crimes by starting their prohibition only after their discharge from sentence or court supervision.[1]
The intent of the legislature also may be ascertained by considering the former law. Minn.Stat. § 645.16(5) (2006). Those convicted of violent crimes were formerly prohibited from possessing firearms "unless ten years have elapsed since the person has been restored to civil rights or the sentence or disposition has expired, whichever occurs first, and during that time the person has not been convicted of or adjudicated for any other crime of violence." Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subd. 1(b) (2002). The quoted language was deleted on 1 August 2003, the effective date of Minn. Stat. § 624.713, subd. 1(b) (Supp.2003), which banned for life the possession of firearms by those convicted of crimes of violence. See Laws 2003, ch. 28, art. 3 §§ 8-10. Thus, the expiration of the prohibition period changed from ten years after the defendant's discharge to no expiration during defendant's lifetime. The beginning of the prohibition period did not change. See Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subd. 3(a) (2002) (requiring court to notify defendant of prohibition on possessing firearms at time of conviction of crime of violence); Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subd. 3(a) (Supp. 2003) (same).
The statutory language on which appellant relies, i.e., "[t]he lifetime prohibition . . . applies only to offenders who are discharged from sentence or court supervision for a crime of violence on or after August 1, 1993," was added to accommodate those discharged prior to 1 August 1993. If, before 1 August 2003, the effective date of the lifetime prohibition, ten years had elapsed since their discharge and they were again permitted to possess firearms, that reinstatement was not revoked by the 2003 statute.
This provision was plainly intended to limit the retroactive effect of the 2003 amendment by not imposing the new lifetime prohibition on those whose ten-year prohibition had expired. See American Family Mut. Ins. Co. v. Lindsay, 500 N.W.2d 807, 810 (Minn.App.1993) (noting that retroactive application of statutes is not favored), review denied (Minn. 6 Aug. 1993). But this retroactivity provision does not reflect any legislative intent to also make discharge from the sentence the triggering event for the new lifetime prohibition. As discussed above, such a result would be absurd, and respondent has not shown any reasonable construction of the statute that supports it.
DECISION
Because we conclude that the prohibition on the possession of firearms imposed *405 on those convicted of a crime of violence by Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subd. 1(b) (2004), begins at conviction and lasts for life except for those whose firearm prohibition ended prior to 1 August 2003, we reverse the district court's grant of respondent's motion to amend the jury instruction for possession of firearms by an ineligible person and remand for further proceedings.
Reversed and remanded.
NOTES
[*]  Retired judge of the Minnesota Court of Appeals, serving by appointment pursuant to Minn. Const. art. VI, § 10.
[1]  The legislature did intend to be more lenient with some groups in regard to the possession of firearms: see, e.g., Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subd. 1(h) (2004) (those convicted in another state of an offense comparable to assault in Minnesota may not possess firearms "unless three years have elapsed since the date of the conviction"); Minn.Stat. § 624.713, subd. 1(k) (2004) (those convicted of certain gross misdemeanors may not possess firearms "unless three years have elapsed since the date of conviction").

=== CASE 9739559 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:35.067974+00 ===

HOFFMAN, Judge.
David G. Dunlap appeals the order of modification entered in favor of appellee Leeanne S. Dunlap transferring to her the care and custody of the couple's minor daughter.
The evidence shows that at the time of dissolution, the parties entered into an *725agreement, subsequently approved by the trial court, that their daughter, Tobie, would be placed in the custody of her father. This decision was made as her mother was preparing to enter the United States Navy. Nearly four years after dissolution and upon learning of her naval transfer to the state of Hawaii, Leeanne petitioned the court to modify its order and grant her custody of Tobie. David thereafter filed a petition to increase the amount of support payments previously paid by Leeanne. The trial court denied David's petition and modified its prior custody order in favor of Leeanne. David alleges the trial court abused its discretion in ordering the removal of Tobie from his custody and placing her in the custody of her mother.1
The evidence presented and findings of fact entered by the trial court indicate that Tobie is an outgoing, well-adjusted, six-year-old girl, functioning at average or above average levels in school. Her mother is an exemplary member of the United States Navy and believes she may make the Navy her career. Leeanne receives an income sufficient to support Tobie and adequate housing will be available for their use in Hawaii. Both parties have had To-bie in their possession a substantial amount of time since the dissolution and both agree that the other has provided her with proper care.
The evidence shows that Tobie's relationship with her father is a secure and affectionate one. In its initial findings of fact, though, the court noted:
"2. The Respondent, while he has maintained a home for Tobie, is now living with a lady to whom he is engaged, but is not married. This living arrangement is in the presence of Tobie."
The trial court concluded that Tobie should be placed in the custody of her mother with David to have visitation rights. Following the filing of David's motion to correct errors, the trial court specifically added to its initial findings of fact and conclusions of law, the following:
"That Finding Of Fact No. 2, set out the fact that the Respondent is living with a lady to whom he is engaged, but is not married, which living arrangement is in the presence of Tobie, and the Court further finds that living out of wedlock in the presence of Tobie is morally detrimental to said child and creates an atmosphere that is not in her best interests. The Court concludes that living out of wedlock in the presence of the child creates an immoral atmosphere that is so detrimental to this child's moral upbringing, that this fact, alone, constitutes a changed circumstance so substantial and continuing as to make the existing custody order unreasonable[.]" (Emphasis added.)
David argues on appeal that the evidence does not present a legal or factual basis for a modification of the initial custody order.
This Court acknowledges that determinations relating to child custody lie within the sound discretion of the trial court. The decision of the trial court will be reversed only for an abuse of judicial discretion. Barnett v. Barnett (1983), Ind. App., 447 N.E.2d 1172. The decision must be clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court or the reasonable, probable and actual deductions which may be drawn therefrom. Campbell v. Campbell (1979), 182 Ind.App. 661, 396 N.E.2d 142. The "best interests" of the child are of primary importance in an action to modify custody. In re Marriage of Davis (1982), Ind.App., 441 N.E.2d 719. Continuity of custody is a key element in determining what the best interests of the child may be. Neighley v. Neighley (1971), 256 Ind. 43, 266 N.E.2d 793.
In Indiana, a modification of child custody may be made only upon a showing of changed cireumstances so substantial and continuing as to make the existing custody order unreasonable. IND.CODE § 81-1-11.5-22(d). The circumstances in question must be of such a decisive nature as to make the change of custody neces*726sary for the welfare of the child. Huston v. Huston (1971), 256 Ind. 110, 267 N.E.2d 170. Only a strict showing that the present custody arrangement is unreasonable will suffice to justify a change in custody. Moutaw v. Moutaw (1981), Ind. App., 420 N.E.2d 1294. The strict showing required by the modification statute is designed to prevent the disruptive effect of moving children back and forth between divorced parents. Smith v. Dawson (1982), Ind.App., 481 N.E.2d 850.
David does not deny that he is living with a woman to whom he is engaged but not married. He and his fiancee have maintained a clean, well-kept home and have provided a stable and reliable environment for his daughter. His fiancee and Tobie share an affectionate relationship. Tobie is fully aware of her father's living arrangement and all parties agree that Tobie has in no way been adversely affected by the relationship. The psychological testing of Tobie, requested by her mother, has shown Tobie to be an intellectually and emotionally well-adjusted child. Leeanne's primary complaint with the homelife provided by David is that the living arrangement he maintains might adversely affect Tobie in the future.
The trial court has concluded that the extramarital living arrangement maintained by David and his fiancee is in itself so detrimental and immoral as to justify a change in custody. Although this living arrangement may not be the optimum one, the evidence clearly shows Tobie has not been adversely affected by it. In order to deprive a parent of the custody of a child because of sexual misconduct, the misconduct must be shown to 'have an adverse effect upon the welfare of the child. Al though it is a factor to be considered, evidence of sexual misconduct alone is insufficient to deny a parent the custody of a child. D.H. v. J.H. (1981), Ind.App., 418 N.E.2d 286. Without some evidence that the living arrangement is in some way detrimental to the welfare of Tobie, a modification of custody, based solely upon that relationship, is improper.
In her argument, Leeanne additionally notes that Tobie does not attend church when residing with her father. It is clear, however, that Indiana specifically leaves the choice of religious training to the custodial parent. IND.CODE § 81-1-11.5-21(b). Although David and Tobie presently do not attend church, there has been no suggestion that he would prohibit Tobie from doing so. Leeanne specifically admits that David has had no objections to Tobie's baptism nor to her attending church.
The facts and issues presented in support of Leeanne's petition to modify custody do not show that the present custody arrangement is unreasonable nor that there are changed circumstances so substantial and continuing as to warrant a modification of the original custody order.
The order of the trial court is reversed and the cause remanded for consideration of appellant's petition for increased support.
Reversed and remanded.
STATON, P.J., concurs in result.
GARRARD, J., concurs with opinion.
. Tobie is presently residing with her father pursuant to a stay of execution pending appeal.

=== CASE 2222274 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:34.404075+00 ===

404 Mass. 459 (1989)
535 N.E.2d 1251
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
GENE F. KELLEY.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Essex.
December 6, 1988.
April 3, 1989.
Present: HENNESSEY, C.J., ABRAMS, NOLAN, LYNCH, & O'CONNOR, JJ.
*460 Elin H. Graydon, Assistant District Attorney (Randy S. Chapman, Assistant District Attorney, with her) for the Commonwealth.
Steven S. Greenzang for the defendant.
Elizabeth R. OuYang & Matthew Engel, for Disability Law Center, Inc., amicus curiae, submitted a brief.
O'CONNOR, J.
The defendant, who is hearing-impaired, was charged with operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor in violation of G.L.c. 90, § 24 (1986 ed.). He moved to dismiss this and two related charges on the ground that he was denied his statutory right to the assistance of an interpreter in violation of G.L.c. 221, § 92A (1986 ed.), with the result, he asserted, that he was not adequately informed of his right under G.L.c. 276, § 33A (1986 ed.), to use a telephone, and of his right under G.L.c. 263, § 5A (1986 ed.), to be examined by a physician. After an evidentiary hearing, a judge in the District Court granted the defendant's motion to dismiss the operating under the influence charge, and otherwise denied the defendant's motion. The Commonwealth appealed, and we transferred the appeal to this court on our own motion. We are concerned only with the charge of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor. We reverse and remand for a further hearing and for findings.
The judge did not make written findings. We summarize the testimony at the hearing on the motion to dismiss. The defendant was arrested by Saugus police at approximately 2 or 2:30 A.M., February 14, 1987, and was taken to the police station, arriving there between 2:30 and 2:45 A.M. According to the police officers' testimony, the defendant had been taken to the booking desk and the booking procedure started, when he became violent and verbally abusive. The defendant swore at, threatened, and pushed the officers and pounded his fists on the booking desk. The officer showed the defendant notes which said, "Can you sign? Would you like us to call anybody to sign for you?" and "Is there anybody we can call? Can you *461 read?" The defendant looked at those notes, nodded his head affirmatively, but resumed his abusive and violent behavior. At times he was so violent that it took three police officers to subdue him. An officer also attempted to show the defendant the booking sheet which set out the rights of an arrestee. At one point, when the defendant seemed to have regained his composure, one of the officers led him to a wall poster which enumerated, in inch-high letters, an arrestee's rights including those with respect to an examination by a physician, use of the telephone, and breathalyzer testing. The defendant again became violent, whereupon the police subdued him and placed him in a cell.
The desk officer on duty when the defendant was brought into the station testified that he called the Lynn police, Lynn Hospital, Danvers police, the Hogan Center in Danvers, Massachusetts Communications for the Deaf, the State police, an agency with the acronym D.E.F., and Beverly Hospital in a fruitless effort to obtain an interpreter for the defendant. None of these had an interpreter available before 9 A.M.
The defendant's testimony varied sharply from that of the police officers in many respects. According to the defendant, after he was taken to the station, he was booked and placed in a cell. He was not advised of his right to be examined by a physician or of his right to contact an attorney, and was not asked if he wished to submit to a breathalyzer test. He was not shown any writings with respect to his rights. "[A]round 5:00 in the morning," the defendant was asked if he wanted to use the telephone. He gave the police his girl friend's telephone number. She testified that she received a telephone call from the police at a little after 8:30 A.M.
After hearing this testimony, the judge granted the defendant's motion to dismiss, without making any written findings or rulings. During oral argument on the motion, the judge stated that, under G.L.c. 221, § 92A, "[t]here is one means of notifying a deaf person or a hearing impaired person of his or her rights ... and that is through an interpreter that was `procured and arranged for in terms of payment, by the arresting officer.'" He ruled that, where an arrestee is deaf or hearing-impaired, *462 c. 221, § 92A, creates an exception to the usual rule that notice of a defendant's right to use the telephone under c. 276, § 33A, and right to an independent physical examination under c. 263, § 5A, may be given in writing. The judge dismissed the charge on the ground, expressed orally, that the defendant was not provided with an interpreter to notify him of these rights.
General Laws c. 221, § 92A, provides in part as follows: "Whenever a deaf or hearing-impaired person is arrested for an alleged violation of a criminal law, including a local ordinance, the arresting officer shall procure and arrange payment for a qualified interpreter to assist such person regarding any interrogation, warning, notification of rights, or taking of a statement. No answer, statement, or admission, written or oral, made by a deaf or hearing-impaired person in response to any question by a law enforcement officer or any prosecutor, in his official capacity, in any criminal proceeding may be used against such deaf or hearing-impaired person unless such statement was made or elicited through a qualified interpreter and was made knowingly, voluntarily or intelligently...."
"In construing a statute, words are to be accorded their ordinary meaning and approved usage.... The word `shall' is ordinarily interpreted as having a mandatory or imperative obligation.... In addition, a general rule exists that directions to public officers for the protection of rights are mandatory." (Citations omitted.) Hashimi v. Kalil, 388 Mass. 607, 609-610 (1983). Thus, the defendant was entitled to an interpreter. Despite the diligent and good faith efforts of the Saugus police as demonstrated by the uncontradicted evidence, however, no interpreter was provided in timely fashion to the defendant. Therefore, as the judge concluded, the defendant's statutory right to an interpreter was not satisfied. The Commonwealth does not contend otherwise.
The matter in contention is not whether the defendant's right to an interpreter was violated, but rather what is that violation's consequence in this case. The Commonwealth argues that, because c. 221, § 92A, expressly provides a sanction for the violation, namely the suppression of statements made by the *463 hearing-impaired defendant before an interpreter has been provided, and provides no other sanction, the implication is that suppression is the only remedy. However, the defendant asserts, and we agree, that, for a remedy to be appropriate, it must be adequate to cure any prejudice to the defendant that may result from the denial of his rights, see Commonwealth v. King, 400 Mass. 283, 291-292 (1987); Commonwealth v. Hine, 393 Mass. 564, 573 (1984), and mere suppression of statements does not remedy a deprivation of adequate notice to the defendant of a right to be examined by a physician of his choice. The defendant asserts that the only adequate remedy in this case is dismissal of the charge as ordered by the judge. We agree with the defendant that the public's "substantial interest in prosecuting those accused of crime and bringing the guilty to justice," Commonwealth v. King, supra at 290, may indeed be overborne by the necessity that the defendant not be deprived by the Commonwealth of a potential defense, but whether such deprivation occurred in this case depends on facts not yet established.
Even if we assume that, without the assistance of an interpreter, the defendant was not adequately notified of his right to use a telephone as guaranteed by G.L.c. 276, § 33A, that particular failure of notice will not support the dismissal of the driving while under the influence charge. The remedy for a violation of c. 276, § 33A, is the suppression of unfavorable evidence obtained as a result of denying the defendant's right. Commonwealth v. Jones, 362 Mass. 497, 502 (1972), citing Commonwealth v. Bouchard, 347 Mass. 418, 419-421 (1964). However, determining the appropriate remedy for a violation of a defendant's right to a physician's examination under G.L.c. 263, § 5A, is more complicated.
The controlling case is Commonwealth v. Andrade, 389 Mass. 874 (1983). In Andrade, we considered the dismissal of a complaint for driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor where the defendant was not informed of his right to an independent physician's examination as required by c. 263, § 5A. We reasoned that dismissal may be required where a timely examination and chemical test of blood alcohol *464 content by a physician might have provided the defendant with exculpatory evidence. However, we concluded that "[d]ismissal of a complaint may not be an appropriate or necessary remedy in all cases.... Rather, each case must be considered on its own set of facts and a remedy adequate to cure potential or actual prejudice resulting from a violation of G.L.c. 263, § 5A, should be allowed." Id. at 878. In determining whether dismissal was the proper remedy, we took note of the absence of police effort to inform the defendant of his right to an examination (the defendant's command of the English language was "marginal at best"); the absence of exigent circumstances "which might have justified the police officers' failure to communicate the defendant's right to him"; the absence of "evidence that the defendant was so inebriated that an attempt at compliance with § 5A would have been futile"; and the absence of evidence that the defendant was so belligerent or otherwise unwilling to cooperate as to justify the failure to comply with the statute. Id. at 879. We remanded the case for a possible further hearing and for findings relative to prejudice. In addition, we pointed out that the record did not show overwhelming evidence of the defendant's guilt, apart from police testimony, such as a videotape. Id. at 882. It is clear from Andrade that whether violation of a defendant's right to adequate notice of his right to an independent physician's examination requires dismissal of the charge against him depends on considerations of fairness, including possible prejudice to him flowing from the violation. The circumstances are critical. Therefore, we remand this case for a further evidentiary hearing and for findings in accordance with the several factors discussed in Commonwealth v. Andrade.
In light of our disposition of this case, we need not address at length the defendant's contention that the Commonwealth's failure adequately to notify him of his rights violated not only his statutory, but also his Federal and State constitutional rights. Even if those rights were violated in this case, "dismissal of the complaint would be an appropriate remedy only in the event that prejudice to the defendant cannot be negated." Andrade, supra at 882 n. 4, citing United States v. Morrison, 449 U.S. 361, 364-367 (1981).
*465 We deal with one final contention made by the defendant. The defendant contends that the absence of an interpreter resulted in his being deprived of an opportunity to take a breathalyzer test. In Commonwealth v. Alano, 388 Mass. 871 (1983), we made clear that G.L.c. 90, § 24, does not establish a right to a police administered breathalyzer test. Rather, if the police do administer such a test, G.L.c. 90, § 24 (1) (e), imposes requirements to be met in order to make the test results admissible. One of those requirements is that the defendant be afforded a reasonable opportunity to have an independent test performed. Id. at 878. Since the record does not show that the police gave the defendant a breathalyzer test, no right to an independent test came into being. It follows that the defendant was not entitled to notice that he was entitled to an independent test.
The order allowing the defendant's motion to dismiss is reversed, and this case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
So ordered.

=== CASE 2222279 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:34.516361+00 ===

180 Ill. App. 3d 74 (1989)
535 N.E.2d 938
BERT J. SWINGER et al., Petitioners-Appellants,
v.
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS' ELECTORAL BOARD OF THE VILLAGE OF FAIRVIEW et al., Respondents-Appellees.
No. 3-88-0343.
Illinois Appellate Court  Third District.
Opinion filed February 3, 1989.
Rehearing denied April 10, 1989.
*75 Malmgren Law Offices, Ltd., of Canton (Jesse H. Malmgren, of counsel), for appellants.
Ancel, Glink, Diamond, Murphy & Cope, P.C., of Chicago, and Kost & Kost, of Lewistown (Joseph A. Murphy, Keith A. Kost, and John J. McCarthy, of counsel), for appellees Robert A. Erickson and Monti Thompson.
John J. McCarthy, of Canton, for appellee Municipal Officers' Electoral Board of the Village of Fairview.
Order reversed.
JUSTICE HEIPLE delivered the opinion of the court:
This appeal involves the annexation of approximately 3,000 acres into the Village of Fairview (Village) in Fulton County, Illinois. On November 2, 1987, the corporate authorities of the Village passed an *76 ordinance annexing the acreage into the Village. Thereafter, the appellants filed with the village clerk a petition calling for a back-door referendum on the question of the annexation of the subject property into the Village. Subsequently, on January 5, 1988, objections to the petition for referendum were also filed with the village clerk. The Village then referred the petition for referendum and the objections thereto to the Municipal Officers' Electoral Board (Electoral Board).
After hearings were held, the Electoral Board found that it had subject matter jurisdiction over the controversy. The Electoral Board then went on to declare that the petition for referendum was invalid since the petition failed to meet mandatory structural requirements of section 28-3 of the Illinois Election Code concerning the manner in which signers of the petition are to show their residence addresses, and the need for consecutive numbering of the pages of the petition. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 46, par. 28-3.) The Electoral Board further found that the petition for referendum was a "petition for a public question referendum" (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 46, par. 28-1), rather than a section 7-1-6 petition for referendum on an annexation matter (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 24, par. 7-1-6), two entirely distinct and separate matters. Additionally, the Electoral Board found that under the Illinois Municipal Code a section 7-1-6 petition calling for a referendum does not apply to a section 7-1-8 annexation. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 24, pars. 7-1-6, 7-1-8.) The circuit court affirmed the decision of the Electoral Board. We, however, reverse for the reason that the objections to the petition for referendum were not timely filed. Thus, the Electoral Board never acquired subject matter jurisdiction and therefore had no authority to invalidate or even consider the petition for referendum.
 1 The petition for referendum states on its face that it is a petition circulated and filed pursuant to section 7-1-6 and calls for a back-door referendum. Section 7-1-6 provides that a petition calling for a back-door referendum shall be filed within 30 days following the date of final Village Board action on the annexation question. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 24, par. 7-1-6.) The final action taken by the Fairview Village Board on the annexation question occurred on November 2, 1986. Consequently, the last day to file a section 7-1-6 petition for referendum was on December 2, 1987. Additionally, section 10-8 of the Illinois Election Code provides that a petition for referendum shall be deemed to be valid unless objections are made in writing within five business days after the last day for filing the petition. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 46, par. 10-8.) That is to say, by December 7, 1987. The appellees, however, did not in fact file their objections *77 to the petition until January 5, 1988, a period of time well past the December 7, 1987, deadline for filing objections. Accordingly, the objections were untimely.
 2 Since the Electoral Board never acquired subject matter jurisdiction, nothing flowing from the Electoral Board's proceedings and the subsequent circuit court affirmance has any validity. The proceedings of the Electoral Board being a nullity, we reverse the order of the circuit court which affirmed those proceedings.
 3 As a final comment on the question of subject matter jurisdiction, it should also be noted that the Electoral Board committed an initial jurisdictional and classification error when it characterized the petition for referendum as a "petition for a public question," which is a wholly different matter. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 46, par. 28-1.) While under such an erroneous classification, the objections to such a petition would have been timely filed, the Electoral Board's characterization of the petition was incorrect. The petition for referendum was on its face designated as a section 7-1-6 petition calling for a back-door referendum on the question of the annexation of the subject property into the Village. It did not seek an advisory referendum on a public policy question.
 4 Although the above ruling is a complete disposition of the matter, we further note the following: The initial annexation ordinance of the Village was pursuant to section 7-1-8 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 24, par. 7-1-8). This section provides that before annexation can occur all of the landowners and a majority of the resident electors must have agreed in advance to be annexed. This form of annexation under the statute contains no provision for a referendum.
Petitioners sought a back-door referendum on the annexation, however, pursuant to section 7-1-6, a statutory section which was wholly inapplicable to the type of annexation accomplished by the Village acting pursuant to section 7-1-8. Had correct procedures been followed, the governing body of the Village, the Village Board, would have simply voted to reject the petition for referendum upon its filing as the nullity that it was. Properly, that would have been the end of the matter.
For the reasons given, we reverse the order of the circuit court of Fulton County.
Reversed.
WOMBACHER and BARRY, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739406 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:26.45748+00 ===

JUSTICE HEIPLE, dissenting: Jay Press owns a house in Champaign, Illinois, which he rents to college students. In January 1988, the house was rented to 11 students. Under the terms of the lease the entire house was leased to all 11 tenants, each of whom was responsible for the entire rent and upkeep of the premises. Following an inspection of the house, he received notice of various violations of chapter 20 of the 1985 National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code. (National Fire Protection Association, Life Safety Code §§20—1.1 through 20—3.4, at 101 —128 through 101—129 (1985), as adopted by city ordinance (Champaign, Ill., Council Bill No. 86—87 (May 6, 1986)).) The violations stemmed from classifying Press’ house as a “rooming house.” At issue is whether Press’ house falls within the Code’s definition of “rooming house.” The same rules of construction which govern statutes apply to construing municipal ordinances. Strict construction is to be given to statutes which create liability where none would otherwise exist. (Anderson v. Board of Education of School District No. 91 (1945), 390 Ill. 412, 422.) The Code in section 20—1.1.1 defines “rooming house” in pertinent part as follows: “Lodging or rooming houses include buildings in which separate sleeping rooms are rented providing sleeping accommodations for a total of 16 or fewer persons ***.” (Emphasis added.) Life Safety Code §20—1.1.1, at 101—128. In order to fall within the Code’s definition of “rooming house,” separate sleeping rooms must be rented. However, as the majority admits, the lease provides that the house was rented to all of the tenants in its entirety and not by the renting of separate sleeping rooms. Thus, the house does not fall with the express terms of the Code. The majority, by contending to look at how the house is used, is rewriting Champaign’s municipal ordinance. Regardless of how wise it would be to require this structure to meet the fire safety provisions applicable to rooming houses under the Life Safety Code, the City of Champaign has not provided for this structure. The burden of redrafting and amending municipal ordnances falls upon the municipality itself. The City of Champaign by modifying its current ordinance would be able to bring Press’ house within its terms and subject the house to the fire safety provisions. It is not the responsibility of this court to correct drafting errors and rewrite municipal ordinances as we may deem appropriate. Accordingly, I respectfully dissent from the decision of the court.

=== CASE 2219684 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:18.799481+00 ===

539 N.W.2d 46 (1995)
Erika BJORNSON, By and Through her guardian and parent Jan BJORNSON, and Jan Bjornson, individually, Plaintiffs and Appellees,
v.
GUARANTY NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY, Defendant and Appellant, and
Farmers Insurance Exchange, Defendant.
Civ. No. 950062.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
October 31, 1995.
Timothy A. Priebe of Mackoff, Kellogg, Kirby & Kloster, P.C., Dickinson, for plaintiffs and appellees.
*47 Michael J. Maus of Howe, Hardy, Galloway & Maus, P.C., Dickinson, for defendant and appellant.
NEUMANN, Justice.
Guaranty National Insurance Company (Guaranty) appealed from a district court judgment awarding Erika Bjornson $30,000 in damages under an automobile liability insurance policy written by Guaranty. We conclude Erika was not entitled to receive both Uninsured Motorist (UM) and Underinsured Motorist (UIM) benefits under the policy. Accordingly, we affirm the $20,000 award of UIM coverage and reverse the $10,000 award of UM coverage.
The parties have stipulated to the facts in this case. Jeff Bjornson, Erika's father, was killed in an automobile accident in Arizona while he was riding in a car driven by Rodger Rosaaen. Rosaaen's vehicle was insured by Old Hickory Casualty Insurance Company (Old Hickory) and carried the Arizona minimum statutory liability limits of $15,000 per person and $30,000 per accident. Old Hickory settled with multiple claimants, collectively paying them the $30,000 liability limits under Rosaaen's policy. In that settlement Erika and her mother, Jan Bjornson, each received $5,000.
At the time of the accident, Jeff had an automobile liability insurance policy with Guaranty, under which he carried both UM and UIM coverage. Erika, who incurred damages in excess of $25,000 as the result of her father's death, sued Guaranty for benefits under both the UM and UIM provisions of Jeff's policy. The trial court awarded Erika $20,000 of UIM benefits and an additional $10,000 of UM benefits under the policy.
On appeal, Guaranty asserts Erika is entitled to benefits under the UIM provisions, but not the UM provisions, of Jeff's policy. Erika asserts the trial court correctly construed the insurance policy as providing both UM and UIM coverage, because Rosaaen's vehicle fits within the policy's definitions of both an uninsured motor vehicle and an underinsured motor vehicle. Erika claims she is therefore entitled to coverage under both provisions, because the policy does not explicitly preclude a claimant from receiving both UM and UIM benefits for a single accident.
On appeal, we will independently examine and construe an insurance policy to determine whether the trial court erred in its construction. Sellie v. N.D. Ins. Guar. Assoc., 494 N.W.2d 151 (N.D.1992). The construction of a written insurance contract is a question of law which is fully reviewable by this court. State Farm v. LaRoque, 486 N.W.2d 235 (N.D.1992). In interpreting a contract we look first to its language and, if the intent is apparent from its face, there is no room for construction. Stuhlmiller v. Nodak Mutual Ins. Co., 475 N.W.2d 136 (N.D. 1991).
The definitions of an uninsured and an underinsured motor vehicle in Jeff's policy with Guaranty unambiguously preclude an insured from receiving both UM and UIM benefits when the tortfeasor's vehicle, although carrying some liability insurance protection, falls within the definition of an uninsured motor vehicle. The relevant language provides:
"Part IIIUninsured Motorists
* * * * * *
"(3) `Uninsured motor vehicle' means a motor vehicle which is:
* * * * * *
"(B) insured by a liability bond or policy at the time of the accident, but which provides bodily injury liability limits less than the minimum bodily injury liability limits required by the financial responsibility law of the state in which your insured car is principally garaged.
* * * * * *
"Underinsured Motorist Endorsement
* * * * * *
"(3) `Underinsured motor vehicle' means a motor vehicle which is:
"(A) Insured by a liability bond or a policy at the time of the accident providing bodily injury liability less than the limit of liability shown in *48 the Declarations Page for underinsured motorist coverage.
"`Underinsured motor vehicle' does not mean a vehicle:
* * * * * *
"(B) insured by a liability bond or policy at the time of the accident, but which provides bodily injury limits of liability less than the minimum bodily injury liability limits required by the financial responsibility law of the state in which your insured car is principally garaged."
Contracts must be interpreted as a whole to give effect to every part if reasonably practicable. Continental Western Ins. Co. v. The Dam Bar, 478 N.W.2d 373 (N.D. 1991). The quoted provisions of Guaranty's policy, when construed together, clearly preclude an insured from receiving both uninsured and underinsured benefits, when the tortfeasor's vehicle is insured but carries less than the minimum statutorily required amounts. In such a case, the vehicle is defined as an uninsured vehicle under Part III, Paragraph 3(B) of the policy. It is then explicitly declared not an underinsured motor vehicle by the language of Paragraph 3(B) of the Underinsured Motorist Endorsement.
The insurance policy explicitly looks to the state where the insured's car "is principally garaged" to determine if the tortfeasor's vehicle carries less than the statutorily required liability insurance. In the party's stipulation of facts, it is conceded Jeff's vehicle was principally garaged in Arizona and that Rosaaen's vehicle carried the Arizona statutory minimum liability limits of $15,000 per person and $30,000 per accident. Consequently, on the face of Jeff's policy, Rosaaen's vehicle is not an uninsured motor vehicle. However, Erika claims Rosaaen's vehicle is uninsured under Arizona's interpretation of its financial responsibility law, that a vehicle is deemed to have less than the statutory minimum required liability insurance when an injured claimant receives less than $15,000 because the insurance proceeds are split among multiple claimants. Porter v. Empire Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 106 Ariz. 274, 475 P.2d 258 (1970). Although Rosaaen's vehicle carried $15,000 of liability insurance per person, only $5,000 was made available to Erika because there were multiple claimants. Erika asserts Rosaaen's vehicle was therefore an "uninsured motor vehicle" under Jeff's policy, because only $5,000, not the $15,000 statutory minimum limit, was available to her.
In Porter, the Supreme Court of Arizona held that a claimant for UM coverage, who recovers less than the statutory minimum amount of coverage under the negligent motorist's liability insurance because the proceeds are split among multiple claimants, may recover UM benefits up to the statutory minimum liability requirements. In effect, the Porter case created a legal fiction that a tortfeasor's motor vehicle, although carrying some insurance, is considered an uninsured vehicle to the extent the minimum liability amounts are not made available to the injured claimant. The rationale of the Porter case is that a negligent motorist who has purchased some liability insurance is functionally uninsured when the minimum statutory amount is not available to the injured person under the tortfeasor's policy. See Lowing v. Allstate Ins. Co., 176 Ariz. 101, 859 P.2d 724, 727 (1993). Erika urges this court to apply Porter's legal fiction to conclude Rosaaen's vehicle is an uninsured vehicle, thereby entitling Erika to receive uninsured motorist benefits under Jeff's policy. However, we must refuse to apply Porter in this case, because the Porter rationale (i.e. to provide the statutory minimum limits of coverage to an injured party through UM benefits) is inapplicable where, as here, the injured claimant has underinsured motorist coverage. The claimant in Porter only had uninsured motorist coverage, and without Porter's legal fiction that the tortfeasor's vehicle was uninsured the claimant would not have received any benefits and thereby would have been deprived of the statutory minimum coverage. Here, Erika has underinsured motorist coverage for a circumstance like this, in which the tortfeasor's vehicle has some, but not enough, liability insurance.
A definition of a term in an insurance contract may exclude coverage if the *49 language of the contract, as a whole, is clear. Haugen v. Auto-Owners Ins. Co. of Lansing, 191 N.W.2d 274 (N.D.1971). When the language of an insurance policy is unambiguous it should not be strained to impose liability on the insurer. Thompson v. Nodak Mutual Ins. Co., 466 N.W.2d 115 (N.D.1991). We conclude Jeff's automobile liability policy with Guaranty unambiguously precludes Erika from receiving both UM and UIM benefits under these circumstances. We further conclude that under Jeff's policy Rosaaen's vehicle is an underinsured, not an uninsured, motor vehicle and, therefore, Erika is entitled to receive UIM coverage.
Jeff carried $25,000 of UIM coverage under his policy. The parties stipulated Erika's damages exceed $25,000 and the trial court appropriately awarded Erika UIM benefits of $20,000 (i.e. $25,000 UIM coverage less $5,000 received in settlement from Rosaaen's insurance carrier). See Score v. American Family Mutual Ins. Co., 538 N.W.2d 206 (N.D.1995). However, Guaranty argues Erika is entitled to only $15,000 of UIM benefits. Guaranty asserts the $5,000 Jan received in settlement with Old Hickory should also be deducted from Erika's coverage because Jan had no legitimate claim for damages resulting from Jeff's death and therefore her $5,000 settlement should be attributed to Erika and deducted from Erika's UIM coverage. Guaranty has provided no legal authority to support its position of attributing Jan's settlement to Erika. Furthermore, we conclude Guaranty has waived this issue through its stipulation of facts:
"Plaintiffs asserted claims for their damages against Rosaaen. Plaintiffs notified Guaranty that Jan Bjornson and Erika Bjornson were both making claims against Rosaaen and requested Guaranty's approval. Guaranty knew, as early as April, 1990, that both Jan Bjornson and Erika Bjornson were making a claim against Rodger Rosaaen for the wrongful death of Jeff Bjornson.
* * * * * *
"In November, 1990, Plaintiff Erika Bjornson and Plaintiff Jan Bjornson each settled with Old Hickory, Rosaaen's liability carrier for $5,000, a total of $10,000. In consummation thereof Plaintiff Erika Bjornson received $5,000 from Old Hickory and Jan Bjornson received $5,000 from Old Hickory. Neither Jan nor Erika have received any other amounts from Rosaaen or Rosaaen's liability carrier.
"Guaranty, after being notified of the terms of the settlement with Old Hickory, did not object to the settlement."
By its stipulation, Guaranty concedes it was notified Old Hickory gave Erika and Jan each $5,000 in settlement of their separate claims against Rosaaen and that Guaranty did not object to the settlement. Having acquiesced in the settlement, Guaranty cannot now complain about it.
In accordance with this opinion, the trial court's award of UIM benefits to Erika in the amount of $20,000 is affirmed and the court's award of UM benefits of $10,000 is reversed.
AFFIRMED IN PART AND REVERSED IN PART.
VANDE WALLE, C.J., and LEVINE, MESCHKE and SANDSTROM, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 3030483 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:44:26.689237+00 ===

Opinions of the United
2007 Decisions                                                                                                             States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit
2-8-2007
WFD Partners v. N Star Steel KY Inc
Precedential or Non-Precedential: Non-Precedential
Docket No. 05-1205
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007
Recommended Citation
"WFD Partners v. N Star Steel KY Inc" (2007). 2007 Decisions. Paper 1648.
http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007/1648
This decision is brought to you for free and open access by the Opinions of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit at Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in 2007 Decisions by an authorized administrator of Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. For more information, please contact Benjamin.Carlson@law.villanova.edu.
NOT PRECEDENTIAL
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT
Nos. 05-1205 & 05-2004
WFD PARTNERS, L.P.,
Appellant
v.
NORTH STAR STEEL KENTUCKY, INC.
On Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Western District of Pennsylvania
D.C. Civil Action No. 04-cv-1063
(Honorable Arthur J. Schwab)
Submitted Pursuant to Third Circuit LAR 34.1(a)
January 26, 2007
Before: SCIRICA, Chief Judge, FUENTES and CHAGARES, Circuit Judges
(Filed: February 8, 2007)
OPINION OF THE COURT
SCIRICA, Chief Judge.
WFD Partners, L.P. appeals a verdict in favor of North Star Steel Kentucky, Inc. in
a breach of contract action, as well as the denial of its motion for relief under Fed. R. Civ.
P. 60(b). We will affirm.
I.
In March 2004, WFD entered an agreement to sell to North Star certain production
equipment and intellectual property associated with it (assignments of a patent and
trademark, non-exclusive use of a customer list, and drawings) from a steel mill WFD had
purchased. The pertinent terms were: North Star would wire two $82,500 payments, the
first within ten days of the agreement’s execution and the second after the equipment had
been identified but before it had been removed; North Star would also pay a separately-
invoiced rate of $250 per ton of equipment removed; and North Star would provide
evidence of all insurance coverages reasonably deemed necessary to WFD before
removing any equipment. The first $82,500 payment was made as scheduled.
Between May 16 and 18, 2004, North Star employees and subcontractors
identified and dismantled equipment for removal from the steel mill. On May 18, North
Star plant manager Mark Quiring informed WFD partner David Gur that the second
$82,500 payment would not be wired until May 19. With Gur’s authorization, North Star
then removed a truckload of equipment from the steel mill on May 18. On May 19, WFD
partner William Snyder barred North Star from the steel mill, citing uncertainty over the
second $82,500 payment, accusing North Star’s subcontractors of stealing from the steel
mill, and claiming North Star had failed to provide evidence of adequate insurance.
On May 21, Quiring received an email from WFD—it stated WFD considered the
agreement null and void, but did not offer to repay the initial $82,500. Quiring responded
on May 24, threatening to take legal action unless North Star was allowed to perform
2
under the agreement. WFD did not assent. North Star sought to resuscitate and perform
the agreement three times in June and July, and sent a “Memorandum of Insurance” in
June through its counsel explaining its coverage. On October 19, North Star’s
comptroller sent a letter to WFD seeking to complete performance and specifically
offering to list WFD as an “additional insured” on North Star’s policy in response to
WFD’s insurance demands.
On July 19, 2004, WFD sued North Star for breach of contract. North Star
counterclaimed, alleging WFD had breached the agreement. A bench trial followed, and
the District Court ruled in North Star’s favor on December 15, 2004. It found North Star
had presented adequate evidence of insurance, that North Star had asked in good faith to
make the second payment on May 19 without objection by WFD, and that WFD’s theft
allegations were not supported by credible evidence. The court concluded WFD had
made a business decision to prevent performance of the agreement by North Star, and that
this was a breach. It awarded damages to North Star and ordered North Star to return the
intellectual property to WFD. WFD appealed from the judgment in January 2005.
Quiring had testified at trial that North Star was still in possession of the
intellectual property and would be willing to return it to WFD. But in a February 2005
telephone conference, counsel for North Star disclosed that the testimony had been
inaccurate, and that North Star had sold all its assets to Gerdau Ameristeel, Inc., so that it
was unable to return the intellectual property to WFD. Citing this revelation, WFD
moved for relief under Fed. R. Civ. P. 60(b). The District Court issued an advisory
3
opinion on February 28, 2005, stating it was inclined to modify its judgment in an amount
established at a valuation hearing on the intellectual property. WFD appealed from the
advisory opinion, characterizing it as a denial of WFD’s Fed. R. Civ. P. 60(b) motion.
We remanded the case to the District Court in an October 2005 Order, having
already taken jurisdiction over WFD’s appeal from the January judgment. Order, Oct. 12,
2005. A valuation hearing was conducted on October 26. Limited discovery was
subsequently scheduled, but the District Court declared WFD’s Fed. R. Civ. P. 60(b)
motion moot on November 2, after the parties informed it they had reached a settlement
agreement in principle. Negotiations ultimately fell apart, but North Star then reacquired
the intellectual property from Gerdau Ameristeel. On March 16, 2006, it moved to
reopen the case and have the valuation hearing requirement declared moot because North
Star could now return the intellectual property to WFD. WFD responded a hearing was
still required because the intellectual property’s value had dropped, but the court granted
North Star’s motion to reopen the case and declared the valuation hearing requirement
moot on March 23, 2006.
II.
The District Court had jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1332 and pursuant to our
Order of October 12, 2005. We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. §§ 1291 and 1292.
On appeal from a judgment entered in a non-jury trial, we review findings of fact
for clear error. Hooven v. Exxon Mobil Corp., 465 F.3d 566, 572 (3d Cir. 2006); Fed. R.
4
Civ. P. 52(a). We review the denial of relief from judgment under Fed. R. Civ. P. 60(b)
for abuse of discretion. Brown v. Phila. Hous. Auth., 350 F.3d 338, 342 (3d Cir. 2003).
III.
WFD contends the District Court committed clear error in making three factual
findings at trial. In reviewing a district court’s factual findings, our “sole function” is to
review the record to determine whether we are “left with a definite and firm conviction
that a mistake has been committed.” Speyer, Inc. v. Humble Oil & Ref. Co., 403 F.2d
766, 770 (3d Cir. 1968). We conclude there was no clear error in the challenged findings.
First, the District Court found North Star was adequately insured when its
employees and subcontractors entered the steel mill to dismantle and remove equipment.
The agreement required North Star to provide all insurance coverages reasonably deemed
necessary by WFD for its protection prior to North Star’s entry. WFD contends North
Star was contractually required both to name WFD as an additional insured and to
provide Pennsylvania workers’ compensation insurance for its subcontractors, but failed
to do either. But there was evidence WFD expressed no concern over insurance until
May 19, after North Star and its subcontractors had already begun dismantling and
removing equipment from the steel mill. Further, the Memorandum of Insurance
suggested North Star was adequately insured, including as to workers’ compensation
coverage, under the agreement. Two WFD witnesses testified they had no reason to
believe North Star lacked the coverage described in the Memorandum at the time North
5
Star was attempting to perform under the agreement. The District Court’s finding that
North Star was adequately insured was not clearly erroneous.
Second, the District Court found WFD’s theft allegations were not based on
credible evidence. One WFD employee testified that, on arriving at the steel mill early in
the morning on May 19, he discovered broken locks and doors and found North Star’s
subcontractors removing equipment from lockers. But he also testified he saw no-one
attempting to take any equipment away. Moreover, his testimony was explicitly not
proffered to show that a theft had occurred, but rather to show Snyder’s state of mind in
barring North Star from the steel mill. No witness testified to personal knowledge that
persons associated with North Star stole anything from the steel mill, and two North Star
witnesses testified nothing was stolen. The District Court’s finding that WFD’s theft
allegations were not based on credible evidence was not clearly erroneous.
Third, the District Court found WFD made a business decision to prevent North
Star from performing under the agreement. There was evidence WFD had been in contact
with other potential buyers for equipment from the steel mill before it began negotiating
with North Star, and Snyder testified he also spoke to a potential buyer after barring
North Star from the steel mill. Additionally, there was evidence WFD repeatedly rejected
North Star’s offers to perform under the agreement from May through October 2004.1
1
WFD characterizes letters to WFD from North Star’s counsel (dated July 7, 2004,
before the instant action had even been filed) and comptroller (dated October 19, 2004) as
settlement offers. Accordingly, WFD contends the District Court abused its discretion in
(continued...)
6
The District Court’s finding that WFD made a business decision to bar North Star from
the steel mill, thus preventing it from performing, was not clearly erroneous.
WFD also contends the District Court abused its discretion by holding the
requirement of a valuation hearing on the intellectual property was mooted by North
Star’s reacquisition of the intellectual property, characterizing this as a denial of Fed. R.
Civ. P. 60(b) relief. “An abuse of discretion may be found when the district court’s
decision rests upon a clearly erroneous finding of fact, an errant conclusion of law or an
improper application of law to fact.” Reform Party of Allegheny County v. Allegheny
County Dep’t of Elections, 174 F.3d 305, 311 (3d Cir. 1999). WFD contends the purpose
of the District Court’s judgment was to return the parties to the status quo ex ante, and
that this required a determination of how much the value of the intellectual property to
WFD had diminished because of its use by Gerdau Ameristeel. But the District Court
explained during the February 2005 conference that the amount due North Star and its
obligation to return the intellectual property were separate requirements of its judgment.
“And if [North Star is] unable to [produce the intellectual property], then we’ll have a
1
(...continued)
admitting the letters from North Star into evidence in violation of Fed. R. Evid. 408 and
erred in relying on the October letter (and WFD’s failure to respond) to conclude WFD
made a business decision to terminate the agreement. These arguments are unavailing
because Fed. R. Evid. 408 “is designed to exclude the offer of compromise only when it
is tendered as an admission of the weakness of the offering party’s claim or defense . . . .”
2 Kenneth S. Brown et al., McCormick on Evidence § 266 (6th ed. 2006). See also 29
Am. Jur. 2d Evidence § 510 (2006) (“Rule 408 is designed to avoid one party using
material against the party who submitted the material for settlement purposes.”).
7
prompt hearing on the value and, if necessary enter a judgment . . . as to the value . . . .”2
The District Court did not abuse its discretion in holding that North Star’s reacquisition of
the intellectual property mooted the requirement of a valuation hearing.
IV.
We will affirm.
2
WFD emphasizes the fact that Gerdau Ameristeel used the customer list in
contending the intellectual property’s value to WFD has diminished, but at trial it
contended North Star had obtained the benefit of the list as soon as it received it the list.
8

=== CASE 3884498 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 09:14:53.938691+00 ===

One of the provisions in the policy is that "all statements made by the insured shall, in the absence of fraud, be deemed representations and not warranties." Therefore, even if the statements contained in the application were not true, this fact alone, was not sufficient to defeat the plaintiff's right of recovery. The burden of proof rested upon the defendant to prove, as alleged by it, that the policy of insurance was obtained by fraud, misrepresentation and deceit, which unquestionably would render it null and void. The testimony upon this question was conflicting, and the case was properly submitted to the jury. Indeed, the defendant's attorneys neither made a motion for a nonsuit nor requested the direction of a verdict. We have stated these facts for the purpose of showing the issues raised by the pleadings.
His Honor the presiding Judge, was not requested to charge, that there was no testimony tending to show waiver. He, however, was requested to charge, that there was no evidence, that the defendant's agent knew of Mrs. Gamble's condition or varied any stipulations in the contract, which is an entirely different proposition and which he could not have charged without invading the province of the jury. The question of waiver was not involved in the case and nothing was said in regard to it that was prejudicial to the rights of the appellant.
For these reasons I concur. *Page 201

=== CASE 9739409 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:30.561485+00 ===

DYKMAN, J.
Howard M. appeals from an order which terminates his guardianship of a child, Jenae K.S., and transfers her to the custody of her mother, Jean R. The first issue is the appropriate standard of review for deciding custody when a guardianship is terminated and a custody contest develops between the child's parent and a third party, in this case, the guardian. The second issue is whether sufficient evidence supported the trial court's finding that there were no compelling circumstances making it appropriate to award custody to a third party, Howard.
We conclude that when a guardianship is terminated, a parent is entitled to custody of a child unless the trial court finds that the parent is unfit or compelling reasons exist for awarding custody to a third party. We also conclude that the evidence was sufficient to support the trial court's finding that no compelling reasons existed for awarding custody of Jenae to Howard. We therefore affirm.
*20STANDARD OF REVIEW
Though modification of custody determinations are reviewed for an erroneous exercise of discretion, In re Stephanie R.N., 174 Wis. 2d 745, 764-66, 498 N.W.2d 235, 241-42 (1993), this case does not involve a custody dispute between two parents, but between a parent and a third party. Whether a parent is "unfit" or whether "compelling reasons" exist to award custody to a third party is a mixed question of fact and law. We separate mixed questions of fact and law into two components, reviewing disputed issues of material fact under § 805.17(2), Stats.,1 and reviewing the legal issues de novo. DOR v. Exxon Corp., 90 Wis. 2d 700, 713, 281 N.W.2d 94, 101 (1979), aff'd, 447 U.S. 207 (1980).
BACKGROUND
On June 20, 1984, Jean gave birth to a daughter, Jenae. Jean was not married to Jenae's father, and never heard from him or saw him after she told him that she was pregnant. In 1985, Jean moved to Beaver Dam, Wisconsin. She relied upon her sister, Rita, and her sister's partner, Howard, for child care while she worked. Jenae resided with Howard and Rita during the weekdays and on some weekends.
In 1988, Jean and Jenae moved to Crandon, Wisconsin, to live with William R., but after a brief time, Jean returned Jenae to Howard. In 1989, Jean married William. Later that year, Jean petitioned the trial *21court, asking that Howard be appointed Jenae's guardian. She did this because of difficulties Howard was experiencing in obtaining medical attention for Jenae and because Jenae was about to begin school.
The parties agree that Jean and Jenae maintained a relationship during Howard's guardianship although they differ as to the extent and quality of that relationship. Howard provided all of Jenae's financial support although Jean claims that she offered financial help which he refused.
In September 1992, Jean petitioned the trial court, asking that the guardianship be terminated. The court appointed a guardian ad litem, and Jean, Jenae and Howard underwent various psychological evaluations. The court held a hearing on Jean's petition in August 1993 at which Jean, Rita and Jenae testified. The record also contains the reports of several professionals. On March 1,1994, the court determined that Jean was a fit parent and that no compelling reasons existed to award custody to Howard, a third party. Accordingly, it terminated the guardianship and transferred custody of Jenae to Jean. Howard appeals.
DECISION
Jean relies upon Barstad v. Frazier, 118 Wis. 2d 549, 568-69, 348 N.W.2d 479, 489 (1984), to support the trial court's order. In Barstad, the supreme court said:
We conclude that the rule to be followed in custody disputes between parents and third parties is that a parent is entitled to custody of his or her children unless the parent is either unfit or unable to care for the children or there are compelling reasons for awarding custody to a third party. Compelling reasons include abandonment, persis*22tent neglect of parental responsibilities, extended disruption of parental custody, or other similar extraordinary circumstances that would drastically affect the welfare of the child. If the court finds such compelling reasons, it may award custody to a third party if the best interests of the children would be promoted thereby.
(Citation and footnote omitted.)
Howard asserts that Barstad involved an initial custody determination, not a reevaluation of custody as is involved in the instant case. He notes that § 767.325(1)(b), Stats.,2 which governs revisions of legal custody and physical placement orders after two years have passed from the date the initial order was entered, was not enacted when Barstad was decided. He also contends that the facts in Barstad were much different from the facts of Jenae's guardianship.
*23The reason, however, that the Barstad court concluded that a parent is entitled to the custody of his or her child absent unfitness or compelling circumstances turned on the constitutionally protected right of a parent to the custody of his or her child. That is why the standard for governmental interference in the relationship is higher than the "best interest of the child" test. The court said:
While neither this court nor the United States Supreme Court has ever addressed the specific question posed by this case, i.e., what the constitution requires in a custody dispute between a parent and a nonparent third party, a number of relevant principles emerge. On the one hand, "[t]he fundamental liberty interest of natural parents in the care, custody, and management of their child does not evaporate simply because they have not been model parents or have lost temporary custody of their children to the State." On the other hand, it is evident... that the assertion of parental rights is to some extent dependent on the assumption of parental responsibilities, and that the zone of constitutionally protected family autonomy is not defined solely by genetic ties. A biological parent who has never borne any significant responsibility for the child and who has not functioned as a member of the child's family unit is not entitled to the full constitutional protections.
Barstad, 118 Wis. 2d at 562-63, 348 N.W.2d at 486 (citations omitted).
The supreme court has recently reaffirmed Barstad. In In re H.S.H.-K., 193 Wis. 2d 649, 664-65, 533 N.W.2d 419, 423 (1995), a case involving, in part, a third-party request for custody, the supreme court con*24sidered the trial court's order granting sole custody to the child's parent. The supreme court said:
A person who is not a biological or adoptive parent may not bring an action to obtain custody of a minor Tinless the biological or adoptive parent is "unfit or unable to care for the child" or there are compelling reasons for awarding custody to a nonparent.
Id.
The constitutional underpinning of Barstad is the reason why we reject Howard's assertion that § 767.325(1)(b), Statas, is applicable to guardianship proceedings where the contest is between a parent and a third party. Section 767.325(1)(b) uses a "best interest of the child" test for determining custody between parents. As we have discussed, Barstad rejects that test in cases involving third parties in favor of one which makes it more difficult to separate a child from a parent. Were we to conclude that § 767.325(1)(b) provides the proper test for termination of minor guardianship proceedings where the contest is between a parent and a third party, we would then have to conclude that § 767.325(1)(b) is unconstitutional in that setting. We are to interpret statutes so as to avoid a finding of unconstitutionality. See In re Marcus, 107 Wis. 2d 560, 570, 320 N.W.2d 806, 812 (1982). Accordingly, we conclude that § 767.325(1)(b), which does not, on its face, apply to guardianship proceedings, is inapplicable in guardianship litigation between a parent and a third party.
While we agree with Howard that a failure to exercise parental responsibilities may result in the forfeiture of constitutional rights to custody or visita*25tion, we disagree that we can decide that issue as he requests, as a matter of law. Howard argues:
If Jean R. had assumed her parental responsibilities and raised her daughter Jenae as a member of her own household, there is no question that Jean would be permitted to continue to raise Jenae free of government interference. That didn't happen, however. Not only did Jean choose to have Jenae raised by Howard, but Jean herself invoked government "interference" by petitioning the Dodge County Circuit Court to appoint Howard as Jenae's guardian.
This is not an argument about the standard applicable for reviewing the instant case. It is an assertion that the facts of the case require a result different from that reached by the trial court. Howard does not challenge the court's finding that Jean is a fit parent. He claims, however, that there are compelling reasons to deny custody to Jean.
The trial court found that there were no compelling reasons to continue Jenae's custody with Howard. We may not upset the factual component of that finding unless it is clearly erroneous. Section 805.17(2), Stats. Howard's brief recounts in detail the evidence of Jean's inadequacies. However, evidence which would support a finding contrary to that made by the trial court does not mandate reversal. Cogswell v. Robertshaw Controls Co., 87 Wis. 2d 243, 249, 274 N.W.2d 647, 650 (1979).
The record contains evidence that Jean maintained an interest in Jenae, though hampered by the demands of being a working single parent without a high school education. She worked a second shift which ended at 1:00 a.m. She agreed to the guardianship so *26that Jenae could get medical care and be enrolled in school. For a time, Jean was hospitalized with a form of diabetes and she was in a severe car accident. When she moved to Crandon, she encountered financial problems. She had meager savings and there was minimal employment there. She sent Jenae back to Howard because she felt that it was best for Jenae at the time. She maintained as much contact with Jenae as she could, but Howard did a lot of traveling. She telephoned many times, but often was unable to reach Howard or he had other plans. She asked Howard to bring Jenae to Crandon to visit, but he refused. She continued to offer money to help raise Jenae but Howard always refused. Jean left cards and gifts for Jenae at her parents' house when she couldn't see Jenae. She would travel to Beaver Dam about every month, though she tried to see Jenae more often. Jean telephones Jenae once a week.
Jenae is not afraid to get close to Jean when they are alone together, but Jenae is afraid to show her love to Jean when Howard is present. Consequently, Jean and Jenae worked out a code so that Jenae could tell Jean that she loved her when Howard was present. When Jenae was interviewed by a psychologist in October 1992, she showed the psychologist a message on a chalk board reading: "Dear Dr. Gina, I really want to live with my mom." After the psychologist read the message, Jenae insisted on erasing it.
The facts of record from which the trial court concluded that there were no compelling circumstances to deny Jean custody of Jenae differ from the facts Howard has stressed in his brief. After hearing the evidence, the court might have concluded that Jean was the parent Howard asserts her to be. But it did not. *27The evidence we have recited permitted the court to conclude, as it did, that there were no compelling circumstances which would permit it to award custody to Howard, a third party. And, our standard of review does not permit us to second guess the inferences drawn by the court. Once we accept those inferences, the conclusion that Howard has not met the Barstad test follows. We therefore affirm.
By the Court. — Order affirmed.
Section 805.17(2), Stats., provides in relevant part:
Findings of fact shall not be set aside unless clearly erroneous, and due regard shall be given to the opportunity of the trial court to judge the credibility of the witnesses.
Section 767.325(1), Stats., provides in relevant part:
[T]he following provisions are applicable to modifications of legal custody and physical placement orders:
(b) After 2-year period. 1. Except as provided under par. (a) and sub. (2), upon petition, motion or order to show cause by a party, a court may modify an order of legal custody or an order of physical placement where the modification would substantially alter the time a parent may spend with his or her child if the court finds all of the following:
a. The modification is in the best interest of the child.
2. With respect to subd. 1., there is a rebuttable presumption that:
a. Continuing the current allocation of decision making under a legal custody order is in the best interest of the child.
b. Continuing the child's physical placement with the parent with whom the child resides for the greater period of time is in the best interest of the child.

=== CASE 9739410 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:30.566225+00 ===

SUNDBY, J.
(dissenting). Fortuitously, the Wisconsin Supreme Court has very recently cut the Gordian knot which has tied the hands of trial courts in resolving custody and physical placement disputes betweén biological parents and persons who have established a parent-relationship with a child. See In re H.S.H.-K., 193 Wis. 2d 649, 533 N.W.2d 419 (1995). The court decided that in this same-sex marriage, the biological mother had "exercised her constitutional rights to include another adult to act as a parent." Id. at 694, 533 N.W.2d at 435. The court concluded that when the biological parent has permitted another adult to establish a parent-like relationship with his or her child, the court may exercise its equitable powers to protect the child's best interest by preserving the child's relationship with that adult.
This exercise of equitable power protects parental autonomy and constitutional rights by requiring that the parent-like relationship develop only with the consent and assistance of the biological or adoptive parent. It also protects a child's best interest by preserving the child's relationship with an adult who has been like a parent.
Id. at 696, 533 N.W.2d at 436.
*28Here, when the biological mother, Jean R., petitioned the court to appoint Howard M. guardian of her child, Jenae K.S., she exercised her constitutional right to include Howard to act as Jenae's parent. Barstad v. Frazier, 118 Wis. 2d 549, 348 N.W.2d 479 (1984), upon which the majority relies, does not apply where the parent-like relationship between a third party and the child developed with the consent and assistance of the biological parent. In this case, as in H.S.H.-K., the biological mother exercised her constitutional right to include another adult to act as a parent when she petitioned the circuit court to appoint Howard guardian of Jenae.
In her petition to establish a guardianship over Jenae, Jean stated that Jenae was in need of a guardian for the following reasons: "The ward is a minor. I desire for the benefit of my child that my child be permitted to reside at this time with Howard [M.] ... and it is necessary for him to be appointed legal guardian so he can properly care for my child at this time." In its order appointing Howard as Jenae's guardian, entered September 12,1989, the court found that Jenae was "a proper subject for guardianship" and Howard was "a competent and suitable person" to be appointed guardian. of the person and estate of Jenae. The mother does not challenge these findings.
On September 14, 1992, the mother filed a petition for termination of Howard's guardianship of Jenae pursuant to § 880.08(4), Stats., which provides: "Notice of a rehearing to determine if a ward is a proper subject to continue under guardianship shall be given as required for the appointment of a guardian." The legislature's use of the word "rehearing" is unusual if the legislature intended to include in its meaning a proceeding to terminate a guardianship. "Rehearing" ordinarily refers *29to "a second or new hearing ... by the same tribunal . . . ." Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1914 (1976). Black defines "rehearing" as the "[s]econd consideration of cause for [the] purpose of calling to court's or administrative board's attention any error, omission, or oversight in first consideration." Black's Law Dictionary 1287 (6th ed. 1990).
A "rehearing" usually follows close upon a decision entered after a hearing. A person who seeks a rehearing generally considers that the tribunal has reached the wrong result and seeks to correct the order or action of the tribunal. See § 227.49, Stats. ("Any person aggrieved by a final order may, within 20 days after service of the order, file a written petition for rehearing which shall specify in detail the grounds for the relief sought and supporting authorities."). The intention of the legislature in enacting § 880.08(4), Stats., is unclear; however, because there is no other procedure in ch. 880, Stats., to terminate a guardianship, it must have intended that the court could act under § 880.08(4). A guardian may be removed under § 880.16(1) and (2), STATS., without terminating the guardianship, but only for cause or by a minor ward who has reached the age of fourteen years. Jenae is now eleven years old. She will shortly be able to make her own decision as to whom she wishes as her guardian or whether she wishes the guardianship ended. Section 880.26, Stats., prescribes when a guardianship of the person shall terminate but does not include the circumstance where an interested person believes that the guardianship is no longer necessary and should be terminated. A guardian may be removed for the reasons stated in § 880.251, Stats., none of which apply here.
*30I conclude that the mother's attempt to terminate the guardianship of her daughter may be considered by the court under § 880.08(4), Stats. However, the circuit court must determine whether Jenae is "a proper subject" to continue under guardianship. A rehearing does not include a redetermination as to whether the guardian is "a proper guardian." See § 880.09, Stats. Thus, the circuit court is not required to substitute for the guardian a parent who is "suitable and willing" to act as the child's guardian.
Section 880.09(2), Stats., provides in part: "If one or both of the parents of a minor . . . are suitable and willing, the court shall appoint one or both of them as guardian unless the proposed ward objects." Jenae testified she did not want to live with her mother in Crandon, and that if she had to go there to live, she would run away. She also testified that she loved her "father" very much and wanted to stay with him. "[T]here is no way I am going to go live with her. I am too scared of her after she spanked me black and blue and left me in the bedroom just because I didn't eat." According to the report of Gina Koeppl, Ph.D., who evaluated Jenae, Jenae stated that she was happy in both settings and finds it hard to decide with whom she wishes to live. Dr. Koeppl reported that "Dad" put pressure on Jenae to say that she wished to live with him. At the beginning of the hearing on August 4, 1993, Jenae handed the judge a note which read: "About my dad[:] My dad is a kind loving man. He is not [cruel] like my mom. My dad never spank me. We always ta[l]k things out. I love him and I'll never leave him."
Child Protective Services filed a home study with the court. The worker reported that Jean had given birth to two other non-marital children that she gave up for adoption. In March 1988, the mother moved to *31Crandon to live with William R. Jenae lived with them at this time. However, in May 1988, Jenae stated that she wanted to go back to live with Howard and Rita M. The mother felt she needed to explore her relationship with William R. so she encouraged Jenae's decision.
The mother married William October 28, 1989. The mother and William have been involved in Alcoholics Anonymous for eight years. William wishes to adopt Jenae. The mother informed the psychologist that Jenae was excited about having "two grandmas" and "two grandpas." The worker concluded that the mother and William R. "appear to be loving and concerned 'parents.'"
Psychiatric Associates of Beaver Dam made a clinical examination of Jenae on November 10, 1992. The social worker found that Jenae would not benefit from a change of physical custody at this time. However, Jenae's mood was positive but with some mixed feelings respecting her mother's attempt to seek custody. She expressed her concerns "protective of her father and home." The worker concluded:
It would seem more constructive for Jenae to continue to see her mother on a regular basis increasing the length of visits if all goes well. Jenae indicated that she would like to see her mother more often.
The social worker supported a slow reintegration process consistent with Jenae's protective feelings as to her "dad." Dr. Koeppl supported Jenae's return to her mother as soon as deemed feasible by the therapist and the guardian ad litem. She agreed with Dr. Sionag Black's recommendation that Jenae be gradually reunified with her mother.
*32The trial court made no determination as to the credibility of the witnesses and, therefore, did not determine Jenae's wishes. The court felt bound to apply the Barstad v. Frazier standard. The court found that the mother was a fit parent and was entitled to custody of Jenae in the absence of compelling reasons for continuing the guardianship. The court, therefore, ordered that Jenae be informed immediately that the court had terminated the guardianship so that Jenae could make an adjustment to the transfer of custody to her mother. Because the standard the trial court should have applied was Jenae's best interest, the trial court erred in terminating the guardianship and awarding custody to Jenae's mother.
H.S.H.-K. confirms the opinion I expressed in my dissent to the certification of this case to the supreme court. I call particular attention to my discussion of In re Guardianship of Schmidt, 71 Wis. 2d 317, 237 N.W.2d 919 (1976). In Schmidt, the court first considered what standard governed its decision to choose as guardian the deceased mother's sister-in-law or the maternal grandparents. The court held:
The trial court aptly noted that the hearing was directed to a choice of a guardian; it was not a divorce custody or adoption hearing. Sec. 880.09, Stats., provides that in selecting a guardian:
The court shall consider nominations made by any interested person and, in its discretion, shall appoint a proper guardian, having due regard for the following:
*33The relevant factors include a preference for a minor's parent to be the guardian if "suitable and willing,"....
Both parties appear to accept the standard of "the best interest of the child" as controlling here. We think the conclusion is inescapable that the best interests test be followed. Nothing in the guardianship section indicates otherwise, although preference is given to certain nominations. This test, however, does not consist of concentration solely on the objective factors to the exclusion of the rights, legal or moral, of parents. See sec. 48.01(3), Stats., cited in Adoption of Randolph (1975), 68 Wis. 2d 64, 77, 227 N.W.2d 634. It must be considered in the balance, as the child's best interest may direct that a relationship be allowed between the child and the natural parent or other close relative that is known to him.
Id. at 327-28, 237 N.W.2d at 924 (emphasis added).
Where the natural parent voluntarily petitions to name a guardian for his or her child, the custody change from the parent to a third party is not only consented to but advocated by the parent. That parent cannot expect that his or her constitutionally protected parental rights may be enforced with the same vigor as in the case of a dispute between the natural parent and a third party who seeks to usurp the parent's rights. Those rights, however, must be balanced in determining the child's best interest. Schmidt, 71 Wis. 2d at 328, 237 N.W.2d at 924-25.
H.S.H.-K. clarifies that one of a biological parent's constitutionally protected rights is the right to "allow another adult to develop a parent-like relationship with the child." 193 Wis. 2d at 695 n.40, 533 N.W.2d at 436. The court stated that "on the basis of the record before us, a circuit court could find that Knott [the *34biological parent] had consented to and fostered Holtzman's formation and establishment of a parent-like relationship with the child, thereby sharing her parental rights." Id. (emphasis added).
We must reverse the judgment of the trial court. For the sake of all the parties, but especially Jenae's, we should conclude as a matter of law that Jenae's best interests would not be served by terminating the guardianship. A remand to the trial court will keep Jenae's status unsettled. We have previously noted that "[a] child's time is not an adult's time." In re R.H., 147 Wis. 2d 22, 37, 433 N.W.2d 16, 22 (Ct. App. 1988) (quoting J.R. Milligan & E. Loth, Permanency Planning for Children (A New Ballgame in Appellate Courts), 4 Appellate Court Administration Rev. 37, 38 (1982-83)), aff'd, 150 Wis. 2d 432, 441 N.W.2d 233 (1989). "[To] avoid irreparable psychological injury, placement, whenever in dispute, must be treated as the emergency that it is for the child." Id. (quoting J. Goldstein et al., Beyond the Best Interests of the Child 43 (1973)).
When the mother petitioned the circuit court to appoint Howard guardian of Jenae, she represented to the court that she sought the guardianship. I believe we can conclude as a matter of law that the mother has not shown that Jenae is not "a proper subject" to continue under guardianship; nor has she shown that Howard is not "a proper guardian" for Jenae. The mother seeks to terminate the guardianship simply because she now feels strong enough to re-establish a parental relationship with her daughter. I agree with Psychiatric Associates that that process should be slow and should consider Jenae's wish to protect Howard.
The equitable power which the H.S.H.-K. court has held a trial court may exercise to protect parental *35autonomy and the constitutional rights of biological parents permits the trial court to continue Howard's guardianship upon conditions which advance Jenae's best interests.
As long as the guardianship continues, Howard will have "care, custody and control" of Jenae. See § 880.01(3), Stats. The trial court is free, however, to exercise its equitable powers to ensure that Jenae's mother will have ample opportunity to develop her relationship with Jenae. Howard is seventy-five and may shortly welcome the mother's help in raising Jenae.
For some time, the legislature and the courts pursued policies which tended to limit the child's family. Perhaps that trend can now be reversed if the equitable powers announced in H.S.H.-K. are exercised by trial courts to provide the child with as extended a family as may be consistent with the child's best interest. Biological parents and persons having a parent-like relationship with a child should cooperate so that the child is not forced to make "Sophie's choice."

=== CASE 2219696 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:19.032847+00 ===

595 N.E.2d 736 (1992)
230 Ill. App. 3d 720
172 Ill. Dec. 375
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Ernest PERRY, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 5-88-0549.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
July 2, 1992.
*737 Daniel M. Kirwan, Deputy Defender, John T. Hildebrand, Asst. Defender, Office of the State Appellate Defender, Fifth Judicial District, Mt. Vernon, for defendant-appellant.
William R. Haine, State's Atty., Edwardsville, Kenneth R. Boyle, Director, Stephen E. Norris, Deputy Director, Raymond F. Buckley, Jr., Staff Atty., Office of the State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, Mt. Vernon, for plaintiff-appellee.
Justice HARRISON delivered the opinion of the court:
Following a jury trial in the circuit court of Madison County, defendant, Ernest Perry, was convicted of two counts each of murder (Ill.Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 38, par. 9-1(a)) and home invasion (Ill.Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 38, par. 12-11(a)(2)) in connection with the stabbing deaths of Alvin Autery and Mary Irwin. The circuit court denied defendant's post-trial motions and imposed concurrent sentences of imprisonment for natural life without parole on each of the murder convictions and 30 years' imprisonment on each of the home invasion counts.
We reversed and remanded for a new trial on the grounds that the circuit court had erred in refusing to suppress defendant's confession. (People v. Perry (1990), 205 Ill.App.3d 655, 151 Ill. Dec. 38, 563 N.E.2d 1144.) Our judgment was, in turn, reversed by the Illinois Supreme Court under authority of McNeil v. Wisconsin (1991), 501 U.S. ___, 111 S. Ct. 2204, 115 L. Ed. 2d 158, which was decided after our opinion was issued. (People v. Perry (1992), 147 Ill. 2d 430, 168 Ill. Dec. 817, 590 N.E.2d 454.) In reversing our judgment, the supreme court remanded the cause to us for consideration of the remaining arguments raised by defendant which we had no occasion to reach in our previous disposition. Those arguments are (1) whether defendant's sentences of natural life imprisonment on the murder convictions violated his rights under the eighth amendment to the United States Constitution (U.S. Const., amend. VIII) and article I, section 11, of the Illinois Constitution of 1970 (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 11), and (2) whether defendant is entitled to a new hearing on his pro se post-trial motion. For the reasons which follow, we must answer each of these questions in the negative. We therefore affirm.
Defendant was sentenced to terms of natural life imprisonment pursuant to section 5-8-1(a)(1)(c) of the Unified Code of Corrections (Ill.Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 38, par. 1005-8-1(a)(1)(c)), which mandates an automatic natural life sentence for first-degree murder where, as here, the defendant is found guilty of murdering more than one victim. Defendant contends that this sentencing provision should not have been applied to him because he did not commit the actual murders but was instead found guilty on the theory of accountability (Ill. Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 38, pars. 5-1, 5-2). He argues that his culpability was qualitatively different from that of the actual murderer, and that to automatically impose a natural life sentence on him as if he were the actual murderer without taking into account his personal circumstances and the particular circumstances of the offense contravenes both the eighth amendment to the United States Constitution (U.S. Const., amend. VIII) and Article I, section 11, of the Illinois Constitution of 1970 (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 11).
The State disputes that defendant's convictions were premised on accountability. At trial, accountability was only one of two alternative theories on which the convictions were sought. The jury also heard evidence and argument and was instructed on the theory that defendant was the principal offender, i.e., that he murdered the victims himself. Which of these theories the jury adopted is unclear, for it returned only general verdicts finding defendant guilty of the Autery and Irwin murders. This, however, is of no consequence, for *738 even if we accept defendant's argument that his convictions were based on accountability, his constitutional arguments would fail.
The mandatory natural life sentence for multiple murders specified by section 5-8-1(a)(1)(c) of the Unified Code of Corrections (Ill.Rev.Stat.1985, ch. 38, par. 1005-8-1(a)(1)(c)) is not limited only to those found guilty as principal offenders. It is also validly applied where guilt is based on accountability (People v. Foster (1990), 198 Ill.App.3d 986, 998-99, 145 Ill. Dec. 312, 320-21, 556 N.E.2d 1214, 1222-23), and it has been upheld against State and Federal constitutional challenges even where the defendant's convictions were based on accountability. (198 Ill.App.3d at 1000-01, 145 Ill. Dec. at 322, 556 N.E.2d at 1224.) Defendant has not persuaded us that we should reach a contrary conclusion here.
We turn then to defendant's argument regarding his pro se post-trial motion. Defendant contends that he is entitled to a new hearing on that motion because the circuit court failed to examine the factual matters underlying a claim he made therein that he was denied effective assistance of counsel. This argument is untenable. We agree that where a defendant presents a post-trial motion alleging ineffective assistance of counsel, the trial court should examine the factual matters underlying the claim. (People v. Washington (1989), 184 Ill.App.3d 703, 711, 133 Ill. Dec. 148, 153, 540 N.E.2d 1014, 1019.) In this case, however, defendant is not in a position to complain that this obligation was not met.
The record plainly shows that a hearing was held which considered not only defendant's pro se post-trial motion, but also a post-trial motion filed by his attorney. Defendant was present while his attorney presented arguments on those motions. Although the attorney did not argue the ineffective assistance of counsel point, he did advise the court at the conclusion of his argument that defendant had filed his own pro se motion. The circuit court then gave defendant the opportunity to address the arguments raised by that motion. The defendant expressly declined that opportunity. He offered nothing as to his ineffective assistance of counsel claim, and he has pointed to no impediment which prevented him from doing so. Under the circumstances, we fail to see how the circuit court can be faulted for not inquiring further into the facts underlying the claim. Given defendant's conduct at the hearing, we deem the claim to have been abandoned.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Madison County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
RARICK and WILLIAM A. LEWIS, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2219700 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:19.09013+00 ===

595 N.E.2d 230 (1992)
230 Ill. App. 3d 65
172 Ill. Dec. 167
John SCHOONOVER, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
AMERICAN FAMILY INSURANCE GROUP, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 4-91-0900.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fourth District.
June 18, 1992.
R. John Alvarez, Grosboll, Becker, Tice, Alvarez & Smith, Petersburg, for plaintiff-appellant.
Karen L. Kendall, Bradley S. McMillan, Duncan B. Cooper, III, David A. Perkins, Heyl, Royster, Voelker & Allen, Peoria, for defendant-appellee.
Presiding Justice GREEN delivered the opinion of the court:
This case is the latest of a series of decisions of this court concerning the operation *231 of Supreme Court Rule 308(a), which states:
"When the trial court, in making an interlocutory order not otherwise appealable, finds that the order involves a question of law as to which there is substantial ground for difference of opinion and that an immediate appeal from the order may materially advance the ultimate termination of the litigation, the court shall so state in writing, identifying the question of law involved. Such a statement may be made at the time of the entry of the order or thereafter on the court's own motion or on motion of any party. The Appellate Court may thereupon in its discretion allow an appeal from the order." 134 Ill.2d R. 308(a).
The procedures giving rise to the instant appeal began on April 4, 1989, when plaintiff John Schoonover filed a complaint in the circuit court of Morgan County against defendant American Family Insurance Company to recover, pursuant to a homeowner's insurance policy issued by defendant, for fire damage to a house owned by him. On October 5, 1990, that court denied a second defense motion for summary judgment based upon the theory that the suit was tardily filed under the terms of the policy. That order of dismissal contained the findings required under Supreme Court Rule 308(a) for us to grant leave to appeal the order and we granted leave to appeal. We reversed the order denying summary judgment and remanded to the circuit court with directions to grant a summary judgment in favor of the defendant. Schoonover v. American Family Insurance Co. (1991), 214 Ill.App.3d 33, 157 Ill. Dec. 794, 572 N.E.2d 1258, appeal denied (1991), 141 Ill. 2d 560, 162 Ill. Dec. 508, 580 N.E.2d 134.
After plaintiff filed his complaint in Schoonover, defendant was served with summons on April 11, 1989. Then, as now, Supreme Court Rules 101(d) and 181(a) (134 Ill.2d Rules 101(d), 181(a)) required defendants in cases of the nature involved here to appear within 30 days of summons. However, defendant made no appearance until June 1, 1989, when it filed a motion for additional time until June 1, 1989, and to be excused from filing a verified pleading. On June 8, 1989, plaintiff responded by objecting to the extension and requesting a default because of defendant's tardiness in appearing. On June 9, 1989, the circuit court denied plaintiff's motion for default and granted defendant's motion for an extension of time.
On remand, after our decision in Schoonover, the circuit court entered a summary judgment in favor of defendant as directed by the mandate of this court. On December 5, 1991, plaintiff filed the instant notice of appeal as to that judgment. He now contends that the summary judgment entered pursuant to the mandate was erroneous because the circuit court erred in denying his motion for a default judgment against defendant. Defendant maintains that the decision of the court directing entry of summary judgment is res judicata and law of the case as to the propriety of the summary judgment and, in any event, the circuit court acted within its discretion in denying the motion for a default judgment.
Under the holding in Relph v. Board of Education of DePue Unit School District No. 103 (1981), 84 Ill. 2d 436, 50 Ill. Dec. 830, 420 N.E.2d 147, the theory of res judicata is not available to defendant. In Relph, in separate counties, teachers discharged by school districts in reduction of forces because of economic conditions sought writs of mandamus to require their rehiring. Circuit courts entered summary judgments for the respondents. On appeal the circuit courts were directed to enter summary judgments for the teachers. (Hagopian v. Board of Education of Tampico Community Unit School District No. 4 (1978), 56 Ill.App.3d 940, 14 Ill. Dec. 711, 372 N.E.2d 990; Relph v. Board of Education of DePue Unit School District No. 103 (1977), 51 Ill. App. 3d 1036, 9 Ill. Dec. 614, 366 N.E.2d 1125.) Subsequent to the remands, the supreme court decided Lenard v. Board of Education of Fairfield School District No. 112 (1979), 74 Ill. 2d 260, 24 Ill. Dec. 163, *232 384 N.E.2d 1321, which placed a new interpretation upon the law involved.
On remand from the Hagopian and Relph appellate decisions, the circuit courts took the position that the appellate court decisions were res judicata and no consideration could be given to the Lenard opinion. Appellate courts agreed (Hagopian v. Board of Education of Tampico Community Unit School District No. 4 (1980), 83 Ill.App.3d 1097, 39 Ill. Dec. 308, 404 N.E.2d 899; Relph v. Board of Education of the DePue Unit School District No. 103 (1980), 83 Ill.App.3d 1139, 39 Ill. Dec. 331, 404 N.E.2d 922). On consolidated appeals to the supreme court, that court held that the appellate court judgments which remanded the case, although directing entry of judgments, did not have a res judicata effect. The court explained:
"The judgments of the appellate court were not final judgments in the sense that they did not terminate the litigation but remanded the cases to the trial courts with directions that judgments be entered, which judgments, in turn, would be appealable to the appellate court under our constitution. The appellate court's decisions, in turn, would then be subject to review by this court through petitions for leave to appeal. (73 Ill.2d R. 315(a).) Since the judgments in these cases were still subject to the appellate process, they were not to be given res judicata effect. The most that can be said of the appellate court's mandate in each case is that it established the law of the case." Relph, 84 Ill.2d at 442-43, 50 Ill. Dec. at 833, 420 N.E.2d at 150.
The doctrine of the law of the case was explained by this court in Lubbers v. Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. (1986), 147 Ill.App.3d 501, 511, 101 Ill. Dec. 175, 183, 498 N.E.2d 357, 365, as "[w]here, in a prior appeal, questions of law are presented and determined, such become the law of the case and are generally binding and will control in a subsequent appeal unless the facts presented in the subsequent proceedings are so substantially different as to require a different interpretation." (See also Bisco v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. (1990), 204 Ill.App.3d 19, 149 Ill. Dec. 593, 561 N.E.2d 1289, appeal denied (1991), 136 Ill. 2d 541, 153 Ill. Dec. 371, 567 N.E.2d 329.) The foregoing rule was further qualified by the supreme court to indicate that it is applicable only to a subsequent appeal to the appellate court and not the supreme court even though it denied leave to appeal in the first case and is not applicable if a change in the interpretation of the law has occurred between the appeals. Relph, 84 Ill.2d at 443, 50 Ill.Dec. at 833, 420 N.E.2d at 150.
The law of the case rule in regard to a case decided in the first appeal pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 308 presents tricky procedural questions. Was the question of the propriety of the trial court's denial of plaintiff's motion for a default decided in Schoonover when we ordered the circuit court to enter a summary judgment for defendant? Should plaintiff have cited that claim of error on review in Schoonover in support of his theory that summary judgment for defendant should not have been allowed? Should and could plaintiff have cross-appealed the denial of the motion for default in Schoonover?
The questions are complicated by a feature of the Schoonover decision which we have not yet discussed. We held there that the provision of Supreme Court Rule 308(a) requiring the circuit court to identify "the question of law involved" does not limit the issues which can be raised in support of the appeal. Rather, the order appealed can be attacked by any point raised in the circuit court. This court had not spoken directly to this question before but several decisions of the other districts of the appellate court had held that the scope of review was limited to the identifying questions (i.e., Koch v. Spalding (1988), 174 Ill.App.3d 692, 124 Ill. Dec. 302, 529 N.E.2d 19; Getto v. City of Chicago (1981), 92 Ill.App.3d 1045, 48 Ill. Dec. 588, 416 N.E.2d 1110). We agreed with the dissent of Justice Harrison in Koch and the opinion in In re Oil Spill by Amoco Cadiz (7th Cir.1981), 659 F.2d 789, the latter of which gave a construction of a Federal statute (28 U.S.C. § 1292(b) (1988)), from which Supreme Court Rule *233 308 was derived, similar to that of Justice Harrison's dissent.
The procedural problem confronting plaintiff here is not entirely a product of our interpretation of Supreme Court Rule 308(a) in Schoonover because a similar problem would have existed if the summary judgment had been ordered based entirely upon one of the identifying questions. He still would have the problem of preserving the question of the ruling on the motion to default. However, under an interpretation that in a Supreme Court Rule 308 appeal the issues can go beyond the identifying questions to fully decide the propriety of the order appealed, plaintiff would have been more likely to take every step to preserve the question concerning the denial of the default.
The instant case is not our first encounter with problems arising in the circuit court after reversals of interlocutory orders in appeals granted under Supreme Court Rule 308. In Sinclair v. State Bank (1991), 207 Ill.App.3d 430, 152 Ill. Dec. 516, 566 N.E.2d 44, appeal denied (1991), 139 Ill. 2d 605, 159 Ill. Dec. 117, 575 N.E.2d 924 (Sinclair I), this court accepted a Supreme Court Rule 308 appeal from an order of the circuit court denying a motion to dismiss the complaint. The circuit court order identified two questions of law as being involved. This court held that the circuit court had erroneously ruled as to both questions and reversed without remandment. Unlike in Schoonover, we based our decision upon the identified questions. However, the effect of our decision was to dismiss the complaint for failure to state a cause of action without the plaintiff having the opportunity to amend which would have existed, if the complaint had been dismissed by the circuit court.
While leave to appeal to the supreme court was pending in Sinclair I, that plaintiff filed a motion in the circuit court seeking to file an additional count on a different theory. The circuit court, noting no remandment had been ordered, denied the motion and the plaintiff appealed. This court noted that had the dismissal of the complaint occurred in the circuit court, section 2-615(d) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Code) (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 110, par. 2-615(d)) would have given the plaintiff an opportunity to seek to file an amended complaint. Recognizing that we should have ordered remandment for that purpose in Sinclair I, this court concluded that under the peculiar circumstances of that case, fairness required that the plaintiff be permitted to have an opportunity to present a proposed amendment. This court then reversed and remanded for that purpose. Sinclair v. State Bank (1992), 226 Ill. App. 3d 909, 168 Ill. Dec. 462, 589 N.E.2d 862 (Sinclair II); see also Healy v. Vaupel (1990), 133 Ill. 2d 295, 317, 140 Ill. Dec. 368, 379, 549 N.E.2d 1240, 1251.
By analogy to the manner in which this court dealt in Sinclair II with the problems arising from Sinclair I, we elect to consider first the question of whether the circuit court's denial of plaintiff's motion for a default judgment was error. Defendant's appearance and request for additional time to plead was tardy by slightly more than 30 days. Plaintiff maintains that because defendant was in a business where it was inherently subject to frequent litigation, had business sophistication, and had access to capable counsel, defendant had no excuse for its tardiness.
In contending the circuit court abused its discretion in denying plaintiff's request to default defendant, plaintiff relies upon Graf's Beverages of Illinois, Inc. v. Tauber (1977), 50 Ill.App.3d 1047, 9 Ill. Dec. 36, 366 N.E.2d 150, and Piekarczyk v. Gibas (1951), 342 Ill.App. 510, 97 N.E.2d 129 (abstract of decision). In Graf's, the defendant appealed from an order refusing to vacate a default judgment. There, unlike here, the defendant had been defaulted for failure to timely plead and the appellate court was upholding rather than setting aside, as plaintiff would have us do, the discretion of the circuit court. The opinion in Piekarczyk was published only in abstract, which plaintiff has not appended to his brief. Ill.Rev.Stat.1991, ch. 110A, par. 908.
Section 2-1301(e) of the Code provided, in part, that even after a default judgment *234 has been entered, "[t]he court may in its discretion, before final order or judgment, set aside any default * * *." (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1991, ch. 110, par. 2-1301(e).) Here, no default had been entered but the court's discretion to deny a default must be at least as great as the discretion as to whether to set aside a default. (See Freeborn & Peters v. Professional Seminars Associates, Inc. (1988), 176 Ill.App.3d 714, 718-19, 126 Ill. Dec. 179, 182, 531 N.E.2d 806, 809.) The reason why the court has considerable discretion is because of the drastic nature of a default. Wollschlager v. Sundstrand Corp. (1986), 143 Ill.App.3d 347, 349, 97 Ill. Dec. 625, 627, 493 N.E.2d 107, 109; Widicus v. Southwestern Electric Cooperative, Inc. (1960), 26 Ill.App.2d 102, 109, 167 N.E.2d 799, 803.
In Havana National Bank v. Satorius-Curry, Inc. (1988), 167 Ill.App.3d 562, 565, 118 Ill. Dec. 363, 365, 521 N.E.2d 645, 647, this court explained that the issue as to whether a defendant should be defaulted depends upon whether justice is being granted and that this depends upon (1) the diligence or lack of diligence by the defaultee, (2) the existence of a meritorious defense, and (3) the relative hardships on the parties arising from a default or a refusal of the court to default. In Wilkin Insulation Co. v. Holtz (1989), 186 Ill.App.3d 151, 155-56, 134 Ill. Dec. 157, 160, 542 N.E.2d 157, 160, the court affirmed a default judgment where the defendant had caused numerous delays and disregarded trial court orders but stated that a reviewing court should not interfere with a trial court's discretion in ruling in regard to a default.
The circuit court does not have unlimited discretion in rulings in regard to defaulting a defendant. (Graf's, 50 Ill.App.3d at 1051, 9 Ill. Dec. at 39, 366 N.E.2d at 153.) However, here the plaintiff did not move for a default until defendant had appeared and no showing was made that plaintiff suffered any substantial prejudice by the delay in excess of 30 days. The decision in Schoonover indicates the defendant did have a viable defense. On the record presented, which includes no transcript of the hearing on the motion for default, we do not determine the circuit court abused its discretion in denying that motion.
Plaintiff maintains that fundamental unfairness to him results from an inconsistence between the strict standard which we applied to the requirements of the policy in regard to his making a claim against defendant within one year of his loss and the standard which permitted defendant to tardily contest plaintiff's complaint. However, the purpose of the one-year limitation of the policy was because investigation by the insurer of the validity of the claim would be hampered by further delay. Plaintiff was not hampered in this manner because of defendant's tardiness in making an appearance. Moreover, the policy makes no provision for court's discretion in regard to whether the time for filing claims may be extended at the discretion of the court while the statutory provisions providing for a default expressly grant discretion to the court.
We conclude that the doctrine of the law of the case also requires us to affirm. Accordingly, we do so for the reasons stated.
Affirmed.
STEIGMANN and LUND, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739411 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:35.047491+00 ===

JUSTICE NICKELS delivered the opinion of the court: Intervenor, National Housing Partnership (NHP), appeals the order of the circuit court granting summary judgment to defendant, Brookwood Land Venture (Brookwood). NHP sought to participate in the just compensation determined by a jury as the fair-market value of certain property, which Brookwood owned and which was the subject of an underlying condemnation action. NHP’s claim was based on a contract providing for such participation in the event Brook-wood entered a sales or purchase agreement for the property within a given time frame. On appeal, NHP asserts that the circuit court erred in finding as a matter of law that: (1) the condemnation was not a contract for sale within the meaning of NHP’s contract with Brookwood, and (2) if the condemnation was a contract for sale, such sale did not occur until after expiration of NHP’s right to participate in the proceeds of the sale of the property. We affirm. In 1984, NHP and Marquette Properties, Inc., entered a real estate sales contract with Brookwood and Capital Bank and Trust Company of Chicago, as trustee of a land trust, for the purchase of 27 acres of vacant land in Du Page County. However, Marquette Properties, Inc., is not involved in this appeal because, subsequent to the filing of the complaint in intervention, it assigned all its rights under that contract to NHP. The sales contract called for a purchase price of $1.6 million, set the latest possible closing date as November 28, 1984, and required NHP’s payment of certain sums as earnest money. However, the closing was delayed by litigation concerning the only then existing access to the property filed by an adjacent homeowners’ association alleging ownership of such access. NHP and Brookwood negotiated several amendments to the initial contract extending the closing date, for which NHP paid additional sums. Eventually, NHP and Brookwood entered an “Agreement Terminating Real Estate Purchase/Sale Contract” (termination agreement) on November 26, 1986. NHP’s earnest money was returned, but the additional sums that had been paid to extend the purchase agreement were retained by Brookwood. The termination agreement further provided: “(b) Seller [Brookwood] shall make a reasonable and good faith effort to sell the premises for cash to another buyer on such terms and conditions as are in the Seller’s sole judgment acceptable to the Seller, provided only that Seller has no direct or indirect ownership or control of said buyer, and that the purchase/sale agreement is the result of good faith arm’s length negotiations. (c) If a contract for the sale of the Premises, as described in paragraph (b) above (the ‘Subsequent Contract’) is entered into prior to March 1, 1988, Purchaser [NHP] shall be entitled to participate in the ‘Net Proceeds’ (as hereinafter defined) resulting therefrom in accordance with the following: (i) if the Net Proceeds are less than $1,600,000.00, Purchaser shall receive $160,000.00. (ii) if the Net Proceeds exceed $1,600,000.00, Purchase shall receive the sum of $160,000.00 plus fifty percent (50%) of the amount by which Net Proceeds exceed $1,600,000.00, but in no event shall Purchaser receive more than $307,250.00.” After provision for a possible installment contract, the termination agreement defined “Net Proceeds” as the total cash consideration less expenses for title insurance, escrow charges, transfer taxes, real estate commissions, real estate taxes, and interest on the existing mortgage incurred between the date of the termination agreement and any subsequent contract. Early in February 1987, the Forest Preserve District of Du Page County (District) approached Brookwood to acquire the property. After Brookwood rejected the District’s offer of $1,463,400 for the property, further negotiations were considered futile and ceased and a condemnation action was filed February 24, 1987. Although NHP was initially named a defendant, it was dismissed with prejudice in January 1988 with respect to any legal title or fee interest in the property, but without prejudice as to its rights under the termination agreement. NHP filed a complaint in intervention in June 1988 seeking injunctive and declaratory relief and damages based on the termination agreement. In April 1989 after a jury trial, just compensation for the property was set at $2,211,898, which was upheld on appeal. (Forest Preserve District v. Brookwood Land Venture (1990), 199 Ill. App. 3d 973.) After completion of the condemnation proceeding, the circuit court allowed NHP’s petition to intervene finding that its right to participate in the proceeds of a sale required the court to reach the issue now before us of whether the condemnation was a sale as that term was defined and used in the termination agreement. NHP and Brookwood filed cross-motions for summary judgment, and the circuit court granted Brookwood’s motion. The circuit court found that the relevant provision of the termination agreement was only applicable to a voluntary transfer of title and that, in any event, the condemnation occurred outside the time frame allowed by the termination agreement. NHP timely appealed and now asserts that the court erred as a matter of law in finding that the termination agreement did not apply to transfer of title by condemnation filed but not concluded until after expiration of the contract. Summary judgment is proper when the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1005(c); Hagy v. McHenry County Conservation District (1989), 190 Ill. App. 3d 833, 842.) The construction of the terms of a contract presents only a question of law and, therefore, is appropriate for summary judgment. W.H. Lyman Construction Co. v. Village of Gurnee (1985), 131 Ill. App. 3d 87, 93. In construing the terms of a contract, a court looks first only to the language of the contract employed by the parties in describing their intent. (Berutti v. Dierks Foods, Inc. (1986), 145 Ill. App. 3d 931, 934.) If such language is clear and unambiguous, it will be given its natural and ordinary meaning. (Berutti, 145 Ill. App. 3d at 934.) Assertions of mere disagreement between the parties over the meaning of the terms of a contract based on a subsequent unexpected turn of events cannot render an otherwise unambiguous contract ambiguous. (Berutti, 145 Ill. App. 3d at 934.) Rather, if a court can determine the meaning of a contract based on a simple knowledge of the facts on which the meaning of the language depends, no ambiguity exists. (Berutti, 145 Ill. App. 3d at 934.) Thus, a court may not place a construction on the terms of a contract that is contrary to the plain and obvious meaning of the language. (Johnstowne Centre Partnership v. Chin (1983), 99 Ill. 2d 284, 287-88.) The entire instrument must be considered in determining if an ambiguity exists (United States Trust Co. v. Jones (1953), 414 Ill. 265, 270-71), and the fundamental purpose of the agreement provides the context in which disputed language should be interpreted (Pieszehalskii v. Oslager (1984), 128 Ill. App. 3d 437, 445-47).  Condemnation, or eminent domain, is the process by which a sovereign exercises the power to “take” private property for public purposes subject to the constitutional requirement that just compensation be paid to the owner. (Department of Public Works & Buildings v. Kirkendall (1953), 415 Ill. 214, 217.) No taking in the constitutional sense occurs until a condemnation petition is filed, just compensation is ascertained, and such compensation is paid. (Towne v. Town of Libertyville (1989), 190 Ill. App. 3d 563, 568.) Generally, no taking occurs until either a purchase or sale agreement is negotiated and executed or until condemnation proceedings, including payment, are concluded. (Towne, 190 Ill. App. 3d at 568; Griffin v. City of North Chicago (1983), 112 Ill. App. 3d 901, 906.) As a prerequisite to condemnation jurisdiction, the governmental body seeking to exercise its eminent domain powers must attempt to negotiate an agreement to purchase the subject property. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 110, par. 7 — 102; City of Chicago v. Harrison-Halsted Building Corp. (1957), 11 Ill. 2d 431, 434; Lake County Forest Preserve District v. First National Bank (1990), 200 Ill. App. 3d 354, 356.) However, when circumstances demonstrate that agreement is unreachable, no further negotiations are necessary. (Peoples Gas Light & Coke Co. v. Buckles (1962), 24 Ill. 2d 520, 527-28; Lake County Forest Preserve, 200 Ill. App. 3d at 356.) Just compensation is “the amount of money which a purchaser, willing but not obligated to buy the property, would pay to an owner willing but not obligated to sell in a voluntary sale.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 110, par. 7 — 121.) Thus, although just compensation is determined by attempting to approximate the voluntary marketplace, the essence of a condemnation is its involuntary, compulsory nature. In contrast, a contract for sale or purchase requires a meeting of the minds, or mutual assent to the terms of the contract. (D.B. Corkey Co. v. Koplin (1988), 176 Ill. App. 3d 1096, 1102.) Such assent is generally the result of offer and acceptance. (D.B. Corkey Co., 176 Ill. App. 3d at 1102.) Both a seller and a buyer have the right to select with whom each will contract, and neither can be forced to agree with another not of his choosing. (Davito v. Blakely (1968), 96 Ill. App. 2d 196, 201.) The terms of the contract must be definite before such meeting of the minds can occur and an agreement or contract can be deemed to have been reached. (D.B. Corkey Co., 176 Ill. App. 3d at 1102; Deleon Group, Inc. v. Northern Trust Corp. (1989), 187 Ill. App. 3d 635, 643.) Thus, a contract or agreement for sale or purchase is a consensual, voluntary relationship. With this fundamental distinction between acquisition by condemnation and transfer of title pursuant to a contract or agreement, we turn to NHP’s argument that the “contract for sale” language of the termination agreement included transfer of title by condemnation.  The clear and unambiguous language of the termination agreement applies to a “purchase/sale agreement” that is “the result of good faith arm’s length negotiations.” Such negotiations were completely subject to Brookwood’s judgment as to what terms and conditions were acceptable, limited only by good faith as is implicit in the performance of every contract (see, e.g., Madonna v. Giacobbe (1989), 190 Ill. App. 3d 859, 866). The termination agreement expressly defines the “net proceeds” in which NHP was entitled to participate as the cash price less only those expenses traditionally associated with a voluntary, arm’s length negotiated sale by a willing seller. Finally, the fundamental purpose of the termination agreement was to allow NHP to recoup some of the price it paid for what eventually became in essence an option agreement. NHP’s ability to receive such recoupment was not only expressly limited in duration, but subject to Brookwood’s good-faith willingness to become a seller on any given terms. We fail to find the challenged language ambiguous in light of the plain language of the termination agreement considered together with the language of the entire agreement in the context of its fundamental purpose, and we need look no further to determine the intent of the parties. The cases cited by NHP do not persuade us otherwise. In City of Chicago v. Carpenter (1968), 95 Ill. App. 2d 81, 81-82, a promissory note given in exchange for one-half interest in the condemned property was both payable on demand and “payable when [the] property is sold.” On the obligor’s death, his one-half interest passed to his sons. When the proceeds of the condemnation were to be distributed, the sons and holder of the note both participated in the proceeds as owners of the property, but the holder of the note sought payment for the obligor’s share of that investment from the obligor’s share of the proceeds of the condemnation. Finding the language of the note ambiguous, the court looked to the intent of the parties based on the circumstances of its execution. Because the transaction was speculative with no requirement of initial investment, the court found that the maker of the note intended to pay for his portion of such investment from any proceeds realized at the time such proceeds were realized. City of Chicago, 95 Ill. App. 2d at 83-87. City of Chicago is initially and fundamentally distinguishable from the present instance in that there is no ambiguity in the termination agreement. In addition, NHP did not invest in the property speculating that its value would increase and generate a profit, but rather the purpose of the termination agreement was to allow NHP to extinguish both the risks and costs associated with its continued interest in the property. Finally, the limited recovery of NHP’s expenses under the termination agreement, unlike the note in City of Chicago, was also expressly limited in duration. Thus, City of Chicago is not controlling because the termination agreement is not ambiguous, its purpose was not speculative investment, and it did not allow NHP unlimited recovery of its expenses. Nor do we find NHP’s citation of isolated references arising in inapposite contexts from other precedent persuasive. Vournas v. Montgomery County (1982), 53 Md. App. 243, 452 A.2d 1263, concerned an owner’s attempt to avoid payment of a statutory transfer tax where the statute specifically defined such transfer as acts by the parties or by law through which title to property is conveyed from one person to another. (Vournas, 53 Md. App. at 252, 452 A.2d at 1269.) In discussing the claim of a landowner in Langston v. City of Miami Beach (Fla. App. 1971), 242 So. 2d 481, to just compensation for a portion of the private roadway abutting his property, the Florida court concluded that the government had the same rights upon completion of the condemnation as would a third party upon a bona fide sale. (Langston, 242 So. 2d at 482-83.) Finally, the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois merely acknowledged that a statutory grant of authority to a governmental agency to acquire land by purchase for the legitimate governmental purpose of conservation also included acquisition for the same purpose by eminent domain. (United States v. 2.74 Acres of Land in Williamson County (E.D. Ill. 1940), 32 F. Supp. 55, 57.) Thus, NHP’s argument fails because each of these precedents concerns the authority of the government to initiate eminent domain proceedings or the status of the government upon completion of such proceedings, and each contains nothing to persuade us that a condemnation is a sale as that term was used in the termination agreement. • 3 In light of our finding that the circuit court did not err in construing the unambiguous language of the termination agreement, it is unnecessary to consider whether the condemnation occurred at the point in time at which the condemnation complaint was filed or not until the condemnation was concluded and the just compensation determined by the jury was paid. However, we note that no taking occurs until just compensation is paid. (Towne, 190 Ill. App. 3d at 568.) Until such time, a governmental body is free to decline to proceed with the condemnation. (Department of Transportation v. La Salle National Bank (1981), 102 Ill. App. 3d 1093, 1099; see also, e.g., Commissioners of Lincoln Park v. Schmidt (1944), 386 Ill. 550.) So, too, during the time between the filing of a condemnation complaint and a jury’s finding, the parties are free to continue to negotiate towards a consensual purchase agreement. Thus, an eminent domain proceeding is again distinct from a contractual relationship because in a condemnation proceeding the seller has neither the right to require performance nor a cause of action for damages caused by the government’s failure to complete the process. (Cf. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 110, par. 7 — 123 (attorney fees, costs, and expenses of defense recoverable if government dismisses condemnation proceeding prior to judgment).) Until a seller acquires some right of redress against the buyer, we find that a transfer of title by either sale or condemnation does not occur.  Finally, Brookwood asserts that NHP’s appeal of these issues was frivolous and seeks sanctions against NHP pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 375(b). (134 Ill. 2d R. 375(b); Kennedy v. Miller (1990), 197 Ill. App. 3d 785.) Although the authority cited by NHP has failed to persuade us and, in some instances, has only tangential relation to the facts of this appeal, we nevertheless find NHP’s assertions were not frivolous. Rather, the dearth of timely relevant authority on point indicates that the issues raised warranted our attention. We find no authority for parsing an appeal into individual issues in considering its merit, but rather “[a]n appeal will be deemed frivolous where it is not reasonably well grounded in fact and not warranted by existing law or a good-faith argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law” (134 Ill. 2d R. 375(b)). In contrast, failure to comply with the rules on appeal is applicable to the conduct relating to individual issues, and the sanctions provided are directed to the individual issues to which the offending conduct relates. (134 Ill. 2d 375(a).) Therefore, for purposes of Supreme Court Rule 375(b), we decline to consider separately the two interrelated issues asserted by appellant, which were themselves framed by the circuit court’s order addressing not only the nature of a condemnation proceeding, but alternately the timing of that event. The order of the circuit court granting the motion for summary judgment of defendant, Brookwood Land Venture, is affirmed. Affirmed. BOWMAN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739412 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:35.052001+00 ===

JUSTICE McLAREN, respectfully dissenting in part: I respectfully dissent. I believe this appeal is frivolous and subject to sanctions pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 375(b) (134 Ill. 2d R. 375(b)). The majority opinion resolved the merits of the first trial court’s ruling, but did not resolve the merits of the second trial court’s ruling. I believe the appeal, dependent upon reversing the trial court’s second ruling, is frivolous and is nothing more than a feeble attempt to force a large peg into a smaller square hole. The following is the entire argument of appellant regarding the trial court’s second ruling. The appellant’s brief states as follows: “THE TRIAL COURT ERRED IN HOLDING AS A MATTER OF LAW THAT THE TAKING BY CONDEMNATION, EVEN IF A SALE WITHIN THE MEANING OF THE TERMINATION AGREEMENT, DID NOT TAKE PLACE WITHIN THE TIME REQUIRED BY THAT AGREEMENT. As part of the basis of its judgment in favor of Brook-wood, the trial court concluded that the transfer of title of the Property through the process of condemnation did not ‘fall within the time limitations of the agreement.’ (SR. C187, App. 2). Simply stated, there is absolutely no basis for this reading of the Termination Agreement. It is irrelevant that the condemnation award was not made and the monies not paid by the District until after March 1988, so long as the condemnation petition was filed before that date. [(Emphasis added.)] The time limits in the Termination Agreement refer only to the date of contracting and sets [sic] no deadline as to when the transaction must actually be concluded in order for NHP to be entitled to a portion of the proceeds. By its express terms, the Termination Agreement contemplates that the ultimate sale might be consummated after March 1, 1988. Thus, paragraph 2(d) of the Termination Agreement provides: ‘If no Subsequent Contract [for the sale of the Property] is entered into by March 1, 1988, or if one previously entered into is terminated prior to its consummation after March 1, 1988, then this agreement shall terminate and be of no further force or effect ***. [APP. 48]’ (Emphasis added.) The trial court simply misread the Termination Agreement in concluding that the condemnation was not timely.” The appellant’s reply brief states as follows: “THE TRIAL COURT ERRED IN HOLDING AS A MATTER OF LAW THAT THE TAKING BY CONDEMNATION, EVEN IF A SALE WITHIN THE MEANING OF THE TERMINATION AGREEMENT, DID NOT TAKE PLACE WITHIN THE TIME REQUIRED BY THAT AGREEMENT. Without explanation, the trial court concluded that the transfer of title of the Property through the process of condemnation did not ‘fall within the time limitations of the agreement.’ Brookwood now attempts to justify this misreading of the Termination Agreement by noting that the condemnation judgment was entered on the jury’s verdict well after the contract deadline of March 1, 1988. Brookwood ignores the fact, however, that this deadline refers not to consummation of the sale, but to the execution of a contract. As noted in NHP’s initial brief (and ignored by Brook-wood), the Termination Agreement, by its express terms, contemplates that the ultimate sale might be consummated after March 1, 1988. Hence the key date is tied not to a sale, but to the execution of a contract for sale: ‘If no Subsequent Contract [for the sale of the Property] is entered into by March 1, 1988, or if one previously entered into is terminated prior to its consummation after March 1, 1988, then this agreement shall terminate and be of no further force or effect *** (emphasis added).’ This provision also renders irrelevant Brookwood’s argument that the Forest Preserve District could have, after March 1, 1988, discontinued its efforts to obtain the property. If that happened, and if the sale was never consummated, the Termination Agreement would be deemed terminated and NHP would have no claim thereunder. The same would be true, under the above referenced language, if a private purchaser terminated its efforts to obtain title to the property prior to consummation of the sale after March 1, 1988. The parties clearly contemplated that a sale might fall apart in mid-stream, and that such an occurrence would negate NHP’s rights. Of course, this did not happen, and the District did in fact purchase the Property.” The argument wholly fails to establish, let alone address, that the filing of the condemnation suit by the adverse third party is the equivalent of a “subsequent contract entered into by March 1, 1988.” This equivalency is an essential element of appellant’s theory of reversing the trial court’s ruling and its final judgment. As it fails, so does the entire appeal. The appellant knew or ought to have known that a successful appeal was dependent upon reversal of the trial court’s second ruling. The failure to properly address the second ruling resulted in a frivolous appeal. By analogy, a trial court finds no liability in tort because there is no duty on the part of the defendant and the statute of repose has run. An appeal as to the existence of a duty may arguably be valid. However, the failure to properly address the ruling of the statute of repose ought to result in sanctions for a frivolous appeal pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 375(b). In this case, the appellant has failed to properly address the termination of the contract, under its own terms, prior to liability for breach of contract arising. Therefore, I would grant sanctions pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 375(b) (134 Ill. 2d R. 375(b)) and therefore dissent as to the portion of the opinion denying sanctions.

=== CASE 9739413 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:35.959827+00 ===

CADY, Judge.
This is an appeal from an adjudication by the juvenile court of a child in need of assistance (CINA). On our review, we affirm.
Stephanie is the daughter of Troy and Tammy. She was born January 22, 1990. Troy and Tammy divorced in 1991 and Tammy was awarded physical care of Stephanie. Troy and Tammy are hostile to one another.
In July 1993 Tammy contacted the department of human services (DHS) to report that, after returning from a week of visitation with Troy, Stephanie told Tammy’s fiance, Todd, that “daddy Troy” had licked her crotch. Todd reported that when he was putting Stephanie to bed she pulled up her nightgown, spread her legs apart, spread her genitals apart and told him to lick it. Todd *498reported that Stephanie said “isn’t it pretty” and that “daddy Troy” liked it.
The report was investigated by the police and the DHS. Stephanie, Tammy, Troy, Todd, and Troy’s wife were all interviewed. Stephanie continued to report that “daddy Troy” licked her butt or crotch. She stated it “felt like tickles.” She also spread the legs of an anatomically correct doll and pointed. Troy denied the allegations and suggested either the family dog had licked Stephanie or that Stephanie was coached.
The investigation prompted the State to file a petition for child in need of assistance, and an adjudicatory hearing was held. Troy attempted to have the parties stipulate that he passed a lie detector test as a part of the police investigation. All parties objected. The court found lie detector tests were not generally accepted as rehable indicia of truthfulness and refused to accept any evidence of a he detector test.
Detective Randy Hunefeld testified about his investigation, as did child abuse investigator Connie McClellan. McClellan concluded the allegations of sexual abuse were founded. Social worker Gladys Alvarez testified that she had been working with Stephanie in therapy. Her testimony included Stephanie’s statements about “daddy Troy” licking her. The State also offered a report written by Alvarez to the county attorney. Alvarez later testified about the various indicators she looks for when trying to assess the reliability of a child’s report of sexual abuse. She concluded that the indicators of reliability were present in this case.
The evidence presented by Troy included the deposition testimony of Gary Wells, a professor of psychology. Dr. Wehs concluded it was not possible to determine whether Stephanie had in fact experienced the reported incident. At the hearing Troy also offered into evidence a written report by Dr. Wehs. The court sustained the State’s objections that the report was hearsay and contained opinions which invaded the province of the jury. The court also found Dr. Wells’ testimony unhelpful and gave it no weight in the determination.
The court found clear and convincing evidence that Stephanie had been sexually abused by Troy, and adjudicated Stephanie to be a CINA pursuant to Iowa Code section 232.2(6)(d) (1993). Following a subsequent hearing, the juvenile court entered a disposi-tional order placing Stephanie in Tammy’s custody under the supervision of DHS. The no-contact order was entered, and Troy was ordered to complete a sexual offender program.
Troy raises several issues on appeal. We address each separately.
I. Alvarez Testimony
The father first argues that the trial court erred in admitting the written report and opinions of Gladys Alvarez, a clinical social worker and therapist who works with young children alleged to have been sexually abused. Alvarez is employed by the Des Moines Child and Adolescence Guidance Center and was Stephanie’s therapist following the sexual abuse report.
During the course of the direct examination of Alvarez, the State offered a letter into evidence written by Alvarez to an assistant county attorney concerning the therapy sessions with Stephanie. The father objected to the offer, asserting it contained inadmissible hearsay, opinions beyond the expertise of the witness and for which “no proper foundation” had been laid, and “invaded the province of the jury.” The court reserved its ruling and indicated that a written ruling would be made as a part of the final written decision.
Alvarez later testified to the various factors she uses to assess the reliability of sexual abuse accounts of children, and that she found nothing to doubt the reliability of Stephanie’s statements. No objection was lodged to this line of questioning.
The trial court failed to make a specific ruling on the offer of the letter in its written decision. The father did not respond with a posttrial motion requesting the ruling.
Error may not be predicated on a ruling which admits evidence unless a substantial right of the opposing party is affected and a timely objection was made which enunciated the specific grounds of the objection, unless the grounds were otherwise ap*499parent from the record. Iowa R.Evid. 103(a). The objection must generally be specific enough to alert the trial court to the legal question or problem raised, and enable opposing counsel to take any possible corrective action to remedy the defect. State v. Williams, 207 N.W.2d 98, 109-10 (Iowa 1973).
In this case, the father timely objected to the offer of the letter written by Alvarez to an assistant county attorney. The objection was also specific enough to alert the trial court to the legal issue presented.1 However, after the trial court reserved ruling on the objection and failed to include a specific ruling on the objection in its final decision, the father was required to ask the court for a ruling by filing a motion under Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 179(b). In re Estate of Claussen, 482 N.W.2d 381, 385-86 (Iowa 1992). The failure to ask for a ruling constitutes a waiver. Id.
The father also waived any error in permitting Alvarez to testify at trial about the factors she used to assess the reliability of the child’s claim. This evidence was presented at trial without objection. See Iowa R.Evid. 103(a).
II. Wells Testimony
The father next claims the trial court erred in failing to admit the written report by Dr. Wells, and in failing to give his deposition testimony any weight. The trial court indicated it gave no weight to his testimony because Dr. Wells had performed no clinical work for 17 years, was not involved in the detection or treatment of child victims, was provided only a small portion of the evidence in the case, and never met with Stephanie or reviewed any reports. The court sustained the objections to questions of Dr. Wells which sought his opinion whether Stephanie was truthful, and sustained objections to portions of the written report of Dr. Wells, including his opinion whether Stephanie actually experienced the event.
We recognize that the weight to be given evidence at trial is within the province of the finder of fact. Moreover, expert testimony regarding the truthfulness of a witness is inadmissible “because weighing the truthfulness of a victim is a matter reserved exclusively to the fact finder.” State v. Myers, 382 N.W.2d 91, 95 (Iowa 1986). We also observe that a written report of a witness generally constitutes a prior out-of-court statement of the witness and is admissible only if the witness is available for cross examination and one of the three criteria under Iowa Rule of Evidence 801(d)(1) are met. Dr. Wells was not available for cross-examination in this case, and none of the three circumstances set forth in rule 801(d)(1) were present. The trial court did not err in rejecting the testimony of Dr. Wells, and in sustaining the objections to his report.
III. Polygraph Test Results
The father next argues that the trial court erred in excluding evidence of the results of a polygraph examination he submitted prior to trial. Polygraph evidence is generally inadmissible in the absence of a stipulation by the parties. In re A.D.L., 497 N.W.2d 178, 180 (Iowa App.1992). The father asks that we carve out an exception to this rule in child in need of assistance actions involving allegations of child sexual abuse when the evidence against the accused is based largely on statements of the victim and experts who have interviewed the victim. See In re X, 110 Idaho 44, 714 P.2d 13, 18 (1986) (Polygraph results admissible in sexual abuse case under Idaho Child Protective Act when evidence is “almost entirely” hearsay and opinion evidence from counselors and psychologists). See also McCormick on Evidence § 206 (John W. Strong ed., 4th ed. 1992).
The rules of evidence applicable to civil trials are required to be followed in CINA proceedings, except as otherwise spe-*500cifieally provided in the juvenile justice act. Iowa Code § 232.96(3) (1993). Our courts have refused to admit polygraph results under our rules of evidence because of their questionable reliability. See Haldeman v. Total Petroleum, Inc., 376 N.W.2d 98, 101-02 (Iowa 1985); Iowa R.Evid. 403. Iowa’s juvenile justice act makes no special provision for the admission of polygraph results. Accordingly, we find the trial court did not abuse its discretion in excluding the results.
IV. Sufficiency of Evidence
The father lastly asserts the trial court erred in finding there was clear and convincing evidence of sexual abuse. We review this claim de novo. In re L.K.S., 451 N.W.2d 819, 821 (Iowa 1990). We are not bound by the findings of the juvenile court, but give them weight because of its unique opportunity to hear and observe the witness. In re S.V., 395 N.W.2d 666, 668 (Iowa App.1986).
The State has the burden of proving the allegations by clear and convincing evidence. Iowa Code § 232.96(2) (1993). Clear and convincing evidence means no serious or substantial doubt exists about the correctness of the conclusions drawn from the evidence. Raim v. Stancel, 339 N.W.2d 621, 624 (Iowa App.1983).
We find clear and convincing evidence to support the adjudication. Stephanie was consistent in relating the events to others, and was able to describe the sensation experienced with the action. She was able to recall some details, and used age appropriate language. Moreover, we give weight to the findings of the juvenile court, who was able to observe the various witnesses.
AFFIRMED.
. The general objection that the question calls for an “opinion and conclusion” of the witness and "invades the province of the jury” lacks specificity and has no force or effect. Olson v. Katz, 201 N.W.2d 478, 482 (Iowa 1972). Some specific reasons for exclusion must be pointed out. In this case, counsel for the father indicated that the opinions went beyond the expertise of the witness as a therapist.

=== CASE 9739414 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:35.964213+00 ===

SACKETT, Judge
(dissenting).
I dissent.
Our primary responsibility in this case is to Stephanie, a child who was the center of a bitter struggle between her divorced parents and who, at three and one-half years of age, allegedly reported to her mother’s fiance that her father had engaged in inappropriate sexual contact. The child’s allegations could not be either verified or discounted by a physical examination. The mother reported the matter to the police. As the majority points out, the police interviewed the child, the mother, and the father, the mother’s fiance, and the father’s wife. The father denied the conduct and took a he detector test that he passed. The State elected not to prosecute the father in a criminal action but a child in need of assistance petition was filed. The trial court considered the testimony concerning the child’s truthfulness introduced by the State, rejected a report on the issue of the child’s credibility offered by the father, and did not consider the results of the he detector test that the father attempted to introduce. The trial court found clear and convincing evidence of sexual abuse by the father.
The father urges, among other issues on appeal, in cases such as this, the results of a he detector test should be considered. I am inchned to agree the unique facts of this situation and our need to protect the child provide a compelhng reason to allow the admission of polygraph evidence under limited circumstances and in closely tailored circumstances such as these where the only evidence of abuse is based on hearsay and opinions as to the truthfulness of the child. I recognize polygraph evidence is generally inadmissible. I also recognize the polygraph results are still determined to be of questionable reliability. But I suggest their reliability is on par or greater than the evidence the trial court considered in making its factual consideration.
The focal issue is whether the father engaged in the conduct. His visitation rights should be severely restricted if he did commit the acts with which he is charged and, if so, it is critical the child have the necessary protection from him.
But, if the child’s complaints have been fabricated or coached, then it is the mother and her fiance who should be limited in their access to the child. A second nagging issue may be lurking as to whether the child was abused but allegedly identified the wrong perpetrator and, if so, there may be a prob*501lem with the mother not giving the child the required protection.
On one side of the coin is the fact the chñd allegedly detañed the abuse to her mother’s fiance a week after it was to have happened and repeated it to several people who found it credible. The trial judge found there was clear and convincing evidence the abuse occurred.
On the other side of the coin is the fact this is a classification of case where false reporting is the most likely to occur; the chñd was only three and one-half years old, an age when a chñd is easüy influenced and confused. Furthermore, evidence of others as to the truthfulness of the chñd has no proven reliability; and a recent study suggested, particularly where the witness may have an agenda, such testimony is not reliable. See Thomas M. Horner & Melvin J. Guyer, Prediction, Prevention, and Clinical Expertise in Child Custody Cases in Which Allegations of Child Sexual Abuse Have Been Made, Family Law Quarterly, Vol. XXV, No. 3, 381 Fall 1991. Thomas M. Horner, a clinical assistant professor of psychology and director of the Infancy and Early Chfldhood Clinic in the Department of Psychiatry at the University of Michigan School of Medicine, and Melvin J. Guyer, a professor of social psychology in the Department of Psychiatry at the University of Michigan School of Medicine, who holds a Ph.D. in psychology and a J.D. from the University of Michigan, point out in their article that, as a victim, the chñd is vulnerable to an adult’s ulterior purpose cloaked in suggestive tones and the chñd is easüy led to say and do things that fit the adult’s conception. See Thomas M. Horner & Melvin J. Guyer, Prediction, Prevention, and Clinical Expertise in Child Custody Cases in Which Allegations of Child Sexual Abuse Have Been Made, Farmly Law Quarterly, Vol. XXV, No. 3 at 389, Fall 1991.
When aü these factors are considered, I am of the opinion the polygraph test results may bear a greater indication of reliability than the other evidence considered. For the child’s protection, I feel, under these limited circumstances, the polygraph should be considered.
The State suggests this polygraph test was not a credible test. The father’s attorney aüeged it is and it was given at the direction of the West Des Moines Police Department. The record is confusing. Because I see the only real issue is the ehñd’s protection, I would remand to the trial court to receive evidence of how the polygraph test was given, the qualifications of the examiner, and the results of the test.
I note the majority has resolved several issues on error preservation and the State has suggested the record in this ease does not lend itself to resolving the issue of the admission of a polygraph test under this special circumstance. I suggest error preservation is not controlling where applying it may result in a court not considering evidence that gives it guidance in how to protect a chñd.

=== CASE 9739415 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:37.054724+00 ===

GARTZKE, P.J.
The appellant, Management Computer Services, Inc. (MCS), designs and programs computer software. One part of its business is licensing computers, software, training, supplies and support designed to meet the accounting needs of public housing authorities (PHA's). Respondent Hawkins, Ash, Baptie & Co. (HABCO) is a Wisconsin partnership and *591a public accounting firm. It provides accounting services to PHA's. Respondent Hawkins, Ash, Baptie, Inc. (HABINC) is a corporation owned by HABCO. It licenses turnkey computer systems1 to PHA's. The individually named defendants are HABCO partners.2
MCS's complaint alleged that HABCO conspired to copy, use and sell MCS products, including its computer software, without authority from MCS in breach of its agreement with MCS, contrary to Wisconsin criminal and civil statutes. HABCO counterclaimed that MCS's breach of the contract excused HABCO's obligation, if any, to purchase equipment from MCS and to make certain payments to MCS.
The case was tried in 1991. The jury found: (1) HABCO had materially breached its 1979 contract with MCS by failing to purchase computer hardware from MCS, failing to pay twenty-five percent of the program value to MCS for use of the contract software, and by failing to compensate MCS for the use of proprietary software, and that MCS's damages from those breaches amounted to $740,000, $530,000 and $250,750, respectively; (2) MCS breached the contract by failing to pay HABCO ten percent of the program value for contract software provided and installed for HABCO's clients, and that HABCO's damages in this regard were $5,140; (3) HABCO intentionally converted MCS's software contained on backup tapes without MCS's consent, that HABCO's actions seri*592ously interfered with MCS's right to possess and use that property, and that MCS's conversion damages in this regard were $65,000; (4) HABCO was unjustly enriched by copying MCS’s software, and the reasonable value of the benefit HABCO retained is $1 million; and (5) HABCO's copying MCS's backup tapes was outrageous. The jury assessed $1,750,000 in punitive damages against HABCO.
The trial court changed answers in the verdict. It eliminated the contract and unjust enrichment damages, reduced MCS's conversion damages to $62,000, and ordered a new trial under § 805.15(6), Stats., on punitive damages (both as to whether defendant's conduct was outrageous and as to the amount of punitive damages), unless MCS accepted a reduced award of $50,000. MCS rejected the $50,000 award. At the second trial, MCS called only one witness, asked five introductory questions and rested. The court dismissed MCS's punitive damages claim. That appeal brings before us all prior orders and rulings adverse to MCS, none of which have been previously appealed. Rule 809.10(4), Stats.
The respondents have cross-appealed. They assert that the trial court should have dismissed MCS's conversion claim for failure to prove its damages and should have granted frivolous costs and sanctions against MCS for its default of proof at the retrial of the punitive damage issue.
The issues are: (1) whether the trial court correctly set aside the breach-of-contract verdict against HABCO; (2) whether the evidence supports the finding that the respondents were unjustly enriched; (3) whether the evidence supports the award for conversion; (4) whether (a) the punitive damages award is excessive, (b) the trial court erred by ordering a retrial *593after MCS had declined a remittitur and (c) MCS waived its right to complain about the scope of the second punitive damages trial; (5) whether the court erred in tolling interest on the verdict from June 1992 until October 1992; and (6) whether the court erred in dismissing MCS's Wisconsin Organized Crime Control Act claim.
1. BREACH OF CONTRACT
MCS alleged in its complaint that by the terms of the agreement between it and HABCO, the latter agreed to pay MCS twenty-five percent of the value of MCS software on each computer system HABCO installed and operated, and HABCO agreed to purchase computers through MCS for the MCS software it used on non-MCS computers. HABCO failed to pay MCS twenty-five percent of the value of the software, and HABCO failed to purchase computers through MCS for each installation on which it used MCS contract software.
Probably because the agreement between the parties contains no provisions directly providing as MCS contends, MCS claimed the provisions of the contract were ambiguous and it sought leave before the trial to submit parol evidence on the intention of the parties regarding their contractual obligations. The trial court held that the agreement was ambiguous, and at the trial it admitted parol evidence on the parties' intent. The jury found that HABCO had materially breached the contract with MCS by "failing to purchase computer hardware from MCS," "failing to pay 25 percent of the program value to MCS for use of the contract software," and "failing to compensate MCS for the use of the proprietary software," and MCS sustained dam*594ages of $740,000, $530,000, and $250,750, for those respective breaches.
After the verdict BLAB CO moved the court to reverse its pretrial ruling. The court did so. It held that the contract was too indefinite to be enforced in the respects that MCS claimed, and vacated the jury's answers to the breach of contract questions, including, of course, the damage questions. We affirm the ruling.
When a trial court is asked to change an answer to the verdict, the evidence is viewed in the light most favorable to the verdict and the answer must be affirmed if it is supported by any credible evidence. Nelson v. Travelers Ins. Co., 80 Wis. 2d 272, 282-83, 259 N.W.2d 48, 52-53 (1977). MCS contends that the evidence so viewed supports the verdict on the breach of contract questions.
But the rule MCS relies on applies to issues the jury must decide. Whether an agreement is ambiguous is a question of law for the court. Energy Complexes, Inc. v. Eau Claire County, 152 Wis. 2d 453, 467, 449 N.W.2d 35, 40 (1989). Whether the contract is sufficiently definite to be enforced as one party contends it should be enforced is also a question of law. The court's pretrial decision that the contract was ambiguous did not prevent it from later deciding whether, as a matter of law, the contract is sufficiently definite to be enforced, insofar as it covers the party's contractual obligations that the jury found HABCO had violated.
To be enforceable the contract must express the essential commitment and obligations of each party with reasonable certainty. Witt v. Realists, Inc., 18 Wis. 2d 282, 297, 118 N.W.2d 85, 93 (1962). The minds of the *595parties must meet on the essential terms. Todorovich v. Kinnickinnic Mut. Loan & Bldg. Ass'n, 238 Wis. 39, 42, 298 N.W. 226, 227 (1941).
When we review a trial court’s ruling on whether a contract is sufficiently definite, we examine the contract to determine what the parties contracted to do, not to make or reform it. What the parties contracted to do is not necessarily what they intended to agree on but what they did agree on, as evidenced by the language they chose. Wisconsin Marine & Fire Ins. Co. Bank v. Wilkin, 95 Wis. 111, 115, 69 N.W. 354, 354 (1897) (quoted with approval, Marion v. Orson's Camera Ctrs., Inc., 29 Wis. 2d 339, 345, 138 N.W.2d 733, 736-37 (1966)).
The first question asked of the jury, whether HABCO violated the contract by failing to purchase computer hardware from MCS, is quickly answered. The agreement provides that HABCO is to purchase a single-computer system, and it is undisputed that HABCO did. Nothing in the contract required HABCO to purchase computers from MCS other than the single system it in fact purchased. And nothing in the contract provides that HABCO is to purchase additional computer systems from MCS. The court properly vacated the jury's answer to the first question and the $740,000 award.
The second question, whether HABCO breached the agreement by failing to pay twenty-five percent of the program value to MCS for the use of contract software, is answered by reference to the following provision in the contract:
*596HABCO shall pay MCS 25 percent of the program value as identified in this Agreement for the use of the jointly owned software on each additional computer system purchased through MCS and installed or operated by HABCO.
(Emphasis added.) It is undisputed that HABCO did not purchase additional systems from MCS. The trial court properly vacated the jury's finding that HABCO had breached the contract as to the twenty-five percent provision and the $530,000 award based on that breach.
The trial court properly vacated the jury's affirmative answer to the question whether HABCO had breached the agreement by "failing to compensate MCS for use of the proprietary software." This question must have been put to the jury in accordance with MCS's theory of the case: that when HABCO purchased computer equipment from a vendor other than MCS, the contract required HABCO to pay twenty-five percent of the program value for the use of MCS software with that equipment. MCS's president, Robert A. Sierp, testified that this was his understanding of the agreement. Since it is undisputed that HABCO used MCS software with computers it bought from vendors other than MCS, it is arguable that HABCO breached the contract when it used MCS software on non-MCS computers. For that reason, the jury could have been asked whether HABCO's use of MCS software on non-MCS computers breached the contract between the parties, and MCS's damage, given that breach. But the jury was not asked those questions. The jury was asked whether HABCO breached the agreement by "failing to compensate MCS for their use of the proprietary software." That question referred the jury to the agree*597ment, and it makes no provision for compensation to MCS for HABCO's use of proprietary software on non-MCS equipment. The jury could answer the question affirmatively only on the basis of parol evidence. When the court subsequently ruled that the contract was insufficiently definite to be enforced, as MCS would have it enforced, MCS was left with the quoted question and award based on a theory of the case which no longer applied.3
We conclude that we must affirm the trial court's ruling vacating the verdict with respect to MCS's claim that HABCO breached the contract.
2. DAMAGES FOR CONVERSION
In the early 1980's, to ensure that it had a copy of its software if a fire or other damage occurred at its place of business, MCS stored copies of its computer program backup tapes in HABCO's vault. Sierp testified there was no written agreement regarding storage. Nor was there a written agreement that HABCO had to keep the tapes secure or could not "look" at them. He could not recall whether MCS paid HABCO for storage.
In 1981 or 1982, HABCO's data-processing manager and a HABCO partner loaded MCS's backup tapes on HABCO's computer and copied MCS's payroll, accounts receivable and accounts payable software, all without the permission or knowledge of MCS. HABCO concedes that it converted the software and used some of it. In 1990, HABCO replaced the payroll and *598accounts payable software with new software it bought from an organization other than MCS.
An owner of converted property may recover its value at the time of the wrongful taking. Production Credit Assoc. v. Nowatzski, 90 Wis. 2d 344, 354, 280 N.W.2d 118, 123 (1979). Interest to the date of trial may also be recovered. Id. The jury was instructed only that if HABCO "wrongfully took or converted software from MCS's backup tapes, then you are to award MCS as damages, the value of its property at the time of the wrongful taking." The jury awarded $65,000 to MCS to compensate it for the value of the software copied from the backup tapes. On motions after verdict, the trial court reduced the award to $62,000. It held that the only evidence on the conversion damages was the amount HABCO paid in 1989 and 1990 to replace the copied software, $62,000. MCS argues that the $65,000 award must be reinstated, and we agree.
Damages need only be proved to a reasonable certainty. Production Credit Assoc., 90 Wis. 2d at 356, 280 N.W.2d at 124. Unliquidated tort damages need not be fixed with mathematical precision. Cutler Cranberry Co. v. Oakdale Elec. Coop., 78 Wis. 2d 222, 233, 254 N.W.2d 234, 240 (1977). A fair and reasonable estimate is all that the law requires. Id. at 234, 254 N.W.2d at 240. Conversion, of course, is a tort.
MCS established its damages for conversion with sufficient definiteness. The jury could have taken into account that between the conversion in the early 1980's to the date of trial in 1991, the value of the use of *599$62,000 amounts to some $3,000.4 We vacate that part of the order which reduces the award and direct the trial court to reinstate it and to award judgment to MCS for that amount.5
3. UNJUST ENRICHMENT
That HABCO's tortious conduct unjustly enriched it is undisputed. The trial court made no finding or conclusion to the contrary. The court ruled, however, that the separate awards for conversion and unjust enrichment duplicated each other because, it said, the damages for unjust enrichment, in this case, were the same as the damages for the conversion. It set aside the $1 million unjust enrichment award for the additional reason that no credible evidence supported it. We need not discuss the duplication issue.6
Tort damages and restitution are different in purpose and measurement. The differences are critical to this case. Damages for conversion are designed to compensate the plaintiff "for the loss sustained because his property was taken." Traeger v. Sperberg, 256 Wis. 330, 333, 41 N.W.2d 214, 216 (1950). Restitution, the recovery for an unjust enrichment, is granted for another *600reason, that it would be inequitable to allow a defendant to retain a benefit without paying for it. Ramsey v. Ellis, 168 Wis. 2d 779, 785, 484 N.W.2d 331, 333 (1992). Unjust enrichment is not dependent on loss to the plaintiff.
The differences between tort damages and restitution are the reason why a tort victim may seek restitution from the tortfeasor. The tort victim may bring an action for restitution because the victim has suffered little loss from the tort. Lord Goff & Gareth Jones, The Law of Restitution 714 (4th ed. 1993). See also George E. Palmer, The Law of Restitution § 2.3 at 60 (1978):
In many instances the most important difference between quasi contract and the tort remedy lies in the measure of recovery. Sometimes there will be no such difference, but often there will be, since the damage action is designed to provide money compensation for harm to the victim of the tort, whereas quasi contract is aimed at awarding him the money value of the benefit to the tortfeasor. When this leads to differences in the amount of recovery, the advantage will sometimes be in the tort action but frequently it will be in the quasi contract action. (Footnote omitted.)
MCS offered two exhibits to establish its loss from the conversion, and that evidence was admitted. MCS argues in this appeal that the evidence it provided to establish its conversion damages is a basis for the jury's award of $1 million for unjust enrichment.7 We disagree.
*601The two exhibits MCS offered to establish its conversion damages are accounting studies. The studies are designed, on the basis of HABCO's own records, to show that HABCO used MCS's software to process over 200,000 items for itself and its clients, that MCS could have provided that service to HABCO, and that the charges MCS would have made to HABCO for that service amount to $191,880.
There is no doubt but that MCS offered the two exhibits to establish its damages for the conversion. When arguing admissibility of the exhibits, trial counsel for MCS noted several times that the exhibits were offered in support of its conversion claim.
When moving for admission of the two exhibits, trial counsel for MCS correctly argued that two methods exist to calculate damages for conversion: (1) the value of the property at the time it is taken plus interest, and (2) the value of the property plus its rental value. Interest and rental value are alternative measures of damages to be added to the value of converted property. Production Credit Assoc., 90 Wis. 2d at 356, 280 N.W.2d at 124.
Although the trial court admitted both exhibits, its jury instructions made them irrelevant for the conversion claim. The trial court instructed the jury: "If the defendant wrongfully took or converted software from MCS's backup tapes, then you are to award MCS damages, the value of its property at the time of the wrongful taking." No mention is made of rental value. Because the jury awarded MCS only $65,000 damages for the conversion, the only reasonable inference is that the jury relied on the instruction quoted above and did not rely on the two exhibits and the $191,880 they reflect.
*602On appeal MCS proposes to use the two exhibits to prove unjust enrichment by equating the "rent" it would have received had HABCO paid MCS for the use of the software or had MCS used the software to serve HABCO and its clients and charged for that service. The two exhibits do not support those contentions.
The exhibits do not show the cost HABCO would have incurred had it paid MCS for the use of the software. HABCO would have used its own computers and its own personnel, all at its own cost, had it "rented" the software. Moreover, the exhibits show only the charges MCS would have made and the "direct expenses" MCS would have incurred had it used the tapes with its computers and personnel to serve HABCO. Had MCS charged HABCO for those services, MCS would have had a profit, but lost profits to a plaintiff do not prove unjust enrichment to a defendant. Graf v. Neith Co-op. Dairy Prods. Assoc., 216 Wis. 519, 523, 257 N.W. 618, 620 (1934).
MCS relies upon a third exhibit, "HABCO/PHA Initial Contract Sales Data"8 to establish $357,300 of unjust enrichment to HABCO. MCS arrives at that number by adding two columns in the document identified as "AP" and "GPR." The first column, "AP" refers to "accounts payable" and the second column "GPR" refers to "general payroll," these being parts of the software HABCO converted. The total for the first column is $216,000 and the total for the second is $141,300.9
*603MCS contends that the three exhibits "are sufficient to support the jury's verdict of $1 million for unjust enrichment." We disagree.
First, as we have said, the two earlier exhibits showing a total value of $191,880 conversion damages do not establish unjust enrichment to MCS. Second, even adding that amount to the $357,300 total of the third exhibit results in a far cry from the $1 million the jury awarded for unjust enrichment. Third, the gross sales of HABCO's accounts payable and payroll software to housing authorities do not measure the benefit to HABCO, since gross revenues do not account for HABCO's sales expenses and updating costs HABCO required to keep software current. MCS's president admitted that software cannot be used without such continuous updating, and the record so reflects. HABCO also asserts that only small portions of MCS's accounts payable and payroll software found their way into HABCO's software. MCS's reply brief does not rebut those contentions. A proposition asserted by a respondent on appeal and not disputed by the appellant's reply is taken as admitted. Schlieper v. DNR, 188 Wis. 2d 318, 322, 525 N.W.2d 99, 101 (Ct. App. 1994).
MCS cites Topzant v. Koshe, 242 Wis. 585, 588-89, 9 N.W.2d 136, 137-38 (1943), as establishing both a tort damages rule and an unjust enrichment rule for our application in this case. The Topzant court examined the traditional measure of damage for conversion. That measure includes an option available to the plaintiff when a tortfeasor has subsequently sold the converted *604chattel for more than its value on the date of taking. In that circumstance, the plaintiff may elect to recover as tort damages the sale price with interest from the date of sale to the date of trial. Id. at 588-89, 9 N.W.2d at 138. The Topzant court cited Ingram v. Rankin, 47 Wis. 406, 420-21, 2 N.W. 755, 766 (1879), for that option. The Ingram court commented that the rule
will prevent the defendant from making profit out of his own wrong, will give the plaintiff the benefit of any advance in the price of the chattels when [the] defendant holds possession of the same at the time of the trial, and on the whole will be much more equitable....
Ingram, 47 Wis. at 421, 2 N.W. at 766.
The Topzant and Ingram decisions are not in point. As we showed at the beginning of this section of our opinion, there is a significant difference between conversion damages (designed to compensate for a loss) and an award for unjust enrichment (designed to prevent the wrongdoer from unjustly retaining a benefit). An attempt to apply the conversion rule to establish unjust enrichment of the wrongdoer fails to take into account the expenses the wrongdoer has had. The Topzant rule prevents the wrongdoer from retaining the gross purchase price it received on sale of the converted goods, since that is a price to which the property owner would have been entitled had it made the sale, and in that sense the rule measures a loss to the owner. But loss to the owner does not equate with unjust enrichment of the wrongdoer and is not an alternative method of establishing unjust enrichment to the wrongdoer.
*605We therefore conclude that the trial court correctly held that the credible evidence does not establish that HABCO enjoyed, and therefore must disgorge, unjust enrichment to it in the amount of $1 million.
4. PUNITIVE DAMAGES
The jury found that HABCO's conduct was outrageous and awarded $1,750,000 for punitive damages. When reducing the award to $50,000, the trial court said that HABCO's conduct for which punitive damages could be awarded was not so outrageous or malicious as to merit the award, the award was not reasonably related to MCS's actual damages and the award was so disproportionate to HABCO's conduct that it amounted to a denial of due process of law. The court did not discuss the evidence. The court added only that had the HABCO defendants been charged criminally with theft of the MCS software, the maximum penalty imposable for the theft would have been a $10,000 fíne. The court's order for remittitur gave MCS the option of a new trial under § 805.15(6), Stats.,10 or to accept a $50,000 award. MCS elected a new trial.
We reject the trial court's conclusion that the punitive damage award violates due process. Due process is provided if the standards imposed by a state's trial and *606appellate courts "impose [ ]a sufficiently definite and meaningful constraint" on a jury's discretion in awarding punitive damages. Pacific Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Haslip, 499 U.S. 1, 22 (1991). Those standards must ensure that a particular award is no greater than reasonably necessary to punish and deter. Id.
Wisconsin's statutes and case law impose definite and meaningful constraints on a jury's discretion to award punitive damages. The case law establishes the factors to be considered in determining the proper amount to be awarded as punitive damages. They include "the grievousness of the defendant's acts; the degree of malicious intention; the potential damage which might have been done by such acts as well as the actual damage; and the defendant's ability to pay." Fahrenberg v. Tengel, 96 Wis. 2d 211, 234, 291 N.W.2d 516, 527 (1980). The jury was instructed regarding those factors, the purpose of punitive damages, and the jury's right to decline to award punitive damages.
Due process requires that the size of a punitive damage award be judicially reviewable to protect a defendant from the danger of arbitrary deprivation of property. Honda Motor Co. v. Oberg, 512 U.S. —, —, 129 L.Ed.2d 336, 349-50 (1995). Wisconsin provides that review. Section 805.15(6), Stats., establishes a procedure by which a trial court provides relief from an excessive damage award by determining the amount which as a matter of law is reasonable and ordering a new trial on the issue of damages unless the party to whom the option of remitting the excess amount is offered elects to accept judgment in the changed amount. Case law establishes the scope of appellate review of such an order. Powers v. Allstate Ins. Co., 10 *607Wis. 2d 78, 102 N.W.2d 393 (1960); Carlson & Erickson Builders v. Lampert Yards, 190 Wis. 2d 651, 670-71, 529 N.W.2d 905, 912 (1995).
The Powers court recognized that the circuit court which sees and hears the witnesses has an advantage over an appellate court which can only review the record. Thus a reviewing court will reverse a circuit court's remittitur order only when it finds that the circuit court erroneously exercised its discretion. A reviewing court will not reverse a circuit court's discretionary determination if the record shows that discretion was in fact exercised and there exists a reasonable basis for the circuit court's determination after resolving any direct conflicts in the testimony in favor of the prevailing party, even if the reviewing court would have reached a different conclusion than the circuit court.
If, however, a circuit court fails to analyze the evidence supporting its conclusion that the damage award is excessive, or fails to state the reasoning behind its decision, the reviewing court should place no weight upon the trial court's findings. In such a situation, the reviewing court must then review the entire record and determine, as a matter of first impression, whether the jury award is excessive. In conducting its analysis, the reviewing court must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the party prevailing with the jury.
Carlson & Erickson Builders, 190 Wis. 2d at 670-71, 529 N.W.2d at 912 (footnotes omitted).
Our review of the trial court's order reducing the punitive damages award has two parts: first, whether the court properly exercised its discretion when it set aside the $1,750,000 punitive damage award as excessive; second, if it did, whether the court properly gave *608MCS the option of accepting a $50,000 award or a new trial.
Because the trial court's reasons for setting aside the $1,750,000 award are sketchy and largely con-clusory, we give little weight to that decision. We review the record de novo to determine whether, as a matter of first impression, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to MCS, the award is excessive. Carlson & Erickson Builders, 190 Wis. 2d at 670-71, 529 N.W.2d at 912. We conclude that it is excessive.
Punitive damages are awarded "to punish the wrongdoer and to deter him and others from future similar wrongdoing." Fahrenberg, 96 Wis. 2d at 234, 291 N.W.2d at 526-27. If the award is more than enough to meet those purposes, it is excessive. To determine whether it is excessive, we examine the evidence presented to the jury in the light most favorable to its decision. Carlson & Erickson Builders, 190 Wis. 2d at 670-71, 529 N.W.2d at 912.
HABCO's wrongdoing — its copying and use of the MCS software — was outrageous and malicious to a high degree. It was done secretly, without the knowledge or consent of MCS. It was done solely for the financial benefit of HABCO. It was done with criminal intent, and MCS rightly refers to it as theft. It was done by HABCO personnel possessing significant responsibilities. HABCO's manager of data processing and a partner of HABCO copied the backup tapes. They worked together. They searched the backup tapes for specific program items HABCO lacked, and they copied those items to their computer, copied from the computer to another tape, printed off the source code and *609removed it from their computer.11 They changed the billing output generated by the stolen accounts receivable software to disguise what they had done.12 The partner kept the newly created tapes in his office. The manager kept the source code print outs in his office. The theft enabled HABCO to use MCS's software for years.
However, the high degree of outrageousness and maliciousness present here are not the only factors we must consider. The compensatory award and the potential criminal penalties are additional factors for our consideration.
In Wozinak v. Local 1111 of UE, 57 Wis. 2d 725, 731, 205 N.W.2d 369 (1973), Meke v. Nicol, 56 Wis. 2d 654, 664, 203 N.W.2d 129 (1973), and Lisowski v. Chenenoff, 37 Wis. 2d 610, 634, 155 N.W.2d 619 (1968), this court recognized that compensatory damages and criminal fine[s] are relevant to the assessment of punitive damages. This court has never held, however, that there is any mathematical formula for calculating punitive damages on the basis of the compensatory damages or the criminal fine. Plaintiff argues that the award of $125,000 is about six times the maximum fine of $20,000, if defendant were found guilty of just two counts of receiving stolen property. In Lisowski v. Chenenoff, 37 Wis. 2d 610, 155 N.W.2d 619 (1964), the ratio of punitive damages to penalty was 10 to 1, and in Dalton v. Meister, 52 Wis. 2d 173, 188 N.W.2d 494 (1971), it was 75 to 1. In Meke v. Nicol, 56 Wis. 2d 654, 664, 203 N.W.2d 129 (1973), the punitive damages were 13 times the maximum fine for a similar *610offense. In Malco v. Midwest Aluminum Sales Co., 14 Wis. 2d 57, 66, 109 N.W.2d 516 (1961), the court stated that "[t]here is no arbitrary rule that punitive damages cannot equal 15 times the compensatory damages." In Dalton v. Meister, 52 Wis. 2d 173, 181, 188 N.W.2d 494 (1971), the court noted that "there is no arithmetic proportion to which punitive damages should relate to the wealth of the defendant or to the damage done the plaintiff
Fahrenberg, 96 Wis. 2d at 233, 291 N.W.2d at 526.13
The high ratios of the punitive damage award to the compensatory award for tort damages and to the potential criminal fine lead us to conclude that the initial award of $1,750,000 is unnecessary to serve the purposes of deterrence or punishment. The punitive award is almost twenty-seven times the compensatory award of $65,000. The punitive award must bear "a reasonable relationship to the award of compensatory damages." Tucker v. Marcus, 142 Wis. 2d 425, 447, 418 N.W.2d 818, 826 (1988). Even with "due regard for the discretion of the jury in assessing punitive damages," id. at 447-48, 418 N.W.2d at 826, the award does not bear a reasonable relationship to MCS's compensatory damages. The potential criminal penalty for willfully, knowingly and without authorization copying computer programs where the damages are greater than $2,500 is a fine not exceeding $10,000 or imprisonment not exceeding five years, or both. Sections 943.70(2)(a) *611and (3)(b)3, and 939.50(3)(d), Stats. The punitive damages award is 175 times the maximum fine.
We also conclude that the reduced punitive award of $50,000 is insufficient to punish HABCO and to deter others in the future from similar wrongdoing. The compensatory award is in a sense a starting place, since punitive damages equal to compensatory damages are reasonable. Dalton, 52 Wis. 2d at 181, 188 N.W.2d at 498. The $50,000 award by the trial court does not even match the compensatory award for conversion, $65,000. The high degree of outrageous conduct and maliciousness exhibited by HABCO is such that a punitive award merely equal to the compensatory award fails to serve the purposes of punishment and deterrence.
We reach that conclusion because the record shows how easy it is to steal computer programs, once possession of the physical software is obtained. One contemplating such a theft and watching the development of the law might well consider that the ease of theft, the low risk of detection and the potential profit are worth the cost if punitive damages merely approximate the amount of compensatory damages. We should dissuade software thieves from reaching that conclusion. In this age of computers and the many uses to which they are put in almost every professional, commercial, industrial and governmental context, deterrence of others similarly situated is even more important than punishing the wrongdoer. We conclude that a punitive award only approximating MCS's compensatory damages is far too little.
To accomplish the dual purposes of punishment and deterrence, we conclude that, as a matter of law, *612reasonable punitive damages in this case are $650,000.14 This amount is approximately ten times the amount of the compensatory damages award, a far more reasonable relationship in this case, and sixty-five times the maximum fine for computer theft. It better satisfies those purposes in the case before us than does the $50,000 award the trial court directed in its remittitur order. Accordingly, MCS should be given the option of accepting judgment for $650,000 in punitive damages, or having a new trial limited to the issue of the amount of punitive damages.
We direct the trial court to modify the judgment by decreasing the amount of the punitive damages award to MCS from $1,750,000 to $650,000, exclusive of costs, unless within twenty-one days from the date of remitti-tur, MCS files with the clerk of the circuit court a notice in writing that the plaintiff elects to have a new trial limited to the issue of the amount of punitive damages. If such notice is timely filed, the modified judgment for $650,000 punitive damages shall stand reversed and a new trial had on punitive damages.15
*6135. ISSUES ON RETRIAL
The trial court stated that the retrial if MCS elected it, included the issue whether HABCO's conduct was outrageous. The court erred. No reason exists to retry the issue whether HABCO's conduct was outrageous. Liability for punitive damages has been fixed. To retry that issue would deprive MCS of a liability finding. The amount HABCO must pay because of that liability is the only remaining issue. Evidence relevant to the degree of that outrageousness may be presented by both MCS and HABCO, but the jury should be instructed that as a matter of law HABCO's conduct was outrageous. The only question for the jury is the amount of punitive damages, and it should consider the degree of outrageousness in fixing that amount.
The trial court apparently interpreted Badger Bearings, Inc. v. Drives & Bearings, Inc., 111 Wis. 2d 659, 331 N.W.2d 847 (Ct. App. 1983), as holding that a trial court has unlimited discretion in fixing the scope of a new trial. That was not our holding.
In Badger Bearings, we said that the trial court might grant a partial new trial when the error is confined to an issue which is "entirely separable" from the others. We concluded that "compensatory and punitive damages are separable and that justice would not be served by mandating a new trial on all damages questions as the invariable alternative to acceptance of a changed amount of punitive damages." Id. at 673-74, 331 N.W.2d at 855.
Consequently, because the liability of the respondents for punitive damages will not be an issue, and that issue is separable from the amount of damages, the only issue at the second trial will be the amount of *614the punitive damages, and evidence relevant to outra-geousness will be admissible only on the degree of that outrageousness.
6. INTEREST ON VERDICT
After MCS rejected the $50,000 punitive award, the court scheduled the second trial for June 23, 1992. On June 3, 1992, MCS moved to a continuance, on grounds that counsel (who had been substituted for trial counsel) was not prepared to try the case on that date. HABCO consented to a continuance, provided that interest on the verdict was tolled through the date of the adjourned trial. Counsel for MCS had no objection to that and obtained the oral consent of MCS's president to the continuance. The court scheduled the trial for October 27,1992, and tolled interest until that date. MCS claims error.
MCS asserts that it has a statutory right to the interest the trial court tolled. Section 814.04(4), Stats., provides that if a judgment is for the recovery of money, interest at the rate of twelve percent per year from the time of the verdict until judgment is entered shall be computed by the clerk and added to the costs. As MCS points out, the statute has no pertinent exceptions.
However, because counsel for MCS and an officer of MCS consented to a continuance and to tolling interest on the verdict through the date of the adjourned trial, and the trial court relied on that consent, MCS is judicially estopped from claiming that it did not consent. See Coconate v. Schwarz, 165 Wis. 2d 226, 231, 477 N.W.2d 74, 75 (Ct. App. 1991) (judicial estoppel precludes a party from asserting a position in a legal proceeding that is inconsistent with a position previously taken). Having consented to the adjournment *615and to the tolling of interest, it has waived the right to interest on the judgment.
7. WISCONSIN ORGANIZED CRIME CONTROL ACT (WOCCA) CLAIM
MCS sought damages under WOCCA, § 946.80-88, STATS. Section 946.87(4), Stats., provides that a person who is injured by reason of any violation of § 946.83 or § 946.85 has a cause of action for twice the actual damages sustained, attorney fees and costs reasonably incurred and, when appropriate, punitive damages. Section 946.83(3), STATS., provides that no person employed by, or associated with, any enterprise may conduct or participate, directly or indirectly, in the enterprise through a "pattern of racketeering activity." Section 946.82(3), Stats., provides in pertinent part:
"Pattern of racketeering activity" means engaging in at least 3 incidents of racketeering activity that have the same or similar intents, results, accomplices, victims or methods of commission or otherwise are interrelated by distinguishing characteristics, provided at least one of the incidents occurred after April 27,1982 and that the last of the incidents occurred within 7 years after the first incident of racketeering activity.
Section 946.82(4) defines "racketeering activity" as any activity specified in 18 U.S.C. § 1961(1) in effect as of April 27, 1982, or the attempt, conspiracy to commit, or commission of any of the felonies specified in particular chapters and sections of the Wisconsin statutes, including § 943.70, the computer-crimes statute. The wilful, knowing and unauthorized copying of data, computer programs or supporting documentation is a crime. Section 943.70.
*616HABCO moved for summary judgment dismissing MCS's WOCCA claim. The trial court granted the motion because it concluded that any violation of § 943.70, STATS.; that occurred before its effective date is not racketeering activity under § 946.82(4), Stats., and HABCO's copying and use of software are not violations of § 943.70. For that reason, the court concluded that MCS did not establish the requisite number of predicate acts necessary to establish a "pattern of racketeering activity" under § 946.82(3).
MCS contends that each unauthorized copying of the stolen software after § 943.70, Stats., became effective is a separate violation of § 943.70, and therefore each act of unauthorized copying is a separate predicate act under WOCCA. MCS submitted an affidavit to the trial court identifying sixty-three acts of copying which occurred after § 943.70 became effective.
The Seventh Circuit rejected MCS's same contention on the same facts in Management Computer Servs., Inc. v. Hawkins, Ash, Baptie & Co., 883 F.2d 48 (7th Cir. 1989). In that case MCS sought damages from HABCO under 18 U.S.C. § 1961-68, the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO). Violation of RICO requires a "pattern of racketeering activity." 18 U.S.C. § 1962. A "pattern of racketeering activity" requires at least two acts of racketeering activity within a defined period. 18 U.S.C. § 1961(5). MCS argued that each time HABCO made another use of the software it had copied, it committed another predicate act under RICO. The Seventh Circuit said,
If, as MCS alleged, the contract software at issue was proprietary to MCS, then when HABCO first copied that software it in essence stole the software. HABCO's subsequent use of the allegedly stolen *617software cannot be characterized as subsequent thefts. When a thief steals $100, the law does not hold him to a new theft each time he spends one of those dollars. . . . This is simply not a case that involves long-term criminal conduct or activity that could, in common-sense, be called a pattern of racketeering.
Management Computer Servs., Inc., 883 F.2d at 51.
Because WOCCA is patterned after RICO, federal case law interpreting RICO is persuasive authority in our interpretation of WOCCA. State v. Evers, 163 Wis. 2d 725, 732, 472 N.W.2d 828, 831 (Ct. App. 1991). We see no reason in this case to apply WOCCA differently from the Seventh Circuit's application of RICO to the same facts. We conclude that the trial court properly granted summary judgment dismissing MCS's WOCCA claim.
8. CROSS-APPEAL
In their cross-appeal, the defendants argue that the trial court should have dismissed MCS's conversion claim because MCS failed to prove its damage's, and the court should have granted sanctions against MCS or its counsel.
As we have already said, our disposition of MCS's appeal regarding its compensatory damages for conversion disposes of the first issue in the cross-appeal. The second issue is based upon §§ 802.05 and 814.025, Stats., and results from MCS's default of proof at the scheduled new trial on punitive damages. Our disposition of MCS's appeal regarding punitive damages disposes of the second issue.
*618By the Court. — Judgment and orders affirmed in part, reversed in part and cause remanded with directions.
A turnkey system is a complete computer system including hardware, software, installation, training and support services.
Those individuals are David D. Baptie, James O. Ash, R. Roy Campbell, Robert J. Daley, Walter H. Leifeld, Larry E. Vangen and Jack E. White. We refer to the respondents collectively as HABCO or the respondents.
This case has nothing to do with the trial court's exercise of discretion when framing the verdict. No party objected to the form of the verdict. The form was correct when applied to MCS's theory of the case. That theory was rejected on postverdict motions. That rendered the verdict questions inapplicable.
It may also have taken into account that the copied software included an accounts receivable program, while the replacement software apparently did not.
We do not reach HABCO's contention that the trial court should have dismissed MCS's conversion claim because MCS failed to prove damages.
Duplication between the $65,000 award for conversion and the $1 million unjust enrichment award seems unlikely if the jury followed its instructions, but if duplication occurred it could easily be eliminated by deducting $65,000 from the $1 million award.
MCS offered other exhibits specifically designed to establish HABCO's unjust enrichment. The court refused to admit those exhibits, and MCS has not sought review of those rulings.
The exhibit is identified as 013895-013904.
The purpose of the exhibit was never established. When trial counsel for MCS moved for admission of the exhibit, in response to an objection by counsel for HABCO and to an inquiry by the court regarding the exhibit's purpose, counsel *603stated that the ten-page exhibit contained information used in other exhibits. Those exhibits have not been identified, so far as we can determine.
Section 805.15(6), Stats., provides in pertinent part:
If a trial court determines that a verdict is excessive or inadequate, not due to perversity or prejudice or as a result of error during the trial (other than an error as to damages), the court shall determine the amount which as a matter of law is reasonable, and shall order a new trial on the issue of damages, unless within 10 days the party to whom the option is offered elects to accept judgment in the changed amount.
That way no one could tell they had copied the programs to their computer.
As one of HABCO's clients, MCS would receive bills from HABCO created by the stolen software.
The record contains no evidence of the wealth of any respondent. See Meke v. Nicol, 56 Wis. 2d 654, 658, 203 N.W.2d 129, 132 (1973) (evidence of an individual defendant's wealth is inadmissible when punitive damages are sought from multiple defendants).
"The Powers rule . . . allows both the trial court and the appellate court to determine a reasonable award and to grant the plaintiff the option of accepting that sum or having a new trial. This court has exercised this kind of control in punitive damage cases." Wangen v. Ford Motor Co., 97 Wis. 2d 260, 307, 294 N.W.2d 437, 461 (1980) (citations omitted).
We fashion our mandate on that in Powers, 10 Wis. 2d at 92, 102 N.W.2d at 401, except that we think giving notice to the clerk of circuit court will be more convenient than notice to the clerk of the court of appeals.

=== CASE 9739416 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:37.061788+00 ===

SUNDBY, J.
(concurring). "Punitive damages have long been a part of traditional state tort law." Silkwood v. Kerr-McGee Corp., 464 U.S. 238, 255 (1984), quoted in Pacific Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Haslip, 499 U.S. 1, 15 (1991).1 In Wilkes v. Wood, Lofft 1, 98 Eng Rep 489 (CP 1763), the Lord Chief Justice validated exemplary damages as compensation, punishment and deterrence. (Cited in Haslip, 499 U.S. at 15). The history of the excessive fines clause of the Eighth Amendment shows that the clause is applicable to punitive damages. Browning-Ferris Indus. of Vermont, Inc. v. Kelco Disposal, Inc., 492 U.S. 257, 286-87 (1989) (O'Connor, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).
Under the Saxon legal system in pre-Norman England, "the victim of a wrong would, rather than seek vengeance through retaliation or 'blood feud,' accept financial compensation for the injury from the wrongdoer." Id. at 287. At some point after the Norman Conquest in 1066, this method of settling disputes gave way to a system in which individuals who had engaged in conduct offensive to the Crown placed themselves "in the King's mercy" so as not to have to satisfy all the monetary claims against them. Id. In order to receive clemency, these individuals were required to pay an "amercement" to the Crown, its representative, or a *619feudal lord. Id. at 287-88 (citing Tumey v. Ohio, 273 U.S. 510, 525 (1927)).
Fines and amercements had very similar functions. Id. at 289. Fines originated in the Thirteenth Century as voluntary sums paid to the Crown to avoid an indefinite prison sentence or to avoid royal displeasure. Id. In practice, it became difficult to distinguish between amercements and fines. However, by the Seventeenth Century, fines had replaced amercements as the preferred penal sanction. Id. at 290. The word "fine" took on its modern meaning, while the word "amercement" dropped out of ordinary usage. Id. Shakespeare did not distinguish between fines and amercements in the plays he wrote in the late Sixteenth Century. Id. In Romeo and Juliet, published in 1597, Prince Escalus uses the words "amerce" and "fine" interchangeably. In this manner, he warned the Montagues and the Capulets not to shed blood on the streets of Verona:
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding, My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding; But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine, That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
Id. (quoting Act III, scene 1).
A fascinating account of the development of punitive damages appears in Justice O'Connor's separate opinion in Browning-Ferris. See 492 U.S. at 286-95. The Browning-Ferris majority questioned Justice O'Connor's conclusion that the word "fine," as used in the late Eighteenth Century encompassed private civil damages. 492 U.S. at 265 & n.7. Justice Blackmun doubted whether Shakespeare appreciated the difference between a "fine" and an "amercement." He observed:
*620Though Shakespeare, of course, Knew the Law of his time, He was foremost a poet, In search of a rhyme.
Id. at 265 n.7.
Justice Blackmun concluded that the "pedigree" of the Eighth Amendment convincéd a majority of the Court that the excessive fines clause did not apply to civil damages but was intended to limit only those fines directly imposed by and payable to the government. 492 U.S. at 268.
The majority concluded that the excessive fines clause did not limit the ability of a civil jury to award punitive damages. Id. at 271. Justice Blackmun concluded that the practice of awarding damages far in excess of actual compensation for quantifiable injuries was well recognized at the time the framers produced the Eighth Amendment. Id. at 274.
The petitioners also asked the Browning-Ferris Court to determine whether the punitive damages award therein was excessive under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Id. at 276. However, the Court deferred that inquiry to another day because petitioners had failed to raise the argument before either the district court or the court of appeals and made no specific mention of it in their petition for certiorari. Id. at 276-77.
In Haslip, however, the Court made that inquiry. The Court approved the traditional common-law approach for assessing punitive awards. 499 U.S. at 15-17. Under that approach, the amount of the punitive award is initially determined by a jury instructed to consider the gravity of the wrong and the need to deter similar wrongful conduct. Id. at 15. The jury's determination is then reviewed by trial and appellate courts to *621ensure that it is reasonable. Id. The Court declined to hold that this common-law method for assessing punitive damages was so inherently unfair as to deny due process and violate the Fourteenth Amendment: "If a thing has been practiced for two hundred years by common consent, it will need a strong case for the Fourteenth Amendment to affect it." Sun Oil Co. v. Wortman, 486 U.S. 717, 730 (1988) (quoting Jackman v. Rosenbaum Co., 260 U.S. 22, 31 (1922)), quoted in Haslip, 499 U.S. at 17.
The Court said, however, that accepting the common-law manner of computing punitive damages did not require the conclusion that the imposition of punitive damages is never unconstitutional. 499 U.S. at 18. The Court noted again its concern about punitive damages "run wild." Id.
I set forth the foregoing history of punitive damages solely to show that our review of an award of punitive damages is not deferential; we are part of the "due process" by which an award of punitive damages is determined. The jury makes its award. The trial court reviews the award. It is then reviewed by our court, and, possibly, our supreme court. See TXO Production Corp. v. Alliance Resources Corp., 509 U.S. —, 113 S. Ct. 2711, 2719-20 (1993). The United States Supreme Court has refused to "enshrine" a comparative approach whereby other awards are tested against the award made in a particular case. 509 U.S. at —, 113 S. Ct. at 2720.
The Court has confirmed that a mathematical bright line between the constitutionally acceptable and the constitutionally unacceptable cannot be drawn in every case. Id. (citing Haslip, 499 U.S. at 18). However, a general concern for reasonableness properly enters into the constitutional calculus.
*622Some courts have held that punitive damages should bear a reasonable relationship to the harm that is likely to occur from the defendant's conduct as well as to the harm that actually occurred. "If the defendant's actions caused or would likely cause in a similar situation only slight harm, the damages should be relatively small. If the harm is grievous, the damages should be much greater." TXO, 509 U.S. at —, 113 S. Ct. at 2721 (quoting Garnes v. Fleming Landfill, Inc., 413 S.E.2d 897, 909 (W. Va. 1991)).
In TXO, a plurality of the Court adopted the principle that a mere "dramatic disparity" between the actual damages and the punitive award is not controlling. 509 U.S. at —, 113 S. Ct. at 2722. In TXO, plaintiffs actual damages were $19,000 and the jury awarded $10 million punitive damages. A plurality of the Court affirmed the award.
In a "spotted cow" case, Trandes Corp. v. Guy F. Atkinson Co., 996 F.2d 655 (4th Cir.), cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 443 (1993), the jury awarded Trandes $17,400 in compensatory damages and $750,000 in punitive damages. Id. at 657. Trandes alleged that the defendant improperly acquired and used the "Tunnel System," a computer program written by Trandes's president to perform survey calculations for the construction of subway tunnels. Id. The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the jury's award but remanded for remittitur or retrial of punitive damages in accordance with a Maryland statute placing a cap on punitive damages. Maryland limits punitive damages to twice compensatory damages. Id. at 658.
The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals concluded that "the evidence is clear that [defendant's] actions were both willful and egregious." Id. at 666. The actions which the jury found to be willful and egregious *623do not differ greatly from appellant's actions in this case. Numerous employees of the defendant knew or had reason to know that the defendant was not authorized to use the Tunnel System software, but yet the defendant modified the program to misrepresent that it was an authorized user. Id.
TXO does not provide a great deal of guidance other than fundamental fairness for determining punitive damages. The Haslip Court approved a jury instruction which instructed the jury that punitive damages are to punish the defendant and deter it and others from similar conduct in the future. See Dunn v. Hovic, 1 F.3d 1371, 1380 (3d Cir.), modified in part on other grounds, 13 F.3d 58 (3d Cir.), cert. denied, 114 S. Ct. 650 (1993). The district court also told the jury that punitive damages are allowed only for wanton and reckless behavior "[where] defendant's conduct was outrageous because done with an evil motive or done with reckless indifference to the rights of others." Id. In Haslip, the Court noted that under the applicable Alabama precedent, the factors a trial court considers in scrutinizing a jury verdict for excessiveness of damages are "the 'culpability of the defendant's conduct,' the 'desirability of discouraging others from similar conduct,' the 'impact upon the parties,' and 'other factors, such as the impact on innocent third parties.'" Dunn, 1 F.3d at 1381 (quoting Haslip, 499 U.S. at 16 (quoting Hammond v. City of Gadsden, 493 So. 2d 1374, 1379 (Ala. 1986))).
Wisconsin courts review punitive damage awards much as do the Alabama courts. Courts are particularly likely to approve punitive damage awards where defendant's conduct entails health hazards. See Dunn, 1 F.3d at 1383. Courts also consider the ability of the defendant to pay and the extent to which the defendant *624has profited from its egregious conduct. See id. at 1383-84.
In this case, the plaintiff did not present evidence as to HABCO's net worth. I agree that HABCO's actions were egregious. However, an award of $1,750,000 is unreasonable and will not survive a due process challenge given that HABCO's conduct did not affect the life or health of any individual and MCS can be compensated for its actual damages. An award of $1,750,000 for software theft shocks my conscience. I am satisfied that the award of $650,000 which we make is a sufficient deterrent to HABCO and others who might be similarly tempted to steal and convert computer software.
For these reasons I concur.
I concur solely to make clear that our review of a jury's award of punitive damages is not deferential. Appellate court review is part of the process due a litigant against whom punitive damages have been awarded.

=== CASE 9739417 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:37.066377+00 ===

DYKMAN, J.
(dissenting). Had the defendant accountants at Hawkins, Ash, Baptie & Company (HABCO) been lawyers, they would have been disbarred and prosecuted. Stealing from clients is outrageous behavior, and deserves to be substantially penalized. That is what the jury decided when it awarded $1,750,000 in punitive damages to Management Computer Services, Inc. (MCS). But a majority of this court has reduced MCS's compensatory damages from $2,585,750 to $65,000 and has awarded punitive damages of only $650,000 because that figure is exactly ten times the amount of the reduced compensatory award.
The majority fails to understand MCS's theory of recovery and it also adopts a new rule for determining whether a contract is indefinite which is wholly at variance with past precedent. I cannot accept the *625majority's analyses or conclusions, and, therefore, I dissent.
BREACH OF CONTRACT
The basic problem with the majority's analysis of the contract between HABCO and MCS is its conclusion that because nothing in the wording of the contract expressly required HABCO to purchase more than one computer from MCS, HABCO did not breach the contract by buying additional computers from other vendors. But MCS did not and does not contend that the words of the contract required HABCO to purchase computers from MCS. Robert A. Sierp, president of MCS, testified: "[HABCO wasn't] required to buy computers from MCS." But that is not the end of the analysis because the contract between HABCO and MCS dramatically limited the use that HABCO could make of the software MCS sold to HABCO. Only if HABCO purchased additional computers from MCS could HABCO use MCS's software on those computers.
The contract reads:
This software is proprietary to MCS and shall be furnished upon completion under license to HABCO for use on the HABCO computer installation described in this Agreement. MCS shall provide the non-applications software described above at no extra charge for each additional computer system purchased by HABCO through MCS.
Sierp testified:
[T]he objective was if [HABCO was] going to use that software, that contract software, that [it] would buy a computer from us. If [it] wanted to go off and do some tax reporting, [it] could buy any *626computer [it] want[ed] and we weren't — we would not have been involved in that transaction.
Thus, it is apparent from the parties' contract and from Sierp's testimony that although the contract between MCS and HABCO did not require HABCO to buy MCS computers, if HABCO bought computers from another supplier, it could not use MCS software on those computers. What the majority fails to recognize is that without software, the computers bought from another vendor would be useless to develop turnkey computer systems for public housing authorities. The software furnished by MCS was highly specialized software developed at great cost and it was very valuable to a company in the business of licensing computer systems to public housing authorities.
The jury was asked whether HABCO breached its contract with MCS in three respects. It answered "yes" to all three special verdict questions. The majority dislikes the questions asked, and proposes an alternative. But that is not the test appellate courts use when faced with an argument that a jury question was misleading. In Topp v. Continental Ins. Co., 83 Wis. 2d 780, 785, 266 N.W.2d 397, 401 (1978), the court said:
This court has frequently stated that the form of the special verdict rests in the discretion of the trial court, and the court's chosen form will not be rejected unless the inquiry, taken with the applicable instruction, does not fairly present the material issues of fact to the jury for determination.
Instead of using this deferential review of the verdict used by the trial court, the majority, without considering the court's instructions, reviews the verdict de novo, and decides that it would have used alternative language. I cannot join in this sub silentio overruling of *627Topp. It will only cause confusion for future cases where the proper standard of review for special verdict questions is at issue.
HABCO, MCS, the trial court and the jury all understood MCS's theory of its case. I recognize that the jury questions could have been better worded, but when the jury was first asked whether HABCO breached the parties' contract by failing to purchase computers from MCS, the jury answered "yes" knowing that the contract was not worded: "HABCO agrees to purchase all computers from MCS." The jury responded affirmatively because it knew that the only practical way HABCO could have legally used MCS software for public housing authorities was to buy MCS computers. The jury also knew that HABCO avoided the increased cost of purchasing MCS computers by purchasing computers from another vendor and using MCS software on them in breach of the parties' contract. Because purchasing computers from MCS was the only practical way HABCO could avoid breaching the contract, question one of the verdict settled the real issue over which the parties contended. In any event, I cannot conclude that asking question one was an erroneous exercise of discretion, nor that the question failed to fairly present what everyone knew were the material issues of fact in the case.
The same is true of the second breach question. The jury was asked whether HABCO breached the parties' contract by failing to pay twenty-five percent of the program value to MCS for the use of the contract software. The majority's conclusion, that because HABCO did not purchase additional computer systems from MCS, HABCO did not breach the contract, is an overly simplistic answer and does not address MCS's theory of the case. The breach is HABCO's use of MCS *628software on non-MCS computers, not HABCO's failure to buy MCS computers. Had HABCO done what it agreed to do, it would have had to purchase MCS computers. It then would have used jointly owned software on those computers and paid twenty-five percent of the program value to MCS. MCS's damages for HABCO's breach of its agreement not to use MCS software on non-MCS computers equalled the twenty-five percent it would have received had HABCO not breached the contract. I conclude that the verdict form for the second question was not an erroneous exercise of discretion and that it fairly presented the material issues of fact in the case.
The final breach question is the only one the majority directly addresses, but it does so in a way which ignores our standard of review of a jury verdict. The jury was asked whether HABCO breached the parties' contract by failing to compensate MCS for the use of the proprietary software. Had HABCO not breached the contract by using MCS software on non-MCS computers, HABCO would have been required by the contract to pay twenty-five percent of the program value because it would have then used the software purchased through MCS. That was exactly what the jury was asked. Though the jury verdict might have been better drafted, or drafted in a manner which the majority would prefer, that is not what this court reviews. Our review is deferential, not de novo. See Topp, 83 Wis. 2d at 785, 266 N.W.2d at 401. I conclude that the trial court did not erroneously exercise its discretion in wording the third question of the breach of contract verdict as it did. And, given the focus of the trial, I have no doubt but that the form of the verdict fairly presented the material issues of fact to the jury.
*629There is a problem, however, with this final breach question. Once the jury found the first breach and awarded damages, the facts show that there would be either no breach of the contract by HABCO's failure to compensate MCS for its use of the proprietary software or no damages for the breach. The contract provided that if HABCO bought additional computers from MCS, MCS would provide HABCO with proprietary software at no extra charge. The jury's affirmative response to the first breach of contract question put MCS in the financial position in which it would have been had HABCO bought additional computers from MCS. MCS would then have provided the proprietary software to HABCO at no cost to HABCO. I would change the answer to breach question number three to "no."
INDEFINITE CONTRACT
The majority concludes that the parties' contract is too indefinite to be enforced. Yet, it never quotes the part of the contract which it believes is indefinite. Apparently, the majority has adopted a new rule of contract law to the effect that a contract is indefinite if it does not mean what one of the parties contends that it means. I am unaware of such a rule. We look to the contract itself to determine whether it is indefinite and therefore unenforceable. Arthur Corbin notes:
A court cannot enforce a contract unless it can determine what it is. It is not enough that the parties think that they have made a contract. They must have expressed their intentions in a manner that is capable of being understood. It is not even enough that they have actually agreed, if their expressions, when interpreted in the light of accompanying factors and circumstances, are not such *630that the court can determine what the terms of that agreement are.
1 Arthur Linton Corbin, Corbin on Contracts § 4.1 (1993). This is consistent with the RESTATEMENT (SECOND) of Contracts § 33(2) (1981), which provides: "The terms of a contract are reasonably certain if they provide a basis for determining the existence of a breach and for giving an appropriate remedy." The majority holds: "When the court subsequently ruled that the contract was insufficiently definite to be enforced, as MCS would have it enforced, MCS was left with the quoted question and award based on a theory of the case which no longer applied." Majority op. at 597 (emphasis added). This new holding looks to the pleadings and the positions taken at trial to determine whether a contract is indefinite. The majority cites no authority for this dramatic change in contract law, and I find none. I believe that the proper test for indefiniteness is to look at the language of the contract to determine whether the contract is too indefinite to be enforced.1 There is no question but that the contract is sufficiently definite. Even the majority notes: "Since it is undisputed that HABCO used MCS software with computers it bought from vendors other than MCS, it is arguable that HABCO breached the contract when it used MCS software on non-MCS computers." Majority op. at 596 (emphasis added).
Once we conclude that a contract was formed, and that HABCO breached it, facts that even the majority grudgingly admits, the only question becomes the *631extent of MCS's damages. Because there is evidence to support the damages the jury awarded for HABCO's failure to purchase computer equipment from MCS, and for HABCO'S failure to pay twenty-five percent of the program value for the use of the contract software, I would reinstate that part of the jury's verdict.
PUNITIVE DAMAGES
The only rationale that I can discern for the majority's reduction of the $1,750,000 punitive damage award is that the figure it chooses, $650,000, is ten times the amount of the reduced compensatory damages. But why is ten, aside from being a round number with metric significance, the proper multiplier? Would not eleven or nine be just as appropriate? And if " [t]here is no arbitrary rule that punitive damages cannot equal 15 times the compensatory damages," Malco, Inc. v. Midwest Aluminum Sales, Inc., 14 Wis. 2d 57, 66, 109 N.W.2d 516, 521 (1961), why did not the majority award punitive damages of $975,000?
The use of a multiplier as the sole means to determine punitive damages has been specifically rejected. In Fahrenberg v. Tengel, 96 Wis. 2d 211, 235-36, 291 N.W.2d 516, 527 (1980), the court said:
Although the amount of compensatory damages and criminal penalties have some relevancy to the amount of punitive damages and may be factors in determining the reasonableness of the punitive damages award, we have not been willing in the past, and are not willing in this case, to adopt a mathematical formula for awarding punitive damages. In punitive damages, as in damages for pain and suffering, the law furnishes no mechanical legal rule for their measurement. The amount rests initially in the discretion of the jury. We are reluc*632tant to set aside an award because it is large or we would have awarded less. As we have said in cases involving compensatory damages, " '[A]ll that the court can do is to see that the jury approximates a sane estimate, or, as it is sometimes said, see that the results attained do not shock the judicial conscience.'"
(Emphasis added; quoted source omitted.)
The jury saw the witnesses and heard what HABCO did. I cannot conclude that a $1,750,000 punitive damage award against accountants who have stolen their client's software was an insane estimate by the jury. We give juries discretion in their award of punitive damages. I agree that the award is large and I would have awarded less. But that is not the test. We must look at whether "the jury approximates a sane estimate," id. at 236, 291 N.W.2d at 527, and, using that test, I would affirm the jury's punitive damage award. The message sent by the majority in a world where computers have provided extensive profits to those who can market the technology, is that crime pays, and pays well. The decision to risk $650,000 by stealing software can be an easy one where the profits can reach millions of dollars. Perhaps a $1,750,000 punitive damage award is not much better than a $650,000 award, but it is a start. It sends the message that courts will not reverse large punitive damage awards where the conduct is criminal and egregious. It allows for the possibility that even larger awards will be sustained when the conduct merits it. And that possibility will, perhaps, give potential computer thieves pause when they contemplate obtaining desired software by theft.
*633For these reasons, I respectfully dissent.
Even if we conclude that a contract is ambiguous, we do not necessarily conclude that it is void for indefiniteness. If a contract is ambiguous, we may construe the contract through the use of extrinsic evidence. Pleasure Time, Inc. v. Kuss, 78 Wis. 2d 373, 379, 254 N.W.2d 463, 467 (1977).

=== CASE 9739418 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:37.427513+00 ===

NEUMANN, Justice.
The Olsons appeal from summary judgment dismissing their tort action against the City of Garrison for damages resulting from a broken water main. We affirm.
In November 1991 a break occurred in a City of Garrison water main adjacent to the building housing Art and Sharon Olson’s silk screening business. The break flooded the basement of the Olsons’ business with fourteen to eighteen inches of water and damaged or destroyed machinery and inventory. The record reveals at least one other break had occurred in the vicinity a few months earlier. According to the city engineer, no normal maintenance procedure can prevent water mains from breaking.
The record also reveals decisions concerning the operation and maintenance of the City’s water main system were based upon various factors. These factors included the historical performance of the water main, the cost of repairing versus replacing the water main, the ability of the City to participate in grants or federally aided projects, and the condition of overlying streets.
The Olsons brought a tort action against the City for damages resulting from the broken water main; specifically, the Olsons alleged negligence. The City, in turn, moved for summary judgment, alleging the action was barred by the discretionary function exception to governmental liability. Following a hearing, the City’s motion was granted. The Olsons appeal from that judgment.
Summary judgment is appropriate when, after viewing evidence most favorable to the party against whom summary judgment is sought, there exists no genuine issue of material fact in dispute. Berg v. Lien, 522 N.W.2d 455, 456 (N.D.1994). Even if factual disputes exist, they are not material unless resolution would alter the ultimate outcome. Id. However, we need not determine whether the Olsons have presented facts sufficient to survive summary judgment because we conclude the discretionary function exception to governmental liability provides immunity to the City of Garrison for the operation and maintenance of its water main system.
The discretionary function exception first appeared in Kitto v. Minot Park District, 224 N.W.2d 795 (N.D.1974), in which the court abolished the doctrine of governmental immunity, id. at 797, but retained some immunity for discretionary acts, stating:
... immunity [will be] retained for certain acts which go to the essence of governing. We do not contemplate that the essential acts of governmental decision-making be the subject of judicial second-guessing or harassment by the actual or potential threat of litigation. We hold that no tort action will lie against governmental units for those acts which may be termed discretionary in character. Included within this category are acts traditionally deemed legislative or quasi-legislative, or judicial or quasi-judicial, in nature.
Id. at 804 (emphasis added) (citations omitted). This discretionary function exception, now found in section 32-12.1-03(3) of the North Dakota Century Code, frames the analysis in the instant case.
Section 32-12.1-03(3) was enacted by the North Dakota Legislature in response to the Kitto decision and for the purpose of limiting governmental liability. O’Fallon v. Pollard, *665427 N.W.2d 809, 811 (N.D.1988). It reads in relevant part:
3. A political subdivision is not liable for any claim based upon an act or omission of an employee of a political subdivision, exercising due care, in the execution of a statute or regulation whether or not such statute or regulation be valid, or based, upon the exercise or performance, exercising due care, or the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function or duty on the part of a political subdivision or its employees, whether or not the discretion involved be abused.
NDCC § 32-12.1-03(3) (Supp.1995).1 Apparently this language comes directly from the language used in the Federal Tort Claims Act.2 Compare NDCC § 32-12.1-03(3) mth 28 U.S.C. § 2680(a) (1994).
The problem that has plagued many courts, however, is defining a test for determining the scope of the discretionary function exception, or stated differently, for determining which governmental acts are discretionary. The Kitto court did not solve this problem definitively. Thus, it is necessary to examine briefly the law in North Dakota to see if it has been addressed elsewhere.
Two other tests for addressing the problem have been considered and subsequently rejected or at least not explicitly adopted in North Dakota. Those tests are the distinction between immune governmental acts and non-immune proprietary acts, and the distinction between immune planning acts and non-immune operational acts.3 Kit*666to, 224 N.W.2d at 805 (repudiating the governmental/proprietary distinction, character-king it as a “quagmire”); Sande v. City of Grand Forks, 269 N.W.2d 93, 98 (N.D.1978) (recognizing the planning/operational distinction as helpful but not controlling). Thus, North Dakota law, with respect to the scope of the discretionary function exception, specifically the test for determining discretionary acts, is unsettled. North Dakota has yet to define its “more narrow and more rational ground for limiting [governmental] liability” under the discretionary function exception. Kitto, 224 N.W.2d at 805.
Nonetheless, the search for this limitation is not without direction. Kitto suggested this court refer to the “substantial experience in dealing with [the] discretionary function exception under the Federal Tort Claims Act” as a possible “useful source of reference,”4 224 N.W.2d at 804-05, and the North Dakota Legislature adopted essentially in whole the federal exception. Compare NDCC § 32-12.1-03(3) with 28 U.S.C. § 2680(a) (1994).
The federal discretionary function exception is based squarely on separation of powers concerns. The purpose of the exception is to “prevent judicial ‘second-guessing’ of legislative and administrative decisions grounded in social, economic, and political policy through the medium of an action in tort.” Berkovitz v. United States, 486 U.S. 531, 536-37, 108 S.Ct. 1954, 1959, 100 L.Ed.2d 531, 541 (1988). In other words, borrowing the language of the Minnesota Supreme Court, the purpose is “to assure that the courts do not pass judgment on policy decisions entrusted to coordinate branches of government ... [and to prevent] tort actions from becoming a vehicle for judicial interference with executive and legislative policymaking.” Holmquist v. State, 425 N.W.2d 230, 231 (Minn.1988).
Keeping in mind the importance of the concern for separation of powers, federal law has developed two inquiries to determine whether particular governmental conduct falls under the discretionary function exception. The focus of the inquiries is on “the nature of the conduct [not] the status of the actor.” Berkovitz, 486 U.S. at 536, 108 S.Ct. at 1958, 100 L.Ed.2d at 540 (quoting United States v. S.A. Empresa de Viacao Aerea Rio Grandense (Varig Airlines), 467 U.S. 797, 813, 104 S.Ct. 2755, 2764, 81 L.Ed.2d 660, 674 (1984)). “In examining the nature of the challenged conduct, [the first inquiry a court must consider is] whether the action is a matter of choice for the acting employee.” Id. “[C]onduct cannot be discretionary unless it involves an element of judgment or choice.” Id. Thus, the discretionary function exception will not apply when a ... statute, regulation, or policy specifically prescribes a course of action for an employee to follow [because] “the employee has no rightful option but to adhere to the directive,” id., and because “the government has restricted its own discretion” through the directive. David S. Fishback & Gail Killefer, The Discretionary Function Exception To The Federal Tort Claims Act: Dalehite To Varig To Berkovitz, 25 Idaho L.Rev. 291, 298 (1988-89). Moreover, the directive must be specific and mandatory as opposed to a general statutory duty. Kennewick Irrigation District v. United States, 880 F.2d 1018, 1026 (9th Cir.1989).
*667Turning to the instant case, the governmental conduct challenged by the Olsons is the operation and maintenance by the City of Garrison of its water main system. The Olsons have not identified a specific and mandatory statute, regulation, or policy that prescribes a course of action for the City’s operation and maintenance of its water mains. Although an independent search by this court did reveal statutes and regulations governing, for example, the certification of water distribution system operators, NDCC ch. 23-26 (1991 & Supp.1995); N.D.Admin.Code art. 33-19 (1994), it did not reveal a specific and mandatory directive governing the operation and maintenance of a city’s water main system.
Nevertheless, as indicated by the record, the City does consider various factors when making decisions about the operation and maintenance of its water mains. These factors include the historical performance of the water main, the cost of repairing versus replacing the water main, the ability of the City to participate in grants or federally aided projects, and the condition of overlying streets. These factors guide the City’s decisions generally and involve discretion or judgment and are not specific and mandatory directives. See, e.g., Kennewick, 880 F.2d at 1026-32. Stated differently, the factors “do not contain directives so precise that they constrain the [City’s] control” over the operation and maintenance of its water main system. Cope v. Scott, 45 F.3d 445, 450 (D.C.Cir.1995) (denying challenge to government’s maintenance of a road where Park Service manual was applicable only “to the extent practicable ... the essence of discretion”); Baum v. United States, 986 F.2d 716, 722-24 (4th Cir.1993) (denying challenge to government’s “judgments involving when and how to maintain its bridges and guardrails” where no specific and mandatory directive governed those judgments); cf. ARA Leisure Services v. United States, 831 F.2d 193, 195 (9th Cir.1987) (upholding challenge to government’s maintenance of a road in which Park Service standards had “explicit” requirements for road conditions). “Where there is room for policy judgment and decision there is discretion.” Berkovitz, 486 U.S. at 537, 108 S.Ct. at 1959, 100 L.Ed.2d at 541 (quoting Dalehite v. United States, 346 U.S. 15, 36, 73 S.Ct. 956, 968, 97 L.Ed. 1427, 1441 (1953)). Therefore, the Olsons’ tort action fails under the first inquiry.
The inquiry does not end here, however. Even if “the challenged conduct involves an element of judgment [or choice], [the second inquiry a court must consider is] whether that judgment [or choice] is of the kind that the discretionary function exception was designed to shield.” Id. at 536, 108 S.Ct. at 1959, 100 L.Ed.2d at 541. “The focus of the inquiry is not on the [government’s] subjective intent in exercising the discretion conferred ... but on the nature of the actions taken and on whether they are susceptible to policy analysis.”5 United States v. Gaubert, 499 U.S. 315, 325, 111 S.Ct. 1267, 1275, 113 L.Ed.2d 335, 348 (1991). This inquiry is more difficult to answer because it directly implicates the separation of powers concerns.
The purpose of the discretionary function exception is to “prevent judicial ‘second-guessing’ of legislative and administrative decisions grounded in social, economic, and political policy through the medium of an action in tort.” Berkovitz, 486 U.S. at 536-37, 108 S.Ct. at 1959, 100 L.Ed.2d at 541. When properly construed, the exception should shield only governmental action based on public policy considerations. Gaubert, 499 U.S. at 323, 111 S.Ct. at 1273, 113 L.Ed.2d at 346. Moreover, public policy considerations, social, economic, or political, must be distinguished from more objective standards based on, for example, scientific, engineering, or *668technical considerations. Kennewick, 880 F.2d at 1030. The latter are not protected by the discretionary function exception, id., when the challenged conduct involves nothing more than a “follow the numbers” approach. Fishback, supra at 325.
In the instant case, the challenged conduct is the operation and maintenance by the City of Garrison of its water main system. The decisions concerning the conduct turn not on objective standards but on public policy considerations. Specifically, the record reveals economic considerations dictated the City’s actions regarding the water main system, and these actions can be described as “a question of how best to allocate resources.” Baum, 986 F.2d at 724.
But economic considerations, when reduced to such ingredients as budgetary constraints or choices involving whether to spend money, do not themselves insulate governmental action. Cope, 45 F.3d at 449. It is when these ingredients are combined with others that economic considerations become grounded in policy. See id. at 451. For example, and similar to Cope, the record indicates no normal maintenance procedure would have prevented the water main that damaged the Olsons’ property from breaking. See id. (stating “no regular maintenance would have prevented the road from deteriorating”); see also Baum, 986 F.2d at 723-24 (rejecting argument about how and when the government “should have” maintained a guardrail system because it is a policy-based decision). Only by balancing the previously enumerated factors, such as the cost of repairing versus replacing the water main and sources of funding, as well as others such as possible disruption to the economic activity on Main Street from excavating a water main, could the City make a judgment about an appropriate course of action. See Cope, 45 F.3d at 451 (discussing the balancing of factors such as “the allocation of funds among significant project demands ... and the inconvenience of repairs as compared to the risk of safety hazards”). This is a judgment so “inherently bound up in considerations of economic and political policy” that it cannot be subject to second-guessing by the judiciary. Baum, 986 F.2d at 724. Thus, under the second inquiry, the Olsons’ tort action challenging the City of Garrison’s operation and maintenance of its water main system cannot be sustained; the conduct is of the type intended to be shielded by the discretionary function exception.
We are not suggesting that every decision made by a city about the operation and maintenance of its water main system is or should be shielded. See Baum, 986 F.2d at 724. But since we are confined to the facts of this case, we find it “unnecessary— and indeed impossible — to define with precision every contour of the discretionary function exception.” Varig Airlines, 467 U.S. at 813, 104 S.Ct. at 2764, 81 L.Ed.2d at 674. It is sufficient to say “the legislature did not intend the ... exception to swallow the general rule” by preserving immunity for all governmental conduct. Holmquist, 425 N.W.2d at 231.
We conclude the City of Garrison’s conduct falls within the discretionary function exception. Thus we need not reach the other issues raised by the Olsons.
Affirmed.
VANDE WALLE, C.J., and LEVINE and SANDSTROM, JJ., concur.
.In its entirety, section 32-12.1-03(3) reads:
3. A political subdivision is not liable for any claim based upon an act or omission of an employee of a political subdivision, exercising due care, in the execution of a statute or regulation, whether or not such statute or regulation be valid, or based upon the exercise or performance, exercising due care, or the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function or duty on the part of a political subdivision or its employees, whether or not the discretion involved be abused. Specifically, a political subdivision or an employee thereof is not liable for any claim which results from:
a. The decision to undertake or the refusal to undertake any legislative or quasi-legislative act, including the decision to adopt or the refusal to adopt any statute, charter, ordinance, order, regulation, resolution, or resolve.
b. The decision to undertake or the refusal to undertake any judicial or quasi-judicial act, including the decision to grant, to grant with conditions, to refuse to grant, or to revoke any license, permit, order, or other administrative approval or denial.
c. The decision to perform or the refusal to exercise or perform a discretionary function or duty, whether or not such discretion be abused and whether or not the statute, charter, ordinance, order, resolution, regulation or resolve under which the discretionary function or duty is performed is valid or invalid.
d. The failure to provide or maintain sufficient personnel, equipment, or other fire protection facilities; or doing any fire extin-guishment or fire prevention work, rescue, resuscitation, or first aid; or any other official acts within the scope of official duties; provided, however, this subsection does not provide immunity for damages resulting from acts of gross negligence.
Nothing contained in this subsection may be construed to limit the liability of a political subdivision or an employee thereof for a personal injury arising out of the execution of any legislative or quasi-legislative act, judicial or quasi-judicial act, or discretionary function.
. The discretionary function exception of the Federal Tort Claims Act is codified at 28 U.S.C. § 2680(a) and reads in relevant part:
The provisions of this chapter and section 1346(b) of this title shall not apply to—
(a) Any claim based upon an act or omission of an employee of the Government, exercising due care, in the execution of a statute or regulation, whether or not such statute or regulation be valid, or based upon the exercise or performance or the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function or duty on the part of a federal agency or an employee of the Government, whether or not the discretion involved be abused.
. A third test concerning governmental liability and discretionary acts also has been recognized. This test makes a distinction between immune discretionary acts and non-immune ministerial acts. Richmond v. Haney, 480 N.W.2d 751, 758-60 (N.D.1992); Miles Homes v. City of Westhope, 458 N.W.2d 321, 325-27 (N.D.1990); Loran v. Iszler, 373 N.W.2d 870, 872-76 (N.D.1985). However, it appears the distinction applies to the liability or immunity of public officials as opposed to governmental units, such as a city or county. E.g., Richmond, 480 N.W.2d at 758-60 (involving police detective). Since the Olsons are challenging the acts of the City of Garrison and not a City of Garrison public official, the discretionary/ministerial act distinction is not applicable.
. The federal courts, too, have struggled with defining a test for determining immune discretionary acts and non-immune nondiscretionary acts. E.g., United States v. S.A. Empresa de Viacao Aerea Rio Grandense (Varig Airlines), 467 U.S. 797, 811, 104 S.Ct. 2755, 2763, 81 L.Ed.2d 660, 673 (1984) (recognizing that “the Court's reading of the [Federal Tort Claims] Act admittedly has not followed a straight line”); Berkovitz v. United States, 486 U.S. 531, 539, 108 S.Ct. 1954, 1960, 100 L.Ed.2d 531, 542 (1988) (citing Indian Towing Co. v. United States, 350 U.S. 61, 64-65, 76 S.Ct. 122, 124-25, 100 L.Ed. 48, 53-54 (1955), in which the Court disapproved the government's argument that liability is precluded for “uniquely governmental functions”); United States v. Gaubert, 499 U.S. 315, 325-26, 111 S.Ct. 1267, 1275, 113 L.Ed.2d 335, 348-49 (1991) (referring to the planning/operational distinction as a "nonexistent dichotomy” and indicating that a discretionary act does not exclusively refer to the planning level). However, it appears federal law, at least for now, has settled on a test. See generally David S. Fishback & Gail Killefer, The Discretionary Function Exception To The Federal Tort Claims Act: Dalehite To Varig To Berkovitz, 25 Idaho L.Rev. 291, 294 (1988-89).
. There are obviously discretionary acts performed by a Government agent that are within the scope of his employment but not within the discretionary function exception because these acts cannot be said to be based on the purposes that the regulatory regime seeks to accomplish. If one of the officials involved in this case drove an automobile on a mission connected with his official duties and negligently collided with another car, the exception would not apply. Although driving requires the constant exercise of discretion, the official's decisions in exercising that discretion can hardly be said to be grounded in regulatory policy.
Gaubert, 499 U.S. at 325, n. 7, 111 S.Ct. at 1275, n. 7, 113 L.Ed.2d at 348, n. 7.

=== CASE 9739419 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:37.432976+00 ===

VANDE WALLE, Chief Justice,
concurring in result.
I agree with the majority opinion. I write only to question the application in North Dakota of the quote from 78 Am.Jur.2d Waterworks and Water Companies § 60 (1975) that distribution of water to a city’s inhabitants is a function undertaken by a city in its private or proprietary capacity. That statement, relied upon by Justice Meschke in his concurring opinion, may be true elsewhere but I doubt its validity in rural areas like North Dakota. One need only look at the many sections in the North Dakota Century Code regulating a city’s authority to operate water distribution systems as evidence that it is a public function. See, e.g., Chapter 40-22 and 40-33 of the NDCC.
The city is given the authority to operate a water distribution system in Chapter 40-33, NDCC, along with electric light and power *669plants, telephone plant, natural gas plant and heating plant. Interestingly, however, the authority in Chapter 40-22 to levy special assessments for those purposes includes only water and sewer systems. Indeed, the history in North Dakota belies the Am.Jur. observation. Whereas in earlier years some cities owned and operated light plants and distribution systems, and a few may still do so, I believe most cities in North Dakota now receive electricity through investor-owned or member-owned entities. The reverse is true for water and sewer systems. Private enterprise has not attempted to provide the service for the obvious reason that water and sewer lines cannot be expanded like lines for electric and telephone utilities.
Although there are now some rural water distribution systems being formed that may deliver water to smaller cities, nearly all, if not all, water and sewer systems are operated by cities. If we were to adhere to the “ordinary liability” theory of the special concurrence for the water systems in small-town rural North Dakota, I suggest we would endanger their existence and foster their demise. The statement in the special concurrence that “[l]ike the physical operation of an electric system, the physical operation of a water system is not a discretionary function that shelters a governmental body from tort liability” is a fiction in North Dakota. Historically and practically there has been a great difference between electric plants and water plants. Additionally, the supporting citation for that statement, Aslakson v. United States, 790 F.2d 688, 693 (8th Cir.1986) involved the Western Area Power Association, WAP A, a large electric distribution system which is an agency of the United States!
If it is argued that unless cities can pay ordinary negligence claims they should not have the water or sewer system, that argument is ruthless as applied to rural North Dakota, particularly when its purpose is to support a legal fiction, i.e., private or proprietary operation of water systems, that does not and probably never existed in this State. I resist the incorporation of this philosophy to the operation of water or sewer systems in small-town North Dakota, which already struggles for survival.

=== CASE 9739420 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:37.436855+00 ===

MESCHKE, Justice,
concurring.
I concur in the result only. I write separately to explain why I believe the majority opinion unnecessarily invokes the discretionary-function exception for municipal tort liability. I join in affirming because there was no showing of any negligence by the City.
Since Kitto v. Minot Park Dist., 224 N.W.2d 795 (N.D.1974), each political subdivision continues to be liable for its negligent conduct, and for the negligent conduct of an employee acting within the scope of employment, “under circumstances where the political subdivision, if a private person, would be liable to the claimant.” NDCC 32-12.1-03(1). There are some exceptions however, to municipal tort liability. For one, a municipality is not hable for a tort claim based upon a discretionary function. NDCC 32-12.1-03(3). As Kitto explained, 224 N.W.2d at 804, the tort liability of a municipality does “not contemplate that the essential acts of governmental decision-making be the subject of judicial second-guessing or harassment by the actual or potential threat of litigation.”
This discretionary-function exception respects the constitutional separation of powers by preventing judicial interference with poli-cymaking of the executive and legislative branches, even at the local level. See generally W. Page Keeton, Prosser & Keeton on the Law of Torts § 131, at 1039 (5th ed. 1984). As the Minnesota Supreme Court well explained in Holmquist v. State, 425 N.W.2d 230, 231-32 (Minn.1988), the discretionary-function exception applies to governmental decisions choosing between competing public policy considerations.
This case is not about governmental planning or policymaking. Nor should we confuse it with operational phases of a governmental regulatory program that would be an essential act of governmental decisionmak-ing. See United States v. Gaubert, 499 U.S. 315, 111 S.Ct. 1267, 113 L.Ed.2d 335 (1991). Rather, this case is about the physical operation of a water system. Historically,
distribution of water to its inhabitants is a function undertaken by a municipality in its private or proprietary capacity, and in the exercise of such a function a municipality is subject to the same liabilities as govern a private individual or corporation *670in like circumstances. Also, the standard of care is the same as that exacted from a private company. A municipality in maintaining a water supply system is chargeable with a duty to construct and maintain its water reservoirs with reasonable care....
A municipal corporation engaged in the business of supplying water to its inhabitants is liable for injuries resulting from negligence on its part in laying its water pipes in the public streets;.... It is, in short, liable to all persons injured by the negligent construction, management, and operation of the waterworks. However, a municipality is not an insurer of the safety of its waterworks or against injuries resulting from its operation of a water supply system, and may not be held hable therefor unless the injuries complained of are proximately caused by the negligence of itself or its employees.
78 Am.Jur.2d Waterworks and Water Companies § 60 (1975) (footnotes omitted). If every city decision about the physical operation of its water system becomes a discretionary function, the exception will swallow the general rule of tort liability equivalent to that of a private person.
Like the physical operation of an electric system, the physical operation of a water system is not a discretionary function that shelters a governmental body from tort liability. See Aslakson v. United States, 790 F.2d 688, 693 (8th Cir.1986) (“As a general rule, operational mismanagement in the maintenance of electrical transmission lines does not fall within the scope of the discretionary function exception.”). We should analyze this case under normal negligence doctrine.
A single prior break in an underground waterline does not evidence unreasonable operation, because there can be many reasons for the break, apart from negligent conduct. Here, there was no evidence from the Olsons that the City acted unreasonably in maintaining and operating its waterlines. There is no evidence that a reasonable operator would have replaced the water main or taken it out of service. I agree with that small part of the majority opinion that says “the record indicates no normal maintenance procedure would have prevented the water main [break] that damaged the Olsons’ property....” Therefore, I agree summary judgment was proper.

=== CASE 2219719 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:19.499672+00 ===

595 N.E.2d 169 (1992)
229 Ill. App.3d 1023
172 Ill.Dec. 106
Edward James KOCAL, Petitioner-Appellee,
v.
Vicki S. HOLT, f/k/a Vicki S. Bay, Respondent-Appellant. Edward James KOCAL, Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
Vicki S. HOLT, f/k/a Vicki S. Bay, Respondent-Appellee.
Nos. 3-91-0195, 3-91-0316.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Third District.
June 5, 1992.
Rehearing Denied July 22, 1992.
Dean A. Stone (argued), Macomb, for Vicki S. Holt.
James R. Standard, Monmouth, for Edward James Kocal.
Justice GORMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
This action was brought by petitionerfather for joint custody of his daughter, Krista Bay. The trial court imposed joint custody and ordered petitioner to pick up Krista in Macomb, Illinois. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
Petitioner Edward Kocal and respondent Vicki Holt (formerly Bay) began living together in Macomb, Illinois, in August 1982. *170 Krista Bay was born to the couple on August 16, 1984. Respondent was the primary caregiver. Petitioner and respondent stopped living together in May 1985. Petitioner moved to Davenport, Iowa. He visited Krista monthly for the next several months. He then stopped paying child support. In 1987, an Iowa county court entered an order for support. That year, respondent married and continued to be the primary caregiver of Krista. During 1987-8, petitioner visited Krista on a regular basis and had her for several overnight visits. To facilitate the overnight visits, petitioner and respondent's husband met in Monmouth, Illinois, to transfer Krista.
In February 1989, respondent stopped allowing petitioner to visit Krista. Respondent alleged petitioner had returned Krista late and that the minor had been riding in petitioner's vehicle without a child's car seat, while seated in the lap of petitioner's female companion in a manner which caused the shoulder belt to cross the child's neck.
In August 1989, petitioner filed a petition for order regarding custody and visitation. Respondent counterpetitioned for an increase in child support. In February 1990, the court heard evidence on the petition. Respondent testified that she was opposed to joint custody. She stated that her relationship with petitioner was marked by animosity and a total lack of agreement concerning Krista. She also testified that she and petitioner do not communicate at all.
The trial judge interviewed Krista in camera. Krista told the judge that her mother had said that she does not like her father. Krista also said that she herself does not like her father. Further, the youngster indicated that she had fun when she visited her father. She also said that she understood that her father loved her and that he has told her so.
In April 1990, the court held that the proceeding was an initial custody determination and therefore, petitioner's burden of proof was by a preponderance of the evidence. The trial judge ordered that petitioner and respondent have joint custody of their daughter, "in spite of the vitriolic interrelationship between the parties and the distance involved." Joint custody was to encompass all major decisions such as education, health care, and religious training. All other day to day decisions were to be left to respondent, who was also awarded primary residential custody. The judge set forth petitioner's visitation rights and directed the parties to undergo counseling. On rehearing, the court ordered petitioner to pick up Krista in Macomb, which order reversed an earlier ruling requiring petitioner to pick his daughter up in Monmouth.
Respondent now appeals the joint custody decision. Petitioner appeals the decision regarding the transportation of the child for visitation.
The first issue respondent raises for review is whether the trial court applied the correct standard in making its custody determination.
Section 14(a)(2) of the Parentage Act provides the following:
If the judgment of parentage contains no explicit award of custody, the establishment of a support obligation or of visitation rights in one parent shall be considered a judgment granting custody to the other parent. Ill.Rev.Stat. 1989, ch. 40, par. 2514(a)(2).
In pertinent part, section 610 of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act sets forth the following:
(a) ... [N]o motion to modify a custody judgment may be made earlier than 2 years after its date, unless the court permits it to be made on the basis of affidavits that there is reason to believe the child's present environment may endanger seriously his physical, mental, moral or emotional health, (b) The court shall not modify a prior custody judgment unless it finds by clear and convincing evidence, upon the basis of facts that have arisen since the prior judgment or that were unknown to the court at the time of entry of the prior judgment, that a change has occurred in the circumstances of the child or his custodian ... *171 Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 40, par. 610(a) and (b).
In the March 1987 Iowa County Stipulation for Support, petitioner acknowledged paternity. In the later Order for Support, the court set child support at $100 per month. Under the above quoted provision of the Illinois Parentage Act, the Iowa Order is considered a judgment granting custody of Krista to respondent. Since more than two years had elapsed from that order until the petition with regard to custody was filed in this case, section 610(b) of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act applies and the correct standard to be applied, as in any modification, is clear and convincing evidence.
The petitioner cites Upmann v. Terhark (1990), 200 Ill.App.3d 827, 146 Ill.Dec. 605, 558 N.E.2d 568 appeal denied as support for his position that custody should be determined by a preponderance of the evidence. There, an illegitimate boy was born. Six months later, the mother filed a paternity petition. An order was entered finding paternity and imposing a support obligation on the father. Shortly thereafter, the father petitioned for custody. The trial court granted mother and father joint legal custody and gave the father physical custody. The appellate court affirmed and refused to follow section 610(a).
The Upmann court's decision is distinguishable in several ways. First and most important, that court was analyzing the interplay of section 14(a)(2) of the Parentage Act and section 610(a)not 610(b)of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act. Second, the father there petitioned for custody within a matter of days of learning that the minor was indeed his child. Third, the minor there was only a few months old and the mother was not providing the child with a stable environment.
The second issue respondent raises is whether the trial court abused its discretion in awarding joint custody of Krista to the parties.
Under In re Marriage of Pool (1983), 118 Ill.App.3d 1035, 74 Ill.Dec. 458, 455 N.E.2d 887, joint custody orders are appropriate only where both parents have displayed an "unusual capacity to cooperate". In Pool, there was testimony regarding noncooperation and discord during the period of separation and trial. Therefore, the appellate court held that the trial court had abused its discretion in making a joint custodial award and reversed with instructions to place the children with one parent, subject to visitation by the other. Although Pool was decided under a prior statute which provided that joint custody was appropriate only where it was in the best interest of the child and both parties agreed to the arrangement, the Pool case is still applicable here. Presently the statute does not require the parties' agreement to the arrangement, but does provide that one factor in the joint custody determination is "the ability of the parents to cooperate effectively and consistently with each other towards the best interests of the child." Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 40, par. 602.1(c)(1).
The parties here have not displayed a capacity to cooperate effectively regarding their daughter's upbringing. Rather, petitioner and respondent have such a history of disagreement that imposing a joint custody arrangement, even though limited, is against the best interests of the child. Therefore we reverse the imposition of joint custody and remand for a determination regarding visitation.
The final issue, which was raised for review by petitioner, was whether the trial court abused its discretion in directing him to pick up Krista in Macomb, Illinois.
Visitation orders will not be disturbed on appeal absent a grave abuse of discretion. In re Marriage of Amato (1980), 80 Ill. App.3d 395, 399 N.E.2d 1018. Although the trial court did originally order that Monmouth, Illinois would be the pick up/drop off point, it modified that order approximately six months later after hearing testimony of respondent's changed working shift. This change in schedule occurred through no fault of the respondent. The court then directed that the pick up point was to be Macomb. We can find *172 no abuse of discretion here and affirm the trial court's determination on this issue.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded.
HAASE and STOUDER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739609 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:25.580233+00 ===

Abrams, J.
(concurring, with whom Liacos, J., joins). I concur with the majority’s reasoning in denying relief to the plaintiff. Unfortunately, on the record before us, there is no remedy for the grievous wrong inflicted on Spring and members of his family. The decedent was an ailing, elderly, incompetent patient at a nursing home. Following the court order terminating the decedent’s dialysis treatments, Matter of Spring, 380 Mass. 629 (1980), two nurses employed by the defendant Authority asked the decedent whether he wanted to die. The nurses, together with four aides, sent a letter and transcript of the “interview” with the decedent to the local newspaper. This was done with the approval of both the supervisory nurse and the Center administrator. Later, a physician and nurse — unaffiliated with the Authority — were permitted access to the decedent by the Authority employees to make an unsolicited visit. No defendant had obtained the permission of either the decedent’s family or guardian. The decedent’s privacy was significantly invaded without justification.
The dilemma for the plaintiff became, of course, from whom to seek relief. As the court notes, G. L. c. 66A is inapplicable to the Authority. Ante at 281. Further, assuming that an action for invasion of privacy existed at common law, such an action *294might have been available against a municipality, see 18 E. McQuillin, Municipal Corporations § 53.13a (3d ed. rev. 1984), but not against a hospital maintained by a municipality, see id. at § 53.86. See also Beakey v. Billerica, 324 Mass. 290 (1949) (municipality not liable for negligent acts of its officers or employees in maintenance of infirmary); Young v. Worcester, 253 Mass. 481, 484 (1925) (municipality not liable for negligent act, “greater in culpability than is ordinarily imputed to negligent conduct,” arising out of maintenance of city hospital).
The Legislature, furthermore, has specifically provided that “[t]he exercise by the Authority of [its] powers . . . shall be deemed and held to be the performance of essential governmental functions.” St. 1973, c. 1097, § 1, amending St. 1971, c. 554 (emphasis added). At common law, immunity was typically afforded services performed by a municipality which were “not for the immediate advantage of the town in its corporate capacity.” Fisher v. Boston, 104 Mass. 87, 93 (1870). Thus, neither at common law nor by statute may we view this agency as a proprietary agency for purposes of imposing liability.
It is clear, moreover, that the defendants intentionally sent the letter to the newspaper. The Legislature has exempted intentional torts from the Massachusetts Tort Claims Act. Section 10 (c) of G. L. c. 258, inserted by St. 1978, c. 512, § 15, provides that the act does not apply to “any claim arising out of an intentional tort, including . . . intentional mental distress . . . [and] invasion of privacy.” “Where the Legislature in enacting a statute follows a Federal statute, we follow the adjudged construction of the Federal statute by the Federal courts.” Packaging Indus. Group, Inc. v. Cheney, 380 Mass. 609, 611 (1980). See Irwin v. Ware, 392 Mass. 745, 767-768 (1984).
General Laws c. 258, § 10 (c), finds its Federal analogue in the Federal Tort Claims Act, 28 U.S.C. § 2680 (h) (1982).1 *295The Federal courts have construed that provision as immunizing public employers from suits arising out of intentional torts. United States v. Muniz, 374 U.S. 150, 163 (1963). Wine v. United States, 705 F.2d 366 (10th Cir. 1983). See W.L. Prosser & W.P. Keeton, Torts § 131 (5th ed. 1984) (Federal government retains immunity from specified intentional tort claims). That same outcome was intended by the Legislature when it enacted G. L. c. 258, § 10.
It ought to be underscored, however, that the plaintiff in such a case retains the right to bring an action against the individual governmental employees involved. “A . . . logical interpretation of [G. L. c. 258, § 10 (c)] excludes [intentional torts] from the act’s waiver of public employer immunity but does not affect any common law remedies against public employees for these acts.” Glannon, Governmental Tort Liability under the Massachusetts Tort Claims Act of 1978, 66 Mass. L. Rev. 7, 12 (1981). See Alves v. Hayes, 381 Mass. 57, 58 (1980); Morash & Sons v. Commonwealth, 363 Mass. 612, 624 n.7 (1973). And indeed, the plaintiff here did pursue actions against the defendants Greany, Webster, McEvady, and Walohan as individuals for invasion of privacy. The jury returned verdicts for the four defendants and the plaintiff took no cross appeal from the judgments on those verdicts. Thus, even had there been error in those judgments, any such error is not before us. “[Fjailure to take a cross appeal precludes a party from obtaining a judgment more favorable to it than the judgment entered below.” Boston Edison Co. v. Boston Redevelopment Auth., 374 Mass. 37, 43 n.5 (1977). The failure to take a cross appeal as to the individual defendants is particularly surprising in view of these defendants’ obvious insensitivity to a grieving family struggling to come to terms with the sad fate of one of its members.
Title 28 U.S.C. § 2680 (h) reads in pertinent part: “The provisions of this chapter . . . shall not apply to — (h) Any claim arising out of assault, battery, false imprisonment, false arrest, malicious prosecution, abuse of process, libel, slander, misrepresentation, deceit, or interference with contract rights.”

=== CASE 9739610 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:26.163342+00 ===

JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH delivered the opinion of the court: On October 14, 1978, the members of the Sitzmacher Ski Club, Inc., embarked upon a hayrack ride conducted by the Hidden Lake Management Corporation, hereafter defendant. Because of a flat tire on one of the wagons, three wagons pulled onto the shoulder of the road. A number of the riders left the wagons, and as the result of being struck by an automobile driven by Rickey J. Mitchell, three of them were killed and two were injured. Actions filed against Mitchell, defendant, and the Sitzmacher Ski Club, Inc., in the circuit court of Rock Island County by the administrators of the estates of the decedents pursuant to the Wrongful Death Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 70, par. 2), and by the injured individuals, were consolidated for trial. During the conference on jury instructions, defendant tendered, and the court, over the plaintiffs’ objections, gave the following instruction: “If you award damages to any plaintiff in this case, you are instructed that any such award as you may make is not subject to federal or state income taxes.” In all five cases the jury returned verdicts against defendant and Mitchell and in favor of the ski club. This appeal involves only the wrongful death action filed by plaintiff Gaylen W. Klawonn as administrator of the estate of his deceased wife, Connie L. Klawonn. The jury found damages to be $81,906.12 and that decedent was 50% negligent. The circuit court entered judgment against defendant and Mitchell in the amount of $40,953.06. Plaintiff’s post-trial motion sought a new trial and contended, inter alia, that the court erred in instructing the jury that any award was not subject to taxation. The court vacated the judgment and ordered a new trial solely because of its determination that it had erred in instructing the jury as to the nontaxable nature of its award. All other grounds asserted in the motion were overruled. Defendant sought leave to appeal from the order granting a new trial. (87 Ill. 2d R 306(a)(1).) The appellate court denied the petition, and we allowed defendant’s petition for leave to appeal (87 Ill. 2d R 315(a)). There can be no dispute that under present law compensatory damage awards are tax exempt. The Internal Revenue Code specifically exempts from the definition of gross income “the amount of any damages received (whether by suit or agreement and whether as lump sums or as periodic payments) on account of personal injuries or sickness.” (26 U.S.C. sec. 104(a)(2) (1982); as to Illinois income tax see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 120, pars. 2 — 201 through 2 — 203(e).) This exemption applies even though such damages often include compensation for loss of past and estimated future earnings which would have been taxable had plaintiff not been injured. The section applies not only in the personal injury context but also to wrongful death awards. See Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. v. Liepelt (1980), 444 U.S. 490, 62 L. Ed. 2d 689, 100 S. Ct. 755. Although the nontaxable nature of compensatory damage awards is clear, this court has previously noted the inadvisability of instructing or otherwise informing the jury of this fact. Hall v. Chicago & North Western Ry. Co. (1955), 5 Ill. 2d 135, involved an action under the Federal Employers’ Liability Act (45 U.S.C. sec. 51 et seq. (1946)) for personal injuries sustained by the plaintiff while employed by the defendant railroad. During closing argument defense counsel advised the jurors that, if they found for the plaintiff, “whatever amount he receives by way of verdict in this case is not subject to Federal income tax.” (Hall v. Chicago & North Western Ry. Co. (1955), 5 Ill. 2d 135, 149.) Upon objection by the plaintiff, this remark was stricken, but the circuit court nevertheless granted plaintiff a new trial. In affirming the new trial order, this court relied upon the fact that the jury had been generally instructed on the proper measure of damages and it was therefore no more appropriate to include specific reference to the issue of taxes than to innumerable similar factors. (5 Ill. 2d 135, 150-51.) Further, this court indicated that it believed the determination not to tax compensatory damage awards was intended by Congress to give the injured party a tax benefit. The court ultimately determined that “the incident of taxation is not a proper factor for a jury’s consideration, imparted either by oral argument or written instruction. It introduces an extraneous subject, giving rise to conjecture and speculation.” 5 Ill. 2d 135, 152. When presented in Raines v. New York Central R. R. Co. (1972), 51 Ill 2d 428, cert. denied (1972), 409 U.S. 983, 34 L. Ed. 2d 247, 93 S. Ct. 322, an action also brought under the Federal Employers’ Liability Act, in the context of a jury instruction rather than argument of counsel, the court relied upon Hall to hold that the circuit court had correctly refused to instruct the jury that any award in favor of the plaintiff would not be subject to income tax. (51 Ill. 2d 428, 430.) Relying on Hall and Raines, our appellate court decisions consistently preeluded evidence or instructions concerning income tax in personal injury and wrongful death actions brought pursuant to State law. In 1980, however, the Supreme Court ruled, in a wrongful death action arising under the Federal Employers’ Liability Act, that evidence of income taxes payable on the decedent’s past and future earnings was admissible and held it to be error to refuse to instruct the jury that an award of damages would be tax free, thereby overruling Hall and Raines. Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. v. Liepelt (1980), 444 U.S. 490, 62 L. Ed. 2d 689, 100 S. Ct. 755. In Liepelt, the Supreme Court noted that, in a wrongful death action under the FELA, the measure of recovery is those damages that flow from the deprivation of the pecuniary benefits which the beneficiaries might reasonably have received. It reasoned that it is the wage earner’s “after-tax income, rather than his gross income before taxes, that provides the only realistic measure of his ability to support his family. It follows inexorably that the wage earner’s income tax is a relevant factor in calculating the monetary loss suffered by his dependents when he dies.” (444 U.S. 490, 493-94, 62 L. Ed. 2d 689, 693-94, 100 S. Ct. 755, 757.) The court recognized that there are many variables which may affect a wage earner’s future income tax liability but saw no greater difficulty in their handling than in the solution of other similar problems, such as the amount of a decedent’s expected expenditures. It rejected the contention that evidence describing a decedent’s estimated after-tax earnings was too speculative or complex for a jury’s consideration. (444 U.S. 490, 494, 62 L. Ed. 2d 689, 694, 100 S. Ct. 755, 757-58.) It rejected, too, the theory upon which Hall had, in part, relied, that the award exemption was intended by Congress as a tax benefit to the victim. The Supreme Court emphasized that tax-conscious jurors may mistakenly assume that a plaintiffs recovery will be subject to Federal taxation and therefore substantially increase an award to insure that he is fully compensated, thus awarding an amount improperly inflated beyond the earnings which the injured plaintiff would have received or the decedent would have provided. In concluding to eliminate this potential windfall, the Supreme Court quoted language used by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in Burlington Northern, Inc. v. Boxberger (9th Cir. 1975), 529 F.2d 284, 297: “ ‘[t]o put the matter simply, giving the instruction can do no harm, and it can certainly help by preventing the jury from inflating the award and thus overcompensating the plaintiff on the basis of an erroneous assumption that the judgment will be taxable.’ ” Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. v. Liepelt (1980), 444 U.S. 490, 498, 62 L. Ed. 2d 689, 696, 100 S. Ct. 755, 759. Accordingly, the court held that it was error to refuse to instruct the jury that “your award will not be subject to any income taxes, and you should not consider such taxes in fixing the amount of your award.” (444 U.S. 490, 492, 62 L. Ed. 2d 689, 693, 100 S. Ct. 755, 757.) The court determined that such an instruction “would not be prejudicial to either party, but would merely eliminate an area of doubt or speculation that might have an improper impact on the computation on the amount of damages.” 444 U.S. 490, 498, 62 L. Ed. 2d 689, 696, 100 S. Ct. 755, 759-60. Although Liepelt has established that in FELA actions juries, upon request, must be instructed that any damages awarded are not subject to taxation, this case involves purely State law, and Liepelt is not directly controlling. See, e.g., Hansen v. Johns-Manville Products Corp. (5th Cir. 1984), 734 F.2d 1036, 1045. We have thoroughly reviewed the law of the other States concerning whether and in what manner income tax consequences are to be taken into account in awarding compensatory damages. The decisions present a variety both of holdings and the reasons upon which they are based. (See generally Annot. 16 A.L.R.4th 589 (1982 & 1984 Supp.).) A detailed analysis of those opinions, their rationale, and the numerous commentaries concerning them would unduly extend the length of this opinion and contribute little to the decision we are required to make. The decision in Liepelt is based, not on evidence, but on the conjecture that “[although the law is perfectly clear, it is entirely possible that the members of the jury may assume that a plaintiffs recovery in a case of this kind will be subject to federal taxation, and that the award should be increased substantially in order to be sure that the injured party is fully compensated.” (Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. v. Liepelt (1980), 444 U.S. 490, 496, 62 L. Ed. 2d 689, 695, 100 S. Ct. 755, 759.) After discussing the evidence of pecuniary loss the court said, “It is surely not fanciful to suppose that the jury erroneously believed that a large portion of the award would be payable to the Federal Government in taxes and that therefore it improperly inflated the recovery.” 444 U.S. 490, 497, 62 L. Ed. 2d 689, 696, 100 S. Ct. 755, 759. We agree with the rationale of the dissenting opinion that “[tjhere certainly is no evidence in this record to indicate that the jury is any more likely to act upon an erroneous assumption about an award's being subject to federal income tax than about any other collateral matter.” (444 U.S. 490, 503, 62 L. Ed. 2d 689, 699, 100 S. Ct. 755, 762.) As Mr. Justice Blackmun pointed out: “It also is ‘entirely possible’ that the jury ‘may’ increase its damages award in the belief that the defendant is insured, or that the plaintiff will be obligated for substantial attorney’s fees, or that the award is subject to state (as well as federal) income tax, or on the basis of any number of other extraneous factors. Charging the jury about every conceivable matter as to which it should not misbehave or miscalculate would be burdensome and could be confusing.” (444 U.S. 490, 503, 62 L. Ed. 2d 689, 699, 100 S. Ct. 755, 762.) In our opinion proof of pecuniary loss, not simple under the best of circumstances, should not be rendered more complex by injecting the question of income tax or other extraneous factors. Defendant, and several railroads as amici curiae, argue that refusal of income tax instructions violates both the United States and Illinois constitutions for the reason that non-FELA defendants are deprived of equal protection and due process. We do not agree. Actions brought under the Federal Employers’ Liability Act are, of course, based on Federal law, and Federal law applies even though the matter is litigated in a State court. The fact that the State, in litigation based solely on State law, follows a procedure different than that applicable under Federal law does not serve to deprive a nonFELA defendant of equal protection or due process. For the reasons stated, the order granting plaintiff’s motion for new trial is affirmed. Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9739611 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:26.168256+00 ===

JUSTICE RYAN, dissenting: The opinion in this case creates an absurdity in the law which I am sure will cause the public to figuratively shake its head in bewilderment and to express disgust with the courts and the legal profession. If a person is injured in an accident involving the Federal Employers’ Liability Act, a jury must be told that the award is not subject to Federal income tax, whereas if the same person is injured in an accident covered by State law, a jury cannot be told that the award is not subject to the tax. The tax consequences are exactly the same in both situations. So, as a layman, Mr. Lawyer, I would ask you, please explain the reason for the difference in the treatment of these two claims. As a lawyer, Mr. Layman, I can only answer it is so because the Illinois Supreme Court said it is so. We may not agree with the holding of the United States Supreme Court in Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. v. Liepelt (1980), 444 U.S. 490, 62 L. Ed. 2d 689, 100 S. Ct. 755, but it is the law which must be followed in FELA cases whether tried in a Federal or a State court. We may prefer Justice Blackmun’s reasoning as stated in his dissent, quoted in the majority opinion, but that is not the law which must be followed. Further, in Gulf Offshore Co. v. Mobil Oil Corp. (1981), 453 U.S. 473, 486-87, 69 L. Ed. 2d 784, 796-97, 101 S. Ct. 2870, 2879-80, the Supreme Court noted that it had not limited the holding in Liepelt to FELA cases, but had articulated in that case a Federal common law rule applicable to all Federal claims. So as the law now stands in Illinois, if a Federal claim is being tried in the State court, evidence of the tax consequences may be introduced and the jury must be instructed that any award is not subject to Federal income tax, whereas if the claim being tried arises under State law, the jury may not be so instructed. If a case involves both a claim arising under Federal law and one arising under State law, the trial judge has the dubious pleasure of trying to rationally instruct the jury that as to the Federal claim, and the Federal claim only, the award is not subject to income tax. I can clearly visualize the look of bewilderment on the faces of the jurors. I have reviewed the laws of the other States concerning whether and in what manner income tax consequences should be taken into account in awarding compensatory damages. It is an understatement to say that the decisions vary widely. (See generally Annot. 16 A.L.R.4th 589 (1982 & 1984 Supp.).) Some States have excluded all evidence regarding income taxes and prohibited all mention thereof in both argument and jury instructions. (See, e.g., Richardson v. LaBuz (1984), 81 Pa. Commw. 436, 459-61, 474 A.2d 1181, 1196-97; Dehn v. Prouty (S.D. 1982), 321 N.W.2d 534, 538-39.) Other courts have drawn a distinction between the specific types of damages involved. For example, income taxes which would have been paid upon awards for past wages are readily ascertainable and are to be deducted from the lost gross earnings, while gross future earnings are recoverable without tax reductions because future tax rates, exemptions, deductions and related questions are deemed too speculative. (See, e.g., Yukon Equipment, Inc. v. Gordon (Alaska 1983), 660 P.2d 428, 433-35.) Other courts have distinguished between personal injury actions and wrongful death actions, reducing the amount of recovery by the amount of taxes in wrongful death actions, while permitting a gross income recovery in personal injury actions. (See generally Louissaint v. Hudson Waterways Corp. (1981), 111 Misc. 2d 122, 126-27, 443 N.Y.S.2d 678, 680-81, and cases there cited. See also In re Air Crash Disaster Near Chicago, Illinois on May 20, 1979 (7th Cir. 1983), 701 F.2d 1189, 1195-96.) At least one court has specifically determined that evidence of tax consequences should be excluded but that the jury should be instructed that any award will not be subject to taxes. (Domeracki v. Humble Oil & Refining Co. (3d Cir. 1971), 443 F.2d 1245, cert. denied (1971), 404 U.S. 883, 30 L. Ed. 2d 165, 92 S. Ct. 212.) Even before Liepelt, several jurisdictions permitted some consideration of the tax consequences in calculating damages. See, e.g., Mosley v. United States (4th Cir. 1976), 538 F.2d 555, 558-59 (applying North Carolina law); Tenore v. Nu Car Carriers, Inc. (1975), 67 N.J. 466, 484-95, 341 A.2d 613, 623-29; Turcotte v. Ford Motor Co. (1st Cir. 1974), 494 F.2d 173, 184-86 (applying Rhode Island law); Runyon v. District of Columbia (D.C. Cir. 1972), 463 F.2d 1319, 1322 (applying District of Columbia law); Abele v. Massi (Del. 1970), 273 A.2d 260, 260-61; Adams v. Deur (Iowa 1969), 173 N.W.2d 100, 105-06; Floyd v. Fruit Industries, Inc. (1957), 144 Conn. 659, 671-73, 136 A.2d 918, 925-26; Dempsey v. Thompson (1952), 363 Mo. 339, 344-46, 251 S.W.2d 42, 44-45. A clear majority of commentators favor the jury’s consideration of income tax consequences in determining the amount of compensatory damages, either by the introduction of appropriate evidence, an appropriate instruction, or both. See, e.g., D. Dobbs, Remedies sec. 8.8 (1973); 2 F. Harper & F. James, Torts sec. 25.12 (1956); Elligett, Income Tax Considerations in Florida Personal Injury Actions, 36 U. Miami L. Rev. 643 (1982); Dennis, Sirmon & Drinkwater, Wrongful Death Damages — Fair Compensation for Future Pecuniary Loss Requires Consideration of Economic Trends and Income Tax Consequences, 47 Miss. L.J. 173 (1976); Feldman, Personal Injury Awards: Should Tax-Exempt Status Be Ignored?, 7 Ariz. L. Rev. 272 (1966); Burns, A Compensation Award for Personal Injury or Wrongful Death Is Tax-Exempt: Should We Tell the Jury?, 14 DePaul L. Rev. 320 (1965); Nordstrom, Income Taxes and Personal Injury Awards, 19 Ohio St. L.J. 212 (1958); Comment, 38 Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 289 (1981); Note, 33 Ohio St. L.J. 972 (1972); Note, 50 Ky. L.J. 601 (1962); Comment, 26 Ford L. Rev. 98 (1957); Note, 4 U.C.L.A. L. Rev. 636 (1957); Note, 44 Ky. L.J. 384 (1956); Note, 9 Vand. L. Rev. 543 (1956); Comment, 11 Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 66 (1954); Note, 42 Geo. L.J. 149 (1953); Note, 32 Tex. L. Rev. 108 (1953); Contra, Franz, Should Income Taxes Be Included When Calculating Lost Earnings?, 18 Trial 53 (Oct. 1982); Kennelly, The Effect of Income Taxes Upon Earnings in Wrongful Death and Permanent Disability Cases — An Update, 25 Trial Law. Guide 77 (1981); Note, 1983 B.Y.U. L. Rev. 159 (1983); Note, 35 N. Car. L. Rev. 401 (1957); Comment, 42 Iowa L. Rev. 134 (1956); Note, 8 Ark. L. Rev. 174 (1953); Comment, 33 B.U. L. Rev. 114 (1953). There is nothing we can do about the law as announced in Liepelt. That decision must be followed in all cases involving Federal claims tried in State courts. The law would look a little less absurd to the man on the street if the same rule of law were applied to claims arising under State law. I therefore respectfully dissent. JUSTICE MORAN joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9739612 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:27.269994+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE JONES delivered the opinion of the court: Respondent Christopher Korper appeals, and petitioner Margaret Korper cross-appeals, from the property disposition and maintenance provisions of an amended judgment of dissolution of marriage entered by the circuit court of St. Clair County on April 19, 1983. On appeal, respondent contends (1) the trial court erred in its choice of method of apportioning respondent’s military pension, (2) the trial court erred in its finding that petitioner was entitled to maintenance, and (3) the trial court erred in ordering respondent to pay a portion of petitioner’s legal fees. On cross-appeal, petitioner argues that the trial court failed to apportion the marital property justly. In addition, petitioner has sought an order requiring respondent to pay petitioner’s legal fees in connection with the defense of this appeal. The parties were married on April 18, 1961, and were separated on November 22, 1980. At the time the proceedings were commenced petitioner was 42 years old and respondent was 43 years old. During the course of their marriage two children were born and two children were adopted. At the time the proceedings were commenced the two children born to the marriage were still minors and were living with petitioner. Respondent was a lieutenant colonel in the United States Air Force stationed at Scott Air Force Base. Petitioner worked at home as a homemaker. The judgment from which this appeal and cross-appeal are taken awarded custody of the two minor children born to the parties to respondent. There is no dispute with regard to that award. The disputed portions of the judgment, detailed below as necessary, disposed of the parties’ marital property, awarded maintenance to petitioner and ordered respondent to pay a portion of petitioner’s legal fees.  Respondent’s first contention of error concerns the trial court’s choice of method used to dispose of the retirement benefits to which respondent was entitled under his military pension. At the outset, we note that respondent is appealing the method of disposition used by the trial court, not the value placed on those benefits nor that the value of those benefits was subject to division as being marital property. Based upon a stipulation of the parties, the trial court found the present value of the retirement benefits respondent was entitled to under his military pension to be $296,000. The trial court then found respondent’s rights to the retirement benefits acquired during the marriage of the parties to be marital property and awarded petitioner $145,000 as her interest therein. The trial court ordered respondent to pay the petitioner the entire $145,000 within 30 days of the date the judgment of dissolution became final. Until that payment was made, respondent was required to pay petitioner interest thereon in the form of additional maintenance. Respondent contends that Federal law precludes any allocation of military retirement benefits prior to such time as the benefits are actually received by the retiree. Respondent’s argument is based on the United States Supreme Court’s ruling in McCarty v. McCarty (1981), 453 U.S. 210, 69 L. Ed. 2d 589, 101 S. Ct. 2728, wherein the court held that Federal law precluded the division of military pensions in dissolution proceedings held pursuant to State law. Respondent is cognizant of the subsequent enactment by Congress of the “Uniformed Services Former Spouses’ Protection Act” (Pub. L. No. 97— 252, 96 Stat. 718, 730-38 (1982)), and that the law was enacted by Congress as a response to the McCarty decision. Section 1002(a) of the Act (96 Stat. 718, 730-31) amends 10 U.S.C. sec. 1408(c)(1) to read as follows: “(c)(1) Subject to the limitations of this section, a court may treat disposable retired or retainer pay payable to a member for pay periods beginning after June 25, 1981, either as property solely of the member or as property of the member and his spouse in accordance with the law of the jurisdiction of such court.” (Emphasis added.) Respondent argues that since “disposable retired or retainer pay” is subject to various payroll-related deductions, the amount thereof can only be finally determined once the payment is actually made to the retiree. Respondent maintains that by this use of the phrase “disposable retired or retainer pay,” Congress “clearly” intended that the Federal law preemption of State laws that allow division of military retirement benefits remain in effect until those benefits are actually paid to the retiree. Thus, it is respondent’s position that by enacting the law Congress intended to create only a narrow exception to the holding in McCarty. We disagree. We find respondent’s statutory interpretation to be unduly technical and contrary to the express intent of Congress as reflected in the following legislative history of the Act. “The purpose of this provision is to place the courts in the same position that they were in on June 26, 1981, the date of the McCarty decision, with respect to treatment of nondisability military retired or retainer pay. The provision is intended to remove the federal pre-emption found to exist by the United States Supreme Court and permit State and other courts of competent jurisdiction to apply pertinent State or other laws in determining whether military retired or retainer pay should be divisible. Nothing in this provision requires any division; it leaves that issue up to the courts applying community property, equitable distribution or other principles of marital property determination and distribution. This power is returned to the courts retroactive to June 26, 1981. This retroactive application will at least afford individuals who were divorced (or had decrees modified) during the interim period between June 26, 1981 and the effective date of this legislation the opportunity to return to the courts to take advantage of this provision.” (S. Rep. No. 502, 97th Cong., 2d Sess. 16 (1982), U.S. Code Cong. & Admin. News 1982, 1596, 1611.) It is evident from this legislative history that Congress’ intent in enacting the law was to abrogate all applications of the McCarty decision by placing the courts of the several States into a pre-McCarty position. (See, e.g., Walentowski v. Walentowski (1983), 100 N.M. 484, 672 P.2d 657; In re Marriage of Frederick (1983), 141 Cal. App. 3d 876, 190 Cal. Rptr. 588; In re Marriage of Steczo (Ariz. App. 1983), 135 Ariz. 199, 659 P.2d 1344; In re Marriage of Buikema (1983), 139 Cal. App. 3d 689, 188 Cal. Rptr. 856.) Respondent’s argument, relying as it does on the continuing partial application of the McCarty decision, must therefore fail. Our law prior to McCarty recognized a marital property interest in retirement benefits where the rights thereto were acquired during marriage. (In re Marriage of Coram (1980), 86 Ill. App. 3d 845, 408 N.E.2d 418.) This is true regardless of whether the interest is matured, vested or nonvested, or contributory or noncontributory. In re Marriage of Pieper (1979), 79 Ill. App. 3d 835, 398 N.E.2d 868; In re Marriage of Hunt (1979), 78 Ill. App. 3d 653, 397 N.E.2d 511. Our law prior to McCarty likewise recognized a marital property interest in retirement benefits from military pensions. (In re Marriage of Musser (1979), 70 Ill. App. 3d 706, 388 N.E.2d 1289.) Following the McCarty decision our supreme court overruled the appellate court’s decision in Musser, concluding that the “case [was] governed by McCarty.” (In re Marriage of Musser (1981), 87 Ill. 2d 68, 70, 429 N.E.2d 530, 531.) The effect of the Uniformed Services Former Spouses’ Protection Act is, in turn, to overrule our supreme court’s decision in Musser, leaving us free to apply the law as it was before that decision.  In general, the distribution of marital property is a matter that rests within the sound discretion of the trial court, the exercise of which will not be disturbed absent an abuse thereof. (In re Marriage of Hellwig (1981), 100 Ill. App. 3d 452, 426 N.E.2d 1087.) Such an abuse of discretion occurs only where no reasonable person would take the view adopted by the trial court. (In re Marriage of Lee (1979), 78 Ill. App. 3d 1123, 398 N.E.2d 126.) The choice of the method of apportioning the present value of the marital property interest in the retirement benefits to which a spouse is entitled is similarly a matter left to the discretion of the trial court. (In re Marriage of Wisniewski (1982), 107 Ill. App. 3d 711, 437 N.E.2d 1300; In re Marriage of Papeck (1981), 95 Ill. App. 3d 624, 420 N.E.2d 528.) It is with these principles in mind that we review the decision of the trial court relating to the allocation and payment of the pension. Illinois courts have held that in valuing employment benefits of this nature, the benefits that have accrued should be considered marital property, regardless of whether the benefit is vested or nonvested. In re Marriage of Fairchild (1982), 110 Ill. App. 3d 470, 442 N.E.2d 557; In re Marriage of Hunt (1979), 78 Ill. App. 3d 653, 397 N.E.2d 511; In re Marriage of Donley (1980), 83 Ill. App. 3d 367, 403 N.E.2d 1337; In re Marriage of Wisniewski (1982), 107 Ill. App. 3d 711, 437 N.E.2d 1300. As already related, the court, based upon a stipulation of the parties, found the value of respondent’s pension to be $296,000, awarded $145,000 thereof to petitioner and ordered it paid within 30 days. The only source of funds available to the respondent for payment of the $145,000 within the time limited was a money management account in the amount of $208,000. The money management account originally had been created by respondent with $162,000 he had inherited from his parents and thereafter enlarged with its earnings. Petitioner had never made any contribution to this account. The court found the money management account to be marital property and awarded the petitioner $15,000 as her share. Respondent raised no issue with regard to finding of the court that the money management account was marital property. The $15,000, together with the $145,000 share of the value of respondent’s pension, made a total cash payment due from respondent to petitioner of $160,000, the entirety of which was to be paid within the 30 days. There is a sharp dispute over the method chosen by the trial court to give the petitioner her interest in respondent’s military pension. It should be mentioned that the' pension is not a contributory one on the part of respondent; it does not accumulate any cash value and has no provision for a survivor’s benefit. Respondent objects to the petitioner’s receiving the entirety of her interest in the pension in cash payable from marital property other than the pension itself. He asserts this to be inequitable in that it affords the petitioner her full interest now, whereas he must fulfill all the assumptions made by the actuary in arriving at the value of the pension in order to collect the portion of the pension settled upon him by the court’s order. Respondent claims there is no reason why he should be made to bear all the uncertainty and supposition that will attend the eventual realization of the value of the pension as fixed by an actuarial process. The stipulated value of the pension was derived by an actuary re-tamed by petitioner. The actuary utilized the assumptions ordinarily and necessarily indulged in by actuaries. The value derived was necessarily the result of projections based upon certain assumptions such as respondent’s age, remaining work years, age at retirement, life expectancy, and so forth. The figures used by an actuary to predict life span are unavoidably averages, since some persons live longer than others. This being so, the projections used cannot speak with certainty as to the time of death of a particular person. The ultimate value of the pension depends upon respondent’s survival for the projected term of years, the preservation of his pension entitlement rights and the constancy of a fund (in this case, the continuing will of Congress) to make the pension payments for the duration of respondent’s life. Thus, there are several areas of uncertainty that surround respondent’s receipt of his pension benefits. The order of the trial court completely relieves the petitioner of any uncertainty the future may hold by awarding her the entirety of her assigned portion at this time. The respondent bears the entire burden of uncertainty, including the possibility that he may receive no part of his pension at all. Respondent argues that “since the husband’s retirement is about five years in the future, the most equitable way to handle the military retirement [pension] would be to wait until retirement occurs and divide the income as it is received by the husband under the reserved jurisdiction approach.” The petitioner, on the other hand, argues that the trial court had a choice between “immediate offset and deferred distribution of husband’s retirement benefits. Its choice of immediate offset was not only clearly within its discretion, but was the preferable approach. The virtues of the immediate offset method are that it is final, equitable, and immediate.” The terms “reserved jurisdiction approach” and “immediate offset” have evolved in case law as courts have considered the problem of apportionment and payment of pension entitlement by the parties to a marriage dissolution proceeding. Illinois cases have acknowledged both methods of disposition. (In re Marriage of Evans (1981), 85 Ill. 2d 523, 426 N.E.2d 854.) In an appropriate case, the court can reduce the pension plan to present value and award an offsetting value of money or property to the nonemployee spouse. This is the immediate offset approach. (In re Marriage of Degener (1983), 119 Ill. App. 3d 1079, 458 N.E.2d 46; In re Marriage of Bentivenga (1982), 109 Ill. App. 3d 967, 441 N.E.2d 336; In re Marriage of Wisniewski (1982), 107 Ill. App. 3d 711, 437 N.E.2d 1300.) In other cases, the court can order the employee spouse to pay the allocated portion of the fund, as disbursed, retaining jurisdiction to enforce the decree. This is the reserved jurisdiction approach. In re Marriage of Degener (1983), 119 Ill. App. 3d 1079, 458 N.E.2d 46; In re Marriage of Wisniewski (1982), 107 Ill. App. 3d 711, 437 N.E.2d 1300; In re Marriage of Hunt (1979), 78 Ill. App. 3d 653, 397 N.E.2d 511. Variations in ages, amounts of property, both marital and non-marital, duration of marriages, health, types of pension, amount of benefits to be received and other circumstances that may be encountered in dissolution proceedings make it impractical to hold that the disposition of pension entitlement in a dissolution proceeding pursuant to section 503 of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 40, par. 503) must always be limited to one approach or the other. All pension disposition cases cannot be fitted into the same mold, and a unitary approach would prove unwise. Notwithstanding the availability of the two methods of allocation, our review of the Illinois cases that have considered the problem of disposition of pensions as marital property has led to the conclusion that the “immediate offset” approach has been much more acknowledged than used. The reason for hesitancy in using the “immediate offset” approach is obviously because of the disparity in which the parties are placed; the one receives the pension payment or a property disposition offset immediately while the other must undergo the attendant uncertainties in the collection of pension benefits and may receive the apportioned share, part of it, or nothing at all. The supreme court stated in In re Marriage of Evans (1981), 85 Ill. 2d 523, 528, 426 N.E.2d 854, 857: “[I]f the payment of benefits is contingent upon future events, such as the continuation of employment, a present award based on the discounted value of future payments to the employed spouse will prove excessive if the amount of benefits which he actually receives is less than the amount which was assumed.” The case of In re Marriage of Fairchild contains a well-reasoned analysis of the problem that arises when statistically generated actuarial assumptions are adopted as the determinant of value and benefits to be received in a particular case. We need not quote at length from that case, since the conclusion will suffice: “A potentially unfair situation thus arises, as the employee spouse risks making a final division of property with the non-employee spouse based upon a fixed value of future pension/ savings benefits which may, in fact, be valueless if the actuarial assumptions for the hypothetical person are inapplicable to the very real person before the court. * * * The dilemma, then, is that while it is unfair to ignore the value of nonvested benefits in the division of marital property, those benefits in some instances being the only significant marital asset, it is also unfair to effect a present division of the marital property utilizing an actuarial value of those benefits computed in reliance on speculative, albeit actuarily accepted assumptions.” In re Marriage of Fairchild (1982), 110 Ill. App. 3d 470, 474-75, 442 N.E.2d 557, 560. In In re Wisniewski the court stated that it would be possible to make a division of a nonvested pension by taking a value as determined by actuarial evidence and then discounting that amount to an extent in consideration of the probability it will not vest, further discount the new amount to present value and then determine the marital portion of that amount. “In some cases,” the Wisniewski court said, “the trial court may be able to evaluate this risk in determining the value.” (In re Wisniewski (1982), 107 Ill. App. 3d 711, 717, 437 N.E.2d 1300, 1305.) Understandably, the Wisniewski court did not adopt the suggested procedure. The assumptions required would be too many and too farfetched for use by a court seeking to make an equitable disposition of marital property pursuant to section 503 of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act. The court in the Wisniewski case thought the “reserved jurisdiction” approach was the more reasonable one for the facts it had under consideration. Likewise, we think that approach the more reasonable one for the case now before us.  Petitioner argues that respondent cannot contest the court’s allocation of the pension because he stipulated at the trial that its value was that fixed by the actuary, $296,000. But we agree with respondent that although there was an agreement as to value, there was no agreement that payment of the share of the pension assigned to petitioner could be made at present out of other marital property. The figure assigned as value was one based upon actuarial assumptions that well may not transpire. Since the valuation of the pension is so great a part of the total marital assets, we can find no basis to justify an order that casts the entire burden of uncertainty upon the respondent, and it was inequitable to do so.  Respondent in his brief has addressed issues and arguments to the court regarding the amount and duration of maintenance he was ordered to pay petitioner and regarding the award of petitioner’s attorney fees to be paid by him. In a cross-appeal, petitioner argues that the division of marital property made by the court was inequitable and asks relief on that issue. However, since we have overturned the order of the trial court as it related to the disposition of the pension, and that action will have a very marked effect upon the disposition of the marital property, we deem it best to set aside the entirety of the judgment of the court as it pertains to the disposition of marital property, maintenance and attorney fees, and remand the case for a reconsideration thereof. Our action with regard to the pension will doubtless call for variation in the disposition as originally provided by the court. Our only instruction upon remand is that in making disposition of respondent’s military pension, the court should allocate the portion of the pension found to be marital property upon an “as received” basis, the so-called “reserved jurisdiction” method.  Finally, petitioner has filed a motion to dismiss respondent’s appeal under the release of errors doctrine. We have considered the motion to dismiss and respondent’s response thereto and have concluded that no change of position has been effected that will work a detriment or prejudice to petitioner and that ample assets remain under the designation of marital property to afford the court full opportunity to make any compensating orders that may be indicated upon rehearing. For these reasons, petitioner’s motion to dismiss respondent’s appeal is denied. Reversed and remanded with instructions. KASSERMAN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2219722 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:19.54685+00 ===

539 N.W.2d 247 (1995)
In Re Petition for DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST Thomas F. MARESH, an Attorney at Law of the State of Minnesota.
No. C7-95-1084.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
November 3, 1995.
*248 Marcia A. Johnson, Director, Kenneth L. Jorgensen, First Assistant Director, Office of Lawyers Professional Responsibility, St. Paul, for appellant.
Thomas F. Maresh, Eden Prairie, Pro Se.
Heard, considered and decided by the court en banc.
OPINION
PER CURIAM.
The Director of the Office of Lawyers' Professional Responsibility filed a petition for disciplinary action against respondent Thomas F. Maresh, together with the parties' stipulation for respondent's temporary suspension from the practice of law. Respondent was suspended on May 26, 1995. When respondent failed to serve and file an answer to the petition for disciplinary action, the allegations of misconduct were deemed admitted pursuant to Rule 13(b), Rules on Lawyers Professional Responsibility.
Respondent was admitted to practice law in October 1990. During the period of our inquiry, from August 1994 through April 1995, respondent misappropriated client funds belonging to three separate clients. He engaged in a complicated pattern of applying the funds of one client for the benefit of another, of misappropriating trust account funds by depositing them into his business account, and of issuing trust account checks in amounts in excess of the account balance. Respondent has not made restitution to two of the clients entitled to funds.
To conceal the misappropriations, respondent contrived a series of explanations, including that the conduct was accidental, that funds had been properly disbursed when they had not been and, most incredibly, that funds had been held in a foreign trust account in Belgium and that he had instructed that bank to transfer the funds to his Elk River trust account. Not only were these explanations false, but on a number of occasions during the director's investigation, the misrepresentations were made under oath.
In addition to this misappropriation and misrepresentation, respondent failed to maintain proper trust account books and records, had no receipts and disbursements journal or check register, and failed to perform trial balances and reconciliations of his trust account.
We view these cumulative violations as very serious and demonstrative of respondent's unfitness to practice law. Taken separately, acts of misappropriation, misrepresentation, and trust account mismanagement all warrant serious discipline. The fact that these acts of misconduct occur simultaneously compounds the seriousness of respondent's behavior. See In Re Hunter, 473 N.W.2d 866 (Minn.1991). The respondent has not offered any mitigating circumstances and, accordingly, we order that Thomas F. Maresh be disbarred from the practice of law.
Disbarred.

=== CASE 2219725 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:19.622181+00 ===

539 N.W.2d 430 (1995)
248 Neb. 827
Alphons M. ENGELHAUPT and Laurina E. Engelhaupt, Appellees,
v.
VILLAGE OF BUTTE, Nebraska, Appellant.
No. S-95-425.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
November 17, 1995.
*431 Gary J. Nedved, of Bruckner, O'Gara, Keating, Hendry, Davis & Nedved, P.C., Lincoln, for appellant.
Shelley A. Horak, of Baron, Sar, Goodwin, Gill, Lohr & Horak, Sioux City, for appellees.
WHITE, C.J., and CAPORALE, FAHRNBRUCH, LANPHIER, WRIGHT, CONNOLLY, and GERRARD, JJ.
CAPORALE, Justice.
Finding, among other things, that the defendant-appellant condemner, Village of Butte, sought to take more land than it presently required for the expansion of its water system, the district court, on the petition of the plaintiffs-appellees condemnees, Alphons M. Engelhaupt and Laurina E. Engelhaupt, entered a decree enjoining the village from acquiring the portion of the Engelhaupts' land it sought. Asserting a number of errors, including that the district court wrongly found the attempted taking to be excessive, the village undertook an appeal to the Nebraska Court of Appeals. To equalize the caseloads of the two courts, we, on our own motion, removed the matter to this court. We now affirm the decree of the district court.
In general, Neb.Rev.Stat. § 17-531 (Reissue 1991) grants villages the power to provide water for the "purpose of fire protection and public use and for the use of the inhabitants...." Neb.Rev.Stat. § 17-535 (Reissue 1991) further empowers villages to, among *432 other things, "condemn any and all necessary property" for said purpose.
Alleging that it needed to expand its present water system, the village filed a petition seeking to condemn 11.92 acres of the Engelhaupts' land. Although the Engelhaupts did not plead that the proposed taking was excessive, the district court's pretrial order listed the scope of the taking as one of the trial issues. Since the issues set out in a pretrial order supplant those raised in the pleadings, Malerbi v. Central Reserve Life, 225 Neb. 543, 407 N.W.2d 157 (1987), the scope of the taking, contrary to the position of the village, was an issue in the trial court and is thus a proper issue before us.
In that regard, the engineer testifying on behalf of the village said that the existing water treatment plant, located on an easement on the Engelhaupts' land, is beyond its original service life; that the condition of the plant contributes to the poor quality of the water; that the village is operating with a single well and needs to build redundancy into the system to provide for maintenance and emergencies; and that the land sought was needed so as to provide for the proper spacing of the wells, a new treatment plant, a small lagoon, and "expansion for additional wells, come the time that they are needed." The evidence does not disclose how much of the 11.92 acres is required for the village's present need.
We begin by recalling that the power of eminent domain may be exercised only on the occasion, and in the mode or manner, prescribed by the Legislature and that statutes conferring and circumscribing such power must be strictly construed. Krauter v. Lower Big Blue Nat. Resources Dist., 199 Neb. 431, 259 N.W.2d 472 (1977). Thus, under a statutory scheme permitting the condemner to take only property for which it had a present plan and present public purpose use, we held in Krauter, supra, that the lower court had properly dismissed the condemner's action to take fee title to 320 acres of land where the evidence showed that only an easement on 140.68 acres was needed for the public use then planned. In so ruling, we specifically rejected the condemner's argument that it could take property that "might be needed and used for a public purpose in the future." Id. at 437, 259 N.W.2d at 475.
We also held therein that the amount of property needed and the estate or interest in such property are questions of fact for the court. Whatever constitutional provisions might otherwise protect the condemnees, here, § 17-535 specifically limits the village to taking only such property as is "necessary" for providing the purposes described in § 17-531. In an equity action, an appellate court tries factual questions de novo on the record and reaches a conclusion independent of the findings of the trial court, provided that where credible evidence is in conflict on a material issue of fact, the appellate court considers and may give weight to the fact that the trial judge heard and observed the witnesses and accepted one version of the facts rather than another. Gas `N Shop v. City of Kearney, 248 Neb. 747, 539 N.W.2d 423 (1995). So reviewed, the evidence convinces us that the village seeks to condemn more land than it presently requires.
We therefore affirm the district court's decree without reaching the other errors assigned by the village.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9739423 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:40.926051+00 ===

Caporale, J.
I. INTRODUCTION
In this conversion action, the district court, pursuant to the verdict, entered judgment in the amount of $28,000 in favor of the plaintiff-appellee, Ervin Melcher, and against the defendant-appellant, The Bank of Madison. The bank thereupon appealed to the Nebraska Court of Appeals asserting, in summary, that the district court erred in overruling the bank’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or a new trial because (1) it was entitled to the directed verdict it sought at the close of all the evidence and (2) the district court incorrectly instructed the jury. The Court of Appeals reversed the judgment of the district court, Melcher v. Bank of Madison, 3 Neb. App. 665, 529 N.W.2d 814 (1995), and Melcher thereafter successfully petitioned this court for further review. We now reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals and remand with direction.
II. SCOPE OF REVIEW
A verdict is not to be set aside on appeal unless clearly wrong, and it is sufficient if any competent evidence is presented to the jury upon which it could find for the successful party. Hoeft v. Five Points Bank, ante p. 772, 539 N.W.2d 637 (1995); Wolf v. Walt, 247 Neb. 858, 530 N.W.2d 890 (1995).
m. FACTS
Melcher’s son owned a John Deere 4430 tractor, which had a number of mechanical deficiencies. As a result, the son considered buying a John Deere 4450 tractor to replace the 4430 unit, but concluded that the 4450 version was too expensive for him.
Melcher then traded in the son’s 4430 for a 4450 at a *796purchase price of $39,500.50 plus sales tax of $857, for a total of $40,357.50. Melcher signed the purchase contract and was allowed $15,000 for the trade-in of the 4430, but a promissory note having a balance of $7,693 remained due on the 4430, so Melcher only received a credit of $7,307. In addition, Melcher paid $5,000 cash on the purchase price. Thus, a balance of $28,050.50 remained due on the 4450. Melcher signed a promissory note to John Deere for that amount, and he eventually paid it in full.
Although Melcher had the 4450 delivered to the son, Melcher testified that he never gave title to the unit to the son or anyone else and that he maintained possession of it and allowed his family members to use it any time they wanted, free of charge. Nonetheless, the son stated that he and Melcher had agreed that if the 4450 needed repairs, the son would pay for them.
The testimony as to how Melcher came to trade in the 4430 is in conflict. Melcher testified that the son told him to trade it in on the 4450. At one point, the son stated that he was surprised by the arrival of the 4450 and that he wished Melcher would have told him about the trade-in, but at another point, stated that he “gave” the 4430 to Melcher to purchase the 4450. The record does not explain what the son meant by the word “gave.”
Following Melcher’s purchase of the 4450, he had the son sign promissory notes in the amount of $28,000 during each of 7 successive years. Apparently, the son made no payments on the notes, but he did pay Melcher $5,000 from the proceeds of a loan he obtained from the bank as the final payment on the 4430.
Melcher did not claim depreciation of the 4450 on his tax returns and did not list it as an asset in the financial statements he supplied the bank. The son did both and, when filing for protection under chapter 12 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, listed the 4450 in his schedule of assets and named Melcher as a creditor. Melcher did not file any objection to the son’s listing of the 4450 as his property.
The son had given a security interest in all of his farm equipment, including the 4430 and after-acquired property, to *797the bank during all pertinent times. Thus, when Melcher converted his chapter 12 bankruptcy proceeding to a proceeding under chapter 7 of the code, the bank sought, and was granted, relief from the automatic stay in order to bring an action in replevin to recover the son’s farm equipment. After obtaining such judgment, the bank repossessed the 4450 and, after making some repairs, sold the unit at auction.
This suit then followed'. Although Melcher testified that at the relevant time the 4450 was worth $40,000, there was evidence that it was sold at the auction for $31,100.
IV. ANALYSIS
It is true that a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict may be granted when the movant’s previous motion for directed verdict, made at the conclusion of all the evidence, should have been sustained. Getzschman v. Miller Chemical Co., 232 Neb. 885, 443 N.W.2d 260 (1989). See, also, Hoeft v. Five Points Bank, ante p. 772, 539 N.W.2d 637 (1995).
1. Directed Verdict
The first question then is whether the bank was, as it claims, entitled to a directed verdict at the close of all the evidence because of Melcher’s conduct and because of the status of the evidence. In this connection, it is to be recalled that in reviewing the action of a trial court, an appellate court must treat a motion for directed verdict as an admission of the truth of all competent evidence submitted on behalf of the party against whom the motion is directed. The party against whom the motion is directed is entitled to have every controverted fact resolved in his favor and to have the benefit of every inference which can reasonably be deduced from the evidence. In order to sustain a motion for directed verdict, the court resolves the controversy as a matter of law and may do so only when the facts are such that reasonable minds can draw but one conclusion from the evidence. Wolf v. Walt, 247 Neb. 858, 530 N.W.2d 890 (1995). See, also, Hoeft, supra.
(a) Conduct
The bank urges it was entitled to a directed verdict because *798as Melcher failed to object to the son’s listing of the 4450 as one of his assets in his bankruptcy proceeding, Melcher became judicially estopped from asserting an ownership interest in the 4450 and because pursuant to the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, title to the 4450 passed from the son to the bankruptcy estate.
(i) Judicial Estoppel
The doctrine of judicial estoppel holds that one who has successfully and unequivocally asserted a position in a prior proceeding is estopped from asserting an inconsistent position in a subsequent proceeding. Edwards v. Aetna Life Ins. Co., 690 F.2d 595 (6th Cir. 1982); DeMers v. Roncor, Inc., 249 Mont. 176, 814 P.2d 999 (1991). The doctrine protects the integrity of the judicial process by preventing a party from taking a position inconsistent with one successfully and unequivocally asserted by the same party in a prior proceeding. Reynolds v. C.I.R., 861 F.2d 469 (6th Cir. 1988). It has been said that unlike equitable estoppel, judicial estoppel may be applied even if detrimental reliance or privity does not exist. Edwards, supra. However, the doctrine is to be applied with caution so as to avoid impinging on the truth-seeking function of the court because the doctrine precludes a contradictory position without examining the truth of either statement. See Reynolds, supra. Absent judicial acceptance of the inconsistent position, application of the rule is unwarranted because no risk of inconsistent results exists. Edwards, supra.
While we adopt the doctrine, it has no application here. Melcher did not successfully or unequivocally assert in the son’s bankruptcy proceeding that the 4450 belonged to the son or that Melcher himself had no ownership interest. Indeed, as Melcher did not file an objection, the issue of ownership of the 4450 was, in fact, never litigated and was never clearly in issue. See In re Greene, 145 B.R. 714 (Bankr. S.D. Ga. 1992) (objection to allowance of claim filed in accordance with 11 U.S.C. § 502 (1988) and relevant bankruptcy rules clearly places in issue allowance or disallowance of claim). Consequently, Melcher’s failure to object to the son’s listing of the 4450 as his does not judicially estop Melcher from asserting an ownership interest in the 4450 in this action. See, In re *799Montgomery, 80 B.R. 385 (Bankr. W.D. Tex. 1987) (failure of creditor to object to debtor’s exemptions did not operate as estoppel preventing creditor from raising debtor’s entitlement to exemption in debtor’s lien avoidance action); Matter of Simicich, 71 B.R. 48 (Bankr. M.D. Fla. 1987) (defendant’s initial failure to assert ownership interest in items of personal property did not operate as estoppel that could be invoked to divest him of title and create title in debtor); Eames v. Philpot, 72 Cal. App. 151, 236 R 373 (1925) (debtor’s scheduling of chattel in bankruptcy did not divest third-party owners of right of possession).
(ii) Operation of Bankruptcy Code
While it is true that pursuant to 11 U.S.C. § 541 (1994) of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code the estate comprises all the legal and equitable interests in property of a debtor, that section “does not address the threshold questions of the existence and scope of the debtor’s interest in a given asset.” In re Farmers Markets, Inc., 792 F.2d 1400, 1402 (9th Cir. 1986). These questions are resolved pursuant to nonbankruptcy law. Id.; Collins v. Federal Land Bank of Omaha, 421 N.W.2d 136 (Iowa 1988).
(b) Status of Evidence
The bank also urges the evidence was insufficient to sustain the verdict. In assessing that claim, we recall the corollary to the rule set forth in part IV(1) above concerning the circumstances under which a directed verdict at the close of all the evidence may be granted; that is, that on a motion for judgment non obstante veredicto, or notwithstanding the verdict, the moving party is deemed to have admitted as true all the relevant evidence admitted which is favorable to the party against whom the motion is directed, and, further, the party against whom the motion is directed is entitled to the benefit of all proper inferences deducible from the relevant evidence. Critchfield v. McNamara, ante p. 39, 532 N.W.2d 287 (1995); Humphrey v. Nebraska Public Power Dist., 243 Neb. 872, 503 N.W.2d 211 (1993).
First, the bank urges that as the amount of the verdict was less than Melcher’s opinion as to the value of the 4450, there is no evidence to support that amount. The argument overlooks the *800evidence as to the price at which the unit was sold at auction; that evidence was received without objection. The applicable rule is that where evidence is admitted generally, it may be considered for any purpose for which it is relevant and competent. See Baxter v. National Mtg. Loan Co., 128 Neb. 537, 259 N.W. 630 (1935). That being so, the verdict amount, being within the range of the evidence, is adequately supported by the evidence. Sayer Acres, Inc. v. Middle Republican Nat. Resources Dist., 205 Neb. 360, 287 N.W.2d 692 (1980) (condemnation award within range of evidence not clearly wrong).
Additionally, the bank argues that the evidence does not support a finding that Melcher owned the 4450. While it is true that reasonable minds could well conclude from the evidence that the son owned the unit, it cannot be said that reasonable minds could not conclude that Melcher owned it. Melcher had testified that he bought the 4450, that he was in continuous possession of it, and that he had never given or transferred title to anyone. The credibility of a witness is an issue for the jury. Roberts v. Weber & Sons, Co., ante p. 243, 533 N.W.2d 664 (1995).
Viewed in the light most favorable to Melcher, the evidence establishes a prima facie case for conversion, and the question was thus properly submitted to a jury. See Barelmann v. Fox, 239 Neb. 771, 478 N.W.2d 548 (1992) (plaintiff in conversion must show (1) immediate right to possession of property and (2) its wrongful possession by tort-feasor).
(c) Resolution of Claim
Accordingly, the bank was not entitled to a directed verdict.
2. Jury Instructions
The foregoing determination leads us to a consideration of the bank’s claim that the district court erred in its instructions to the jury by failing to instruct as the bank requested with regard to five specific matters and in misstating the law in an instruction given on its own motion.
(a) Instructions Refused
The bank first complains of the district court’s failure to give *801its tendered instruction defining the issues and the facts the bank had the burden to prove and its tendered instruction concerning the equitable estoppel defense it asserted based upon Melcher’s alleged knowledge of the security interest the son gave the bank. However, although the district court did not use the bank’s tendered instructions concerning those matters, it properly instructed the jury on the applicable law concerning them. It is the meaning of an instruction, not its phraseology, that is crucial. Scharmann v. Dayton Hudson Corp., 247 Neb. 304, 526 N.W.2d 436 (1995). Thus, it is not error to refuse to give a requested instruction if the substance of the request is included in the instructions given. See id. See, also, Nichols v. Busse, 243 Neb. 811, 503 N.W.2d 173 (1993); Brown v. Farmers Mut. Ins. Co., 237 Neb. 855, 468 N.W.2d 105 (1991).
Next, the bank complains that the district court failed to define “conversion,” as requested. While the district court did not instruct that conversion means “any distinct act of dominion, wrongfully asserted over another’s property in denial of, or inconsistent with that person’s rights, ” as the bank asked, the district court did instruct that the case involved a claim for the “wrongful taking” of the 4450. All jury instructions must be read together, and if, taken as a whole, they correctly state the law, are not misleading, and adequately cover the issues supported by the pleadings and the evidence, there is no prejudicial error necessitating a reversal. Hamemick v. Essex Dodge Ltd., 247 Neb. 392, 527 N.W.2d 196 (1995). While a more complete definition might have been desirable, within the context of the facts in this case, it cannot be said that the lack of such constituted prejudicial error necessitating a reversal.
Additionally, the bank tendered two instructions defining promissory notes having certain characteristics as negotiable instruments. The bank argues in that connection that if the jury had been instructed as to the definition of a promissory note and that a promissory note is a negotiable instrument, it might have found that the promissory notes given by the son to Melcher were negotiable instruments and, therefore, adequate consideration for the sale of the 4450. However, the negotiability of a promissory note does not affect whether it constitutes adequate consideration for a sale. Consideration is *802sufficient to support a contract if there is any detriment to the promisee or benefit to the promisor. Hecker v. Ravenna Bank, 237 Neb. 810, 468 N.W.2d 88 (1991). Generally, a court will not inquire into the adequacy of consideration for a contract, inasmuch as consideration based on value of property or performance of a promise is a matter of personal judgment by parties to a contract. Id. Consequently, the bank was not prejudiced by the district court’s refusal to give the two tendered instructions at issue.
(b) Instruction Given
Finally, the bank urges that the district court erred by instructing the jury that the bank had the burden to prove it had no knowledge that Melcher claimed a security interest in the 4450. We agree that under the circumstances, the bank’s knowledge or lack of knowledge of Melcher’s alleged claim of a security interest in the 4450 was not a relevant consideration in determining its liability.
The difficulty from the bank’s point of view is that it did not object to that instruction when it was given an opportunity to do so. Absent plain error, failure to object to a jury instruction after it has been submitted for review precludes raising an objection on appeal. Barks v. Cosgriff Co., 247 Neb. 660, 529 N.W.2d 749 (1995); Long v. Hacker, 246 Neb. 547, 520 N.W.2d 195 (1994); Humphrey v. Nebraska Public Power Dist., 243 Neb. 872, 503 N.W.2d 211 (1993). Plain error exists where there is error, plainly evident from the record but not complained of at trial, which prejudicially affects a substantial right of a litigant and is of such a nature that to leave it uncorrected would cause a miscarriage of justice or result in damage to the integrity, reputation, and fairness of the judicial process. Long, supra; Dike v. Dike, 245 Neb. 231, 512 N.W.2d 363 (1994); Hoch v. Prokop, 244 Neb. 443 , 507 N.W.2d 626 (1993).
Although the instruction now complained of was erroneous, it does not amount to plain error. In order to consider the instruction, the jury would have had to find by a preponderance of the evidence that Melcher was the owner of the 4450 and had an immediate right to possession. Logically, that means the jury *803necessarily found that the 4450 did not belong to the son at the time he gave the security interest to the bank and that the bank did not have an immediate right to possession. Therefore, the bank would have failed to carry its burden of proof on the issue of this affirmative defense, regardless of the instruction. Thus, the error in giving the instruction could not cause a miscarriage of justice or result in damage to the integrity, reputation, and fairness of the judicial process.
(c) Resolution of Claim
Consequently, the district court’s instructions do not provide a basis for reversal.
V. JUDGMENT
The record failing to support either the bank’s claim that it was entitled to a directed verdict or its claim that it was entitled to a new trial because of error in the jury instructions, it necessarily follows that the district court did not err in overruling the bank’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or for a new trial.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is therefore reversed and the cause remanded to that court with the direction that it affirm the judgment of the district court.
Reversed and remanded with direction.

=== CASE 9739424 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:40.931011+00 ===

Gerrard, J.,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the result reached by the majority, which reverses the decision of the Nebraska Court of Appeals and affirms the judgment of the district court. In my opinion, the trial court erred in denying the bank’s motion for directed verdict at the close of the evidence and in denying the bank’s posttrial motions, because there is no competent evidence which would support the conclusion that Ervin Melcher was the owner of the John Deere 4450 tractor eventually sold by the bank in satisfaction of its judgment against Melcher’s son, Donald.
A jury verdict will not be set aside unless clearly wrong, and it is sufficient if any competent evidence is presented to the jury upon which it could find for the successful party. Hoeft v. Five Points Bank, ante p. 772, 539 N.W.2d 637 (1995); Wolf v. Walt, 247 Neb. 858, 530 N.W.2d 890 (1995); Nichols v. Busse, 243 Neb. 811, 503 N.W.2d 173 (1993); Kozeny v. Miller, 243 *804Neb. 402, 499 N.W.2d 75 (1993). The majority found Melcher’s testimony and the testimony of his son to be sufficient evidence in support of Melcher’s claim of ownership and possession of the 4450. Essentially, Melcher testified that he purchased the 4450, that he was in continuous possession of the tractor, and that he had never transferred title of the 4450 to anyone. Melcher’s claims are not supported by the record.
The record reflects that Melcher was not the sole payor for the 4450. Instead, Melcher was responsible for $5,050.50 of the total $40,357.50 cost of the new 4450. The remainder of the purchase price, $35,307, was attributable to his son. When Melcher negotiated the purchase of the 4450, he received $15,000 for the trade-in of his son’s old John Deere 4430 tractor. After a promissory note covering the 4430 was paid off, the credit received in exchange for Melcher’s son’s old tractor was $7,307. Melcher’s son, on direct examination as a hostile witness, revealed more of the background of the tractor trade-in and subsequent indebtedness to Melcher in the following colloquy:
[Bank’s attorney:] Did you ask your father what he had done with your 4430 tractor?
[Melcher’s son:] Yes.
Q. And didn’t he tell you that he traded it in?
A. Yes.
Q. And didn’t you tell him that you wished he would have told you about that first?
A. Yes.
Q. And didn’t you then ask him, well, what am I suppose to do?
A. I was suppose to make payments to him.
Q. My next question is, didn’t he say, you make payments on this one?
A. Yes.
Q. Was there anything else that you and your father talked about and discussed concerning the absence of your 4430 tractor and the arrival of the 4450 tractor?
A. He traded that one in for the 4450, and I was out of the 4430.
Q. Did your father later come to you and have you sign *805a promissory note?
A. Yes.
In fact, at the direction of Melcher, his son signed promissory notes in the amount of $28,000 for the 7 consecutive years prior to trial evidencing his son’s indebtedness to Melcher for the purchase of the new 4450. Thus, Melcher’s son contributed $35,307 to the purchase of the 4450, which included $7,307 equity in the old tractor and his annually renewed promissory notes to pay Melcher $28,000. Therefore, contrary to Melcher’s claim, his son was responsible for paying at least 87 percent of the cost of the new tractor.
Melcher never possessed the 4450 as he claimed. The tractor was delivered directly to Melcher’s son, and at all relevant times, his son was the sole possessor of the 4450. Regardless of Melcher’s nebulous claim that the 4450 was available for other family members’ use “whenever they needed it,” Melcher’s son testified that he had, in fact, been using the tractor from the date of delivery in June 1986 until the date that the bank repossessed it. Moreover, it is undisputed that Melcher’s son was solely responsible for the maintenance of the tractor, he was the only one who claimed depreciation of the tractor on his tax returns, and only he listed the 4450 as an asset on financial statements.
Finally, Melcher claims that he never transferred title of the 4450 to anyone. No record of “title” was offered or received into evidence, and there is good reason for that omission. Melcher never had “title” to the tractor because tractors are excluded as motor vehicles covered by the certificate of title act. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-101 et seq. (Reissue 1993). Section 60-102 states that the act shall apply to motor vehicles, commercial trailers, and semitrailers required to be registered under Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 60-301 to 60-306 (Reissue 1993). Section 60-301(14), now codified at § 60-301(16) (Supp. 1995), states “[m]otor vehicle shall mean any vehicle propelled by any power other than muscular power except ...(b) farm tractors . . . .” Therefore, Melcher’s claim that he never gave title to the tractor to anyone is correct, but only because he never had a title to give any more than his son would have had a title to give to anyone.
In the instant case, the only evidence to support the jury *806verdict was the testimony of Melcher and his son — and even their testimony, given the benefit of every inference which can reasonably be deduced from the evidence, does not support the conclusion that Melcher was the owner of the 4450 at the time of its taking by the bank. This case should not have been submitted to a jury. Once Melcher was able to dodge the bullet of a directed verdict, he successfully crafted the legal equivalent of a silk purse out of evidence that equated to something less than a sow’s ear.
I would affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals which had reversed the judgment of the district court.

=== CASE 2219729 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:19.701343+00 ===

595 N.E.2d 280 (1992)
Diane KNIGHT; William Knight; Alberta McClure; Veril McClure; Charles McClain; Marion McClain; Deloris Miller; Elmer Miller; Haskell Sims; Amie Sims; Elizabeth Sullivan; Frank Sullivan; Albert Vaal; and Mary Vaal, Appellants,
v.
Warren PARKE d/b/a Parke Coal Company, Appellee.
No. 63A01-9112-CV-382.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
July 16, 1992.
Michael C. Kendall, Kendall Law Office, Indianapolis, for appellants.
Jeffrey A. Wilhite, Mary Lee Franke, Kahn, Dees, Donovan & Kahn, Evansville, for appellee.
ROBERTSON, Judge.
The appellants, hereinafter referred to as the Homeowners, appeal an adverse judgment following a jury trial on their two count complaint against Parke. After a judgment had been rendered, the Homeowners' counsel had one of his employees contact the jurors to "ask [the jurors] how they arrived at their verdict." At that time, counsel acquired information leading him to believe that jurors had violated the court's instructions concerning juror conduct prior to deliberations and filed a motion to correct error with an attached affidavit and a request for a hearing. The motion to correct error was denied without an evidentiary hearing, the trial court ruling that "[t]o set aside the verdict of the jury based on certain statements of a juror after the trial would permit a juror to impeach his own verdict."
The trial court followed the long-standing rule in this state, described in one opinion as "settled beyond dispute," Wagner v. Riley (1986), Ind. App., 499 N.E.2d 1155, 1157, and in another as "[none] more firmly established," Stauffer v. Lothamer (1981), Ind. App., 419 N.E.2d 203, 217, that the affidavit or testimony of jurors will not be received to impeach their verdict, whether the jurors' statements be reported first or second hand. Henry v. State (1978), 269 Ind. 1, 379 N.E.2d 132, 139; Stinson v. State (1974), 262 Ind. 189, 313 N.E.2d 699; Wilson v. State (1970), 253 Ind. 585, 255 N.E.2d 817. See generally, Stauffer, 419 N.E.2d at 217 and cases cited therein. The jury's exposure to extraneous influence is the only in-road in this inviolate doctrine of which the cases cited by the parties make us aware. See Fox v. State (1984), Ind., 457 N.E.2d 1088; Harrison v. State (1991), Ind. App., 575 N.E.2d 642; Mattox v. United States (1892), 146 U.S. 140, 13 S.Ct. 50, 36 L.Ed. 917.
The rule is based upon controlling considerations of a public policy which in these cases chooses the lesser of two evils... . If the facts were as stated in the affidavit, the jury adopted an arbitrary and unjust method in arriving at their verdict, and the defendant ought to have *281 had relief, if the facts could have been proved by witnesses who were competent to testify in a proceeding to set aside the verdict. But let it once be established that verdicts solemnly made and publicly returned into court can be attacked and set aside on the testimony of those who took part in their publication and all verdicts could be, and many would be, followed by an inquiry in the hope of discovering something which might invalidate the finding. Jurors would be harassed and beset by the defeated party in an effort to secure from them evidence of facts which might establish misconduct sufficient to set aside a verdict. If evidence thus secured could be thus used, the result would be to make what was intended to be a private deliberation, the constant subject of public investigation  to the destruction of all frankness and freedom of discussion and conference.
McDonald v. Pless (1915), 238 U.S. 264, 267-68, 35 S.Ct. 783, 784, 59 L.Ed. 1300.
Members of the jury in the present case allegedly formed opinions before retiring to deliberate and purportedly discussed the case among themselves. Thus, their "misconduct" does not fall within the Fox exception but is governed by the general rule. The trial court therefore did not err either in refusing to consider the affidavit of a third party which contained statements solicited by the party from a member of the jury or in denying that portion of the Homeowners' motion to correct error which was premised upon juror misconduct.
Judgment affirmed.
BAKER and MILLER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2219736 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:19.926947+00 ===

595 N.E.2d 570 (1992)
230 Ill. App.3d 472
172 Ill.Dec. 209
Delbert YATES, Jr., a minor, by Delbert Yates, Sr., his father and next friend, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
CHICAGO NATIONAL LEAGUE BALL CLUB, INC., a foreign corporation, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-90-1209.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, First Division.
April 6, 1992.
Rehearing Denied June 23, 1992.
As Modified on Denial of Rehearing June 29, 1992.
*573 Tressler, Soderstrom, Maloney & Priess, of Chicago (Francis A. Spina and William J. Cremer, of counsel), for defendant-appellant.
Thomas R. Cirignani & Associates, Chicago (Thomas R. Cirignani, of counsel), for plaintiff-appellee. *571
*572 MODIFIED ON DENIAL OF REHEARING
Justice CAMPBELL delivered the opinion of the court:
Minor-plaintiff Delbert Yates, Jr., by Delbert Yates, Sr., his father and next friend ("Mr. Yates"), brought suit in the circuit court of Cook County against defendant Chicago National League Ball Club, Inc. (the "Chicago Cubs" or "Cubs") for injuries resulting from being struck by a foul ball while attending a baseball game. Plaintiff alleged that defendant negligently: (1) failed to provide adequate screening in the area behind home plate; and (2) failed to warn him so as to enable him to avoid the harm. Following a jury trial, judgment was entered on a verdict rendered in favor of plaintiff; defendant now appeals.
The record on appeal contains the following facts. Mr. Yates testified that on August 20, 1983, he attended a baseball game between the Atlanta Braves and Chicago Cubs. Mr. Yates' wife, four of their daughters and plaintiff Delbert Yates, Jr. also attended the game. Mr. Yates had previously purchased eight tickets for the game through Carson, Pirie Scott in Merrillville, Indiana. Mr. Yates testified that he had requested tickets behind home plate.
The Yates family arrived at the ballpark between 12:30 and 1 p.m. and had difficulty finding a place to park their car. By the time they were admitted to the park, the game had already started; an usher showed the family to their seats. Mr. Yates testified that he took the first seat, whereas plaintiff took the seventh seat, leaving the eighth seat empty. Mr. Yates felt that his seat was protected by a screen in place behind home plate.
During the game, Leon Durham came up to bat and hit a foul ball which struck plaintiff. Mr. Yates testified that he saw the ball hit his son, after which he saw a knot under plaintiff's eye and saw blood pouring down plaintiff's face. According to Mr. Yates, two people came and took plaintiff to a first aid station. Plaintiff was then taken to the hospital. Plaintiff's injury required surgery and a hospital stay of at least five days.
Mr. Yates testified that in the 90 days following the surgery, plaintiff continued to have excruciating headaches. In addition, whereas plaintiff had played basketball and organized baseball prior to being injured, he could no longer really hit or catch the ball. Plaintiff had become withdrawn and stayed in his room most of the time.
On cross-examination, Mr. Yates testified that he had been to Wrigley Field two or three times before the date of the accident. Mr. Yates was aware that balls would leave the field and go into the stands. Mr. Yates had previously sat in a seat not protected by a screen. Although the diagram he was shown at the time of purchasing tickets did not indicate the position of the screen, Mr. Yates assumed that the seats he was shown behind home plate *574 would be behind the screen. Defense counsel sought to impeach Mr. Yates with prior deposition testimony in which Mr. Yates stated he asked for tickets "behind the home plate around the screen." Defense counsel also sought to impeach Mr. Yates with prior deposition testimony in which Mr. Yates stated he did not actually see the ball strike his son. Mr. Yates admitted that he had not sat in plaintiff's seat. On redirect, Mr. Yates testified that he was never told by the Chicago Cubs that his seats were not protected by the screen.
Mrs. Theda Yates, plaintiff's mother, testified that she did not see the baseball strike her son, but that, immediately thereafter, her son appeared as described above. Mrs. Yates' testimony concerning plaintiff's hospitalization and the change in plaintiff's activities was also similar to that described by Mr. Yates. Mrs. Yates also stated that plaintiff suffered from occasional double vision following the injury.
On cross-examination, Mrs. Yates testified that Mr. Yates requested seats behind home plate and behind the screen. Defense counsel read Mrs. Yates' prior deposition testimony into the record, in which she indicated that Mr. Yates had asked for seats behind the screen "where we always sat but they were always [sic] sold." Mrs. Yates testified that she was aware that foul balls went into the stands at baseball games, which was why they bought the seats at issue. Mrs. Yates stated that she had not gone to plaintiff's seat to see whether the seat was protected.
Mrs. Yates was then shown Defendant's Exhibits 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8, a series of photographs taken at Wrigley Field from a number of perspectives. Mrs. Yates agreed that whether the seats Mr. Yates bought appeared to be protected by the screen depended on the angle from which they were photographed. These exhibits were published to the jury.
On redirect, Mrs. Yates testified that the Cubs never told her that the seats her family was going to sit in were protected by the screen from some angles and not from others. Mrs. Yates also stated that she would not have sat in her seat if she had known they were not protected from foul balls.
Plaintiff testified that he was born on December 27, 1972. In 1983, plaintiff was in fourth grade at the Hazelnut Elementary School. Plaintiff attended the August 20, 1983, baseball game between the Atlanta Braves and Chicago Cubs, along with his parents and sisters. Immediately after plaintiff bet his sister Susan as to whether Leon Durham would get a hit, he was struck by a baseball. Plaintiff saw only a white blur before he was struck. Plaintiff then testified that he was taken to a first aid station, then to a hospital and later had surgery.
Plaintiff also testified that in the 90 days following the surgery, he had painful headaches almost every day and that he continued to have similar headaches once or twice a month thereafter. Plaintiff further testified as to his involvement with sports, particularly baseball. In the two or three years before the accident, plaintiff had played organized baseball as an outfielder, second baseperson and catcher. Plaintiff had one of the top five averages on his team. After the accident, plaintiff would see two baseballs when attempting to field a fly ball. Plaintiff did not play any other sports after the accident. Plaintiff also has trouble driving cars and climbing ladders.
On cross-examination, plaintiff stated that he had been to Wrigley Field approximately five times before the accident. He had also been to Comiskey Park on at least one occasion. Plaintiff admitted that he was aware that foul balls would leave the field. Plaintiff also admitted that from his experience as a baseball player, he knew that the ball could travel in many different directions after being hit. Plaintiff could not remember whether the ballpark was crowded on August 20, 1983.
Plaintiff next read edited deposition testimony given by Allen R. Caskey into the record. Defendant's motion to strike the entire transcript was heard and denied outside the presence of the jury.
Caskey testified that he had obtained a bachelor's degree in 1964, a master's degree *575 in 1965 and a doctorate in 1974; these degrees were in the field of recreation and parks administration and were received from the University of Illinois. He was president of A.R.C. Associates, Inc., a firm providing planning, design, construction, supervision and inspection, as well as operation, maintenance and safety consulting services, to park and recreation agencies. The facilities involved include swimming pools, tennis courts, basketball courts, playgrounds and softball and baseball facilities. Caskey had previously been involved with the planning, design and development of approximately 300 softball and baseball fields, ranging in size from a small backstop to a facility seating a few thousand spectators. Caskey had also previously consulted for the Chicago White Sox in a similar lawsuit.
Caskey testified that he had been retained by plaintiff to review documents regarding this lawsuit. After reviewing these documents, Caskey arrived at a number of opinions, based upon a reasonable degree of certainty within the area of design, construction and operation of a baseball stadium. Caskey opined that the seats in the "area behind home plate" should be protected at Wrigley Field. Caskey defined the "area behind home plate" as the area between the first and third base lines as if those baselines were extended into the stands. Caskey opined that this area was the most dangerous area of the ballpark because it has the highest probability of line drive foul balls which would have a short reaction time on the part of spectators.
Caskey testified that it would be feasible to protect spectators from foul balls by erecting a screen to prevent foul balls from entering the stands. Caskey also opined that plaintiff's seat on August 20, 1983, was in the area behind home plate, but was also in an unprotected area of the ballpark.[1] Caskey opined that screening could be extended down the first and third baselines, but a minimal amount of screening would be that which would cover the area behind home plate. Caskey concluded that plaintiff's injuries were caused by the lack of protective screening and that defendant had not exercised reasonable care in providing safe seating in the area behind home plate.
On cross-examination, Caskey admitted that his undergraduate degree was in physical education and recreation; he could not recall anything in his undergraduate studies which related to major league backstops. Caskey stated that there would be different considerations in designing a major league baseball stadium than were present in designing baseball fields for high school or little league use, including the size of the facility, the size of the players and the speed of the ball. Caskey further stated that he had never designed or built a major league stadium. Caskey testified that he was neither a licensed architect nor an engineer; he stated that he did not have licenses in the professions requisite to designing a major league ballpark. Caskey admitted that he had never designed, built or published articles concerning major league backstops.
Caskey also admitted that he had not gone to Wrigley Field to make observations or take measurements regarding the seats and screen in this case. Caskey had not made time or distance calculations in this case, nor could he cite a specific study on the subject. Caskey's knowledge of the location of plaintiff's seat was based on photographs and a schematic diagram provided to him. Caskey did not know whether the diagram was to scale.
Caskey stated that in forming his opinions, he had relied upon various publications on the personal injury issue and his years of reading documentation on safety, design and operation of baseball stadiums and fields. He also stated that he could not recall any of those publications specifically addressing major league backstops. Caskey indicated that he was unaware of any major league studies regarding which *576 areas of a ballpark carry the greatest risk of spectator injury from foul balls, nor had he conducted such a study himself.
Caskey was unaware of any major league standard concerning backstop size or defining the area behind home plate. Caskey agreed that it was not necessary to screen the entire ballpark, that the screen would end at some point and that seats beyond that point would be unprotected. Caskey had not conducted a study to determine whether the risk of a foul ball reaching plaintiff's seating area was greater than that of a foul ball reaching the area just beyond the area he defined as behind home plate. Nor had Caskey conducted a survey of the size of major league backstops. Caskey estimated that between 60 and 80 percent of his work in lawsuits was on behalf of plaintiffs.
Plaintiff called Paul Rathje as an adverse witness. Rathje testified that he was the Cubs' Assistant Director of Stadium Operations, a position he had held since 1983. His department was responsible for stadium and field maintenance, as well as game day personnel, such as ushers, security, and first aid personnel. Rathje testified that the screen in place in August 1983 had been installed in 1982. Rathje stated that the purpose of the screen was to protect "those sitting directly behind home plate." Rathje admitted that in a prior deposition, he had stated that the purpose was to protect "those sitting in the home plate area." Rathje defined the "home plate area" as the area between the extended first and third base lines. He considered the "area behind home plate" to be the most dangerous area of the ballpark, involving the majority of high-velocity foul balls. Rathje distinguished the `"area behind home plate" from the "home plate area." He noted that foul balls could be hit directly into any unscreened area of the ballpark.
Rathje also testified that he was unaware of any materials indicating which seats were to be protected and of any safety analysis undertaken prior to erecting the screen in 1982. Rathje stated that there were no warning signs in the home plate area and that children were not barred from the home plate area.
Rathje further testified that he had previously gone to the ballpark with a seating chart in an attempt to determine which seats were protected by the screen. Rathje opined that plaintiff's seat was not in the protected area and was not protected by the screen. According to Rathje's calculations, the protected area encompassed 1327 seats, which constituted approximately four percent of the total seats in the ballpark.
In later questioning, Rathje denied that 62 persons had been hit by foul balls between the first and third base lines and behind home plate in 1982. Rathje admitted that he had previously signed a sworn interrogatory which read to the contrary, but later testified that the number 62 represented the number of spectator accident reports for the entire ballpark in 1982. Rathje stated that there were 10 foul ball injuries in the "home plate area," as defined by Caskey, in 1982.
Defendant called Richard de Flon, senior vice president and architect with the firm of Hellmuth, Kassabaum & Obata, to testify as an expert witness, de Flon received bachelor degrees in environmental design and architecture from the University of Kansas, de Flon testified that he was a licensed architect in more than six states, was a member of the American Institute of Architects and the Missouri Council of Architects, and was accredited with the National Council of Architectural Registration Boards.
Since the 1970s, de Flon limited his work to the area of sports facility design; his work includes the Hoosier Dome in Indianapolis, Indiana and the suites erected at Comiskey Park and Soldier Field in Chicago. Since joining the Hellmuth firm in 1983, he was involved in the design of between 10 and 15 minor and major league stadiums, de Flon was the principal in charge of the new Comiskey Park in Chicago and was also involved with projects in: Baltimore, Maryland; Saint Petersburg, Florida; and Buffalo, New York.
*577 de Flon testified that he had been retained by the Cubs to evaluate the screen at Wrigley Field. He visited the ballpark, viewed the backstop, sat in plaintiff's seat and measured the angle from the seat to the backstop. de Flon also indicated that the screen at issue was 73 feet wide and 30 feet tall.
de Flon then testified that an architect uses three criteria to determine the appropriate size for a screen: (1) the needs of the team; (2) the needs and desires of the fans; and (3) the physical configuration and constraints of the stadium. Based on a reasonable degree of architectural certainty and on his years of dealing with baseball teams and stadiums, de Flon testified that the screen at issue fell within major league standards of safety and adequacy. de Flon determined the standards of major league baseball by conducting a survey of the screens erected in each of the major league ballparks. These screens ranged in length from slightly less than 40 feet to over 120 feet. de Flon testified that the norm ranged between 65 and 75 feet, placing the screen at issue within the norm. He also stated that architects used historical data for the design process and that he was unaware of any codified standard for major league screens. de Flon opined that plaintiff's seat was unprotected.
On cross-examination, de Flon testified that he did not have a firm definition of the "area behind home plate," explaining that this area varies depending on the physical configuration of each stadium. He noted that different people define the term differently. de Flon admitted that other stadiums he visited had warning signs, but that Wrigley Field did not. He also opined that one did not have to have experience with major league ballpark design to be qualified to discuss the size of the screen.
de Flon stated that he did not believe any of the major league screens were inadequate. He further stated that it was not within his expertise to factor the trajectory and angle of balls in designing a protective screen.
The Cubs then called Thomas Cooper, who was employed as the Director of Stadium Operations. Cooper testified that over 36,000 people attended the game at which plaintiff was injured; this number would have been close to Wrigley Field's 1983 capacity. Cooper then testified as to the procedure followed when a spectator is struck by a foul ball. Cooper stated that a review of incident reports for 1982 did not indicate any incidents in the section where plaintiff was struck. Cooper also stated that there were two incidents in the immediate vicinity of that section. He further stated that many times, a spectator struck by a foul ball would not fill out an incident report.
Doctors Jack Arbit, Allen Putterman, Mark Greenwald and Elva Poznanski testified concerning plaintiff's injuries. Their testimony, however, is not at issue in this case.
At the conclusion of the trial, the jury returned a verdict for plaintiff in the amount of $67,500. Defendant filed a posttrial motion, which was denied. Defendant now appeals.
I.
Defendant first contends that the trial court should have granted its motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. Such a motion should be entered only in those cases in which all of the evidence, when viewed in the light most favorable to the opponent, so overwhelmingly favors the movant that no contrary verdict could ever stand. (Pedrick v. Peoria & Eastern R.R. Co. (1967), 37 Ill.2d 494, 511, 229 N.E.2d 504, 513-14.) When deciding a motion for judgment n.o.v., the court may not consider errors in the admission or exclusion of evidence. (Gundich v. Emerson-Comstock Co. (1960), 21 Ill.2d 117, 128, 171 N.E.2d 60, 66.) A general verdict will not be set aside so long as one ground suffices to sustain the verdict "unless before the case was submitted to the jury a motion was made to withdraw that ground from the jury on account of insufficient evidence and it appears that the denial of the motion was prejudicial." Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 110, par. 2-1201(d); see Lynch v. Board of Education of Collinsville Community *578 Unit District No. 10 (1980), 82 Ill.2d 415, 45 Ill.Dec. 96, 412 N.E.2d 447.
We first address the Cubs' contention that the trial court erred in submitting the inadequate screening issue to the jury. We begin by taking notice of the position which the sport of baseball, particularly major league baseball, occupies in our nation's culture. (See Flood v. Kuhn (1972), 407 U.S. 258, 260-64, 92 S.Ct. 2099, 2101-03, 32 L.Ed.2d 728, 732-33 (plurality opinion).) Indeed, baseball sometimes appears to occupy an anomalous position in American law as well. Flood, 407 U.S. at 282-83, 92 S.Ct. at 2112, 32 L.Ed.2d at 743-44 (upholding the long-standing yet anomalous exemption of major league baseballas opposed to other sportsfrom federal antitrust laws); see Riley v. Chicago Cougars Hockey Club, Inc. (1981), 100 Ill.App.3d 664, 666, 56 Ill.Dec. 210, 212-13, 427 N.E.2d 290, 292-93 (noting the historical rule of nonliability for spectator injuries at baseball games as opposed to hockey matches).
In the context of negligence law, this court has held that while a ballpark owner-occupier does not absolutely insure the safety of invitees on its premises, the owner-occupier does owe a duty of reasonable care to such invitees. (Maytnier v. Rush (1967), 80 Ill.App.2d 336, 342, 225 N.E.2d 83, 87.) This duty is usually satisfied if the owner-occupier "provide[s] screen for the most dangerous part of the grandstand and for those who may be reasonably anticipated to desire protected seats" for a typical game. (Maytnier, 80 Ill.App.2d at 343, 225 N.E.2d at 87, quoting Brisson v. Minneapolis Baseball & Athletic Association (1932), 185 Minn. 507, 509, 240 N.W. 903, 904.) This standard appears to be the majority rule. See Akins v. Glens Falls City School District (1981), 53 N.Y.2d 325, 320, 441 N.Y.S.2d 644, 646, 424 N.E.2d 531, 533; see also Coronel v. Chicago White Sox, Ltd. (1992) 230 Ill.App.3d 734, 737, 171 Ill.Dec. 917, 919, 595 N.E.2d 45, 47 (referring only to the "most dangerous part of the grandstand").[2]
The Cubs argue that they are entitled to judgment n.o.v. because the record showed there was a screen behind home plate, but plaintiff failed to introduce evidence regarding the average demand for screened seats.
The Cubs' formulation of the duty owed in this case is misconceived for two reasons. First, the Coronel court measured the owner-occupier's duty by whether the screen placed in the most dangerous area of the ballpark was adequate without reference to requests for screened seats. (Coronel, 230 Ill.App.3d at 737, 171 Ill.Dec. at 919, 595 N.E.2d at 47, citing Maytnier, 80 Ill.App.2d at 343, 225 N.E.2d at 87.) Second, there is a difference between the majority rule quoted above and one that states that ballpark owners are not liable "if they provide [a] screen [in] the most dangerous part of the grandstand * * * for those who may be reasonably anticipated to desire protected seats" for a typical game. (See also Clapman v. City of New York (1984), 63 N.Y.2d 669, 479 N.Y.S.2d 515, 468 N.E.2d 697 (summary judgment proper where no material fact existed on either the adequacy of the screen or sufficiency of the number of seats behind the screen).) Thus, plaintiff was not required to produce evidence on the average demand for screened seats.
Accordingly, viewing the evidence most favorably to plaintiff, judgment n.o.v. was not warranted. The record indicates that Caskey and Rathje agreed on a definition of "the area behind home plate," though Rathje called it the "home plate area" and stated that only the area directly behind home plate was "the most dangerous area of the ballpark." de Flon's testified that the definition of terms such as "the area behind home plate" may vary from stadium to stadium. The jury may have agreed with Caskey that defendant's failure to *579 screen the area between the extended first and third base lines behind home plate was a breach of the duty of reasonable care in this case.
The Cubs argue that Caskey's testimony should have been excluded. However, as noted above, alleged errors in the admission of evidence are not considered in passing upon a motion for judgment n.o.v. Therefore, defendant has failed to demonstrate that judgment n.o.v. was required in this case.
II.
The Cubs alternatively seek a new trial on the inadequate screening theory. A trial court's ruling on whether a new trial should be granted will not be reversed unless the verdict is against the manifest weight of the evidence. (See Villa v. Crown Cork & Seal Co. (1990), 202 Ill. App.3d 1082, 1089, 148 Ill.Dec. 372, 376, 560 N.E.2d 969, 973.) A verdict is deemed to be against the manifest weight of the evidence where the opposite conclusion is clearly evident or where the findings of the jury are unreasonable, arbitrary and not based on any of the evidence. (Villa, 202 Ill.App.3d at 1089, 148 Ill.Dec. at 376, 560 N.E.2d at 973.) Unlike motions for judgment n.o.v., a court may consider errors in the exclusion or admission of evidence and grant a new trial if there were serious and prejudicial errors made at trial. (See Bartlett Bank & Trust Co. v. McJunkins (1986), 147 Ill.App.3d 52, 63, 100 Ill.Dec. 420, 428, 497 N.E.2d 398, 406.) We turn again to consider the inadequate screening theory, focusing on defendant's allegations that it was prejudiced by errors in the admission or exclusion of evidence.
A.
The Cubs contend that the trial court erred in denying its motion to exclude Caskey's deposition testimony. Defendant suggests that Caskey was not qualified to comment on the adequacy of the screen. The Cubs also assert that plaintiff repeatedly failed to establish a foundation for Caskey's opinions. For example, the Cubs assert that plaintiff never established that the documents and data upon which Caskey relied were of a type reasonably relied upon by experts. The Cubs further assert that plaintiff's direct examination provided no factual basis for Caskey's opinion that the area behind home plate would be considered the most dangerous area of the ballpark.
Expert testimony is admissible if it assists the trier of fact in understanding the evidence or deciding a fact in issue and the witness is qualified by reason of knowledge, skill, experience, education or training to give said testimony. (Ruffiner v. Material Service Corp. (1985), 134 Ill. App.3d 747, 755, 89 Ill.Dec. 414, 419, 480 N.E.2d 1157, 1162, rev'd on other grounds (1987), 116 Ill.2d 53, 106 Ill.Dec. 781, 506 N.E.2d 581.) The question of whether a witness is sufficiently qualified as an expert rests within the sound discretion of the trial court. Hardware State Bank v. Cotner (1973), 55 Ill.2d 240, 250, 302 N.E.2d 257, 264.
In this case, the record indicates that Caskey was called as a safety consultant. The record further indicates that Caskey had been involved with the planning, design and development of approximately 300 softball and baseball fields of various sizes. The Cubs note that crossexamination established that Caskey had never designed a major league stadium or its screen and that Caskey conceded the design considerations at the major league level would be different from the level at which Caskey had worked. Although this court may occasionally determine that a witness testified beyond the scope of his or her expertise (Broussard v. Huffman Manufacturing Co. (1982), 108 Ill.App.3d 356, 63 Ill.Dec. 854, 438 N.E.2d 1217), the record here indicates that Caskey had acted as a consultant for the Chicago White Sox in a similar lawsuit. The record also indicates that the Cubs' expert, Richard de Flon, testified that one need not have designed a major league stadium to render an opinion on backstops. The record further shows that the parties cross-examined the opposing experts, giving the jury ample opportunity to assess their credibility. *580 (Ruffiner, 134 Ill.App.3d at 755, 89 Ill.Dec. at 419, 480 N.E.2d at 1162.) Based on this record, the trial court could determine that Caskey was qualified to testify as an expert in this case.
Defendant next contends that plaintiff failed to establish the foundational requirement that the documents and data Caskey relied upon were of a type reasonably relied upon by experts in the field. In this regard, it is important to note that defendant's argument is that the entire deposition should have been excluded for foundational reasons; defendant raised specific objections to specific opinions at trial, but relies upon the broader challenge on appeal. Where the issue is the exclusion or admission of an expert's entire testimony, the trial court should liberally allow the expert to determine the materials upon which experts in his or her field may rely in rendering an opinion. (Lovelace v. Four Lakes Development Co. (1988), 170 Ill.App.3d 378, 383, 120 Ill.Dec. 424, 428, 523 N.E.2d 1335, 1339.) It is then the opposing party's responsibility to challenge the basis of the expert's opinion, with the weight of the opinion ultimately left to the trier of fact. (See Melecosky v. McCarthy Brothers Co. (1986), 115 Ill.2d 209, 216-17, 104 Ill.Dec. 798, 801, 503 N.E.2d 355, 358.) Where an expert testifies that his or her opinions are based on a reasonable degree of expert certainty within a given field, a jury may infer that the data upon which the expert relied were of a type reasonably relied upon by such an expert. See Melecosky, 115 Ill.2d at 216, 104 Ill.Dec. at 801, 503 N.E.2d at 358.
In this case, the record indicates that Caskey testified that his opinions were based upon a reasonable degree of certainty within the area of baseball stadium design, construction and operation. The record also shows that the Cubs subjected Caskey's qualifications and opinions to extensive cross-examination. Indeed, on cross-examination the Cubs established that Caskey also based his opinions on years of reading publications and documentation regarding the design, operation and safety of baseball fields and stadiums, though he could not recall if any specifically addressed major league stadiums. The record further indicates that Caskey testified that his definition of the area behind home plate was based on his education, training and experience. The record indicates that Caskey stated that he did not make time-distance measurements in this case, and could not recall if any studies conducted by major league baseball established that the area behind home plate is the most dangerous area of the ballpark. However, the jury may have been able to reasonably make that inference based upon Caskey's years of experience and his reading of documents apparently not prepared by major league baseball. Indeed, we note that numerous courts have recognized the area behind home plate as the most dangerous area of the ballpark. (See Coronel, 230 Ill.App.3d at 737, 171 Ill.Dec. at 919, 595 N.E.2d at 47 (and cases cited therein).) Given this record, the trial court did not err in admitting the entirety of the testimony over the foundational objection.
B.
Defendant's second evidentiary objection concerns the admission of evidence of other foul ball injuries. Defendant contends that the trial court erred in allowing plaintiff to impeach Rathje with the discovery interrogatory indicating 62 foul ball incidents occurred in the "area behind home plate" (as defined by Caskey) during the 1982 baseball season, because there was no foundation establishing that the incidents were similar. The record shows that Rathje testified on rehabilitation that there were 62 foul ball incidents at Wrigley Field during the 1982 season, but only 10 occurred in the area behind home plate. Defendant also contends that the error was compounded because during defendant's rehabilitation questions on this point, the trial court precluded defendant from establishing that Rathje had noted and explained the error in a 1984 deposition.
Evidence of prior similar occurrences may be admissible for any number of purposes; the determination of whether occurrences are sufficiently similar to the *581 one at issue rests within the sound discretion of the trial court. (Yassin v. Certified Grocers of Illinois, Inc. (1986), 150 Ill. App.3d 1052, 1065, 104 Ill.Dec. 52, 63, 502 N.E.2d 315, 326.) The other incidents need only be substantially similar; they need not be identical. (Rucker v. Norfolk & Western Ry. Co. (1979), 77 Ill.2d 434, 441, 33 Ill.Dec. 145, 149, 396 N.E.2d 534, 538.) At some point, the similarity of circumstances will go only to the weight of the evidence, rather than its admissibility. Yassin, 150 Ill.App.3d at 1065, 104 Ill.Dec. at 63, 502 N.E.2d at 326.
Regarding the 1982 incidents, defendant wonders whether all of them involved spectators who were sitting quietly or whether some injuries may have resulted because the spectator was attempting to pursue the foul ball. Defendant also wonders whether the 1982 incidents all involved game balls as opposed to practice balls. The record indicates that the interrogatory at issue was designed to determine the number of persons hit by foul balls in a particular area of the stands. Such evidence could be relevant to show the feasibility of the safety measures sought by plaintiff. (Yassin, 150 Ill.App.3d at 1065, 104 Ill.Dec. at 62, 502 N.E.2d at 325.) Defendant offers no evidence or argument to suggest that the differences hypothesized would significantly affect a determination of the feasibility of a larger screen.
Turning to defendant's assertion that it was prejudiced by the exclusion of Rathje's prior consistent statement, the record indicates that Rathje was permitted to explain the error in his previous interrogatory. Even if the prior consistent statement was admissible, reversal is not warranted because the exclusion did not materially affect the result. See, e.g., Ford v. City of Chicago (1985), 132 Ill. App.3d 408, 87 Ill.Dec. 240, 476 N.E.2d 1232.
C.
Defendant's third and final evidentiary objection is that the trial court erred in precluding defendant from presenting evidence of plaintiff's alleged contractual assumption of the risk. Defendant based this defense on a disclaimer of liability printed on the back of plaintiff's ticket.
An express agreement to assume a risk will not be effective unless it appears that the plaintiff has given his or her assent to the terms of the agreement. (See Restatement (Second) of Torts, § 496B, comment c (1977); see also Larsen v. Vic Tanny International (1984), 130 Ill.App.3d 574, 577, 85 Ill.Dec. 769, 772, 474 N.E.2d 729, 732 (citing section 496B, comment d).) In this case, the trial court ruled that the disclaimer on the back of plaintiff's ticket could not form the basis of defense because the print was so small that it was not legibly reproduced on the photocopy submitted to the trial court. Plaintiff's acceptance of a ticket containing a disclaimer in fine print on the back is not binding for the purposes of asserting express assumption of the risk. (Restatement (Second) of Torts, § 496B, comment c, Illustration 1 (1977).) The cases relied upon by defendant involve signed agreements and are distinguishable on that basis. Consequently, the trial court did not err in barring the defense.
III.
Finally, the Cubs argue that the trial court erred in giving certain jury instructions, resulting in an unfair trial. Jury instructions are deemed adequate if they are sufficiently clear to avoid misleading the jury and fairly and correctly state the law. (Villa, 202 Ill.App.3d at 1087-88, 148 Ill.Dec. at 375, 560 N.E.2d at 972.) An instruction will be deemed properly given if it is supported by some evidence in the record; whether an issue is raised by the evidence and which instruction may be given thereon is within the discretion of the trial court. See Villa, 202 Ill.App.3d at 1087-88, 148 Ill.Dec. at 375, 560 N.E.2d at 972.
Defendant first contests the instruction which set forth the theories of liability pursued by plaintiff. Defendant's brief attacks the instruction solely on the ground that "there is no basis in law for the imposition *582 of a duty to warn" in this case; we have limited our review of the instruction accordingly.
In most jurisdictions, a ballpark owner-occupier owes no duty to warn of the risk of being hit by a batted ball while attending a baseball game due to the obvious nature of the risk. (See Falkner v. John E. Fetzer, Inc. (1982), 113 Mich.App. 500, 502-03, 317 N.E.2d 337, 339 (nevertheless recognizing a duty to warn).) In this jurisdiction, a ballpark owner is not always absolved of liability once he or she provides adequate screening. (Maytnier, 80 Ill. App.2d at 343, 225 N.E.2d at 87.) Indeed, Coronel rejects the sort of per se rule of non-liability urged upon us by defendant, stating that:
"[t]he inquiry is whether the defendant should reasonably anticipate injury to those entrants on his premises who are generally exercising reasonable care for their own safety, but who may reasonably be expected to be distracted, * * *, or forgetful of the condition after having momentarily encountered it. If in fact the entrant was also guilty of negligence contributing to his injury, then that is a proper consideration under comparative negligence principles." (Coronel, 230 Ill.App.3d at 741, 171 Ill. Dec. at 922, 595 N.E.2d at 50, quoting Ward v. K-Mart Corp. (1990), 136 Ill.2d 132, 152, 143 Ill.Dec. 288, 297, 554 N.E.2d 223, 232 (emphasis added in Coronel).)
Here, the record indicated that plaintiff was engaged in a discussion about the game with his sister, which could be construed as momentary distraction or forgetfulness. The trial court may have determined, in its discretion, that this evidence warranted an instruction on plaintiff's duty to warn theory.
Defendant next contends that the trial court erroneously refused to instruct the jury that plaintiff was required to prove that the Cubs knew or should have known of the hazard which injured plaintiff. Defendant notes that such an instruction would conform with section 343 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts (1977), which is the law in Illinois. See Genaust v. Illinois Power Co. (1976), 62 Ill.2d 456, 343 N.E.2d 465.
The Cubs zealously maintained throughout this litigation that the hazard in this case was open and obvious. The suggestion that the Cubs may have been unaware of this hazard is somewhat ironic.
Even if it somehow were error to exclude a notice instruction, a reviewing court generally will not reverse on that basis unless the error clearly misled the jury and resulted in prejudice to the appellant. (Villa, 202 Ill.App.3d at 1088, 148 Ill.Dec. at 376, 560 N.E.2d at 973.) In this case, Cubs employee Rathje testified that in the 1982 season, there were 62 foul ball incidents, 10 of which occurred in the "area behind home plate," despite the presence of a screen in that area. Moreover, Rathje testified that the purpose of the screen was to protect spectators in the "area directly behind home plate." Thus, there appears to be no doubt that the Cubs were aware that some risk was involved. Furthermore, after undertaking the task of protecting spectators in "the most dangerous area of the ballpark," the Cubs were obliged to exercise reasonable care in that undertaking. (See Restatement (Second) of Torts, § 323 (1977).) Accordingly, the Cubs have failed to demonstrate that the jury was misled or that the Cubs were prejudiced by this omission.
Moreover, defendant's invocation of Genaust is unpersuasive. Genaust involved an injury caused by power lines that were neither on the defendant's property nor within the defendant's control and there was nothing to suggest that plaintiff would be momentarily distracted. Genaust is therefore distinguishable from this case, in which the hazard is incident to the activity engaged in upon property owned or occupied by defendant and evidence of distraction appears in the record. See Ward, 136 Ill.2d at 155-56, 143 Ill.Dec. at 299, 554 N.E.2d at 234.
Finally, the Cubs contend that the trial court erroneously gave an instruction allowing plaintiff to recover for future pain and suffering. The Cubs assert that there *583 was no competent medical testimony that the headaches plaintiff suffered were likely to continue into the future. However, plaintiff's testimony that his headaches were recurring at the time of trial was sufficient to support the instruction. Warp v. Whitmore (1970), 123 Ill.App.2d 157, 163, 260 N.E.2d 45, 48; Simpson v. Marks (1953), 349 Ill.App. 527, 532, 111 N.E.2d 370, 373; see Onion v. Chicago & Illinois Midland Ry. Co. (1989), 191 Ill. App.3d 318, 322, 138 Ill.Dec. 554, 557, 547 N.E.2d 721, 724. But see Young v. Hummel (1991), 216 Ill.App.3d 303, 309, 160 Ill.Dec. 118, 122, 576 N.E.2d 1072, 1076 (suggesting in dicta that lay testimony alone is insufficient).
For all of the aforementioned reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is affirmed.
Affirmed as modified.
O'CONNOR and MANNING, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  We note that a diagram reflecting these areas was published to the jury, but was not included in the record on appeal. We also note that only two of the photographs referred to in Mrs. Yates' testimony were included in the record on appeal.
[2]  An opinion in the Coronel case was initially filed on November 11, 1991. That opinion was the subject of plaintiff's motion for supplemental authority in this case, which was filed on January 10, 1992. On May 19, 1992, another opinion was filed in Coronel that reached the same conclusion as the first. The points in Coronel to which we refer herein appear in both opinions.

=== CASE 9739425 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:44.28963+00 ===

JUSTICE BILANDIC delivered the opinion of the court: This is an interlocutory appeal from an order entered in the circuit court of Ford County in two juvenile court proceedings. Each case involves a minor child who was the victim of physical and sexual abuse by a parent. The purpose of the juvenile court proceeding was to provide shelter and care for these victims of abuse. A guardian ad litem was appointed in each case to protect the rights of the juveniles. Not to be confused with this case are any issues that may deal with the prosecution of criminal or civil proceedings against the adult perpetrators of the alleged abuse against the juvenile victims. Prior to commencement of the hearing, the trial court would not permit the reporter from the Champaign News-Gazette to gain admission to (he proceedings without signing a pledge not to reveal the identity of the juvenile victims of abuse who were the subjects of the case. The reporter was admitted on the condition that the identity of the minors would not be revealed. The newspaper appealed. The appellate court held that the trial court order was in error to the extent that it prohibited the newspaper from reporting the names of the juveniles regardless of the source of its information. But the appellate court affirmed the trial court to the extent that it prohibited the newspaper from reporting the names of the juveniles, if the source of the identity was the attendance at the juvenile proceedings. (205 Ill. App. 3d 480.) We granted the newspaper’s petition for leave to appeal (134 Ill. 2d R. 315(a)). We are asked to decided whether, under the facts of this case, section 1 — 5(6) of the Juvenile Court Act grants the Champaign News-Gazette the authority to disclose the names of the minor victims. We are also asked to decide whether the order of the trial court proscribing the newspaper from disclosing the names of the minors, under the facts of this case, constitutes an unconstitutional prior restraint on the newspaper’s exercise of its right to freedom of the press guaranteed by the first and fourteenth amendments to the United States Constitution. PREFATORY STATEMENT At the outset, we must emphasize that this is not a case of a juvenile offender that perpetrated a wrong against an adult or another juvenile. Also, not to be confused with this case are issues that may deal with the prosecution of an alleged juvenile criminal offender as an adult. The State of Illinois has been a leader in creating a separate court system of justice for minors with a goal of rehabilitation rather than punishment. (1899 Ill. Laws 131.) This concept was followed by other States. However, the policy of rehabilitation is undergoing reevaluation. The alarming increase in juvenile involvement in major crimes has created a more vocal opposition to rehabilitation and a call for retribution and deterrence as an effective technique for controlling antisocial behavior. (Geraghty & Raphael, Reporter’s Privilege and Juvenile Anonymity: Two Confidentiality Policies on a Collision Course, 16 Loy. U. Chi. L.J. 43, 76 (1984).) It is argued that publicizing the names of juvenile offenders would deter the criminal activity by other juveniles and cause parents to place greater controls on the behavior of their children. In this case, we are not asked to choose between the merits of the conflicting philosophies of dealing with juvenile offenders. The most significant aspect of this case is that it does not involve juvenile offenders. It involves juvenile victims of child abuse by a parent. I The minor children in the case at bar came into the juvenile court system as “abused minor[s].” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 802—3(2).) They were the victims - of physical and sexual abuse by a parent. “In 1962, a prominent physician ominously predicted that the battered child syndrome ‘will be found to be a more frequent cause of death than ... well recognized and thoroughly studied [children’s] diseases.’ Tragically, that prediction has been confirmed. As of early 1973, child abuse was the most common cause of death among small children in the United States. The battered child syndrome has definitely reached epidemic proportions.” (Kelley, The Child Abuse Epidemic: Illinois’ Legislative Response and Some Further Suggestions, 1974 U. Ill. L.F. 403, 403.) Recently, a Chicago-based national television celebrity, accompanied by a former Illinois Governor, testified before a United States Senate committee about the increase in child abuse and child neglect cases and fatalities. (Chi. Trib., Nov. 12, 1991, §A, at 4.) The problem has not abated. The Champaign News-Gazette contends that it was lawfully admitted to the proceedings involving the minors by section 1—5(6) of the Juvenile Court Act, which provides in part: “The general public except for the news media and the victim shall be excluded from any hearing ***.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 801 — 5(6).) The newspaper contends that having gained access lawfully, it is free to report anything it heard or observed, without restraint, because of the right of the general populace to know what is transpiring in its courts. It is undisputed that the press serves as a conduit of information to the public and as a check on abuses of governmental power in the administration of justice. See Sheppard v. Maxwell (1966), 384 U.S. 333, 350, 16 L. Ed. 2d 600, 613, 86 S. Ct. 1507, 1515. The Champaign News-Gazette cites In re Jones (1970), 46 Ill. 2d 506, in support of its argument that it is free to report anything, that it hears or observes at the juvenile court proceedings. Its reliance on Jones is misplaced for a number of significant reasons. In Jones, there was no attempt by either party to prevent disclosure of the name of 16-year-old Kimmel Jones. Significantly, the case is entitled In re Kimmel Jones. In addition, Jones was charged with placing an explosive device in the mail box at the home of Everett Smith. In the case at bar, the minors are in the juvenile court system as victims of physical and sexual abuse by a parent, while Jones was in the system as a delinquent. At the time that Jones was decided by this court, section 1— 20(6) (now section 1 — 5(6)) read as follows: “ ‘The general public except the news media shall be excluded from any hearing and, except for persons specified in this Section, only persons, including representatives of agencies and associations, who in the opinion of the court have a direct interest in the case or in the work of the court shall be admitted to the hearing.’ ” Jones, 46 Ill. 2d at 509, quoting Ill. Rev. Stat. 1969, ch. 37, par. 701—20(6). In 1977, section 1 — 20(6) was amended and the following language added: “However, the court may, for the minor’s protection and for good cause shown, prohibit any person or agency present in court from further disclosing the minor’s identity.” (Pub. Act 80-813, eff. Sept. 20, 1977.) This court, in the case of In re A Minor, considered this section, as amended. The court held: “[T]hat part of *** the Juvenile Court Act which gives the court the power to proscribe the publication of a minor’s name in connection with a juvenile proceeding cannot be constitutionally applied where the publisher learns the identity of the minor not in a hearing closed to the public, but through routine, reportorial techniques, at least where a serious and imminent threat of harm to the minor’s well-being has not been demonstrated by substantial evidence. We express no opinion as to the question of the statute’s facial validity, or its application in other instances.” In re A Minor (1989), 127 Ill. 2d 247, 270. The case at bar can be distinguished from In re A Minor because the Champaign News-Gazette acknowledges that it did not know the identities of the minors and stood to gain knowledge of the minors’ identities solely through attending the juvenile court proceedings. Neither side has cited any authority which balances the role of the media as a check on abuses in the operation of the juvenile court system and a physically or sexually abused minor’s right to privacy, especially where the minor is in the system because he or she is a victim and not a delinquent. In the case at bar, the trial court considered the size of the community where the minors resided and would likely continue to reside. Public identity could adversely affect the two minors for the rest of their lives. The trial court concluded that the State’s interest in protecting the minors is a compelling reason for precluding the Champaign News-Gazette from revealing their identities. The Champaign News-Gazette has not made any argument that its role as a conduit of information to the public has been diminished because it cannot reveal the identity of the minors. This court and courts throughout this country in published opinions identify minors in juvenile proceedings by their initials, or first name and an initial, so that their anonymity may be preserved. The same policy would not diminish the role of the media. Likewise, the Champaign News-Gazette has not made any argument that its role as a check on abuses in the operation of the juvenile court system has been diminished because of its inability to reveal the names of these unfortunate juveniles. Life has not been fair to the two minors in the case at bar because they were brought into this world by a parent who physically and sexually abused them. The “Purpose and policy” of the Juvenile Court Act is stated in section 1 — 2, which provides in part: “(2) *** iphjg Act shall be administered in a spirit of humane concern, not only for the rights of the parties, but also for the fears and the limits of understanding of all who appear before the court. * * * (4) This Act shall be liberally construed to carry out the foregoing purpose and policy.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, pars. 801—2(2), (4).) We are not persuaded that the legislature intended that, under the facts of this case, the news media would be authorized to reveal the identities of the minor victims. We therefore conclude that section 1 — 5(6) of the Juvenile Court Act does not grant the Champaign News-Gazette the right to disclose the names of the juveniles obtained at the court hearing, under the facts of this case. II The Champaign News-Gazette contends that it is an unconstitutional prior restraint under the first amendment to the United States Constitution for the Illinois legislature to empower the courts with the authority to restrict the publication of information obtained at a juvenile court hearing. This argument is not persuasive. In the first instance, we note that the legislature has not authorized the court to restrict “information” obtained at the juvenile victims’ proceedings. The only information that the newspaper may not disclose is the identities of the minor victims. The Champaign News-Gazette’s reliance on In re A Minor (1989), 127 Ill. 2d 247, in support of its argument is misplaced. The most significant difference between A Minor and the case sub judice is that in In re A Minor, the juvenile was before the court in connection with a fatal shooting. Here, the juveniles are before the court as victims of physical and sexual abuse by a parent. Furthermore, in In re A Minor, the. publisher “learn[ed] the identity of the minor not in a hearing closed to the public, but through routine, reportorial techniques.” (In re A Minor, 127 Ill. 2d at 270.) In the case at bar, the Champaign News-Gazette did not obtain the identities of the minor victims through reportorial techniques. Nor were the minor victims’ identities in the public domain. The Champaign News-Gazette discovered the identities of the minor victims only through its presence at the closed juvenile proceedings concerning these minors. Therefore, the newspaper’s reliance on In re A Minor is inapposite. In the instant case, under section 1 — 5(6), “the court may, for the minor’s protection and for good cause shown, prohibit any person or agency present in court from further disclosing the minor’s identity.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 801—5(6).) In determining whether this section amounts to an unconstitutional prior restraint on the freedom of the press guaranteed by the first amendment, we note that prior restraints are not unconstitutional per se. (Southeastern Promotions, Ltd. v. Conrad (1975), 420 U.S. 546, 558, 43 L. Ed. 2d 448, 459, 95 S. Ct. 1239, 1246.) When confronted with a potentially unconstitutional prior restraint on first amendment rights, courts apply a test which balances the various interests at stake. (See Landmark Communications, Inc. v. Virginia (1978), 435 U.S. 829, 842-43, 56 L. Ed. 2d 1, 13, 98 S. Ct. 1535, 1543.) The court is required to: “make its own inquiry into the imminence and magnitude of the danger said to flow from the particular utterance and then to balance the character of the evil, as well as its likelihood, against the need for free and unfettered expression. The possibility that other measures will- serve the State’s interests should also be weighed.” Landmark Communications, Inc., 435 U.S. at 843, 56 L. Ed. 2d at 13, 98 S. Ct. at 1543. In the case at bar, the State has an interest in the nondisclosure of the minor victims’ identities in its role as parens patriae. It was in its role as parens patriae that the State initiated these juvenile proceedings to provide shelter and care for these abused children. The minor victims reside and will continue to reside in a small community. Public identity could cause continuing emotional trauma to these unfortunate children and impede the lengthy and difficult healing process which they must endure. We find that the danger of public disclosure and the probability of irreparable adverse effects which such disclosure would entail to be a compelling State interest at stake in this case. Coupled with the State’s interest in nondisclosure, we find that the minor victims themselves have a compelling interest at stake in this case. The Illinois Constitution guarantees its citizens a constitutional right to be free from governmental “invasions of privacy.” (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §6.) Article I, section 6, of the Illinois Constitution provides in part: “The people shall have the right to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and other possessions against unreasonable searches, seizures, invasions of privacy or interceptions of communications by eavesdropping devices or other means.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §6.) This constitutional right to be free from governmental invasions of privacy is supplemented by the constitutional right to a certain remedy for invasions or injuries to one’s privacy provided for in article I, section 12, of the Illinois Constitution of 1970. (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §12.) Article I, section 12, of the Illinois Constitution of 1970 provides in part: “Every person shall find a certain remedy in the laws for all injuries and wrongs which he receives to his person, privacy, property or reputation. He shall obtain justice by law, freely, completely, and promptly.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §12.) It is clear from the debates in the Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention that article I, section 12, was intended to protect an individual’s privacy from invasions or injuries caused by another nongovernmental individual or company. 3 Record of Proceedings, Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention 1531-32. The minor victims in this case have done nothing to limit or diminish their constitutional right to be free from governmental and nongovernmental invasions of their privacy. They are not juvenile delinquents. They are not participating in the juvenile proceedings begun on their behalf through their own free will. They were victims of abuse by a parent. They were thrust into the juvenile system by actions of third parties, not by their own actions. Under these facts, we find that the minor victims have a compelling interest in their right to be free from invasions of their privacy. Public disclosure of their identities would surely invade their right to privacy in a most egregious manner. Against the State’s and the minors’ compelling interests in nondisclosure, we must weigh the “character of the evil, as well as its likelihood, against the need for free and unfettered expression.” (Landmark Communication, Inc., 435 U.S. at 843, 56 L. Ed. 2d at 13, 98 S. Ct. at 1543.) Under the facts of this case, we find that there is no compelling need for free and unfettered disclosure of the minor victims’ identities. The Champaign News-Gazette was granted access to the juvenile court proceedings, which were closed to the public. It was free to report anything that it observed or heard, except the identity of the minors. As previously stated in this opinion, the Champaign News-Gazette was not deprived of the opportunity to exercise its constitutional right to inform the public about the operation of the juvenile court system. Under the facts of this case, prohibiting the newspaper from disclosing the minor victims’ identities in no way interferes with the newspaper’s constitutional role of acting as a conduit for the public in generating the free flow of ideas, keeping the public informed of the workings of governmental affairs, and checking abuses by public officials. The Champaign News-Gazette has not cited any case, and we are not aware of any, which grants it the constitutional right to publish the names of juvenile victims of physical and sexual abuse by a parent when that information is obtained by attending a juvenile court proceeding that is closed to the public. We therefore conclude that section 1 — 5(6) of the Juvenile Court Act is not unconstitutional under the facts of this case. III The dissent does' not recognize the significant fact that victims of child abuse should not be treated in the same manner as juvenile criminal offenders. The dissent does not cite a single case that authorizes the media to disclose the identity of a victim of child abuse when that information is obtained at a juvenile court proceeding that is closed to the public. Instead, the dissent relies primarily on Oklahoma Publishing Co. v. District Court (1977), 430 U.S. 308, 51 L. Ed. 2d 355, 97 S. Ct. 1045, and Smith v. Daily Mail Publishing Co. (1979), 443 U.S. 97, 61 L. Ed. 2d 399, 99 S. Ct. 2667. Both of those cases are distinguishable from the instant case. Oklahoma Publishing can be distinguished because it involved a juvenile offender and the proceeding was open to the public. In Oklahoma Publishing, a minor appeared at a detention hearing after being charged with murder. Eeporters were present at the hearing and learned the juvenile’s name. As the minor left the courtroom, his picture was taken by a newspaper photographer. Thereafter, a number of newspapers, radio stations and television stations published or broadcast the minor’s name and picture. Subsequently, a hearing was held at which the court entered an order prohibiting the news media from publishing, broadcasting or disseminating the name or picture of the minor. The United States Supreme Court held that the United States Constitution “will not permit a state court to prohibit the publication of widely disseminated information obtained at court proceedings which were in fact open to the public.” (Emphasis added.) (Oklahoma Publishing, 430 U.S. at 310, 51 L. Ed. 2d at 357, 97 S. Ct. at 1046.) In the case at bar, unlike in Oklahoma Publishing, the court proceedings were not open to the general public. The identities of the juveniles here were never “publicly revealed.” Additionally, the minors here were not charged with any crime; they were in court because they were the victims of abuse by a parent. Smith v. Daily Mail Publishing Co. (1979), 443 U.S. 97, 61 L. Ed. 2d 399, 99 S. Ct. 2667, is distinguishable because it involved a juvenile offender and the identity of the juvenile offender was obtained through routine reportorial techniques and not solely by attendance at closed juvenile proceedings. In Smith, the United States Supreme Court held that the media could not be punished for violating a State statute making it a crime to publish the name of a juvenile offender. The minor’s name was obtained in that case when reporters asked various witnesses to the crime, the police, and an assistant prosecuting attorney for his name. In the case at bar, the Champaign News-Gazette stood to gain knowledge of the juvenile victims’ identities solely through attendance at the juvenile court proceedings, which were closed to the general public. Finally, the dissent erroneously states: “Indeed, the United States Supreme Court has never upheld a prior restraint of information protected by the first amendment.” (149 Ill. 2d at 261-62.) In Seattle Times Co. v. Rhinehart (1984), 467 U.S. 20, 81 L. Ed. 2d 17, 104 S. Ct. 2199, the United States Supreme Court upheld a court order forbidding a newspaper from disseminating information obtained through pretrial discovery in a civil proceeding. The Court stated: “[EJven though the broad sweep of the First Amendment seems to prohibit all restraints on free expression, this Court has observed that ‘[fjreedom of speech *** does not comprehend the right to speak on any subject at any time.’ ” Seattle Times Co., 467 U.S. at 31, 81 L. Ed. 2d at 26, 104 S. Ct. at 2207, quoting American Communications Association v. Douds (1950), 339 U.S. 382, 394-95, 94 L. Ed. 925, 941, 70 S. Ct. 674, 682. More significantly, the dissent does not recognize that, under the facts of this case, the first amendment role of the media is not diminished by withholding the names of the juvenile victims. We therefore reaffirm our position that section 1 — 5(6) of the Juvenile Court Act is not unconstitutional under the facts of this case. Accordingly, the judgment of the appellate court is affirmed. Appellate court affirmed.

=== CASE 9739426 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:44.294405+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE MILLER, dissenting: Because I believe the constitutional guarantee of a free press prohibits the State from inviting journalists into a courtroom and simultaneously editing or censoring what they report about the proceedings, I respectfully dissent. Section 1 — 5(6) of the Juvenile Court Act provides that “[t]he general public except for the news media and the victim shall be excluded” from juvenile hearings. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 801—5(6).) It also provides, however, that the juvenile court may, “for the minor’s protection and for good cause shown, prohibit any person or agency present in court from further disclosing the minor’s identity.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 37, par. 801—5(6).) Thus, the Act unambiguously purports to grant judges the authority to prohibit the media from disclosing a minor’s identity, even when this information is revealed in proceedings statutorily open to media attendance. The only issue presented in this case, then, is whether the trial judge’s order prohibiting the newspaper from identifying the minor victims is an unconstitutional prior restraint on the freedom of the press. The majority correctly notes that prior restraints are not unconstitutional per se. (149 Ill. 2d at 254-55.) Nevertheless, such measures are the most serious and the least tolerable infringement on first amendment rights. (Nebraska Press Association v. Stuart (1976), 427 U.S. 539, 559, 49 L. Ed. 2d 683, 697-98, 96 S. Ct. 2791, 2802-03.) For this reason, any prior restraint bears a “heavy presumption” against its constitutional validity. Organization for a Better Austin v. Keefe (1971), 402 U.S. 415, 419, 29 L. Ed. 2d 1, 5, 91 S. Ct. 1575, 1578. In Oklahoma Publishing Co. v. District Court (1977), 430 U.S. 308, 51 L. Ed. 2d 355, 97 S. Ct. 1045, the Supreme Court held that a newspaper could not be enjoined from publishing the name or photograph of an 11-year-old offender after reporters gained the information by attending a juvenile proceeding. (See also Smith v. Daily Mail Publishing Co. (1979), 443 U.S. 97, 61 L. Ed. 2d 399, 99 S. Ct. 2667 (holding that a statute forbidding newspapers from publishing names of juvenile offenders without court approval violates the first amendment).) The Court also has found that States may not award civil damages for invasion of privacy against television stations and newspapers that publicize the names of rape victims obtained from public records. See The Florida Star v. B.J.F. (1989), 491 U.S. 524, 105 L. Ed. 2d 443, 109 S. Ct. 2603; Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn (1975), 420 U.S. 469, 43 L. Ed. 2d 328, 95 S. Ct. 1029. To prohibit or punish publication of truthful, lawfully obtained information, government must demonstrate that such action is necessary to further a State interest of the highest order. (Daily Mail, 443 U.S. at 104, 61 L. Ed. 2d at 405, 99 S. Ct. at 2671.) If, as the majority suggests, the privacy rights of juvenile victims of sexual abuse are greater than those of juvenile offenders and adult victims of sexual offenses, the difference in degree is not of constitutional proportion, particularly where a court presumes to tell the media what they may or may not publish in the first instance. Indeed, the United States Supreme Court has never upheld a prior restraint of information protected by the first amendment. The Court has only hypothesized that a restriction on the “publication of the sailing dates of transports or the number and location of troops” in time of war might be sufficient. (Near v. Minnesota ex rel. Olson (1931), 283 U.S. 697, 716, 75 L. Ed. 1357, 1367, 51 S. Ct. 625, 631.) Thus, while I share the majority’s concern for the privacy rights of minor victims, I do not believe the State’s interest in protecting these rights is of the magnitude necessary to sustain a prior restraint on publication. The majority cites Seattle Times Co. v. Rhinehart (1984), 467 U.S. 20, 81 L. Ed. 2d 17, 104 S. Ct. 2199, for the proposition that the Supreme Court has sanctioned a prior restraint of the press. That case, however, involved a protective order prohibiting a newspaper, as the defendant in a civil action for defamation and invasion of privacy, from publishing information it obtained through pretrial discovery. The Court observed that “an order prohibiting dissemination of discovered information before trial is not the kind of classic prior restraint that requires exacting First Amendment scrutiny.” (467 U.S. at 33, 81 L. Ed. 2d at 27, 104 S. Ct. at 2208.) The Court thus recognized that protective orders occupy a “unique” position in relation to the first amendment, and that court control over information obtained in discovery “does not raise the same specter of government censorship that such control might suggest in other situations.” (467 U.S. at 32, 81 L. Ed. 2d at 26-27, 104 S. Ct. at 2207.) Unlike Seattle Times, the case before us involves restraint of the publication of information lawfully obtained by the media in its capacity as a newsgathering organization. I believe this case is wrongly decided precisely because, as the majority notes, reporters for the News-Gazette obtained the minors’ names at a court hearing which they were allowed to attend. The State may not, consistent with the first amendment, prohibit the publication of information obtained at a court proceeding open to the media. (Oklahoma Publishing, 430 U.S. at 310, 51 L. Ed. 2d at 357, 97 S. Ct. at 1046.) Contrary to the majority’s assertion, I believe that information disclosed at a hearing open to the media is, by definition, “publicly revealed.” Once the media or general public are allowed to attend a judicial proceeding, even if they might have been properly excluded under State law, publication of information revealed there cannot be subject to prior restraint. (Nebraska Press, 427 U.S. at 568, 49 L. Ed. 2d at 703, 96 S. Ct. at 2807.) “Those who see and hear what transpired [in a courtroom] can report it with impunity. There is no special perquisite of the judiciary which enables it, as distinguished from other institutions of democratic government, to suppress, edit, or censor events which transpire in proceedings before it.” Craig v. Harney (1947), 331 U.S. 367, 374, 91 L. Ed. 1546, 1551, 67 S. Ct. 1249, 1254. In sum, the State cannot ask the media to secret facts it makes no effort to safeguard in the first place. (The Florida Star, 491 U.S. at 544, 105 L. Ed. 2d at 462, 109 S. Ct. at 2615 (White, J., dissenting).) “If there are privacy interests to be protected in judicial proceedings, the States must respond by means which avoid public documentation or other exposure of private information.” (Cox Broadcasting, 420 U.S. at 496, 43 L. Ed. 2d at 350, 95 S. Ct. at 1047.) Unlike criminal trials, which the media and the general public have a first amendment right to attend, juvenile proceedings historically have been closed to the public. (Daily Mail, 442 U.S. at 107-09, 61 L. Ed. 2d at 407-09, 99 S. Ct. at 2673-74 (Rehnquist, J., concurring).) If the legislature can constitutionally exclude the general public from juvenile hearings, which it has done in section 1 — 5(6), it may also exclude the media, for the media have no greater first amendment rights than the public at large. Estes v. Texas (1965), 381 U.S. 532, 540, 14 L. Ed. 2d 543, 549, 85 S. Ct. 1628, 1631; Houchins v. KQED, Inc. (1978), 438 U.S. 1, 16, 57 L. Ed. 2d 553, 565-66, 98 S. Ct. 2588, 2597 (Stewart, J., concurring). Publication of the names of minor victims of sexual abuse may be hurtful for the children and their families, and would be of little or no value to the public. The legislature, however, having granted the media a statutory right to attend juvenile hearings, cannot constitutionally establish a process by which information gathered at such proceedings is subject to prior restraint. That restraint must be left to the media. For these reasons, I would reverse the decision of the appellate court and hold that the juvenile court judge’s order prohibiting the newspaper from disclosing the identities of the minors involved in this case violates the first amendment. Accordingly, I dissent.

=== CASE 9739428 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:44.589507+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE GREIMAN delivered the opinion of the court: After a bench trial, defendant Billy Truly was found guilty of armed robbery of a grocery store and sentenced to 10 years in prison. In this appeal, defendant contends (1) he received ineffective assistance of counsel when his attorney failed to investigate, prepare and present defendant’s alibi to the crime; (2) his attorney failed to inform him that he was being counseled by a law student and failure to obtain defendant’s written consent for such counseling constituted per se ineffective assistance of counsel; and (3) the cumulative effect of the errors committed by his attorney deprived defendant of his right to effective assistance of counsel. We affirm the trial court's ruling that there was no per se violation for the failure to obtain defendant’s permission to be interviewed by a law student, but reverse in finding there was ineffective assistance of counsel for failure to investigate, prepare and present defendant’s alibi. At about 7 p.m. on December 28, 1987, two men, one of whom was later identified as defendant, entered George’s Foods on South Kedzie Street. Said Alharsha, the owner of the store, was present with his two brothers, Naser Alharsha and Ahmed Alharsha. Said Alharsha testified that defendant nodded to his accomplice, who then told Said that it was a stickup. The two men took money from the cash register, the wallets of the three brothers and ran out of the store. Said testified that he next saw defendant at about 11:30 a.m. on January 1, 1988, four days after the holdup. When defendant entered the store with two other men, Said pushed the silent alarm button. Defendant carried a golf club and said “Don’t worry about it, it’s not a stick-up.” Defendant told Said that he knew the store had been robbed and that if Said wanted to live and work in the neighborhood, he would have to pay him and the two men with him $50 per week. Said testified that he haggled over price with defendant until police arrived, then advised police that defendant committed the December 28 robbery and was now attempting to extort money from him. Both Said and his brother Naser testified that they knew defendant prior to the robbery, from the neighborhood. Officer Smith testified for the State that when he answered the silent alarm at George’s Foods on January 1, 1988, Said identified defendant as the person involved in the earlier robbery and who was now demanding protection money. After Smith arrested defendant and took him to the police station, defendant acknowledged to Smith that he was aware of the robbery and wanted the $50 as protection money to keep the store from being robbed again. After the trial court found defendant guilty of armed robbery, defendant filed an amended motion for new trial based upon incompetency of counsel. At that hearing, defendant testified that his trial counsel visited him only on the days he was to appear in court, and the visits lasted only 5 to 10 minutes. Defendant stated that he provided counsel with the names and addresses of four potential witnesses who could testify that during the time of the alleged robbery, defendant was recuperating from a gunshot wound and that the complainants had ulterior motives for identifying defendant as the culprit. Defendant claims he directed his counsel to subpoena these witnesses and Mt. Sinai Hospital records and personnel to establish that he had been hospitalized prior to the robbery and retained some physical incapacity at the time of the robbery. Defendant further testified that on the day of trial, he asked counsel to request a continuance because counsel had not subpoenaed any of the witnesses, his medical records, or his physical therapist. Counsel testified that either he, his partner or his law intern spoke to defendant whenever defendant’s case was before the court, a total of approximately 10 to 12 times before trial. He acknowledged that he and defendant discussed possible defense theories and trial strategy and admitted that three to four months before the trial, defendant had informed his law intern of the alleged alibi witnesses. Counsel had attempted, without success, to contact the witnesses by telephone and therefore contends he was not directly in a position to evaluate the potential value of these witnesses to the defense. No investigator from the public defender’s office was requested to attempt to contact the potential witnesses, nor were they subpoenaed. Counsel acknowledged that he assumed the witnesses would come forward on their own, and because of their failure to make themselves available, he was unable to prepare an alibi defense based upon their testimony. When asked if he was ready to proceed with the trial on the trial date, counsel responded that “the pleadings were completed and the case could have gone to trial. I don’t believe that Mr. Truly’s alleged witnesses were there that day.” While he testified that it was defendant’s decision to go to trial, he acknowledged that he had told defendant that he doubted he could get a continuance since he had earlier made a trial demand. Defendant’s counsel testified that he did remember defendant mentioning medical records, but thought that they concerned defendant’s health only at the time of the arrest, not at the time of the robbery, so he did not consider them relevant and did not obtain them. Henry Bynum, defendant’s stepfather, was one of the four defendant requested counsel subpoena for trial. Mr. Bynum testified at the post-trial hearing that on the day of the robbery, defendant left Bynum’s house at 7 p.m., the approximate time of the robbery, to run an errand for his mother, and did not return home until 9 p.m., and at that time, defendant did not walk without the aid of a cane, due to a recent gunshot wound. Lawrence Swift, defendant’s uncle and another of the four people defendant had requested be subpoenaed for trial, also appeared at the post-trial hearing. However, the substance of his testimony was ruled hearsay. Defendant’s post-trial counsel made an offer of proof that Mr. Swift would testify as to a conversation he had with Said that would reflect on Said’s motivation for retribution against defendant. The offer of proof indicated that Said was upset with defendant because he was dissatisfied with some radios and VCRs that defendant had sold him, believed defendant had cheated him and made a threat to even the score. Defendant’s other two alibi witnesses, at least one of whom was medical personnel who would testify as to defendant’s physical condition, did not testify at the hearing; Joyce Stevens was subpoenaed, but the fourth witness, Christine Matlid, could not be located. While defendant also subpoenaed Mt. Sinai Hospital for his medical records for the purpose of the hearing, those documents were not tendered, so the court had no chance to consider them in its ruling. The “benchmark” in determining whether there has been ineffective assistance of counsel is “whether counsel’s conduct so undermined the proper functioning of the adversarial process that the trial cannot be relied on as having produced a just result.” (Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 686, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 692-93, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 2064; People v. Davis (1990), 203 Ill. App. 3d 129, 139, 560 N.E.2d 1072; People v. Garza (1989), 180 Ill. App. 3d 263, 267, 535 N.E.2d 968.) A reviewing court does not evaluate matters of judgment, discretion or trial tactics. Davis, 203 Ill. App. 3d at 139.  The U.S. Supreme Court developed a fact-sensitive analysis in Strickland which seeks to measure “ ‘the quality and impact of counsel’s representation under the circumstances of the individual case.’ ” (Garza, 180 Ill. App. 3d at 268, quoting 2 W. LaFave & J. Israel, Criminal Procedure §11.10, at 28 (Supp. 1988).) A defendant must prove (1) that counsel’s representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness and the shortcomings of counsel were so severe as to deprive defendant of a fair trial, and (2) that there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceedings would have been different. (Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 693, 104 S. Ct. at 2064; People v. Albanese (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 504, 525, 473 N.E.2d 1246; People v. Gunartt (1991), 218 Ill. App. 3d 752, 761, 578 N.E.2d 1081; Garza, 180 Ill. App. 3d at 268.) A reasonable probability is “a probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome.” Davis, 203 Ill. App. 3d at 141; Garza, 180 Ill. App. 3d at 269. A reviewing court must evaluate the attorney’s performance from counsel’s perspective considering the circumstances at the time of trial, without the distorting effects of hindsight, and the defendant must overcome the strong presumption that the chailenged action might be considered sound trial strategy. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 689, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 694, 104 S. Ct. at 2065; Garza, 180 Ill. App. 3d at 269. Defendant first contends that his counsel failed to investigate and develop defendant’s alibi, thus resulting in ineffective assistance of counsel similar to the situations in People v. Garza (180 Ill. App. 3d 263, 535 N.E.2d 968) and People v. Solomon (1987), 158 Ill. App. 3d 432, 511 N.E.2d 875. These cases found that failure to adequately investigate and develop an available defense, or failure to present available witnesses who can corroborate a defense, may be ineffective assistance of counsel. Garza, 180 Ill. App. 3d at 269; Solomon, 158 Ill. App. 3d at 436. See also People v. Gunartt (1991), 218 Ill. App. 3d 752, 578 N.E.2d 1081; People v. O’Banner (1991), 215 Ill. App. 3d 778, 575 N.E.2d 1261; Davis, 203 Ill. App. 3d 129, 560 N.E.2d 1072. In Solomon, defendant’s counsel had raised an entrapment defense to the charge of unlawful delivery of a controlled substance, but failed to take reasonable steps to find the witness who could have proved the element of improper inducement. The Solomon court found assistance of counsel was ineffective where defense counsel improperly introduced the entrapment defense without the witness and failed to secure chemical analysis of the controlled substance which was the subject matter of the case. Solomon, 158 Ill. App. 3d at 436-37. In Garza, the appellate court held there was ineffective assistance of counsel where the evidence was very closely balanced and defense counsel failed to elicit the discrepancies and inconsistencies in the testimony of the State’s sole eyewitness who linked the defendant to the crime. The court concluded there was a reasonable probability that the level of performance by defendant’s counsel influenced the result of the proceedings. Garza, 180 Ill. App. 3d at 269. Moreover, in Garza, defense counsel failed to offer in evidence two photographs that might have cast doubt upon the witness’ ability to identify defendant. While the State argued on appeal that this was merely a tactical decision by defense counsel, the appellate court reasoned that since counsel had failed to obtain the photos and, in fact, never saw them, he could not have made an informed tactical decision one way or the other. Garza, 180 Ill. App. 3d at 269.  We apply the same reasoning to the case at bar. Counsel testified that he would not include any witnesses in the proceedings if he did not have contact with them or know what their testimony would be. While the State here argues that it was a matter of trial strategy whether to require appearance of the four witnesses, we find, as the Garza court found, that counsel could not have made a strategic decision since he admitted that he had made no contact with the witnesses and did not know what the content of their testimony might be. Traditionally, courts have not reviewed an attorney’s choices when made on the basis of strategic considerations. However, these strategic decisions may be made only after there has been a “thorough investigation of all matters relevant to plausible options.” (Strickland, 466 U.S. at 690, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 695, 104 S. Ct. at 2066; People v. Whittaker (1990), 199 Ill. App. 3d 621, 628-29, 557 N.E.2d 468.) We find that defendant here apprised his attorney on several occasions of what appears to be a plausible option: an alibi coupled with a physical incapacity. Defendant repeatedly told his defense counsel that the testimony of the four witnesses would reveal (1) his whereabouts at the time of the robbery, 33 blocks away from the complaining witnesses’ store; (2) that defendant was physically handicapped, walking with a cane at the time of the robbery, and not likely to have run out of the store as complainants testified; and (3) that the complainants had a revenge motive in identifying defendant as one of the robbers. Counsel testified that he thought these potential corroborating witnesses would come forward on their own, and when they did not, the record establishes that he made no reasonable attempt to contact them. When his initial phone calls could not raise the witnesses, he failed to subpoena these witnesses or request that an investigator from the public defender’s office find them. The situation in this case differs from a situation in which an attorney’s decision whether to call a witness to testify may be considered strategic. (See People v. Flores (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 66, 85-86, 538 N.E.2d 481.) Here, counsel’s decision could not be considered strategic since he failed to investigate all matters relevant to the plausible defenses of alibi, incapacity and revenge that defendant proffered to him. Strickland, 466 U.S. at 690, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 695, 104 S. Ct. at 2066. This court has previously noted that representation involves more than the courtroom conduct of counsel: “ ‘The exercise of the utmost skill during trial is not enough if counsel has neglected the necessary investigation and preparation of the case or failed to interview essential witnesses or to arrange for their attendance. Such omissions, of course, will rarely be visible on the surface of the trial, and to that extent the impression of the trial judge [or reviewing judge] regarding the skill and ability of counsel will be incomplete.’ ” Davis, 203 Ill. App. 3d at 141, quoting Moore v. United States (3d Cir. 1970), 432 F.2d 730, 739. We find from the record that counsel was derelict in his duties in that he or his assistants never made a reasonable attempt to locate or subpoena the four potential witnesses, witnesses who defendant repeatedly told counsel could corroborate his defense theories, witnesses whose names and addresses were provided to counsel by defendant. This dereliction amounts to ineffective assistance of counsel because we find that counsel’s errors fall below an objective standard of reasonableness and that there is at least a reasonable probability that but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceedings would have been different. Further, we find the evidence against defendant'to be closely balanced.  The State’s evidence is grounded in the testimony of Said and Naser Alharsha, who both stated that they knew defendant prior to the robbery and that they recognized him during the robbery. However, defense counsel failed to investigate and develop defendant’s plausible theory that the brothers’ identification of him was fabricated out of a desire for revenge for past business dealings with defendant. Defendant informed his counsel that he had a witness, Lawrence Swift, who could testify to this theory on his behalf. The revenge theory, coupled with defendant’s proffered alibi that he was physically and geographically unable to commit the robbery, forms a plausible defense theory for which defendant offered four witnesses. Because defense counsel failed to put forward defendant’s plausible alibi, to which the revenge theory was integral, we cannot say that the testimony of the Alharsha brothers carries such weight so as to provide a rational trier of fact proof of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt if the other evidence had been offered. While the trial court heard testimony from two of defendant’s potential witnesses at the hearing for new trial, the other two witnesses and the hospital records were not available to defendant at that time. The trial court stated that the testimony of the two witnesses did not persuade it to grant the motion, but we find that their testimony demonstrates that defendant was in fact prejudiced by his counsel’s failure to secure witnesses and adequately investigate defense theories. Consideration of the testimony of these witnesses at a post-trial hearing is in a different context than it would have been had it been offered during the course of the trial rather than subsequent to the trier of fact determining defendant’s guilt. In People v. Perez (1992), 148 Ill. 2d 168, in a death penalty post-conviction hearing, defense counsel was found ineffective when he failed to pursue or send a court-appointed investigator to pursue mitigating information and witnesses supplied by defendant. While we recognize that Perez concerns a death penalty hearing, the situation in the present case is similar in that defendant supplied counsel with specific information that was potentially exonerating. The present case is possibly more egregious since counsel knew of the information approximately four months before trial, rather than only a few days as was the situation in Perez. Also, counsel here, as in Perez, failed to ask for a continuance to investigate the proffered evidence, even though defendant here requested he do so. The Perez court stated that had the jury heard the evidence which had not been made available to it, there is a probability that it would have concluded that the balance of factors did not warrant death. Similarly we must conclude that there might have been a reasonable doubt as to defendant’s guilt had the trier of fact heard the witnesses defense counsel failed to locate.  We further find the record establishes that defense counsel failed to obtain, or attempt to obtain, defendant’s written consent to allow a law student to help prepare defendant’s case, as is required pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 711, and that counsel did not believe such consent was necessary where no court appearance was involved. However, that failure to obtain written consent is not per se ineffective assistance of counsel. While we agree that the constitutional rights of a defendant may not be compromised, we do not find that defendant’s rights have been put at such risk in this case by the failure to obtain written consent. As noted above, judicial review regarding ineffective assistance of counsel is performed on a case-by-case basis in an attempt to comprehend counsel’s perception and integration of the combination of facts, circumstances and law unique to that case. The situation in one case may not easily be analogized to the situation in another. To hold that an attorney’s failure to obtain defendant’s written consent is per se ineffective assistance of counsel would handicap and restrict judicial review of such violations in other cases where ineffective assistance of counsel is alleged. Defendant cites two cases involving the representation of defendants by law students in proceedings before a judge. (People v. Schlaiss (1988), 174 Ill. App. 3d 78, 528 N.E.2d 334; In re Moore (1978), 63 Ill. App. 3d 899, 380 N.E.2d 917.) However, we do not find those cases apply to the present situation. In Schlaiss, the court found that defendant was denied his sixth amendment right to counsel because he was not aware that the person representing him in his trial was not a licensed attorney, and he had not given consent to be represented by a law student. The defendant in Moore appeared pro se in a hearing in which the State charged that defendant required mental treatment. The appellate court found that defendant was not informed that the legal advisor that he had chosen, a law student, was not a licensed attorney, so had not given proper consent. We agree with defendant that he should receive zealous representation by his attorney at each stage of the trial process. A defendant is entitled to competent representation out of court as well as in court, as we have clearly set forth here in our discussion regarding counsel’s assessment of defendant’s four potential witnesses. But this case cannot support a charge of ineffective assistance of counsel based upon counsel’s failure to obtain defendant’s consent allowing a Rule 711 law student to participate in the preparation of his case. Defendant raises additional instances of his counsel’s actions or omissions at trial that he contends cumulatively amount to ineffective assistance of counsel: (1) failure to file a motion in limine objecting to any reference to defendant’s alleged crime at the store on January 1, 1988; (2) failure to object to hearsay testimony of complainant as to the armed robbery and defendant’s alleged attempt at extortion; (3) failure to object to the hearsay testimony of the arresting officer as to the armed robbery and extortion; (4) counsel’s introduction into evidence of the police report; and (5) counsel’s statement in closing argument that defendant had tried to extort money from the Alharshas.  We cannot say that these enumerated actions or omissions, even taken cumulatively, amount to ineffective assistance of counsel since they appear to be within the generally protected category of strategic trial decisions. However, we have indicated that defendant’s trial counsel failed to make a reasonable attempt to contact witnesses and submit hospital records that might have provided corroborative evidence to a valid defense theory benefitting defendant. Such failure amounts to ineffective assistance of counsel since we find that the omissions so undermine the proper functioning of the adversarial process that we cannot rely upon the trial as having produced a just result. Accordingly, we reverse the judgment of the circuit court and grant defendant a new trial. Reversed. CERDA, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739429 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:44.594021+00 ===

JUSTICE TULLY, concurring in part and dissenting in part: I agree that defense counsel’s failure to obtain written permission to allow a law student acting under the authority of Supreme Court Rule 711 (c)(1) (134 Ill. 2d R. 711 (c)(1)) to assist defense counsel is not a per se violation of the defendant’s right to effective assistance of counsel for the reasons articulated in the opinion. However, I must respectfully dissent with my colleagues that defendant was rendered ineffective assistance by his counsel which resulted in an unjust trial. The foundation of my concurrence on this issue is the rule of law established in Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 688, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 104 S. Ct. 2052. Strickland issued a double-pronged mandate that counsel’s behavior must fall below an objective standard of reasonableness and counsel’s behavior must fall to a level of deficiency such that the eventual outcome of the trial would have been different but for counsel’s actions. (466 U.S. at 687, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 693, 104 S. Ct. at 2064.) Both prongs of the Strickland mandate must be met to reach a conclusion of unreliable trial results. I am of the opinion that defense counsel’s actions, viewed in the totality of circumstances surrounding the case, did not meet the criteria established in Strickland. The defendant argues that a subpoena of certain hospital records would have validated his claim that he was incapacitated at the time the robbery occurred. Yet, defendant admitted to Officer Smith that two days after his period of “incapacitation” he freely walked into the site of the robbery and demanded protection money. What, in effect, would the hospital records have established? Could the hospital records have conclusively established the condition of the patient at the time of the robbery or would they have established the defendant’s condition during the time he was under hospital supervision for his wound? Even assuming arguendo that defendant needed the assistance of a cane to ambulate, the golf club which he carried on the day he entered the robbery site to demand extortion money could have served this function. Thus, defense counsel’s claim that the defendant’s medical records were not relevant and had no bearing on the case is entirely credible and falls within the scope of counsel’s trial strategy. Defendant’s argument that his counsel’s failure to interview witnesses who could have established his alibi to the crime also fails to meet the criteria set forth in Strickland. (466 U.S. at 687, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 693, 104 S. Ct. at 2064.) Defense counsel did not simply ignore defendant’s request to contact certain witnesses. Counsel made the effort to contact the requested witnesses but was unsuccessful. Counsel discussed trial strategy with the defendant. It was only after the defendant made the decision to go to trial without the benefit of the information the witnesses could or could not have provided that counsel proceeded. The defendant did not request counsel to ask for a continuance to pursue the location of the witnesses. Therefore, defense counsel cannot be said to have failed to investigate or act upon his client’s information but rather counsel clearly proceeded with a trial strategy that was implicitly sanctioned by the defendant. Accordingly, no finding of unreliability in the trial process has been substantiated due to the actions of defendant’s counsel.

=== CASE 2219740 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:20.045521+00 ===

595 N.E.2d 645 (1992)
230 Ill. App.3d 164
172 Ill.Dec. 284
Roger J. SMITH and Trisha Weger, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
Harold A. DUNCAN and Helen Duncan, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 5-91-0377.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
June 22, 1992.
*646 Barry Schaefer, Newton, for plaintiffsappellants.
Max L. Tedford, Cox, Phillips, Weber, Tedford & Heap, P.C., Robinson, for defendants-appellees.
Justice HARRISON delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiffs, Roger J. Smith and Trisha Weger, the operators of an oil and gas lease upon land in Crawford County owned by defendants, Harold A. Duncan and Helen Duncan, filed suit to enjoin defendants from interfering with their operation of the leasehold. Defendants counterclaimed, attempting to cancel plaintiffs' lease on the ground that it terminated due to non-production. Following a hearing on the complaint and countercomplaint, the circuit court held in favor of defendants on the countercomplaint, canceling the oil and gas lease, and denied plaintiffs' complaint for injunction. Plaintiffs appeal only that portion of the circuit court's order granting defendants' countercomplaint.
Defendants executed an oil and gas lease to plaintiffs on October 23, 1987, which provided for a one-year primary term and for a secondary term which would continue "as long thereafter" as oil or gas was produced from said land by the lessee. Plaintiffs' last shipment of oil during the primary term occurred September 8, 1988. Plaintiffs shipped only one tank of oil during 1989, that occurring on October 11, after which date no oil was shipped prior to plaintiffs' filing suit on July 3, 1990.
The leading case in Illinois on the termination of an oil and gas lease under its "thereafter" or habendum clause is Gillespie v. Wagoner (1963), 28 Ill.2d 217, 190 N.E.2d 765. There, as in the case at bar, the basic question presented was whether cessation of production after the expiration of the primary term terminated the lease. The Illinois Supreme Court in Gillespie reasoned as follows:
"The general rule has been stated in the following language: `If the lessee by producing oil or gas within or at the end of the definite term, has satisfied the contingency upon which the lease is to continue beyond that term, it is the plain intent of the "thereafter" clause that the lease shall continue as long as oil or gas continues to be produced in paying quantities. From this it is clearly inferred that if production ceases the lease is at an end, although a temporary cessation of production does not terminate the lease under this limitation.' 2 Summers, Oil and Gas, sec. 305.
* * * * * *
We believe the proper rule to be that temporary cessation of production after the expiration of the primary term is not a cessation of production within the contemplation and meaning of the `thereafter' clause if, in the light of all surrounding circumstances, reasonable diligence is being exercised by the lessee to continue production of oil or gas under the lease." (28 Ill.2d at 219-20, 190 N.E.2d at 766-67.)
The record reflects that the circuit court granted defendants' countercomplaint to cancel the lease "due to cessation of production and lack of diligence * * *." The issue on review, therefore, is whether this finding was against the manifest weight of the evidence. See Cosmopolitan National Bank v. County of Cook (1984), 103 Ill.2d 302, 318, 82 Ill.Dec. 649, 657, 469 N.E.2d 183, 191.
*647 Plaintiff Roger Smith testified at the hearing that after some initial trouble with the motor on the well had been fixed in 1988, the motor ran well for the rest of the year. After the last shipment of oil in September 1988, plaintiffs next attempted to resume production toward the end of April 1989, as Smith stated, "[i]n the spring as soon as the road was unposted and the road dried, and we could get into Mr. Duncan's barnyard and load the trucks * * *." Smith stated that defendants had requested he not enter the property during the winter when the roads were wet. Smith further testified that he was told "not to put a rock road in because it would bother the cattle's feet and I tried to get along, and I didn't try to build a road into it."
Smith stated that he had shipped oil only once in 1989 because "we had a lot of trouble with the motor." Smith further testified:
"Every time we'd go in and get it [the motor] running and start trying to pump the water on the well down, you know it takes a few days to pump the water down on the well. Well, we'd have trouble. Someone would shut the motor on the well off. Then we'd start all over. We'd come back and start it up the next time and then try to keep it running. We had great difficulty in trying to keep it running a day or two at a time. Someone would keep shutting the gas lines off on it."
Throughout the rest of 1989, Smith tried to pump out the water and start the well in production but, "every couple of days someone would bother the motor and shut it off." Smith explained:
"It takes two or three days to get the water pumped down on the well before it starts making oil, and if you loseif you pump it for two or three days, and if you shut that down and lose that, you have to start that two or three day period over. We were just bothered all that year, and it took that long to accumulate that tank of oil."
Smith testified that he encountered similar problems in 1990: "They unposted the roads at the end of April when the spring rains dry [sic] up the road enough to get in on the ground with the truck, and I tried to operate it. And the same thingsomeone bothered the motor just regularly." Smith testified that sometime in August 1990, he had just overhauled the motor and made it operational, but that when he next returned, the gate was padlocked and defendant Harold Duncan told him that he was not going to let Smith on the leasehold again. Smith stated that he then told Duncan, "Well, we figured someone had been shutting the gas off to the motor, the trouble we had been having," and that Duncan said, "Yeah, if you start it again, you won't run it, I won't let you." Smith admitted that he had never seen Duncan shut the motor off.
One of plaintiffs' employees, Richard Walters, testified that he had helped Smith overhaul the motor. Walters testified that when they returned the next day, they could see from the road that the motor on the well was off and when they approached the gate, it was padlocked. Walters testified that Smith asked Duncan if he had been the one shutting the motor off, and Duncan replied, "Yes, I've been shutting it off, what about it?" Smith then replied, "Yes, I guess I'll have to see you in court." Todd Smith, plaintiff's son, and several employees of Bi-Petro Oil testified to having been harassed by Duncan while servicing the well on various occasions in 1988 and 1989.
Defendant Harold Duncan denied that he had ever interfered with plaintiffs' motor prior to 1990. Duncan admitted that in 1990 he shut the motor off and locked the gate, denying plaintiffs' access to the property. Defendant Helen Duncan, Harold Duncan's wife, testified that although she and her husband had run electric lines to the lease during its primary term so that plaintiffs could install an electric motor, plaintiffs had never done so. Mrs. Duncan further testified that from October 1988 to October 1989, she had not seen plaintiffs on her property.
Plaintiffs argue that the record in this case shows reasonable diligence in their operation of the lease, even though only one tank of oil was shipped after the primary term expired. Plaintiffs contend that the failure to produce commercial quantities of oil was beyond their control, where *648 the uncontroverted evidence showed that they suffered continual problems with the well machinery. We agree.
In Kerr v. Hillenberg (Okla.1962), 373 P.2d 66, the Oklahoma Supreme Court held that an oil and gas lease did not terminate where production ceased for 12 months due to the fact that the engine providing power for the operation of the wells broke down and lessee made persistent good faith efforts to obtain the parts necessary for repair. Similarly here, plaintiffs made repeated efforts throughout 1989 and 1990 to keep the motor on the well running so that production could continue. Additionally, neither plaintiffs' acquiescence to defendants' request that a rock road not be built nor any failure to install an electric motor on the well can be said to prove lack of diligence without evidence that such "improvements" were feasible or practical. See Feland v. Placid Oil Co. (N.D.1969), 171 N.W.2d 829 (after oil well was shut down following filling of salt water disposal pit, operator-lessee's failure to construct a second pit did not amount to a violation of its obligation to use reasonable diligence and act in good faith where other circumstances made construction of additional pit unprofitable).
We believe that the record herein amply demonstrates that there was a temporary cessation of oil production and the lease did not terminate. Rather, "in the light of all surrounding circumstances," reasonable diligence was exercised by plaintiffs to continue production under the lease, (Gillespie, 28 Ill.2d at 220, 190 N.E.2d at 767.) We therefore hold that the findings of the trial court and conclusions of law based thereon are not sustained by the evidence or the law. Consequently, the judgment of the circuit court granting defendants' counterclaim and cancelling plaintiffs' lease is reversed.
Reversed.
GOLDENHERSH, P.J., and RARICK, J., concur.

=== CASE 9739430 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:45.892331+00 ===

Liacos, C.J.
The plaintiffs, Gordon S. and Jean B. Russell, challenge the dismissal of their appeal from a judgment of the District Court. The underlying case arose from the grant of a special permit by the board of appeals of Truro (board)2 to the defendant McOwen-Hanelt. Before us is only the procedural issue whether the dismissal of the appeal was proper; the merits of the underlying zoning dispute are not before us. We transferred the case to this court on our own motion, to emphasize once again an appellant’s responsibilities for providing transcripts of lower court proceedings that were recorded electronically. We affirm. Since we have determined the issue at hand to require judicial determination, we deny the motion for damages and costs filed by the defendant McOwen-Hanelt under Mass. R. A. P. 25, as amended, 378 Mass. 925 (1979).
1. Procedural history. The plaintiffs filed a complaint in the District Court on June 21, 1989, seeking de novo review of a decision by the board to grant McOwen-Hanelt a special permit for the use of her land. A trial was conducted, the proceedings of which were recorded electronically. On August 8, 1990, judgment was entered in favor of the defendant.
The plaintiffs filed a timely notice of appeal from the judgment on August 27, 1990. In accordance with Mass. R. A. P. 8 (b) (3) (ii), as amended, 388 Mass. 1106 (1983),3 the plaintiffs also submitted a request to the clerk of the lower *108court for a cassette copy of the electronic recording of the trial proceedings.4 As later found by a judge of the District Court, the cassette became available during the week of September 17, 1990, and the clerk’s office so notified the plaintiffs’ counsel. The plaintiffs deny receipt of that notice. On October 22, 1990, the defendant filed a motion to dismiss the appeal, pursuant to Mass. R. A. P. 10 (c), as amended, 378 Mass. 937 (1979),5 arguing that the plaintiffs had failed to comply with Mass. R. A. P. 9 (c) (2), as amended, 378 Mass. 935 (1979),6 which requires appellants within forty days of filing an appeal7 either to submit a transcript to the clerk of the lower court or to certify that the transcript is *109being prepared. A judge of the District Court held a hearing on this motion on October 29, 1990. Between the filing of the motion and the holding of the hearing, the plaintiffs filed an opposition to the motion; they also filed a new request for the cassette, and they received the cassette during this time period. On the basis of affidavits filed by both parties, the motion to dismiss was granted on November 5, 1990. The plaintiffs nevertheless continued to prepare a transcript, and they filed a motion for reconsideration as well as a motion requesting an evidentiary hearing. On April 1, 1991, the motion for reconsideration was denied.
2. Dismissal of appeal pursuant to rule 10 (c). “The test to determine whether the judge was warranted in dismissing the plaintiff’s appeal is whether he abused his discretion.” McCarthy v. O’Connor, 398 Mass. 193, 196 (1986). Represented by additional counsel, the plaintiffs argue (1) that they did comply with rule 9 (c); (2) that they cured any defect before the hearing on the motion to dismiss; and (3) that any procedural missteps were the product of excusable neglect. The record does not support these arguments.
a. Compliance with rule 9 (cj. The judge found that the plaintiffs did not comply with rule 9 (c) (2). Rule 9 (c) (2) requires an appellant in a civil case to take one of two actions within forty days of filing of a notice of appeal: (1) deliver a transcript of the lower court proceedings to the clerk; or (2) file a signed statement certifying that the transcript has been ordered “from the court reporter.” In cases where the proceedings have been electronically recorded, there is of course no court reporter. As a result, the plaintiffs argue, the requirement of notifying the clerk that the transcript has been ordered from the court reporter translates into a requirement of notifying the clerk that the cassette has been requested (which the plaintiffs claim they did). This argument is incorrect. In a case where trial proceedings have been electronically recorded, rule 9 (c) (2) “require [s] the [appellant] to deliver either a transcript or a signed statement certifying that the tapes [are] being transcribed, to the clerk or register’s office, [no later than] forty days after [the] *110appeal was filed.” Hawkins v. Hawkins, 397 Mass. 401, 406 (1986). See McCarthy, supra at 198 (in case where proceedings were electronically recorded, plaintiff could not argue that “she delivered a transcript to the [clerk] within forty days after she filed her notice of appeal, or that within that period she delivered to the [clerk] a signed certification that she had ordered a transcript”). The plaintiffs did not certify within forty days that the cassette was being transcribed, nor did they submit the transcript. They did not comply with rule 9 (c).
Under rule 10 (c), failure to comply with rule 9 (c) is a ground for dismissal; however, the judge may not dismiss the case if the appellant cures the defect before the hearing on the motion to dismiss or if the defect was due to excusable neglect.
b. Failure to cure defect. Prior to the hearing on the motion to dismiss, the plaintiffs neither filed the transcript with the clerk nor filed a signed statement certifying that the transcript had been ordered. Therefore, they did not cure their defect within the time allowed by rule 10 (c).8
c. Inexcusable neglect. The judge found that the plaintiffs’ failure to comply with rule 9 (c) (2) was due to “inexcusable neglect.” The plaintiffs challenge this finding, arguing in essence that their neglect was due to the failure on the part of the clerk of court to provide them with the cassette on request. “We have said that an appeal should not be dismissed for failure to follow the rules of appellate procedure if the error' was not attributable to the appellant.” Hawkins, supra at 408.
We begin with the finding of the judge that the assistant clerk did notify the plaintiffs’ counsel’s office of the availabil*111ity of the tape. The plaintiffs contest this finding and argue that the judge should have conducted an evidentiary hearing rather than rely on the affidavits filed. The judge did not abuse his discretion by relying on the affidavits. The plaintiffs requested an evidentiary hearing only after the judge granted the motion to dismiss, so that issue is not properly raised. There was no clear error in the judge’s finding. See Tammaro v. Colarusso, 11 Mass. App. Ct. 44, 47 (1980). We note that rule 8 (b) (3) (ii) places a responsibility on the clerk to provide the cassette promptly to the appellant. While it might be preferable for the clerk to provide written notice on a standard form, or to make a docket entry that notice has been given, even if we assume that the clerk’s office somehow had breached its duty properly to notify the plaintiffs of the cassette’s availability, the plaintiffs’ neglect would not be excusable. Rule 9 states that its provisions apply regardless of the provisions of other rules. We have repeatedly said that the burden of pursuing an appeal falls on the appellant. As the end of the forty-day period following the filing of an appeal approaches, the appellant has a responsibility to take action designed to have a transcript available. Of course, if the appellant is unable to obtain the cassette from the clerk, any neglect may be excusable, but in this case, the judge found that the cassette was available within the forty-day period and that counsel was so notified.
We conclude by noting that we could reinstate this appeal despite the fact that there was no error below. See Mass. R. A. P. 3 (a), as amended, 378 Mass. 927 (1979). However, as the defendant has been prejudiced by her inability to use her land, as the plaintiffs did not cure their mistakes before the hearing or even begin to provide for a transcription, and as the plaintiffs have provided far too little information for us to determine whether there is any merit to their claim, we shall not invoke our equitable powers. See Hawkins, supra at 409.
3. Damages. The defendant requests damages under Mass. R. A. P. 25, arguing that the appeal was frivolous. We took the case on our motion believing that the procedural issue *112warranted our attention. In this circumstance we cannot say fairly that the issue was frivolous. The motion is denied.
4. Conclusion. The allowance of the motion to dismiss the appeal is affirmed. The defendant’s motion for damages and costs is denied.
So ordered.
The board of appeals of Truro is not a party to the appeal. However, the board sought to join in the defendant’s brief. See Mass. R. A. P. 16 (j), 365 Mass. 860 (1974).
Rule 8 (b) details the procedures by which a transcript of trial proceedings is made available for inclusion in the record on appeal. Rule 8 (b) (3) (ii) & (iii) lists the responsibilities of the appellant and of the clerk in cases where the proceedings were recorded electronically rather than by an official court reporter. Simply put, the rule requires that the appellant obtain a copy of the recording from the clerk, designate the .portions for transcription (providing the appellee an opportunity for counterdesignation) and then arrange for the relevant portions of the recording to be transcribed.
Rule 8 (b) (3) (ii) refers to this copy simply as “the cassette.” We shall do the same.
Rule 10 (c) of the Massachusetts Rules of Appellate Procedure, as amended, 378 Mass. 937 (1979), reads as follows:
“Dismissal for Failure of Appellant in a Civil Case to Comply With Rule 9 (c) or Rule 10 (a). If any appellant in a civil case shall fail to comply with rule 9 (c) or rule 10 (a) (1) or (3), the lower court may, on motion with notice by any appellee, dismiss the appeal, but only upon a finding of inexcusable neglect; otherwise, the court shall enlarge the appellant’s time for taking the required action. If, prior to the lower court’s hearing such motion, the appellant shall have cured the noncompliance, the appellant’s compliance shall be deemed timely.”
Rule 9 (c) of the Massachusetts Rules of Appellate Procedure, as amended, 378 Mass. 935 (1979), reads in pertinent part as follows:
“(c) Appellant’s Obligation.
“(1) In General. In a civil or criminal case, upon request by the clerk of the lower court, the appellant shall forthwith perform any act reasonably necessary to enable the clerk to assemble the record and the clerk shall assemble a single record.”
“(2) Civil Cases. Notwithstanding any other obligation which these rules may impose, each appellant in a civil case shall, within forty days after filing a notice of appeal, deliver to the clerk of the lower court either (i) a transcript of those portions of the transcript of the lower court proceedings which the appellant deems necessary for determination of the appeal, or (ii) a signed statement certifying that the appellant has ordered such portions from the court reporter. Upon receiving the transcript, the appellant in a civil case shall forthwith deliver it to the clerk of the lower court.”
In this case, the forty days provided in rule 9 (c) (2) expired on October 6. 1990.
Citing Springfield Young Women’s Christian Ass’n v. Evers, 30 Mass. App. Ct. 921 (1991), the plaintiffs argue that they did cure their error prior to the hearing on their motion to reconsider, and therefore that their compliance with the rule should be deemed timely. In the cited case, however, the motion to reconsider was granted, thereby “vitiatfing] the original order of dismissal.” Id. at 922. In the instant case, the motion for reconsideration was denied, leaving the original dismissal intact.

=== CASE 9739431 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:45.89793+00 ===

O’Connor, J.
(dissenting, with whom Wilkins and Greaney, JJ., join). The Massachusetts Rules of Civil Procedure, effective July 1, 1974, and the Massachusetts Rules of Appellate Procedure, also effective July 1, 1974, were designed to clarify and simplify preexisting procedures and thereby eliminate traps to which numerous litigants had fallen prey in earlier times, causing them to lose significant rights. Today, in my view, the court returns to the spirit, if not the letter, of those earlier days by affirming the dismissal of the plaintiffs’ underlying appeal based on an alleged violation of Mass. R. A. P. 9 (c) (2), as amended, 378 Mass. 935 (1979). That rule neither expressly nor impliedly gives the slightest hint that it applies to electronically recorded proceedings, and Mass. R. A. P. 8 (b) (3) (ii), as amended, 388 Mass. 1106 (1983), suggests that it does not. Moreover, the court’s affirmance of the dismissal of the appeal is especially egregious because the dismissal appears to have been grounded on a finding by the judge, unaided by an evidentiary hearing, based on two affidavits that were substantially contradicted by a third affidavit. The retention or loss of appellate rights should not depend on the resolution, without an evidentiary hearing, of a critical and contested factual question about whether an undocketed and unwritten notice via the telephone was or was not given by a clerk to an appellant’s counsel. I would reverse the order dismissing the appeal. To do so would not unfairly prejudice anyone. The same cannot be said for the court’s order affirming the dismissal of the plaintiffs’ appeal.
*113Rule 9 (c) (2) of the Massachusetts Rules of Appellate Procedure provides: “Notwithstanding any other obligation which these rules may impose, each appellant in a civil case shall, within forty days after filing a notice of appeal, deliver to the clerk of the lower court either (i) a transcript of those portions of the transcript of the lower court proceedings which the appellant deems necessary for determination of the appeal, or (ii) a signed statement certifying that the appellant has ordered such portions from the court reporter.” The burden on an appellant within forty days to deliver a transcript or a signed statement that he has ordered a transcript from the court reporter, when the proceedings were recorded by a court reporter, is minimal. Counsel knows from the beginning the identity of the person from whom the transcript must be ordered. Counsel needs only to file a notice of appeal, decide what portion or portions of the transcript are needed, order the designated portions from the known court reporter, and certify that he or she has done so.
The court says that rule 9 (c) (2) also requires an appellant in a case in which the proceedings were electronically recorded, within forty days after the notice of appeal is filed, to deliver to the clerk either a transcript or a signed statement certifying that the tapes were being transcribed. Ante at 109-110. I do not agree that rule 9 (c) (2) applies to electronically recorded proceedings. Rule 9 (c) (2) is silent concerning an appellant’s duty to file anything in connection with a case in which the proceedings were recorded electronically.
In 1974, when the rules of appellate procedure went into effect, there was no rule dealing with electronically recorded proceedings. In 1983, when the rules were amended by adding rule 8 (b) (3) to deal with electronically recorded proceedings, no corresponding rules or amendments to rules 9 or 10 were adopted. Perhaps the court should formally adopt a rule for electronically recorded proceedings to be included in the rules of appellate procedure paralleling rule 9 (c) (2), and perhaps it should not. In any event, it has not done so. In this connection, it is noteworthy that rule 8 (b) (3) (ii), *114which was applicable in this case, requires an appellant to order from the clerk a cassette copy of the electronic recording at the same time he files a notice of appeal. The rule states in relevant part that “[t]he clerk shall promptly provide the cassette,” and that, “[w]ithin fifteen days of receipt of the cassette from the clerk, appellant shall file in court and serve on each appellee a document which includes [among other information] the name, address, and telephone number of the individual or firm selected to prepare the transcript, provided that the appellant and each appellee have agreed to this choice and the appellant so states. If the appellant and appellees have not so agreed, said document shall also specifically notify the clerk to select the transcriber. . . . If the appellant has not designated the entire cassette [for transcription], then after twenty days have expired from the service upon the appellee of appellant’s designation of transcript, the appellant shall promptly send or deliver to the transcriber the cassette provided by the clerk and a written order which states those parts of the cassette designated by the parties for transcription. . . .”
In this case, according to the affidavit of Edward J. Gierej, the truth of which the court accepted, Gierej, “criminal clerk” of the Orleans District Court, received the relevant cassette from Judge Zoll’s office during the wee,k of September 17, 1990, and he immediately notified appellants’ counsel of its availability. Assuming that to be the case, slightly more than twenty-one days elapsed between the filing of the notice of appeal and counsel’s receipt of notice that the cassette was available. Under rule 8 (b) (3) (ii), counsel then had fifteen days to designate the parts of the cassette he intended to have transcribed, and twenty more days to send the cassette to the selected transcriber with an order for transcription. Thus, even if the judge fairly accepted the clerk’s affidavit and rejected the contradictory one filed by appellants’ counsel, a proposition with which I disagree and discuss below, counsel was allowed by rule 8 (b) (3) (ii) a minimum of fifty-six days to order transcription of the cassette. Surely, in light of that timetable, rule 9 (c) (2) should not be read as *115requiring appellants’ counsel to have certified to the District Court within forty days after filing the notice of appeal that he had ordered a transcription of the cassette or, as the court would have it, that “the tapes were being transcribed.”1
In my opinion, rule 9 (c) (2) is not applicable to this case, and therefore the judge erred in concluding that the plaintiffs failed to comply with that rule. For that reason alone, the dismissal of the appeal should be reversed. However, that is not the only reason that the dismissal should not stand. Under Mass. R. A. P. 10 (c), as amended, 378 Mass. 937 (1979), dismissal of an appeal for failure to comply with rule 9 (c) (2) is permissible “only upon a finding of inexcusable neglect.” The judge, for two reasons, it seems to me, exceeded the proper limits of his discretion in finding inexcusable neglect in this case. First, even if rule 9 (c) (2) should be construed as applying to electronically recorded proceedings, as the court holds, surely it is “excusable” for a litigant or counsel to have construed rule 9 (c) (2) otherwise in view of its express language and the provisions of rule 8 (b) (3) (ii). Secondly, as I discuss below, the judge’s ultimate finding of inexcusable neglect appears to have been based on a subsidiary finding that the clerk’s affidavit, and not appellants’ counsel’s, spoke the truth about whether the clerk had notified counsel’s office by telephone that the cassette was availa*116ble. That finding should not have been made without the benefit of an evidentiary hearing.
The judge’s memorandum of decision and order states: “This matter came on to be heard upon the defendant Margaret McCowen-Hanelt’s motion to dismiss plaintiffs appeal, for the failure of the plaintiffs to comply with the provisions of Mass. R. A. P. 9 (c)(2); was argued by counsel and upon consideration thereof and a review of the pertinent affidavits and memoranda, this court finds that said failure by the appellants was inexcusable neglect. The appellants filed their notice of appeal on August 27, [1990,] together with a cassette copy request form. The cassette was received by the Orleans Division on September 17, 1990 which then notified counsel of the availability of the cassette. Thereafter by letter dated October 23, 1990, the Clerk-Magistrate received a request for the cassette, together with payment for it. See Mass. R. A. P. 8 (b)(3)(ii) and R. A. P. 9 (c)(2). It is therefore Ordered that appellee’s motion to dismiss appeal be and is hereby Allowed.'' Although the judge’s reasoning is not entirely clear, it appears that the judge concluded that the appellants’ failure to file a transcript or a statement certifying that “the tapes were being transcribed” (or at least transcription had been ordered) within forty days after August 27 was due to counsel’s disregard of the clerk’s notice that the cassette was available. The judge’s reasoning appears to be that, if the appellants, in response to that oral notice, had promptly requested and paid for the cassette, they could have made the necessary arrangements for transcription of the cassette, as required by rule 8 (b) (3) (ii), within the forty-day requirement of rule 9 (c) (2). Counsel’s failure to proceed promptly in response to the telephone notice, according to the judge’s apparent reasoning, was inexcusable, and therefore the nonconformity with rule 9 (c) (2) was inexcusable as well.
The defendant’s motion to dismiss the appeal, filed on October 22, 1990, was accompanied by the affidavit of Peter S. Farber, counsel for the defendant. Mr. Farber stated under oath that he had spoken with Edward Gierej at the clerk’s *117office at the Orleans District Court and that Gierej had told him that he, Gierej, “had reached the office of appellant’s counsel by telephone on September 17, 1990 and left the message that the cassette was ready to be picked up upon the payment of a . . . fee.” On October 24, the appellants filed an opposition to the motion to dismiss their appeal, together with an affidavit of their counsel, Ansel B. Chaplin. In his affidavit, Mr. Chaplin stated, “I have been awaiting notice from the Clerk of Courts that the cassette tape of that portion of the transcript [the portion previously designated] is available. It was my understanding that a cassette would be sent to me along with a bill for its cost. ... Up to this date I have not received the cassette tape with the bill or any notice from the Clerk that the cassette tape was completed and available. . . . The first notice I received pertaining to these cassette tapes was in the Affidavit of appellees’ counsel, re-fleeting a purported telephone call and message to my office on September 17, 1990 from a Mr. Gierej of the Clerk’s office. I received no telephone call nor any such telephone message either on or about that date or at any other time. When I am not available, an entry is made in a telephone log book if someone calls and is unable to reach me. A review of our telephone log book reflects no such call from a Mr. Gierej nor from anyone with that approximate name.... I have this date contacted the Clerk’s Office and have taken the steps necessary to obtain the cassette tape promptly. Upon its receipt I will file the required Statement within 15 days as required by Rule 8 (b)(3)(ii) and arrange for prompt transcription thereof.” Edward J. Gierej, by an affidavit dated October 25, 1990, stated that he was the criminal clerk of the Orleans District Court and that, “[o]n September 17, 1990 Judge Zoll’s office mailed to me the cassette ordered by plaintiffs’ attorney. I received the cassette during the week of September 17th and telephoned the office of plaintiffs’ attorney immediately upon my receipt of the cassette, which is my usual and customary practice. I spoke to woman at the attorney’s office and left the message that the cassette was ready to be picked up or mailed. I also told the woman what *118the charge for the cassette was. ... I did not thereafter make any reminder calls, and it is not my practice to do sp. It is not uncommon for cassettes to sit in my file cabinet for months, even sometimes years. I do not feel it is my responsibility to make follow-up calls.”
Despite the conflicting assertions in those affidavits, and without conducting an evidentiary hearing, the judge con-eluded that notice had been given as was claimed by Gierej and denied by Mr. Chaplin.2 This court now concludes that “[t]he judge did not abuse his discretion by relying on the affidavits. The plaintiffs requested an evidentiary hearing only after the judge granted the motion to dismiss, so that issue is not properly raised.” Ante at 111. I disagree. Elementary fairness required that, if the viability of the appeal was to depend on the resolution of that question of fact, the resolution should be made only after both sides had full opportunity to present witnesses and cross-examine opposing witnesses. Appellants’ counsel had reason to expect nothing less. The court cites no case that suggests that, in the circumstances present here, the appellants waived their right to an evidentiary hearing.
In my opinion, the appellants did not violate Mass. R. A. P. 9 (c) (2) and, in addition, the judge was not warranted in finding inexcusable neglect. I would reinstate the appeal.
I am fully aware that, in Hawkins v. Hawkins, 397 Mass. 401, 406 (1986), a case in which the proceedings were recorded electronically, the court said without explanation, in an opinion that I joined, that “ [t] he rules further required the plaintiff to deliver either a transcript or a signed statement certifying that the tapes were being transcribed, to the clerk or register’s office, by September 15, forty days after her appeal was filed. Rule 9 (c) (2).” On further reflection, and instructed by the present case, I am now of the opinion, which I have expressed in the text, that rule 9 (c) (2) does not explicitly or implicitly refer to appeals in which the proceedings have been recorded electronically.
Certainly, it cannot be true that rule 9 (c) (2) requires, with respect to electronically recorded proceedings, that within forty days after the notice of appeal is filed, the appellant file the transcript or a statement certifying that “the tapes were being transcribed.” Even in a proceeding recorded by a court reporter, the appellant need only file a transcript or a statement certifying that the appellant has ordered a transcript from the court reporter.
In connection with a motion for reconsideration filed on November 14, 1990, the appellants submitted further affidavits of four secretaries in counsel’s Boston and Truro offices stating that neither office ever received telephone notice concerning the cassette’s availability. The motion to reconsider was denied. The appellants’ motion to depose New England Telephone Company, to verify whether the call had been made, was similarly denied.

=== CASE 9739432 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:46.99877+00 ===

O’Connor, J.
After a jury-waived trial, a judge in the Superior Court found the defendant guilty of being an accessory before the fact to rape and to indecent assault and battery on a mentally retarded person. (After sentencing the defendant to concurrent terms of probation, the judge stayed execution of the sentences and reported the case to the Appeals Court pursuant to Mass. R. Crim. P. 34, 378 Mass. 905 (1979). We transferred the case to this court on our own initiative, and now reverse the convictions and order judgments for the defendant.
Rule 34 states, in relevant part: “If . . . with the consent of the defendant, after conviction of the defendant, a question of law arises which the trial judge determines is so important or doubtful as to require the decision of the Appeals Court, the judge may report the case so far as necessary to present the question of law arising therein.” Although the record does not disclose that the defendant expressly consented to the report, we infer the defendant’s implied consent from the absence of any objection in the trial court or here.
In his report, the judge set forth his findings and a series of questions of law. The significant findings were as follows. The defendant is the mother of a mildly retarded daughter, who was seventeen years old at the time of the incidents described below. The defendant’s boy friend, Manuel F. Matos, Jr., lived with the defendant and her daughter for about two months before May 22, 1988. Matos told the defendant that he intended to have sexual intercourse with her daughter. In response, the defendant expressed neither encouragement nor discouragement. On one occasion, Matos told the defendant that he was going to have intercourse with her daughter, stating that “she needs a man.” The defendant did not respond, although she knew that her daughter did not want to have intercourse with Matos. Matos had intercourse with the daughter from two to four times by force and against her *184will. At least once, after Matos had entered the daughter’s bedroom, the defendant pounded on the closed, unlocked door and told Matos to stop. On May 22, 1988, the defendant took her daughter to a New Bedford police station, where they gave statements about the sexual activity between Matos and the daughter. Prior to this visit at the police station, the defendant made no effort to enlist outside assistance to prevent Matos from engaging in sexual intercourse with her daughter.
The judge’s questions, set forth in his report, are as follows.
“1. Does a parent have any duty to take action to prevent harm to his/her child?
“2. If such a duty exists, does it include a requirement to take reasonable steps to prevent a sexual assault in the family home on a [seventeen] year old, mildly mentally retarded daughter?
“3. If the duty exists, is the failure to fulfill it a crime?
“4. If it is a crime, is it a violation of [G. L. c. 274, § 2] ?”
We need not answer the four questions separately. It is clear that the basic question that prompted the report is whether a person may be found guilty of being an accessory before the fact (G. L. c. 274, § 2 [1990 ed.]) to rape (G. L. c. 265, § 2 [1990 ed.]) and to indecent assault and battery on a mentally retarded person (G. L. c. 265, § 13F [1990 ed.]), where the victim is a minor, the defendant is the minor’s parent, and the defendant failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the sexual attacks by a third person. Stated another way, the question as to each conviction is whether the subsidiary facts found by the judge, on which he clearly based his ultimate guilty findings, support such conclusions.'
General Laws c. 274, § 2, provides: “Whoever aids in the commission of a felony, or is accessory thereto before the fact by counselling, hiring or otherwise procuring such felony to be committed, shall be punished in the manner provided for the punishment of the principal felon.” The following principles emerge from an examination of our case law in this area. In order to be found guilty as an accessory before *185the fact, the evidence must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant must “in some sort associate himself with the venture, that he participate in it as in something that he wishes to bring about, [and] that he seek by his action to make it succeed.” Commonwealth v. Stout, 356 Mass. 237, 241 (1969), quoting United States v. Peoni, 100 F.2d 401, 402 (2d Cir. 1938). We have held that the plain language of the statute, involving aiding, counselling, hiring or otherwise procuring a principal to commit the crime, requires “something more than mere acquiescence,” although not necessarily physical participation, “if there is association with the criminal venture and any significant participation in it.” Commonwealth v. Morrow, 363 Mass. 601, 609 (1973), citing Commonwealth v. French, 357 Mass. 356, 391 (1970), judgments vacated as to death penalty sub nom. Limone v. Massachusetts, 408 U.S. 936 (1972). Moreover, “presence at the scene of the [crime], together with the failure to take affirmative steps to prevent it, does not render a person liable as principal.” Commonwealth v. Murphy, 1 Mass. App. Ct. 71, 76 (1973). A person cannot be found guilty as an accessory before the fact simply because she knows a crime is going to be committed, even when this knowledge is coupled with her subsequent concealment of the completed crime. Commonwealth v. Perry, 357 Mass. 149, 151 (1970). Commonwealth v. Murphy, supra at 77. Therefore, it is clear that what is required to be convicted as an accessory before the fact is not only knowledge of the crime and a shared intent to bring it about, but also some sort of act that contributes to its happening.
The Commonwealth argues that the case was tried, and the defendant convicted, on the theory that, as the mother of the victim, the defendant had a common law duty to protect her child from harm, and that her failure to take reasonable steps to fulfil this duty is an omission sufficient to make her liable as an accessory. Putting the Commonwealth’s contention another way, it is that, in allowing Matos access to her daughter and failing to take reasonable steps to stop his wrongful actions, the defendant “aided” Matos in commit*186ting the crimes and thus became a participant in the criminal activity. The defendant’s intent that the underlying crimes be committed, the Commonwealth contends, can be inferred from her knowledge of the crimes and her intentional acts of omission.
Only one case cited by the Commonwealth in support of this theory involves a statute similar to c. 274, § 2.2 In State v. Walden, 306 N.C. 466 (1982), the Supreme Court of North Carolina upheld a mother’s conviction of aiding and abetting an assault with a deadly weapon by another person on her child. In general, North Carolina law on aiding and abetting, like our law on accessory before the fact, requires that a person must say or do something that demonstrates consent to the felonious purpose and contributes to the execution of a crime. Id. at 476. In Walden, the evidence showed that the mother witnessed, but made no attempt to stop, another person’s lengthy beating of her small child with a belt, which resulted in serious injuries to the child. Id. at 469-470. The Walden court created an exception to the general aiding and abetting rule when a parent, who is present, neglects his or her affirmative legal duty to “take all steps reasonably possible to protect the parent’s child from an attack by another person” and that such an omission shows the parent’s “consent and contribution to the crime being committed.” Id. at 476. See State v. Oliver, 85 N.C. App. 1, 24 (1987) (evidence sufficient to sustain mother’s conviction as aider and abettor to second-degree sexual offense against her child, where mother present in bed while child raped, touched the child during rape, and failed to take any steps to *187avert assault). The Commonwealth urges this court to follow the Supreme Court of North Carolina in holding that a parent’s failure to take reasonable steps to perform his or her affirmative duty to protect his or her child is a form of consent and participation in the commission of a criminal act against the child.
The Commonwealth bolsters its contention that the defendant’s conduct was criminal by analogizing this situation to cases in which this court held that a parent’s failure to protect his or her child, knowing there was a high degree of likelihood that the child would be substantially harmed, constituted wanton or reckless conduct sufficient to support a manslaughter conviction. In Commonwealth v. Gallison, 383 Mass. 659, 665-666 (1981), this court upheld the manslaughter conviction of a mother where the evidence was sufficient for the jury to believe that she made no effort to obtain medical help for her child who had an extreme fever and became unconscious. This court stated, “[a]s a parent . . . the defendant had a duty to provide for the care and welfare of her child,” and found that the jury could have concluded that her inaction in light of the child’s obvious illness was a type of intentional conduct which “involves a high degree of likelihood that substantial harm will result” and thus constituted “wanton or reckless” conduct for the purposes of manslaughter. Id. at 665, quoting Commonwealth v. Welansky, 316 Mass. 383, 399 (1944). See Commonwealth v. Michaud, 389 Mass. 491, 499 (involuntary manslaughter convictions of parents reversed where evidence was insufficient to prove that parents’ failure to seek medical attention for ailing child was reckless rather than negligent).
Other jurisdictions, referred to by the Commonwealth, have reached similar results. See State v. Zobel, 81 S.D. 260, 273, 281 (1965) (father’s conviction of second-degree manslaughter upheld where the evidence proved that he knowingly exposed his children to cruel and inhuman beatings by his wife, resulting in their deaths); State v. Austin, 84 S.D. 405, 414-415 (1969) (first-degree manslaughter conviction of mother upheld where evidence proved she aided *188and abetted cruel punishment of child by her companion, resulting in child’s death); Palmer v. State, 223 Md. 341, 352 (1960) (involuntary manslaughter conviction of mother upheld where evidence proved she displayed a “wanton or reckless disregard for human life” in failing to remove her child from boy friend who beat the child so severely that it would “put any reasonable person on guard that the child’s life was in real and imminent peril”).
While it is clear in this and other jurisdictions that a parent’s failure to fulfil his or her duty to provide for the safety and welfare of a child may rise to the level of wanton or reckless conduct sufficient to support a manslaughter conviction, we decline to follow the Supreme Court of North Carolina and read into our accessory before the fact law the principle that a mere omission by a parent to take action to protect a child, without more, is the equivalent of intentionally aiding in the commission of a felony against that child. By its very terms, c. 274, § 2, requires more than an omission to act. As our case law makes clear, in order to be punished as an accessory before the fact, the defendant must have actually aided in the commission of the felony or counselled, hired, or otherwise procured someone to commit it. See G. L. c. 274, § 2; Commonwealth v. Murphy, supra at 77.
Commonwealth v. Hall, 322 Mass. 523 (1948), relied on by the Commonwealth, does not require a different result. In Hall, this court affirmed the conviction of murder in the second degree of a mother who, the jury could have found, intentionally placed her baby in the attic of her home and withheld food and liquids from it as a result of which the baby died. Id. at 527-528. The defendant in Hall was not charged as an accessory, as here, and unlike the present case, malicious conduct was involved. For conviction as an accessory before the fact, nothing less than shared intent and significant participation in the underlying crime, neither of which was present here, will suffice.
On the facts reported by the Superior Court judge, the Commonwealth has failed to show beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant aided, counselled, hired, or pro*189cured Matos to commit rape and indecent assault and battery, or that she took any other action which would constitute participation in the commission of these crimes against her daughter. The fact that she knew ahead of time of Matos’s intent to commit the criminal acts, and did not report the subsequent crimes to the police immediately, does not make her guilty as an accessory before the fact. Commonwealth v. Perry, supra at 151.
We conclude that the convictions must be reversed and that judgments of acquittal are required.
So ordered.
The Commonwealth’s reliance on another out-of-State case is misplaced because it involves a child abuse statute which is not analogous to G. L. c. 274, § 2. In State v. Williquette, 129 Wis. 2d 239 (1986), the Supreme Court of Wisconsin held that a parent who left her children in the care of a husband who she knew physically and sexually abused them could be prosecuted as a direct principal under the State child abuse statute, as one who “subjects a child to cruel maltreatment” as specified in Wis. Stat. § 940.201 (since repealed). Because the court held that the mother could be tried as a direct principal, the majority opinion did not consider the issue whether she was an aider and abettor. Id. at 243 n.2.

=== CASE 9739433 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:47.005458+00 ===

Abrams, J.
(concurring). I concur. On the facts of this case, the defendant cannot be convicted as an accessory before the fact pursuant to G. L. c. 274, § 2 (1990 ed.). “[0]rdinary rules of statutory construction require us to construe any criminal statute strictly against the Commonwealth.” Aldoupolis v. Commonwealth, 386 Mass. 260, 267, cert, denied, 459 U.S. 864 (1982), quoting Commonwealth v. Devlin, 366 Mass. 132, 137-138 (1974). “Plain omissions in the law to provide for exigencies which may arise cannot be supplied by those charged with administering the law or by the courts in construing and interpreting the statutes” (emphasis supplied). Thacher v. Secretary of the Commonwealth, 250 Mass. 188, 190-191 (1924). Cf. State v. Williquette, 129 Wis. 2d 239, 268 (1986) (Heffernan, C.J., dissenting) (“the majority’s strained interpretation [of the child abuse statute, holding it criminalizes acts of omission] is an invasion of the legislative prerogative”). Currently, no criminal statute reaches acts of omission such as the one involved in this case.
I note that a majority of State Legislatures have enacted criminal child abuse statutes which proscribe acts of omis*190sion as well as the affirmative infliction of harm to a child.1 *191Some State statutes expressly identify the crime as the violation of a duty of care or protection.2 However, as the Supreme Court of North Carolina emphasized in State v. Walden, 306 N.C. 466 (1982), a requirement that parents take affirmative action to prevent harm to their children does not mean that “parents have the legal duty to place themselves in danger of death or great bodily harm in coming to the aid of their children.”3
Strong and compelling arguments can be made for and against criminalizing the type of conduct described in the court’s opinion. See Johnson, Criminal Liability for Parents *192Who Fail to Protect, 5 Law & Ineq. J. 359, 377-390 (1987); Note, Commendable or Condemnable? Criminal Liability for Parents Who Fail to Protect Their Children from Abuse, 1987 Wis. L. Rev. 659, 684-685. As the court’s opinion makes clear, parents have a duty to provide for the safety and welfare of their children. Ante at 187-188. See Commonwealth v. Gallison, 383 Mass. 659, 665 (1981), and cases cited. It is for the Legislature to determine whether expanding that duty by criminalizing acts of omission would better protect the Commonwealth’s children.
See, e.g., Phelps v. State, 439 So. 2d 727, 734 (Ala. Crim. App. 1983) (child abuse statute, Ala. Code § 26-15-3, encompasses acts of omission as well as of commission); Cal. Penal Code § 273a (West 1988) (criminal liability imposed on “(1) [a]ny person who, under circumstances or conditions likely to produce great bodily harm or death,... permits any child to suffer ... or having the care or custody of any child ... permits the person or health of such child to be injured, or ... permits such child to be placed in such situation that its person or health is endangered . . . [and] (2) [a]ny person who, under circumstances or conditions other than those likely to produce great bodily harm or death . . . permits any child to suffer ... or having the care or custody of any child ... permits the person or health of such child to be injured, or ... permits such child to be placed in such situation that its person or health may be endangered . . .”); Colo. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 18-6-401(1) (West 1990 & Supp. 1991) (“[a] person commits child abuse if [he] . . . permits a child to be unreasonably placed in a situation which poses a threat of injury to the child’s life or health . . .”); Fla. Stat. Ann. § 827.04(1) (West 1991) (“[w]hoever . . . knowingly or by culpable negligence . . . permits the infliction of physical or mental injury to the child, and in so doing causes great bodily harm, permanent disability, or permanent disfigurement to such child, shall be guilty of’ child abuse); Iowa Code Ann. § 726.6.le (West 1979 & Supp. 1992) (parent, guardian or legal custodian who “[kjnowingly permits the continuing physical or sexual abuse of a child or minor” is guilty of child endangerment); State v. Green, 449 So. 2d 141, 144 (La. Ct. App. 1984) (“criminal negligence” as used in La. Rev. Stat. § 14:93 prohibiting cruelty to a juvenile is such disregard of the interest of others that the offender’s conduct amounts to a gross deviation below the standard of care expected to be maintained by a reasonably careful person in the circumstances); Minn. Stat. Ann. § 609.378 (2) (1990) (“[a] parent, legal guardian, or caretaker who knowingly permits the continuing physical or sexual abuse of a child is guilty of neglect of a child”); Mo. Ann. Stat. § 568.050 (3) (1986 & Supp. 1991) (criminalizing parent, guardian, or legal custodian who “recklessly fails or refuses to exercise reasonable diligence” in preventing nonaccidental injury to child); Nev. Rev. Stat. § 200.508 (1992) (“1. Any person who ...(b) Is responsible for the safety or welfare of a child and who permits or allows that child to suffer unjustifiable physical pain or mental suffering as a result of abuse or neglect or to be placed in a situation where the child may suffer physical pain or mental suffering as the result of abuse or neglect, is guilty of a gross misdemeanor ... 3. As used in this section: ...(c) ‘Permit’ means permission that a reasonable person would not grant and which amounts to a neglect of responsibility attending the cafe, custody and control of a minor child”); N.M. Stat. Ann. § 30-6-1(C) (Michie 1978 & Supp. 1991) (“[a]buse of a child consists of a person knowingly, intentionally or negligently, and without justifiable cause . . . permitting a child to be (1) placed in a situation that may endanger the child’s life ór health; (2) tortured, cruelly confined or cruelly punished . . .”); W. Va. Code § 61-8D-1 (Michie 1989) (“[n]eglect” for *191purposes of child abuse statute means “unreasonable failure by a parent, guardian, or any person voluntarily accepting a supervisory role towards a minor child to exercise a minimum degree of care to assure said minor child’s physical safety or health”).
See, e.g., Haw. Rev. Stat. § 709-904 (2) (1991) (“[a] person commits the offense of endangering the welfare of a minor ... by violating or interfering with any legal duty of care or protection owed such minor”); Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 17-A, § 554 (West 1983 & Supp. 1990) (the crime of endangering the welfare of a child includes knowingly endangering “the child’s health, safety or mental welfare by violating a duty of care or protection”); Miss. Code Ann. § 97-5-39 (1973 & Supp. 1991) (“[a]ny parent, guardian or other person who . . . omits the performance of any duty, which . . . omission results in the abuse and/or battering of any child” may be found guilty of child abuse); Mont. Code Ann. § 45-5-622 (1990) (“[a] parent, guardian, or other person supervising the welfare of a child less than 18 years old commits the offense of endangering the welfare of children if he knowingly endangers the child’s welfare by violating a duty of care, protection or support”); N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 639:3 (1986) (the crime of endangering the welfare of a child includes “purposely violating a duty of care, protection or support . . . owe[d] to such child”); Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 2919.22 (Baldwin 1986 & Supp. 1991) (endangering children includes “violating a duty of care, protection or support”); Wyo. Stat. § 6-4-403 (Michie 1987 & Supp. 1991) (a person commits the crime of endangering children “by violating a duty of care, protection or support”).
See Iowa Code Ann. § 726.6.le (1979 & Supp. 1992) (“it is an affirmative defense ... if the person had a reasonable apprehension that any action to stop the continuing abuse would result in substantial bodily harm to the person or the child or minor”); Minn. Stat. Ann. § 609.378 (West 1990) (“It is a defense to a prosecution . . . that at the time of the neglect or endangerment there was a reasonable apprehension in the mind of the defendant that acting to stop or prevent the neglect or endangerment would result in substantial bodily harm to the defendant or child in retaliation”).

=== CASE 9739434 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:14:47.266838+00 ===

JUSTICE CLARK delivered the opinion of the court: This case involves two separate actions filed in the circuit court of Cook County and consolidated in the appellate court. In appellate case number 89 — 2691, a group of businesses operating in the Village of South Holland (the Village) filed a declaratory judgment action against the Village seeking to declare its Sunday Closing Ordinance (the ordinance) unconstitutional. Each member of the plaintiffs group had previously been cited for violating the ordinance. The plaintiffs’ group included Opyt’s Amoco; 1-80 Investments Company, d/b/a Truck-o-mat; Linge, Ltd., d/b/a Calumet Auto Truck Plaza; Kar Kleen Kwik Stop, Inc., d/b/a Kar Kleen Car Wash; and George Graske, d/b/a Quick Six Amoco. The parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment. The trial court denied the plaintiffs’ motion and granted the Village’s motion. In appellate case number 89 — 2908, the Village filed a quasi-criminal complaint against defendant Kar Kleen Kwik Stop, Inc., d/b/a Kar Kleen Car Wash, alleging a violation of the Sunday Closing Ordinance. The complaint alleged that defendant illegally sold cigarettes and car washes on Sunday, October 30, 1988. After a bench trial, defendant was convicted on each count and fined $100. The appellate court affirmed the trial court’s judgments in each instance. (209 Ill. App. 3d 473.) We granted plaintiffs’ petition for leave to appeal (134 Ill. 2d R. 315). The most pertinent sections of the ordinance in question provide: “(a) Wholesale and retail mercantile and merchandising establishments. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling, dispensing, renting or distributing, at wholesale or retail, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or description from an established place of business on [Sunday] within the village, provided that this subsection shall not be applicable to works of charity or to the sale of drugs or medicine, the sale or dispensing of articles of food and drink for human consumption from vending machines, the sale or dispensing of articles of food and drink for human consumption from premises whose sole purpose is the daily preparation of food and drink for retail sale to the public, the intent being to allow food and drink dispensing from retail establishments that are commonly known as restaurants, provided further that the sale of said food and drink shall not be allowed from a drive-through facility on Sunday and all drive-through facilities dispensing food and drink shall remain closed, the sale and distribution of newspapers and magazines, the sale of milk, ice cream, ice, gasoline, lubricating oil, or the sale of articles and products necessary to meet the emergency needs of the public on Sunday in the village. * * * (c) Repair and Maintenance Work. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to engage in the business of repairing, maintaining, renovating, rehabilitating, cleaning, or washing property of any kind or description, from an established place of business, on [Sunday] within the Village of South Holland; provided, however, that this section shall not be applicable to works of charity or to the emergency repair of motor vehicles, public transportation equipment, or to the repair or maintenance of property necessary to meet the emergency needs of the public on Sunday in the Village of South Holland.” (Code of the Village of South Holland, art. I, §§9 — 3(a), (c).) Other sections contain similar provisions relating to construction and maintenance work (section 9 — 3(b)), and personal services (section 9 — 3(d)). Plaintiffs claim that the ordinance is an unauthorized assertion of the Village’s police power. Pursuant to its police power, a municipality has the power to “restrict or prohibit the exercise of a legitimate trade where it is necessary for the protection of the public health, morals, safety or welfare.” (Figura v. Cummins (1954), 4 Ill. 2d 44.) In order to constitute a valid exercise of the police power, an ordinance must bear a reasonable relationship to the public interest sought to be protected and the means adopted must be a reasonable method of accomplishing the chosen objective. Crocker v. Finley (1984), 99 Ill. 2d 444. Due process requirements prevent the arbitrary and unreasonable exercise of the police power. (Illinois Gamefowl Breeders Association v. Block (1979), 75 Ill. 2d 443, 453.) Thus, “[wjhere a prohibitory ordinance embraces activities or businesses having no effect upon the relevant object of the police power, it cannot be sustained.” (Pacesetter Homes, Inc. v. Village of South Holland (1959), 18 Ill. 2d 247, 255.) Once the legislature identifies a problem and enacts legislation to protect and promote the general welfare of its citizens, the legislation is presumed to be a valid exercise of the police power. (Illinois Gamefowl Breeders, 75 Ill. 2d at 453.) Nevertheless, it remains within the province of the court to determine whether the police power was properly exercised. Figura, 4 Ill. 2d at 49. This court has long recognized the power of the legislature to enact a comprehensive Sunday closing law under the general welfare branch of the police power. (See McPherson v. Village of Chebanse (1885), 114 Ill. 46.) In upholding a Sunday closing law, this court has previously stated: “Sunday has been observed traditionally as a day on which the normal, nonessential, nonemergency activity of the business world ceases. This has been achieved primarily by voluntary compliance with custom, but it is everywhere recognized that legislative bodies may properly act to preserve this deep-rooted, nation-wide custom, providing only that the measures adopted are reasonable.” Humphrey Chevrolet, Inc. v. City of Evanston (1955), 7 Ill. 2d 402, 405. Given the fact that the ordinance is directed at promoting a legitimate governmental interest, the issue in this case concerns the means adopted to achieve this goal. In Humphrey Chevrolet, this court noted that Sunday closing laws may generally be placed into three categories. The first type prohibits only certain types of businesses from operating, but permits others to remain open. This type of statute is generally disfavored. (See Eden v. People (1896), 161 Ill. 296 (where this court invalidated a statute which required barbershops to close on Sundays, but permitted other businesses to remain open).) The second category, which is also generally disfavored, prohibits commercial activity in general, but exempts certain businesses from the prohibition. (See City of Mt. Vernon v. Julian (1938), 369 Ill. 447-(where this court invalidated an ordinance which prohibited commercial activity on Sunday, but exempted “hotels, restaurants, eating places, drug stores, tobacco stores, confectionary stores, news dealers, ice dealers, shoe shining parlors, garages, gasoline filling stations, telephone exchanges, telegraph offices and moving picture theatres”).) The third category, referred to as “commodity-type” laws, prohibits all commercial activities but exempts the sale of certain commodities from the operation of the law. This court has previously approved commodity-type laws. See Humphrey Chevrolet, 7 Ill. 2d 402. The ordinance in this case is a commodity-type ordinance similar to the ordinance this court upheld in Humphrey Chevrolet. In fact, the only significant difference between section 9 — 3(a) and the Evanston ordinance considered in Humphrey Chevrolet is that section 9 — 3(a) permits the sale of food and drink for human consumption from vending machines and from take-out restaurants, whereas the ordinance in Humphrey Chevrolet exempted the sale of food and drink for consumption on the seller’s premises only. Thus, at least with respect to section 9 — 3(a), the pivotal question in this case is whether these additional exceptions contained in the ordinance render it unreasonable and arbitrary. Plaintiffs argue that the ordinance is invalid because these additional exceptions prevent the ordinance from accomplishing its purported objective. “It is apparent that if a general Sunday closing ordinance is to be [upheld] *** the exceptions to its operation must bear some reasonable relationship to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare ***.” (City of Mt. Vernon, 369 Ill. at 453.) Plaintiffs contend that permitting businesses to remain open, but limiting the goods they can sell, does nothing to promote peace and quiet. Plaintiffs further contend it is arbitrary to permit a merchant to sell food and drink from a vending machine but not “over the counter,” and to permit the sale of prepared food from a take-out restaurant but prohibit the sale of similar food from a store. Plaintiffs argue that this court’s opinion in City of Chicago v. Netcher (1899), 183 Ill. 104, is directly on point and, therefore, that we should reverse based on that case. In Netcher, this court invalidated two Chicago ordinances designed to prohibit certain commercial activities by “department stores.” The first ordinance prohibited the sale of “meat, fish, butter, cheese, lard, vegetables or any other provisions” from any store which sold “dry goods, clothing, jewelry and drugs” (Netcher, 183 Ill. at 108). The second ordinance prohibited the sale of intoxicating liquors from any store which sold “dry goods, clothing, jewelry or hardware” (Netcher, 183 Ill. at 112). This court invalidated the ordinances because they were prohibitions which had no relation to any legitimate public interest. In so finding, the court noted that “[n]o attempt is made to suggest any grounds upon which the ordinance can be justified as an exercise of the police power of the city or the State.” (Netcher, 183 Ill. at 111.) The prohibitions in Netcher applied at all times and prevented only a limited class, of businesses from selling the proscribed products. In contrast, the ordinance in the present case applies to all similarly situated businesses and then only on Sundays. Thus, Netcher is distinguishable. Plaintiffs also rely on this court’s opinion in Pacesetter Homes, Inc. v. Village of South Holland (1959), 18 Ill. 2d 247. In that case, this court invalidated the Village’s previous Sunday closing law because it prohibited harmless as well as harmful businesses. (Pacesetter, 18 Ill. 2d at 255.) In Pacesetter, the ordinance prohibited all business activity except "medical, dental and funeral facilities, public transportation and utilities, and activities necessary for ‘emergency needs’ of the village residents.” (Pacesetter, 18 Ill. 2d at 249-50.) Thus, unlike the ordinances in Humphrey Chevrolet and the present case, the ordinance in Pacesetter was not a commodity-type law. Indeed, in Pacesetter this court distinguished Humphrey Chevrolet on the basis that the Pacesetter ordinance was more restrictive than the ordinance approved in Humphrey Chevrolet. As previously noted, the current ordinance is less restrictive than the ordinance in Humphrey Chevrolet. Thus, we find Pacesetter is distinguishable and rely instead upon this court’s holding in Humphrey Chevrolet. Under Humphrey Chevrolet, we believe the ordinance is a reasonable exercise of the Village’s police powers despite the exceptions contained in the ordinance. The ordinance strikes a balance between the public benefits of peace and quiet on the one hand and the ability to purchase food, drink and other necessities on the other hand. To promote peace and quiet, the ordinance limits the types of goods available for sale to the public. In this way, the ordinance decreases the amount of automobile traffic because fewer citizens will travel to the stores to purchase goods. At the same time, the ordinance permits limited access to specified goods. As the Supreme Court stated in the case of McGowan v. Maryland (1961), 366 U.S. 420, 6 L. Ed. 2d 393, 81 S. Ct. 1101: “[A] legislature could reasonably find that the Sunday sale of the exempted commodities was necessary either for the health of the populace or for the enhancement of the recreational atmosphere of the day — that a family which takes a Sunday ride into the country will need gasoline for the automobile and may find pleasant a soft drink or fresh fruit *** that newspapers and drug products should always be available to the public.” McGowan, 366 U.S. at 426, 6 L. Ed. 2d at 399, 81 S. Ct. at 1105. In balancing these somewhat competing public benefits, the legislature could reasonably find that the sale of food and drink from a vending machine is less likely to increase automobile traffic than is the sale of the same goods over the counter. For example, the legislature could determine that citizens will be less likely to make a special trip to purchase food or drink if these products must be purchased from a vending machine. Thus, we do not believe the vending machine exception renders the ordinance arbitrary. Nor do we believe the ordinance is arbitrary because it permits the sale of prepared food and drink from a restaurant but not from other businesses. Plaintiff Opyt’s Amoco contends that it is arbitrarily prevented from selling prepackaged hamburgers on Sunday while a local McDonald’s restaurant is permitted to sell similar products. The legislature could legitimately decide that the sale of food and drink from restaurants would enhance the recreational atmosphere of the day. (McGowan, 366 U.S. at 426, 6 L. Ed. 2d at 399, 81 S. Ct. at 1105.) At the same time, the legislature could legitimately decide that prepared foods should be available from restaurants only. See Gallagher v. Crown Kosher Super Market (1961), 366 U.S. 617, 623, 6 L. Ed. 2d 536, 540, 81 S. Ct. 1122, 1125 (where the Court stated, “[T]he legislature could determine that, although many retailers, including Crown, sell frozen desserts, to permit only a limited number of inn-holders, druggists and common victuallers to sell them on Sunday would serve the public purpose of providing these items on Sunday and, at the same time, limit the commercial activities ordinarily attendant to their sale”). A court will uphold a legislative classification against an equal protection challenge if any set of facts can be reasonably conceived which will sustain the classification. (Village of Oak Lawn v. Rosewell (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 104.) In this case, such a conceivable set of facts exists. In Humphrey Chevrolet, this court approved an ordinance which excepted the sale of food and drink to be consumed on the seller’s premises. Given the nature of the modern fast-food business, it would be extremely difficult for restaurants to monitor whether food would be ehten on the premises or taken out. The legislature could have legitimately decided it would be impractical to require prepared food and drink be consumed on the seller’s premises. Instead, the ordinance requires that all drive-through facilities at restaurants in the Village be closed on Sunday. We hold the restaurant exception in the ordinance is a reasonable exercise of the Village’s police power. In so holding, we note that the ordinance does not discriminate between similarly situated businesses. Similarly, we do not believe it is arbitrary for the legislature to permit the sale of some products from a store but not other products. Under plaintiffs’ argument, a grocery store which is permitted to sell milk must also be permitted to sell any other product in its inventory. Under this scenario, the exception would swallow the rule and, thereby, defeat the purpose of the ordinance. Further, under plaintiffs’ argument, almost every Sunday closing law in this State would be invalid. We have found that the ordinance promotes a legitimate governmental objective. We have also concluded that the ordinance is a reasonable means of accomplishing this governmental objective. Thus, we hold that the ordinance also meets the requirements of the equal protection and due process clauses of the United States and Illinois Constitutions. See Bernier v. Burris (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 219 (holding the appropriate test under the due process clause for a statute which does not impact a fundamental right is whether the legislation bears a rational relationship to a legitimate governmental interest); People v. Anderson (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 39 (holding the equal protection clause prevents purposeful or invidious discrimination). Although our discussion has focused on section 9— 3(a) of the ordinance, our findings apply with equal force to the remainder of the ordinance. We have reviewed the ordinance in its entirety and find that it is a reasonable means of promoting a legitimate governmental objective. Further, we find the exceptions contained in the ordinance do not render the ordinance arbitrary. Finally, plaintiffs also contend the ordinance is unconstitutionally vague, because it does not define the terms “necessary” and “emergency.” Plaintiffs point to an affidavit submitted with their motion for summary judgment in which a diabetic woman stated she attempted to purchase orange juice and cheese for health purposes. Plaintiffs argue that it is unclear from the ordinance whether the sellers of these products in that situation would be subject to prosecution. In addition, plaintiffs argue it is unclear under what circumstances a truck wash would be necessary to meet the emergency needs of the public. Due process requires that a statute must not be “so vague that men of common intelligence must necessarily guess at its meaning or application.” (People v. Garrison (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 444, 453.) In addition, “the statute must provide sufficiently definite standards for law enforcement officers and triers of fact that its application does not depend merely on their private conceptions.” (Garrison, 82 Ill. 2d at 453.) To satisfy the requirements of due process, a statute’s prohibitions must be sufficiently definite when measured by common understanding and practices. (People v. Wawczak (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 244, 249.) However, as we are “[condemned to the use of words, we can never expect mathematical certainty from our language.” Grayned v. City of Rockford (1972), 408 U.S. 104, 110, 33 L. Ed. 2d 222, 228-29, 92 S. Ct. 2294, 2300. We note that all statutes are presumed to be constitutional (People v. Schwartz (1976), 64 Ill. 2d 275, 281), and the party challenging the statute has the burden of clearly establishing its constitutional infirmity (People v. Bales (1985), 108 Ill. 2d 182, 188). In considering a vagueness challenge to a statute, absent a contrary legislative intent, a court will assume “the words used in the statute have their ordinary and popularly understood meanings. [Citations.] In addition to the language used, consideration [will] also [be] given to the legislative objective and the evil the statute is designed to remedy.” (People v. LaPointe (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 482, 499.) Whenever possible, each word or phrase in a challenged statute will be given some reasonable meaning. “Emergency” has been defined as: “A sudden unexpected happening; an unforeseen occurrence or condition; perplexing contingency or complication of circumstances; a sudden unexpected occasion for action; exigency; pressing necessity. Emergency is an unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for immediate action.” (Black’s Law Dictionary 272 (5th ed. 1979).) We believe this definition comports with the common understanding of “emergency.” Further, we believe that as used in the ordinance “necessary” means that which is reasonably required. Thus, the use of these terms in the ordinance does not render the ordinance unconstitutionally vague. For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment of the appellate court. Judgment affirmed. JUSTICES BILANDIC and FREEMAN took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.