=== CASE 9739257 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:17.088045+00 ===

ANN WALSH BRADLEY, J.
¶ 49. (concurring). Because I believe that the admission of Michael's statement sub silencio overrules precedent, lacks foundation, and violates Weed's constitutional right to confrontation, I cannot join the majority. Nevertheless, I concur because I agree with the majority that the error in admitting the statement is harmless in this case. What is not harmless, however, is that the majority broadens a hearsay exception to such an extent that its foundational requirements are rendered meaningless.
¶ 50. Wisconsin is one of only a few states that has adopted the exception for statements of recent perception. Of those few that have adopted it, Wyoming's exception applies only in civil cases and New Mexico's exception has since been repealed altogether. Wyo. Stat. R. Evid. Rule 804(b)(5) (2003); State v. Ross, 919 P.2d 1080, 1086-87 (N.M. 1996). Thus, Wisconsin stands only with Hawaii and Kansas in applying this exception in criminal cases.
¶ 51. When adopting the federal rules of evidence, Congress rejected the proposal to include the new exception because of "great potential breadth" and its inadequate guarantees of trustworthiness:
The [House Judiciary] Committee eliminated [the proposed statement of recent perception exception] as creating a new and unwarranted hearsay exception of great potential breadth. The Committee did not believe that statements of the type referred to bore sufficient guarantees of trustworthiness to justify admissibility. ■
*468H.R. Rep. No. 93-650 (1973), reprinted in 1974 U.S.C.C.A.N. 7075, 7080.
¶ 52. I share the concern of overbreadth in the application of this exception. It must be narrowly applied.
¶ 53. The exception is unlike other hearsay exceptions where the declarant is unavailable, such as statements under belief of impending death (§ 908.045(3)) and statements against interest (§ 908.045(4)), in which the circumstances and type of statements inherently contain strong guarantees of trustworthiness. The lack of trustworthiness involved with the exception for statements of recent perception is evident from the reluctance of other jurisdictions to adopt it.
¶ 54. Apparently, it is this same reluctance that caused the court in State v. Stevens, 171 Wis. 2d 106, 119, 490 N.W.2d 753 (1992), to declare that corroboration is necessary when evaluating whether to admit hearsay under the exception for statements of recent perception:
Corroboration is the key to reliability of a statement coming under [the exception for statements of recent perception]. . .. Reliability depends on the possibility of corroborating the declarant's statement.
According to one treatise on Wisconsin evidence, corroboration poses a special problem for the introduction of hearsay testimony. Ralph Adam Fine, Fine's Wisconsin Evidence, § 908.045(2), at 319 (2002). The treatise notes that" 'Corroboration is the key to reliability of a statement coming under' Rule 908.045(2)." Id. (quoting Stevens, 171 Wis. 2d at 119).
¶ 55. The majority ignores the language in Stevens regarding the requirement that there be corroboration. It allows for the admission of the statement *469without any corroboration whatsoever, and in doing so, sub silencio overrules Stevens.
¶ 56. In this case, the hearsay involved the testimony of the Fuerbringers that Michael made a statement to the effect that he had removed the bullets from his gun. The majority notes Weed's argument that the statement should be excluded because there was no corroborating evidence, but then fails to address it. Majority op., ¶ 5. The failure to do so is not surprising because it appears that the State did not offer any evidence to corroborate the hearsay statement. Under Stevens, this lack of corroboration in and of itself makes the statement inadmissible. See Stevens, 171 Wis. 2d at 119.
¶ 57. In addition, it is not admissible because it fails to meet the foundational requirements. The requirements necessary to satisfy the exception for statements of recent perception are correctly set forth in ¶ 14 of the majority opinion: the statement must (1) be made in good faith with no contemplation of pending or anticipated litigation, (2) relate to a recently perceived event, and (3) be made while the declarant's recollection is clear.
¶ 58. The precise statement at issue is: "that's the reason I took the bullets out of the .357." I conclude that the statement is ambiguous in meaning and uncertain in time.
¶ 59. Michael did not tell the Fuerbringers when or what even caused him to remove the bullets and it is not clear from the circumstances when the alleged removal took place. Because the timing of the event is uncertain, the State failed to demonstrate that the statement describes a recent perception.
¶ 60. The majority discusses the testimony of the Fuerbringers in which they state their assumption that *470Michael took the bullets out of the gun because of Weed's suicide attempt eight days prior to the statement being made. According to the majority it therefore "appears" that the event described in the statement occurred within eight days. However, the assumptions of the Fuerbringers are insufficient to justify a conclusion that the State demonstrated recency.
¶ 61. This case is similar to Tim Torres Enterprises, Inc. v. Linscott, 142 Wis. 2d 56, 78, 416 N.W.2d 670 (Ct. App. 1987), which involved the introduction of hearsay under the exception for statements of recent perception. The court of appeals determined that the party who sought to introduce the hearsay failed to reliably demonstrate when the perceived event occurred. Id. The court therefore concluded that the statement did not qualify for the hearsay exception. Id.
¶ 62. Similarly, in this case, the majority acknowledges that the Fuerbringers did not know when the alleged removal of the bullets occurred. According to the majority, the Fuerbringers made a "reasonable" assumption that the removal was in response to Weed's suicide attempt eight days before. Majority op., ¶ 18. There are, however, other assumptions which are also reasonable.
¶ 63. Weed notes other things that Michael could have been referring to when he stated "that's the reason I took the bullets out of the .357": he could have been referring to Patricia's angry state of mind, to her consumption of alcohol, or to their argumentative history, any of which may have provided a reason to unload the gun. As a result of this ambiguity, the assumptions of the Fuerbringers do not reliably meet the required foundation that the event be recently perceived.
¶ 64. Further, given that the purpose of his statement was to criticize his wife and that it was made in *471response to her humiliating comments, it is doubtful whether it meets the "good faith" necessary to establish the foundation for admission. Likewise, it is questionable whether the statement was made under circumstances which meet that foundational requirement that the declarant's recollection must be clear. The majority acknowledges that "Michael's mental state might have been affected by having a few beers." Majority op., ¶ 27.
¶ 65. Although it is unfortunate that the majority sub silencio overrules Stevens and incorrectly applies these facts to the foundational requirements for admissibility, the most problematic part of the majority's evidentiary analysis is that it broadens the exception to such an extent as to render the foundational requirements meaningless.
¶ 66. As noted above, Congress rejected this proposed new rule of evidence not only because it lacked sufficient reliability, but also out of a fear of its "great potential breadth." The majority employs an ardently criticized standard of admissibility and in doing so, not only unwisely broadens the exception, but essentially blows it wide open. In describing this standard, a treatise observes that "[n] early any articulated thought meets the test." Daniel D. Blinka, Wisconsin Practice: Evidence, § 8045.2, at 711.
¶ 67. The majority in ¶ 19 applies the Kluever standard of admissibility. The declarant in that case suffered a severe head injury and was rendered unconscious for a substantial period of time but for "islets of memory." Kluever v. Evangelical Reformed Immanuels Congregation, 143 Wis. 2d 806, 810-811, 422 N.W.2d 874 (1988). Since the declarant possessed an "amorphous" concept of time, the court determined that the "mere passage of time" is not controlling and that "a *472determination regarding recency of perception depends on the particular circumstances of the case . .. Id. at 813.
¶ 68. In- discussing the standard set forth in Kluever, one commentator warns that if broadly applied, the foundational requirements are rendered meaningless:
As a standard of admissibility, this formulation fails to provide any meaningful yardstick for determining "recent perception." Nearly any articulated thought meets the test. The holding should be understood as applying only to cases where expert medical testimony supports a finding that the declarant has "islets" of accurate memory.
Blinka, Wisconsin Practice: Evidence, § 8045.2, at 711.
¶ 69. Based on the above analysis, I conclude that the hearsay does not meet the exception for statements of recent perception. There is no corroboration of the statement pursuant to Stevens and it fails to meet the foundational requirements. Therefore, it should not have been admitted under the rules of evidence.
¶ 70. In addition, the admission of the hearsay violated Weed's constitutional right to confrontation. The hearsay rule and the confrontation clause protect similar values and stem from the same roots. White v. Illinois, 502 U.S. 346, 352-53 (1992). Yet, they are distinct doctrines and the confrontation clause prohibits the use of statements that would be permitted under the hearsay rule:
Although the confrontation clause and the hearsay rule are designed to protect similar values, they are not identical. More to the point, the hearsay rule generally permits a wider array of statements than the confrontation clause.
*473Blinka, Wisconsin Practice: Evidence, § 802.3, at 575.
¶ 71. Analysis under the confrontation clause includes an examination of the totality of the circumstances that surround the making of the statement to determine whether the evidence is so trustworthy that cross-examination would have added little to its reliability. Idaho v. Wright, 497 U.S. 805, 820-821 (1990). This case does not meet that test.
¶ 72. As noted above, it is unclear when the alleged removal of the bullets occurred. The majority accepts the assumptions of the Fuerbringers that Michael was referring to Weed's suicide attempt. However, this is not clear and cross-examination would be helpful to clarify the reason for and the timing of the removal.
¶ 73. In addition to clarifying the ambiguities that exist, cross-examination in this case would test Michael's candor and accuracy in making the statement. The fact that the purpose of Michael's statement was to criticize his wife and not to recount an event calls into question its accuracy. This is especially true because the statement was made during an argument and after he had consumed the proverbial "few beers." Because cross-examination would have meaningfully tested the reliability of the statement, it fails the test under the confrontation clause enunciated in Idaho v. Wright.
¶ 74. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that the statement was inadmissible both under the rules of evidence and under the confrontation clause. I concur in the mandate because, for the reasons set forth by the majority, I conclude that the admission of the hearsay was harmless error under Chapman v. California, 386 *474U.S. 18, 20-26 (1967) (the court must be able to declare beyond a reasonable doubt that the error did not contribute to the verdict).
¶ 75. The majority's conclusion of harmless error makes the expansion of the exception for statements of recent perception unnecessary. Additionally, it seems unwarranted because the statement is one that the majority describes as having Tow probative value." Majority op., ¶ 32.
¶ 76. Nevertheless, for whatever reasons, the majority apparently feels compelled to admit a statement which fails the foundational requirements, violates Weed's right to confrontation, and sub silencio overrules Stevens. Most problematic, however, is that for the future it broadens the exception to such an extent that "nearly any articulated thought meets the test." Accordingly, I respectfully concur.
¶ 77. I am authorized to state that CHIEF JUSTICE SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON joins this concurrence.

=== CASE 2219166 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:04.096466+00 ===

412 Mass. 267 (1992)
588 N.E.2d 651
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
GREGORY J. MARTINO.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Hampden.
December 2, 1991.
March 19, 1992.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, ABRAMS, NOLAN, & GREANEY, JJ.
Peter J. Avenia for the defendant.
Ariane D. Vuono, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
GREANEY, J.
A jury in the Superior Court found the defendant guilty of murder in the first degree by reason of deliberate premeditation and extreme atrocity or cruelty in connection with the strangulation of his former girl friend.[1]*269 Represented by new counsel on appeal, the defendant argues a variety of issues. We reject his arguments and discern no basis to grant relief pursuant to G.L.c. 278, § 33E (1990 ed.). Accordingly, we affirm the judgment convicting the defendant of murder in the first degree.
The evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to the Commonwealth, Commonwealth v. Anderson, 396 Mass. 306, 311 (1985), permitted the jury to find the following facts. Approximately six months before the murder, the defendant and the victim, Vivian A. Morrissey, met and became romantically involved to the point where the defendant eventually moved in with the victim and her two children. After the defendant moved in, his relationship with the victim deteriorated. On one occasion, an argument between the defendant and the victim over possession of a videotape[2] escalated into a shoving match in which each tore the other's shirt. Eventually, the defendant moved out. Thereafter, the defendant and the victim stayed in contact with one another, but they continued to have difficulties. In particular, the defendant became upset that the victim had begun dating another man. The victim was also concerned because the defendant would not return his keys to her home, and she asked her estranged husband to change the locks on her house. This was done. She also obtained an unlisted telephone number. On September 14, 1987, the victim was granted a restraining order against the defendant. He then obtained a similar order against her. A few days later they agreed to "drop the orders."
On the day of the murder, September 21, 1987, the victim made a telephone call to the defendant at approximately 3:30 P.M. The defendant told her that he had a visitor and asked her to call him back in fifteen minutes, which she did. The defendant recorded this second telephone conversation on a videotape. During the conversation, the victim expressed concern *270 about a number of repairs her house required, and the defendant offered to help her with some of the repairs. The victim also asked whether she could borrow the defendant's typewriter. They arranged for the defendant to visit the victim and her children at approximately 6 P.M. The defendant arrived at approximately 6:30 P.M. and left at some time after 8:30 P.M. He then drove to a tavern in Greenfield to watch a "Monday Night Football" game on television. Several witnesses, including a bartender, saw the defendant at the tavern at some time during the first half of the football game. The game started at 9 P.M., and its second half began at approximately 11 P.M.
The next morning, a regular babysitter for the victim's children (who was also a friend of the victim) arrived at the victim's home. This friend knocked on the back door but no one answered. She could hear the children inside the house and let herself in with a key the victim had given her. The friend fed the children in the kitchen, and noticed a note to the victim from the defendant.[3] Concerned that the victim had apparently left the children alone, the friend made contact with another babysitter who came to house. Sometime after this babysitter arrived, the victim's body was discovered in the basement and help was promptly called.
Officer Raymond Zukowski of the Greenfield police arrived at the victim's home at about 7:40 A.M. Sergeant Norman Roberts of the Massachusetts State police arrived next and went to the basement. He saw a sheet of yellow-lined paper under the victim's right knee. The sheet of paper had a shoe print on one side and the words "I love you Geg [sic]" on the other side. The words were written in the defendant's handwriting; the shoe print matched the sole of a sneaker owned by the defendant. There was also a pile of wood in the basement near where the body was found, and wood splinters *271 were discovered on the shirt and pants the defendant had worn on the night of the murder. A third note was taken by the police from the defendant's van which read as follows: "I really don't know how to start this. I never wanted or planned to hurt you, it was the farthest thing from my mind, believe me, I do love you, why I'm not showing it anymore, I guess because I...."
The county medical examiner was the next person to arrive. He pronounced the victim dead by strangulation and examined her body. He found three distinct ligature marks on the victim's neck and found a length of rope near the body. This piece of rope was similar to several other lengths of rope discovered by the police at the defendant's home.
Based on the fact that the victim's body was in full rigor, the medical examiner determined that the victim had died approximately twelve hours prior to his examination of her body. A second medical examiner (who was also a pathologist) came to the scene at approximately 10:30 A.M. This physician also estimated that the victim had died twelve to fourteen hours earlier. Further investigation by forensics personnel assigned to the case recovered three hairs from the victim's body. One hair, found in the victim's mouth, was very similar to hair samples taken from the defendant.
1. Sufficiency of the evidence. The defendant argues that at least one of his motions for a required finding of not guilty, which were filed at the conclusion of the Commonwealth's case and at the conclusion of all of the evidence, should have been allowed. He urges that the Commonwealth's case is intrinsically so weak that his conviction rests on nothing more than speculation. The defendant particularly emphasizes his careful refutation of the evidence presented in the Commonwealth's case, maintaining that, at best, the prosecution succeeded only in pointing a finger of suspicion at him.
In reviewing the judge's decision to deny the defendant's motions for a required finding of not guilty, we inquire whether the evidence, considered in the light most favorable to the Commonwealth, was sufficient to satisfy a reasonable *272 jury of each element of first degree murder beyond a reasonable doubt. Commonwealth v. Anderson, 396 Mass. 306, 311 (1985). A conviction may be properly based entirely on circumstantial evidence so long as that evidence establishes the defendant's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Commonwealth v. Nardone, 406 Mass. 123, 129 (1989). Commonwealth v. Montecalvo, 367 Mass. 46, 54 (1975).
The prosecution introduced sufficient evidence of the defendant's guilt under these standards. There was no physical or scientific evidence to warrant a finding that the victim had committed suicide. The Commonwealth established both motive and opportunity on the part of the defendant. The defendant acknowledged that he and the victim had fought shortly before the murder and that he was upset because the victim had begun seeing another man. The defendant admitted having been present at the victim's home about the time at which expert medical testimony estimated the murder to have occurred. A note in the defendant's handwriting, and bearing his footprint, was found partially under the victim's body, and other notes written by him could be found to have incriminatory tones. A hair found in the victim's mouth was similar to samples of the defendant's hair. Wood splinters were found on the sleeves of the jacket the defendant wore on the night of the murder, and there was a stack of wood in the basement of the victim's house, near where the body was discovered.
In cases in which the evidence is largely circumstantial, "it is not essential that the inferences drawn should be the only necessary inferences.... It is enough that [the inferences] be reasonable and possible." Commonwealth v. Merrick, 255 Mass. 510, 514 (1926). "To the extent that conflicting inferences are possible from the evidence, `it is for the jury to determine where the truth lies.'" Commonwealth v. Wilborne, 382 Mass. 241, 245 (1981), quoting Commonwealth v. Amazeen, 375 Mass. 73, 81 (1978). The defendant's arguments are in substance directed toward the weight and credibility of the evidence, a matter wholly within the province of the jury. See Commonwealth v. Nardone, supra *273 at 129-130; Commonwealth v. Montecalvo, supra at 54. Further, the Commonwealth's position as to proof had not deteriorated at the close of all the evidence. The judge properly denied the defendant's motions for a required finding of not guilty.
2. Pretrial motions. The defendant filed several motions to suppress evidence obtained in connection with his interrogation and arrest, from the search of his house and van, and from his trial counsel. The defendant also filed a motion seeking an evidentiary hearing under the principles discussed in Franks v. Delaware, 438 U.S. 154 (1978), asserting that a false statement had been knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly made by the police in an affidavit filed in support of the application for a search warrant for his house. Finally, the defendant moved to dismiss the indictment on the ground that the integrity of the grand jury had been impaired.
The judge held an evidentiary hearing on these motions. The judge's denial of the defendant's motions was accompanied by a very comprehensive and scholarly memorandum of decision. The subsidiary findings of fact made by the judge are fully supported by the evidence she found credible, and we accept them. We proceed to discuss the defendant's legal issues raised on appeal in connection with the motions in light of the judge's findings of fact.
(a) The motions to suppress evidence obtained during interrogation, from the search of the van, and from the defendant's clothing. As the judge found in her memorandum of decision, the defendant was interrogated by the police on September 22, 1987, the day after the murder and prior to the issuance of a warrant for his arrest. The defendant accompanied the police to the district attorney's office in Greenfield, where he gave a statement to the police and signed a form in which he consented to the search of his van and any locked or unlocked containers therein. Later that evening, prior to the issuance of a search warrant for the defendant's home, two police officers went to his home and obtained from the defendant the clothes he had been wearing on the evening of the murder.
*274 The defendant now maintains that his consent to questioning, to the search of his van, and to delivering his clothes to the police was not voluntary. The defendant argues that the evidence from these three sources was obtained in violation of his rights under the Fourth and Fifth Amendments to the Constitution of the United States and art. 14 of the Declaration of Rights of the Massachusetts Constitution, and, therefore, should have been suppressed.
The record provides no basis for the defendant's assertion that his consent was not given voluntarily. He acknowledges that the police administered Miranda warnings to him, that he signed a form waiving his Miranda rights, that he signed a form consenting to the search of his van, and that he was advised that he could suspend the police interrogation or obtain counsel anytime he chose. Nonetheless, he argues that his statements and consents were not voluntary because he felt tired and distraught and did not really believe he was free to go, to remain silent, to refuse to consent to the search of the van, or to refuse to turn over his clothing. In essence, the defendant urges us to accept his version of the facts.[4]
The defendant presented these same claims to the judge, who categorically rejected them. She made findings of fact consistent with the testimony given by the police which indicated that the defendant's consent was voluntarily and intelligently given. We have repeatedly stated that "[t]he determination of the weight and credibility of the testimony is the function and responsibility of the judge who saw and heard *275 the witnesses, and not of this court." Commonwealth v. Harmon, 410 Mass. 425, 431 (1991), quoting Commonwealth v. Moon, 380 Mass. 751, 756 (1980). Moveover, in reviewing the denial of a motion to suppress, we will not disturb the findings of fact made by a judge absent a showing of clear error. Commonwealth v. Yesilciman, 406 Mass. 736, 743 (1990), and cases cited. The defendant has failed to show that the judge erred in any of her findings of fact, and we conclude that her conclusions of law on this aspect of the case are sound. The defendant's motions to suppress were properly denied.
(b) Evidence seized from defense counsel. The defendant argues that the videotape on which the defendant recorded his telephone conversation with the victim on the day of her death was improperly taken from his trial counsel and should have been suppressed because no exigent circumstances justified its warrantless seizure by the police. In addition, the defendant argues for the first time on appeal that, even if exigent circumstances justified the warrantless seizure, there was no justification for the police to view the videotape prior to obtaining a warrant. We reject both arguments.
As the judge describes in her memorandum of decision, the defendant's trial counsel entered the defendant's home while the police had the home under surveillance but before a search warrant had been issued. The police officer posted at the house for security purposes allowed the attorney to enter, but was then told by a supervisor not to allow the attorney to remove anything from the premises. When the attorney emerged with the videotape and a copy of a restraining order, the officer seized both items and would not allow the attorney to replace the items in the house.
The judge properly applied constitutional principles to the facts of the seizure. She found that the officer posted at the scene knew that the attorney represented the defendant and knew that at least one item the police planned to search for *276 in the house after obtaining a warrant was a videotape.[5] Exigent circumstances justified the seizure of the evidence. In view of what the officer at the scene knew, he had a reasonable basis to believe that material evidence might be in the process of being removed from the defendant's home. If material evidence had been removed, it could have been impossible to safeguard it from loss or destruction. This reasonable belief as to the potential loss or destruction of evidence created an exigent circumstance permitting the officer's warrantless seizure of the evidence. Commonwealth v. Huffman, 385 Mass. 122, 125 (1982). Commonwealth v. Ortiz, 376 Mass. 349, 356 (1978). Commonwealth v. Forde, 367 Mass. 798, 801 (1975). Commonwealth v. Hall, 366 Mass. 790, 802 (1975).
We reject the defendant's argument that the Commonwealth has not established that it was impracticable to obtain a warrant to seize the videotape and restraining order. The police did not have time to obtain a warrant because the defendant's attorney was preparing to take the items with him at the time of the seizure. Indeed, the police were in the process of obtaining a warrant at the time this exigency arose. Far from unreasonably hindering the warrant process, the police were actively in the process of doing all they could in order to secure a warrant. See Commonwealth v. Cast, 407 Mass. 891, 904 (1990).
We reject the defendant's further argument that the police created the exigency. The defendant hypothesizes that, instead of seizing the evidence, the police could have forbidden the attorney to enter the house, allowed him to return the items himself, or accompanied him into the house to return the items. None of these solutions would have been clearly adequate. First, at the time the attorney entered the house, he told the officer he only planned "to look around." At this time, there was no reason for the officer to believe that the *277 attorney intended to remove anything from the house and obviously no reason to deny him access. Second, allowing the attorney to replace the items on his own could have presented some risk of their loss. Finally, the police officer might not have wanted to enter the house with the attorney on the chance that he could see evidence in plain view. Had the officer observed and seized any evidence during such a warrantless entry, the defendant might have challenged that evidence on the ground of a warrantless search. The exigency did not result from any misconduct or unreasonable delay by the police. Cf. Commonwealth v. Forde, supra at 801-803 (police failed to get warrant after having probable cause for a week). The officer acted appropriately in seizing the evidence.
Lastly, the defendant argues that, even if exigent circumstances justified the warrantless seizure of the evidence, the police had no justification for viewing the videotape without obtaining a warrant. This argument was not raised below, so we consider it under the substantial likelihood of a miscarriage of justice standard. Commonwealth v. Garcia, 379 Mass. 422, 439 (1980). Because the police subsequently obtained a warrant which expressly authorized them to search the defendant's home and to seize any videotapes found there, the defendant cannot argue that, but for the warrantless viewing of the videotape, the police would never have acquired and viewed it. The police eventually seized thirteen videotapes from the home when they executed the search warrant. The viewing of the videotape earlier than might otherwise have been possible did not create a substantial likelihood of a miscarriage of justice.[6]
(c) Motion for a Franks v. Delaware hearing. Prior to trial, the defendant moved for a hearing pursuant to the *278 principles discussed in Franks v. Delaware, 438 U.S. 154 (1978), on the premise that an affiant, State police Sergeant Norman Roberts, had intentionally or recklessly included a false statement of fact in his affidavit filed in support of the warrant application. This statement involved the videotape discussed above which Sergeant Roberts incorrectly stated had been partially erased. The judge found that Sergeant Roberts's misstatement was unintentional.
As pointed out by the judge in her memorandum of decision, the defendant failed to make a preliminary showing that the affiant's false statement was intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly made. Specifically, the judge relied on the fact that the officer who initially viewed the tape was looking for the videotape depicting the victim and the defendant having sexual intercourse, and he viewed the tape without its audio portion engaged. Under these conditions, the portion of the videotape that contained the recorded telephone call appeared to be blank, and Sergeant Roberts reasonably believed it to be blank. Because this portion of the videotape was imbedded in an otherwise full tape, Roberts reasonably surmised that the blank portion had been erased. Thus, the predicate for a hearing under Franks v. Delaware was not shown. See Commonwealth v. Amral, 407 Mass. 511, 522-523 (1990); Commonwealth v. Ramos, 402 Mass. 209, 215 (1988); Commonwealth v. Singer, 29 Mass. App. Ct. 708, 713-716 (1991).[7]
(d) Motion to dismiss the indictment. The defendant argues that the integrity of the grand jury was compromised by Sergeant Roberts's misstatement concerning the erasure of the videotape. We disagree. "In considering a claim that false or deceptive evidence was presented to a grand jury, we have said that a defendant must show that (1) the evidence was given to the grand jury knowingly or with reckless disregard *279 for the truth and for the purpose of obtaining an indictment, and (2) that the evidence probably influenced the grand jury's determination to indict the defendant." Commonwealth v. Kelcourse, 404 Mass. 466, 468 (1989). See Commonwealth v. Mayfield, 398 Mass. 615, 621 (1986). "Inaccurate testimony given in good faith does not by itself require dismissal." Commonwealth v. Kelcourse, supra. See Commonwealth v. Reddington, 395 Mass. 315, 319-320 (1985). Where, as is the case here, there is no showing that the false statement was intentionally or recklessly made, the judge properly denied the defendant's motion to dismiss the indictment.[8]
3. Admission of evidence. The Commonwealth presented evidence from several witnesses concerning the deterioration of the defendant's relationship with the victim before she was murdered. Prior to trial, the judge, in response to a motion in limine, issued a comprehensive ruling which reflected a careful assessment of the evidence the Commonwealth intended *280 to introduce on this issue. The judge permitted the Commonwealth to introduce evidence that (1) the defendant had accused the victim of "sleeping around"; (2) the victim had told a number of her friends and family that she no longer wanted to be involved with the defendant; (3) the victim had been injured in a physical altercation with the defendant; (4) the victim had her locks changed because the defendant would not return her key and she was afraid of him; (5) the victim had her telephone number changed to an unlisted number; and (6) the victim obtained a restraining order against the defendant approximately one week before she was murdered. The judge excluded statements made by the victim that the defendant had beat her, had tried to rape her, and had threatened revenge. On appeal, the defendant does not argue that the evidence at issue was not properly admitted. Rather, he contends that he was prejudiced by the cumulative nature of the evidence. In addition, he argues that much of the evidence consisted of prior bad acts, and, therefore, the prejudicial effect of the evidence was unnecessarily exacerbated.
"In Massachusetts, evidence of other criminal behavior may not be admitted to prove the propensity of the accused to commit the indicted offense but it is admissible for other relevant probative purposes." Commonwealth v. Gallison, 383 Mass. 659, 672 (1981), citing Commonwealth v. Chalifoux, 362 Mass. 811, 815-816 (1973). Furthermore, "[t]he admission of such evidence generally is `a matter on which the opinion of the trial judge will be accepted on review except for palpable error.' Commonwealth v. Young, 382 Mass. 448, 462-463 (1981)." Commonwealth v. Cordle, 404 Mass. 733, 744 (1989), S.C., ante 267 (1992).
The judge engaged in a scrupulous analysis of all the evidence proposed by the Commonwealth. Her rulings minimized the prejudicial impact of the evidence of the defendant's hostile relationship with the victim. Furthermore, the evidence concerning the relationship between the defendant and the victim, including the restraining order she had obtained and her decision to change the locks on her house, was *281 introduced by separate witnesses each of whom had a different relationship with the victim. It was significant to the Commonwealth's case that the victim shared her fear and anxiety toward the defendant with a number of people. The evidence was not only relevant to show "the `entire relationship' between the victim and the defendant," Commonwealth v. Cordle, supra at 744, quoting Commonwealth v. Drew, 397 Mass. 65, 79 (1986), but it also tended to show the depth of the victim's fear of the defendant.[9]
4. Denial of the motion for a mistrial. During the prosecutor's direct examination of the man the victim had begun to date two weeks before she was murdered, the witness unexpectedly stated that the victim had told him that "Greg Martino threatened to kill me...." The witness was interrupted by the judge who immediately interjected, "Stop. Side Bar." The defendant objected to the testimony, and eventually moved for a mistrial. The motion was denied. The judge then ordered the testimony struck and instructed the jury as noted below.[10] The defendant argues that he was greatly harmed *282 by the witness's spontaneous remark and, as a consequence, it was error for the judge to have denied his motion for a mistrial. We reject the argument.
The decision whether to declare a mistrial lies within the trial judge's discretion. Commonwealth v. Amirault, 404 Mass. 221, 232 (1989), and cases cited. In this case, before the witness made his unanticipated remark, the jury knew that the relationship between the victim and the defendant had deteriorated considerably. In view of the evidence of the failed relationship, it is difficult to imagine that the jury could have been unduly influenced by the witness's spontaneous remark. See Commonwealth v. Gil, 393 Mass. 204, 218-219 (1984). In the circumstances, the judge's use of a curative instruction was an adequate response to the problem. See Commonwealth v. Gallagher, 408 Mass. 510, 518 (1990); Commonwealth v. Amirault, supra at 239-240.
5. The prosecutor's closing argument. In her closing argument to the jury, the prosecutor commented in the manner noted below[11] on the explanation the defendant gave at trial concerning the note found on the victim's kitchen table. The defendant's trial counsel objected to this portion of the prosecutor's argument at the conclusion of her summation. The judge responded by offering to emphasize in the final jury instructions that the defendant never has to offer proof and "he certainly never has to explain anything." The judge followed through on this promise and later instructed the jury: "The presumption of innocence also means that no person ever has to prove his or her innocence. No person charged with a crime ever has to explain anything to a jury. Exactly *283 the contrary is true." Despite this, the defendant argues that the prosecutor's comment violated the principle of Commonwealth v. Person, 400 Mass. 136 (1987). We do not agree.
Here, unlike Person, where the prosecutor improperly commented on the defendant's silence, there was evidence that the defendant's trial testimony differed from his pretrial position as to the note. As the prosecutor indicated, the defendant was asked when he was first interviewed by the police about the note that had been left on the kitchen table. At that time, the defendant stated that the note left on the table had been written the afternoon before the victim was murdered. At trial, however, the defendant claimed that he was referring to a different note when he was speaking to the police. He also testified that he had no idea what happened to this other note. The prosecutor was entitled to comment on the difference between the defendant's pretrial statements and his trial testimony. Commonwealth v. Sherick, 401 Mass. 302, 304-305 (1987).
The defendant also criticizes the prosecutor's argument that consciousness of guilt could be inferred from the defendant's failure to tell the police that he had recorded a telephone conversation between himself and the victim on a videotape. There was no objection to this portion of the prosecutor's argument at trial. Accordingly, the standard of review is whether the argument created a substantial likelihood of a miscarriage of justice.
The defendant's claim that the prosecutor's remarks impermissibly infringed on his right to remain silent fails for the simple reason that the defendant did not exercise his right to remain silent. See Commonwealth v. Hartman, 404 Mass. 306, 317-318 (1989). Compare Commonwealth v. Cobb, 374 Mass. 514, 520-522 (1978). As shown by the judge's findings of fact on the defendant's pretrial motions, the defendant made a lengthy statement to the police in which he discussed his relationship with the victim in some detail. The full statement was introduced in evidence after the judge ruled that it had been made voluntarily. In view of the detail of the statement, the defendant's omissions could *284 be found to be significant, and the prosecutor was entitled to comment on them.[12]Commonwealth v. Sherick, supra at 305 (collecting cases where similar comments made by prosecutors have been considered to be permissible comments on the evidence).
6. Replacement of a deliberating juror. The defendant next challenges the judge's discharge of a deliberating juror in his absence as a violation of his right to a fair trial under the Fifth, Sixth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, art. 12 of the Declaration of Rights to the Massachusetts Constitution, and G.L.c. 234, § 26B (1990 ed.).[13] Specifically, the defendant argues that, although his trial counsel was present when the judge made inquiries of the juror and agreed to the juror's discharge, he had a fundamental right to be present. In addition, the defendant claims that the record does not demonstrate that he made a voluntary, knowing and intelligent waiver of his right to be present, and, therefore, that the alleged error cannot be considered harmless.
The problem arose at the conclusion of a day of deliberations, when the foreperson of the jury advised the judge that there was a "serious problem" with one of the jurors who wanted to speak with the judge. Efforts to resolve the problem without the judge's speaking directly with the juror were *285 not satisfactory. Thereafter, the foreperson advised the judge (by way of a note) that "the problem arises out of a declaration that perhaps should have been made by the juror before she was selected. It might have resulted in her being challenged. [The juror] will meet with you in your chambers."
The defendant's trial counsel and the prosecutor discussed the situation with the judge at considerable length. It was finally decided that the judge would ask the juror if anything had occurred that might affect her impartiality. When that question was posed to the juror, she responded in the negative. This inquiry took place in the lobby with the defendant's trial counsel and the prosecutor present. There was no objection to the procedure, and counsel did not request that the defendant be present. The judge, trial counsel for the defendant, and the prosecutor then discussed various alternatives. What was apparent to everyone, however, was that the "problem" affecting the juror, if indeed one existed, had not been disclosed. The judge then excused counsel to allow them some time to consider the situation again.
When the lobby conference recommenced, it was agreed that the judge would make further inquiry of the juror. The juror was then called back into the lobby. The judge, the defendant's trial counsel, and the prosecutor were present. Once again, the defense counsel made no objection to the procedure. This time when the judge asked the juror whether there was any matter that should have been brought to the court's attention during empaneling of the jury, the juror responded affirmatively. The juror then revealed that her grandfather had been convicted of murder and had been imprisoned for ten years. The juror also indicated that, had she realized that the juror questionnaire form required the disclosure of this information, she would have disclosed it. The inquiry then ended and another recess was taken in order for counsel to determine what course of action to take.
Approximately ten minutes later, the defendant's trial counsel and the prosecutor reported to the judge that they had agreed that the juror should be discharged. The defendant's trial counsel also stated: "For the record, I explained *286 the problem to [the defendant] and he agrees." When the judge asked whether the defendant's trial counsel would prefer an acknowledgement of the defendant's agreement on the record, either in court or in the lobby with the presence of the court stenographer, counsel replied: "I'm satisfied that [the defendant is] satisfied [with] the volatility of leaving a person on there like that, and not knowing the problems that could result in any way, and he agrees that this is the best solution."
Thereafter, the juror was excused. An individual voir dire was conducted by the judge of each of the remaining eleven jurors. Each juror was asked whether anything had occurred at any time during the case "up to and including this moment which would in anyway effect, or does effect, your ability to be fair and impartial and judge the case based solely on the evidence?" All eleven jurors responded in the negative. An alternate was then selected, and the jury were instructed that they were required to begin their deliberations anew.
When a judge conducts an inquiry about a consequential matter, such as occurred in this case with the troubled juror, there is a requirement, deriving from the constitutional rights of confrontation and fair trial, that the defendant and his counsel be present. See Commonwealth v. Connor, 392 Mass. 838, 843 n. 1 (1984); Commonwealth v. Robichaud, 358 Mass. 300, 301-303 (1970); Commonwealth v. Perez, 30 Mass. App. Ct. 934, 935-936 (1991); Commonwealth v. Bobilin, 25 Mass. App. Ct. 410, 415 (1988); Commonwealth v. Hicks, 22 Mass. App. Ct. 139, 147 (1986). The absence of the defendant from such a colloquy, however, does not automatically constitute reversible error. See Commonwealth v. Hicks, supra. We conclude that no basis for reversal has been demonstrated here.
All discussions by the judge with counsel and with the juror were made a matter of record. That record unequivocally shows that the defendant was fully informed of everything that occurred. No objection was made to the procedure followed by the judge. The procedure was carefully tailored to *287 protect the juror's privacy and the integrity of the jury as a whole, and to give the defendant, through his counsel, sufficient opportunity to evaluate the problem and to arrive at a solution that the defendant, at the time, thought was in his best interests. Importantly, the defendant's trial counsel indicated that the defendant agreed to the discharge of the juror. Further, counsel declined the opportunity to have the defendant's acquiescence placed affirmatively on the record. Nothing has been provided to show that, at the time the juror was discharged, the defendant disagreed with the resolution arrived at after considerable inquiry and discussion.
In the absence of any objection,[14] and in view of the affirmative representations of defendant's trial counsel of the defendant's understanding and agreement ("good cause" existing under G.L.c. 234, § 26B, to replace the juror), the defendant is not entitled to another trial because of the incident.
7. Allegations of ineffective assistance of counsel. The defendant argues that his trial counsel provided him with ineffective assistance of counsel by: (1) failing to object to the defendant's absence during the examination of the juror who was discharged; (2) failing to accept the trial judge's offer of jury instructions on manslaughter based on intoxication; (3) failing to request a "mere presence" instruction; and (4) failing to recognize that a defense witness would testify in a *288 manner favorable to the Commonwealth on cross-examination. Because this is a first degree murder case, "we need not focus on the adequacy of trial counsel's performance" to decide the claims. Rather, "we shall consider [under the standard set by G.L.c. 278, § 33E] whether there was an error ... and, if there was, whether that error was likely to have influenced the jury's conclusion." Commonwealth v. Wright, 411 Mass. 678, 682 (1992).
(a) The defendant's absence when the judge conducted an inquiry into the possible discharge of a deliberating juror provides no basis for relief. As has been discussed, the record clearly demonstrates that the defendant's trial counsel conferred with him during the interrogation of the juror and obtained his agreement to her discharge. The defendant has not shown that he was excluded from participating in his defense.
(b) Trial counsel's refusal of the judge's offer to give a manslaughter instruction based on evidence of the defendant's consumption of alcohol was proper. The record indicates that the defendant participated fully in the decision to refuse the instruction. That decision was reasonable in view of the slight evidence of alcohol consumption and the fact that the defense proceeded on the theory that someone else committed the murder, a theory that would have been undermined had the instruction been given.[15]
(c) The absence of a request for an instruction that evidence of the defendant's presence at the crime scene alone was insufficient to warrant a conviction was not significant. Because the Commonwealth presented evidence which established far more than the defendant's mere presence at the *289 scene, there is no likelihood that the jury could have convicted him on this evidence alone. This case is not like Commonwealth v. Cordle, 404 Mass. 733, 742-743 (1989), S.C., ante 172 (1992), in any material aspect.
(d) The decision to call a defense witness who gave testimony damaging to the defense was proper. This witness testified on direct examination that she had a telephone conversation with the victim for approximately two hours on the evening of the murder. As the defendant concedes in his brief, this testimony was important to him because the witness's testimony, if accepted, tended to establish that the victim was still alive after the defendant had left her home. The fact that the witness gave harmful testimony when she was cross-examined was a risk implicit in her being called to testify. The witness's testimony provided a key link in the defendant's over-all defense strategy notwithstanding her failures when pursued on cross-examination. A new trial is not warranted simply because this strategy was not so successful as originally planned.
8. Review under G.L.c. 278, § 33E. The defendant also asks that we exercise our power under G.L.c. 278, § 33E, to order a new trial, or, in the alternative, to reduce the verdict to manslaughter. The defendant is not entitled to the relief he seeks.
In support of his request for a new trial, the defendant argues that his expert witnesses were better qualified than the experts presented by the Commonwealth and that the testimony of a defense witness whose testimony on cross-examination favored the Commonwealth was not credible. For these reasons, the defendant argues, the verdict was against the weight of the evidence, and he is entitled to a new trial. However, the defendant's arguments concern matters that are generally within the sole province of the jury. As we have stated in previous cases, this court does not sit as a second jury in reviewing cases under G.L.c. 278, § 33E. Commonwealth v. Luce, 399 Mass. 479, 485 (1987). Commonwealth v. Smith, 357 Mass. 168, 181 (1970). See Commonwealth v. Schnopps, 390 Mass. 722 (1984). The evidence tying the defendant *290 to the murder was more than sufficient to establish his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
The defendant argues that his alleged consumption of one-half of a marihuana cigarette and two or three cans of beer on the day of the murder rendered him incapable of forming the mental state necessary to prove murder in the first degree. The defendant also argues that the killing may well have taken place during the course of an emotional argument between himself and the victim. These two factors combined, the defendant urges, justify reducing the verdict to manslaughter. We disagree.
While the defendant testified to having consumed the marihuana and beer, there is nothing to show that the consumption impaired him in any way. Moreover, there is no indication that the victim was killed in the heat of passion. Rather, the record indicates that the victim was strangled from behind, resisted the attack, and took from three to seven minutes to die an agonizing death. In these circumstances, there is no justification for a reduction in the jury's verdict.
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The defendant filed a motion to change the trial's venue which was allowed. The trial took place in the Superior Court in Hampden County.
[2]  The defendant testified that the videotape in question depicted himself and the victim having sexual intercourse. Several witnesses testified that the victim had destroyed this videotape.
[3]  The note read as follows: "Dear Viv, I know you're depressed about all the things to do around the house. I know you have many things to do. Don't let it get you down. I still care for you and lately you have done so much for me, making love the other night and going out. I love you as a friend. Take care, see you later this week, love Greg."
[4]  The defendant argues that a number of factors combined to render involuntary both his statement and the consent to the search and to turn over the clothing items. First, the defendant argues that he was very tired during the interrogation, and became distraught once the police informed him that the victim was dead. Second, the defendant argues that because the police took so long to prepare the consent form for the search of his van, he believed he was not free to leave until he signed it. Third, the defendant claims that the nature of the setting of the interrogation and the signing of the consent form, the district attorney's office, was inherently coercive. Finally, the defendant urges that he was both distraught over the victim's death and exhausted from the afternoon's interrogation when the police obtained the clothing from him.
[5]  At this point in the investigation, the police were still hoping to find the videotape depicting the defendant and the victim having sexual intercourse. See note 2, supra.
[6]  The use of a false statement concerning the videotape in an affidavit filed in support of the search warrant also did not create a substantial likelihood of a miscarriage of justice. As will be discussed below, the statement concerning the videotape was not necessary to the finding of probable cause to issue the warrant. The judge properly admitted in evidence the videotape seized from the defendant's attorney.
[7]  The defendant's argument that the false statement is automatically rendered reckless because the police should not have viewed the videotape prior to the issuance of the warrant also fails. The defendant has established neither that the statement was recklessly made nor that it was necessary to the magistrate's finding of probable cause.
[8]  The defendant also attacks the indictment on jurisdictional grounds. The indictment read (in traditional form) as follows: "The Jurors for the said Commonwealth, on their oath, present that Gregory J. Martino of Greenfield in the County of Franklin, aforesaid, on or about the twenty-first day of September one thousand nine hundred and eighty-seven at Montague in the County aforesaid, did assault and beat Vivian A. Morrissey with intent to murder her, and by such assault and beating, did murder Vivian A. Morrissey." The defendant acknowledges that this indictment tracks the language of the statutory form set forth at G.L.c. 277, § 79 (1990 ed.).
Although the defendant raises this argument for the first time on appeal, the Commonwealth has fully briefed it, perhaps because the defendant has couched the argument in jurisdictional terms. The argument is without merit. As one noted commentator has observed: "An indictment which used the statutory form and charged the defendant with murder was not vague, indefinite or in violation of Article 12 of the Declaration of Rights, and in any event if the allegations were not sufficient to enable the defendant to prepare his defense, he was not entitled to have the indictment dismissed but was entitled as a matter of right to such particulars as might be necessary in order to give him reasonable knowledge of the nature and grounds of the crime charged." K.B. Smith, Criminal Procedure § 730 (1983), citing Commonwealth v. Baker, 368 Mass. 58 (1975). There is nothing to indicate that the defendant ever requested a bill of particulars. No reason exists to question the adequacy of the indictment.
[9]  We reject the defendant's argument that the restraining order obtained by the victim should not have been introduced in evidence as an exhibit. The restraining order, however, had been referred to on a number of occasions by several witnesses in their testimony. As has been discussed above, this testimony was properly admitted. Thus, the introduction of the order itself could not have harmed the defendant.
We also reject the defendant's claims that the judge's limiting instructions to the jury with respect to their consideration of the evidence were deficient. The judge accurately and thoroughly instructed the jury on the purpose for which they could consider the evidence. Moreover, an appropriate limiting instruction was given each time particular portions of the evidence were introduced without objection by the defendant's trial counsel.
[10]  "Ladies and gentlemen, with respect to the last statement made by the witness, you are to totally disregard that statement, you are to strike that statement out of your minds. You have taken an oath as jurors to follow my instructions regarding the law, I have made very definitive rulings regarding the law in this case, and I am telling you must abide by it and you must abide by what I am telling you, and that is to strike from your minds and strike from any consideration whatsoever any statement  the last statement that was just made by the witness. It was not competent testimony, it was not acceptable testimony, and it is not testimony that will be considered within this trial."
[11]  "And I suggest to you that he's had a year plus since the time that he talked to the police to work out some explanation of why he would leave a note containing mistruths, why he would leave a note that refers to making love when there is no way of being able to show that that's what happened and that didn't happen and that was something that was completely out of the relationship at the time that he wrote that note.
"And if you compare it to what he says in his statement, you will see that what he was talking about in his statement was that very note and it's now a year later when he has contrived a story to try to explain away all of the evidence that was left behind."
[12]  The defendant's initial failure to tell the police that he had recorded the telephone conversations could also be considered indicative of consciousness of guilt. See Commonwealth v. Lavalley, 410 Mass. 641, 649 (1991).
[13]  This statute provides, in pertinent part, for the use of an alternate juror to replace a deliberating juror as follows:
"If, at any time after the final submission of the case by the court to the jury and before the jury has agreed on a verdict, a juror dies, or becomes ill, or is unable to perform his duty for any other good cause shown to the court, the court may order him to be discharged and direct the clerk to place the names of all of the remaining alternate jurors in a box and draw the name of an alternate, who shall then take the place of the discharged juror on the jury, which shall then renew its deliberations with the alternate juror. The court shall have jurisdiction to receive the verdict of the jury constituted under the provisions of this section and shall have jurisdiction to render judgment in said case."
[14]  Compare Commonwealth v. Connor, 392 Mass. 838, 842-847 (1984) (reversal required where the record failed to establish that discharge of juror was for good cause shown and defendant objected to the discharge); Commonwealth v. Robichaud, 358 Mass. 300, 303 (1970) (reversal required where defendant was excluded from voir dire of juror over his objection); Commonwealth v. Perez, 30 Mass. App. Ct. 934, 935-936 (1991) (defendant's conviction reversed where sick juror was discharged in the absence of the defendant and his attorney over the defendant's objection); with Commonwealth v. MacDonald (No. 1), 368 Mass. 395, 400 (1975) (court found that because the defendant failed to object to his absence from private interviews with the jurors, he was precluded from raising the issue on appeal); Commonwealth v. Hicks, 22 Mass. App. Ct. 139, 146-147 (1986) (although the judge's interrogation of jurors outside the presence of the defendant constituted error, the error was harmless where defendant failed to object).
[15]  A request for a voluntary manslaughter instruction on the basis of heat of passion was properly denied by the judge. There was no evidence to suggest a killing "for a sudden transport of passion or heat of blood, upon a reasonable provocation and without malice, or upon sudden combat." Commonwealth v. Soaris, 275 Mass. 291, 299 (1931). Trial counsel's request for this instruction and his refusal to accept the intoxication instruction were not inconsistent with the defense or disadvantageous to the defendant.

=== CASE 9739258 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:19.629536+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE MILLER delivered the opinion of the court: The present appeals concern the constitutionality of section 2 — 622 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622). Under that provision, an attorney representing a plaintiff in a healing art malpractice action, or the plaintiff himself, if proceeding pro se, must attach to the complaint both an affidavit declaring that the attorney or pro se plaintiff has consulted with a health professional who believes that there is merit to the action, and the report of the professional stating the basis for that determination. Submission of those documents may in certain instances be postponed until after commencement of the action. Failure to file the required documents will result in dismissal of the action. In the present case, the circuit court dismissed the plaintiff’s actions against the defendants, St. Elizabeth’s Hospital and Dr. Michael Treister, when the plaintiff failed to submit the affidavits and reports required by section 2 — 622. The plaintiff appealed from the dismissal orders, challenging the constitutionality of the statute. The appellate court declared the provision unconstitutional. (184 Ill. App. 3d 802.) We allowed the defendants’ separate petitions for leave to appeal (107 Ill. 2d Rules 315, 317). The plaintiff filed a six-count complaint in the circuit court of Cook County on April 16, 1986. Counts I through III were brought against St. Elizabeth’s Hospital, and counts IV through VI were brought against Dr. Michael Treister. The plaintiff sought recovery from each of the defendants under the Wrongful Death Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 70, pars. 1, 2), the Survival Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 110½, par. 27 — 6), and the family expense act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 40, par. 1015). In his complaint, the plaintiff alleged that his wife, Alicia DeLuna, was admitted to St. Elizabeth’s Hospital for treatment of her lumbar spine and that on April 7, 1986, she underwent a laminectomy, performed by Dr. Treister. The complaint further alleged that during the course of the operation the decedent’s common iliac artery was severed and that she died the following day as a result of massive internal bleeding. The plaintiff failed to file the certificates and reports required by section 2 — 622, and different trial judges subsequently granted the defendants’ separate motions to dismiss the plaintiff’s action for his failure to comply with the statute. The dismissal of the plaintiff’s action against Dr. Treister was made with prejudice, while the dismissal with respect to St. Elizabeth’s Hospital was made without prejudice. Both orders, however, contained language permitting an immediate appeal pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 304(a) (107 Ill. 2d R. 304(a)). On the plaintiff’s appeal from the dismissal orders, the appellate court declared section 2 — 622 unconstitutional. (184 Ill. App. 3d 802.) The appellate court believed that the requirements of the statute infringed on the power of the judiciary and constituted an invalid delegation of judicial power. Declining to follow several earlier decisions of the appellate court upholding the validity of section 2 — 622, the court reasoned that a litigant seeking to pursue a medical malpractice action was improperly put to the burden of having the action approved in advance by a health professional. In the appellate court’s view, the statute “impermissibly confers upon health professionals a judicial role.” (184 Ill. App. 3d at 807.) Dr. Treister and St. Elizabeth’s Hospital separately filed petitions for leave to appeal pursuant to Supreme Court Rules 315 and 317 (107 Ill. 2d Rules 315, 317). We allowed both appeals and consolidated the matters for purposes of oral argument and disposition. The following organizations and individual were granted leave to submit briefs as amici curiae: the Illinois State Medical Society, the Associated Physicians Insurance Company, the Illinois Hospital Association, the Metropolitan Chicago Healthcare Council, and Barbara J. Clinite. 107 Ill. 2d R. 345. Section 2 — 622 is applicable to “any action, whether in tort, contract or otherwise, in which the plaintiff seeks damages for injuries or death by reason of medical, hospital, or other healing art malpractice.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par.' 2 — 622(a).) The plaintiff’s attorney or the plaintiff himself, if proceeding pro se, must attach to the complaint an affidavit stating that he has consulted with a health professional in whose opinion there is “reasonable and meritorious cause” for the filing of the action. The health professional’s written report indicating the grounds for that determination must also be submitted. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2— 622(a)(1).) The plaintiff chooses his own health professional from among those qualified within the terms of the statute. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2— 622(a)(1) (as amended by Pub. Act 86 — 646, §1, eff. Sept. 1, 1989).) If the applicable statute of limitations is near expiration, the action may be commenced without filing the required certificate and report, and the required documents may then be submitted within 90 days thereafter. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622(a)(2).) A similar extension of time is available if there is difficulty in obtaining necessary medical records. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622(a)(3).) In cases involving multiple defendants, a separate certificate and report must be filed with respect to each defendant. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622(b).) Failure to file the documents required by section 2 — 622 “shall be grounds for dismissal under Section 2 — 619.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622(g).) Section 2 — 622 governs actions filed on or after its effective date, August 15, 1985. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622(h). Section 2 — 622 is designed to reduce the number of frivolous suits that are filed and to eliminate such actions at an early stage, before the expenses of litigation have mounted. (See Lyon v. Hasbro Industries, Inc. (1987), 156 Ill. App. 3d 649, 655.) The provision was part of the medical malpractice reform legislation enacted by the General Assembly in 1985 in response to what was perceived to be a crisis in the area of medical malpractice. (Bernier v. Burris (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 219, 229.) The constitutionality of a number of other provisions contained in the same legislative vehicle, Public Act 84 — 7, was previously considered by this court in Bernier v. Burris (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 219. Section 2 — 622, however, was not among the statutory provisions at issue in Bernier; the plaintiff in that case deemed section 2 — 622 a more effective means of screening out frivolous suits than certain other provisions that were challenged there. Bernier, 113 Ill. 2d at 252. The plaintiff contends in the present appeal that section 2 — 622 is unconstitutional because it violates the separation of powers principle, deprives litigants of access to the courts, denies equal protection and due process, and is invalid special legislation. The appellate court considered only the plaintiffs first challenge to the statute and found the provision invalid on that ground. In light of that result, the appellate court did not rule on the plaintiff’s remaining challenges to the validity of the legislation. Other districts of the appellate court, however, have affirmed the constitutionality of section 2— 622, rejecting many of the same arguments made by the plaintiff here. (Sakovich v. Dodt (3d Dist. 1988), 174 Ill. App. 3d 649; Alford v. Phipps (4th Dist. 1988), 169 Ill. App. 3d 845; Bloom v. Guth (2d Dist. 1987), 164 Ill. App. 3d 475.) The constitutionality of section 2 — 622 was also before this court in McCastle v. Sheinkop (1987), 121 Ill. 2d 188, but the appeal was resolved on a different ground. Similar statutory provisions concerning medical malpractice actions have been upheld against constitutional challenges in other States. (See Adams v. Roses (1986), 183 Cal. App. 3d 498, 506, 228 Cal. Rptr. 339, 344 (rejecting, under rational basis test, equal protection challenge to statute requiring that plaintiff’s attorney file, on or before date of service of process, certificate containing declaration that attorney has consulted with medical expert and that attorney believes action has merit, or has been unable to obtain consultation with three different physicians; extension of time for obtaining consultation is allowed if limitations period is near expiration); Robinson v. Pleet (1988), 76 Md. App. 173, 180-81, 544 A.2d 1, 4-5 (no violation of State constitutional right to jury trial in dismissal of action for failure to comply with statute requiring plaintiff to file, within 90 days from date of complaint, certificate of expert attesting to elements of cause of medical malpractice action); see also Fortier v. Traynor (N.D. 1983), 330 N.W.2d 513, 516-17 (statute requiring plaintiff to submit, within three months of commencement of action or within time allowed by court, “admissible expert opinion” in support of medical malpractice action operates as statute of limitations; “admissible expert opinion” not required in certain specified instances involving an “obvious occurrence” of malpractice, and statute is, “to an extent, a codification of existing case law”).) A statutory provision requiring that notice of a medical malpractice claim be provided to the defendant prior to the commencement of the action was invalidated on State equal protection grounds in Carson v. Maurer (1980), 120 N.H. 925, 937-38, 424 A.2d 825, 834-35. In Carson, however, the court assessed the challenged statute against an intermediate level of scrutiny (120 N.H. at 932-33, 424 A.2d at 831), an approach expressly rejected by this court in Bernier, 113 Ill. 2d at 228. We observe, at the outset, that legislation is presumed to be valid, and that the party challenging the constitutionality of a statute has the burden of establishing its invalidity. (Pre-School Owners Association of Illinois, Inc. v. Department of Children & Family Services (1988), 119 Ill. 2d 268, 275; Sayles v. Thompson (1983), 99 Ill. 2d 122, 124-25.) For the reasons set out below, we hold that the challenged provision is not unconstitutional •for any of the reasons asserted by the plaintiff and accordingly reverse the judgment of the appellate court. The plaintiff first argues that section 2 — 622 violates the separation of powers clause of the Illinois Constitution because it improperly grants a judicial power to health care professionals. The plaintiff submits that the legislature improperly delegated a judicial power to the health care professionals who are empowered to submit affidavits pursuant to the statutory provision challenged here. The appellate court agreed with that argument and struck the provision for those reasons. A separation of governmental powers is implicit in the three-part structure of State government, under which separate grants of constitutional authority are made to the legislative, executive, and judicial branches. (County of Kane v. Carlson (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 186, 205-06.) In addition, the same concept is expressed directly in article II, section 1, of the Illinois Constitution: “The legislative, executive and judicial branches are separate. No branch shall exercise powers properly belonging to another.” (Ill. Const. 1970, art. II, §1.) Article VI, section 1, of the Illinois Constitution provides: “The judicial power is vested in a Supreme Court, an Appellate Court and Circuit Courts.” (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, §1.) Discussing the separation of governmental powers effected by the Illinois Constitution, the court in People v. Bainter (1989), 126 Ill. 2d 292, 302-03, stated: “The Constitution does not specifically delineate which powers are legislative, which are executive, and which are judicial. We have construed the concept of judicial power as including the adjudication and application of law (People v. Joseph (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 36, 41) and the procedural administration of the courts (People v. Walker (1988), 119 Ill. 2d 465, 474). The legislature, in turn, is vested with the power to enact laws. The legislature may not, however, enact laws that unduly infringe upon the inherent powers of the judiciary. Walker, 119 Ill. 2d at 474. Although the separation of powers provision clearly distinguishes each of the three branches of State- government, it is not designed to achieve a complete divorce among them. (Strukoff v. Strukoff (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 53, 58.) Inevitably, there will be areas in which the separate spheres of governmental authority overlap, and in which certain functions are shared^ (County of Kane v. Carlson (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 186, 208.) Consistent with that principle, this court has upheld legislative enactments pertaining to judicial practice that do not unduly encroach upon inherent judicial powers or conflict with any of our rules. Walker, 119 Ill. 2d at 475.” As this court noted in Strukoff v. Strukoff (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 53, 61, “statutory provisions governing procedure are not uncommon.” Those legislative measures range from pleading requirements to statutes of limitations; some of the provisions may operate as conditions precedent to maintaining a particular cause of action. In the present case, we do not consider that a health care professional performing the functions specified by section 2 — 622 is exercising a judicial function. Here, the health professional who must be consulted under section 2 — 622 does not exercise a judicial power. Rather, the health professional simply certifies that in his opinion the action has reasonable merit. Expression of that opinion does not become a judicial power simply because the failure to comply with the statute by submitting the certification of the health professional may result in dismissal of the action. Moreover, the statute permits the plaintiff to select his own health professional in obtaining the required certification, and we need not consider here whether our result would be the same if the statute designated a specific person or panel to perform that function. Accordingly, we find distinguishable the provisions invalidated in Bernier v. Burris (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 219 (medical malpractice review panel), In re Contest of the Election for the Office of Governor & Lieutenant Governor (1983), 93 Ill. 2d 463 (three-judge election contest panel), Wright v. Central Du Page Hospital Association (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 313 (medical malpractice review panel), and People ex rel. Rice v. Cunningham (1975), 61 Ill. 2d 353 (three-judge death penalty panel). In each of those cases the challenged provisions were found to be unconstitutional because they created a new court or operated as an infringement on the constitutional authority of the courts. A consideration of the function performed by the health professional under section 2 — 622 in making the required certification demonstrates that his task in that regard is essentially no different from the function he is later called upon to perform at trial. In medical malpractice cases, the applicable standard of care and its breach must normally be established through expert testimony. (Addison v. Whittenberg (1988), 124 Ill. 2d 287, 297; Purtill v. Hess (1986), 111 Ill. 2d 229, 242.) Clearly, giving such testimony at trial does not constitute the exercise of a judicial function. By the same token, there can be no claim that requiring the submission of similar information when an action is filed operates as a delegation of judicial authority, improper or not. Section 2 — 622 merely accelerates the time by which an expert opinion must be obtained. That section 2 — 622 requires the submission of a health professional’s report even in cases in which expert testimony might not be necessary at trial (see Walski v. Tiesenga (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 249, 256-57) merely reflects the legislature’s assessment of the statute’s desired scope. The requirement imposed by section 2 — 622 in healing art malpractice cases serves the same end as that of other provisions that have as their purpose the elimination or curtailment of frivolous actions. In all cases there already exists a separate obligation that attorneys, and pro se litigants as well, ensure that “every pleading, motion, and other paper” they sign is based on fact and made in good faith. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, pars. 2 — 611, 2 — 611.1; 134 Ill. 2d R. 137 (preempts section 2 — 611).) Patterned after section 2 — 611 of the Code of Civil Procedure, Supreme Court Rule 137 provides, in pertinent part: “The signature of an attorney or party constitutes a certificate by him that he has read the pleading, motion or other paper; that to the best of his knowledge, information, and belief formed after reasonable inquiry it is well grounded in fact and is warranted by existing law or a good-faith argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law, and that it is not interposed for any improper purpose, such as to harass or to cause unnecessary delay or needless increase in the cost of litigation.” Under Rule 137, sanctions may be imposed for violations of its provisions. While the consequences of noncompliance with Supreme Court Rule 137 and section 2 — 622 are different, the burdens imposed by the two provisions are similar. In fact, obtaining a health professional’s review pursuant to section 2 — 622 would appear, in many cases, to be a necessary concomitant of fulfilling the separate obligation, imposed first by statute and now by rule, requiring that pleadings, motions, and other papers be based on fact and filed in good faith. It would be inconsistent to require parties in all instances to undertake reasonable investigation of the grounds for their actions, yet invalidate what would only be a reasonable step in that process in cases involving healing art malpractice. In sum, the health professional who supplies the certification required by section 2 — 622 makes no judicial determination and exercises no judicial function. Nor, in fact, does' the legislation operate to establish a new court, in violation of the constitution. Unlike the review panel provisions invalidated in Bernier and Wright, the procedure at issue here does not establish a new court or require the judge to share his authority- with others. Indeed, the health professional consulted pursuant to section 2 — 622 issues no ruling and decides no legal question. The statute merely requires a litigant to submit, in a timely manner, certification declaring the meritorious basis for the alleged cause of action. The plaintiff next contends that section 2 — 622 is unconstitutional because it denies healing art malpractice litigants access to the courts. The plaintiff in the present case derives the right of court access from the “certain remedy” provision of the Bill of Rights of the Illinois Constitution. The appellate court in the present case, having invalidated section 2 — 622 on separation of powers grounds, did not reach the plaintiff’s court-access argument. Article I, section 12, of the Illinois Constitution provides: “Every person shall find a certain remedy in the laws for all injuries and wrongs which he receives to his person, privacy, property or reputation. He shall obtain justice by law, freely, completely, and promptly.” (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §12.) Corresponding provisions found in previous Illinois Constitutions (see Ill. Const. 1870, art. II, §19; Ill. Const. 1848, art. XIII, §12; Ill. Const. 1818, art. VIII, §12) have been regarded as “an expression of a philosophy and not a mandate that a ‘certain remedy’ be provided in any specific form or that the nature of the proof necessary to the award of a judgment or decree continue without modification.” (Sullivan v. Midlothian Park District (1972), 51 Ill. 2d 274, 277.) The same view continues in force and guides the interpretation of the “certain remedy” provision of the current Illinois Constitution. Mega v. Holy Cross Hospital (1986), 111 Ill. 2d 416, 424; Buzz Barton & Associates, Inc. v. Giannone (1985), 108 Ill. 2d 373, 383; People v. Dowery (1975), 62 Ill. 2d 200, 207-08. As we have already noted, the legislature may, consistent with the separation of powers principle, impose requirements governing matters of procedure and the presentation of claims. Such measures do not fail on constitutional grounds simply because noncomplying actions may suffer dismissal. “It is well established that the legislature may impose reasonable limitations and conditions upon access to the courts.” (Buzz Barton, 108 Ill. 2d at 383.) It should be apparent from the preceding discussion that section 2 — 622 does not unconstitutionally infringe on litigants’ right of access to the courts. The provision challenged here merely requires a litigant to obtain, before trial, a certificate from an appropriate health care professional stating that the alleged cause of action is meritorious. As we have already demonstrated, the provision is essentially no different from the parallel requirement generally applicable in malpractice cases that the plaintiff in such an action present expert testimony to demonstrate the applicable standard of care and its breach. Amicus curiae Barbara J. Clinite makes the related contention that the statute violates a litigant’s right of access to the courts under the petition clause of the first amendment of the United States Constitution (U.S. Const., amend. I). We do not agree. The first amendment right to petition for redress does not disable the legislature and the courts from imposing procedural requirements governing the prosecution and presentation of claims. Moreover, the first amendment protection afforded to private litigation is limited, by definition, to nonfrivolous actions. (Bill Johnson’s Restaurants, Inc. v. National Labor Relations Board (1983), 461 U.S. 731, 743, 76 L. Ed. 2d 277, 289, 103 S. Ct. 2161, 2170; see In re Jafree (1982), 93 Ill. 2d 450, 457 (imposing sanctions on respondent for filing frivolous actions not violative of first amendment).) The present statute is intended to eliminate frivolous suits, and it imposes no greater burden on healing art malpractice litigants than that generally required of such litigants at the time they establish their claims. The plaintiff’s final constitutional challenges to section 2 — 622 include the arguments that the provision violates the equal protection and due process clauses of both the Federal and State Constitutions (U.S. Const., amend. XIV; Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §2) and is special legislation in violation of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. IV, §13). The plaintiff contends that because the statute burdens a litigant’s fundamental right of access to the courts, a standard stricter than the generally applicable test of rationality review must be used in resolving these challenges. We have already determined, however, that section 2 — 622 does not unconstitutionally burden the right of access to the courts. As demonstrated in prior cases, the appropriate test to be used in resolving the issue is whether the challenged legislation bears a rational relationship to a legitimate governmental interest. We conclude that it does. Section 2 — 622 does not “implicate a suspect or quasi-suspect classification, and accordingly the appropriate standard for determining the plaintiff’s equal protection challenge[ ] under the Illinois and Federal constitutions is whether the legislation bears a rational relationship to a legitimate governmental interest. (McDonald v. Board of Election Commissioners (1969), 394 U.S. 802, 809, 22 L. Ed. 2d 739, 745, 89 S. Ct. 1404, 1408; Illinois Housing Development Authority v. Van Meter (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 116, 119-20.) This standard applies as well to the additional argument that the provision[ ] violate[s] the State constitutional prohibition against special legislation (Jenkins v. Wu (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 468, 477-78; Anderson v. Wagner (1979), 79 Ill. 2d 295, 315), for although the guarantee of equal protection and the prohibition against special legislation are not identical, they are ‘generally judged by the same standard’ (Chicago National League Ball Club, Inc. v. Thompson (1985), 108 Ill. 2d 357, 368). Similarly, we do not believe that the provisionf ] here burdenjs] a fundamental right, and for our purposes here the appropriate inquiry under due process is whether the legislation bears a rational relationship to a legitimate governmental interest. Williamson v. Lee Optical of Oklahoma, Inc. (1955), 348 U.S. 483, 488, 99 L. Ed. 563, 572, 75 S. Ct. 461, 464; Harris v. Manor Healthcare Corp. (1986), 111 Ill. 2d 350, 368.” Bernier v. Burris (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 219, 228-29. Testing the challenged measure against the rational relationship test, we have no difficulty in concluding that section 2 — 622 is rationally related to a legitimate governmental interest. Applying that test to the provision, it is at once apparent that the statute is sufficiently tailored to serve the legislative purpose it was designed to fulfill. As we have noted, the statute is intended to reduce the number of frivolous actions that may otherwise be filed. By requiring litigants to obtain, at an early point, the opinion of an expert who agrees that a meritorious cause of action exists, the statute will help ensure that only claims with some merit are presented. Finally, the plaintiff raises the additional argument that the provision is unconstitutionally vague because there are no precise standards defining whether an action is “meritorious” or not. We do not agree. The term is sufficiently precise to enable the necessary health professional to determine whether the litigant has reasonable grounds for pursuing the action. See Chastek v. Anderson (1981), 83 Ill. 2d 502. Besides arguing for the constitutionality of the statute, defendant St. Elizabeth’s Hospital has asked, in the alternative, that the appeal against it be dismissed. The hospital observes that the order entered by the circuit court dismissing that portion of the plaintiff’s action against it was made without prejudice and therefore could not be made final through the addition of the language contemplated by Supreme Court Rule 304(a) (134 Ill. 2d R. 304(a)). We agree. An order dismissing an action without prejudice is not final. A nonfinal order cannot be made final simply by declaring that there is no just reason to delay its enforcement or appeal. Kellerman v. Crowe (1987), 119 Ill. 2d 111, 115; Crane Paper Stock Co. v. Chicago & Northwestern Ry. Co. (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 61, 66-67. The plaintiff requests that if the statute is upheld, the action against Dr. Treister be remanded so that the necessary affidavit and report may then be filed. It appears, however, that the plaintiff was choosing in the circuit court to challenge the constitutionality of the provision. We therefore decline to order further proceedings. As a final matter, we note that the plaintiff, then represented by different counsel, moved to strike portions of defendant Treister’s brief before this court. The challenged material consists of certain reports and news articles regarding the proposal and enactment of the legislative package containing the statute challenged here. We ordered the motion taken with the case, and now deny it. Contrary to the plaintiff’s view, the material does not improperly expand the factual record developed in the courts below. For the reasons stated, the judgment of the appellate court in cause No. 68937 is reversed, and in cause No. 68952 the judgment is vacated and the appeal is dismissed. No. 68937 — Judgment reversed. No. 68952 — Judgment vacated; appeal dismissed. JUSTICES BILANDIC and FREEMAN took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 9739259 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:19.635275+00 ===

JUSTICE CLARK, dissenting: I agree with the well-reasoned opinion of the appellate court that section 2 — 622 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622) is unconstitutional in that it violates the separation of powers clause of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. II, §1). I therefore dissent. The separation of powers clause of our constitution provides: “The legislative, executive and judicial branches are separate. No branch shall exercise powers properly belonging to another.” (Ill. Const. 1970, art. II, §1.) Although “[t]he Constitution does not specifically delineate which powers are legislative, which are executive, and which are judicial” (People v. Bainter (1989), 126 Ill. 2d 292, 302-08), section 1 of article VI of the constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, §1) does vest “the exclusive and entire judicial power in the courts” (Wright v. Central Du Page Hospital Association (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 313, 322). It is clear that “[t]he application of principles of law is inherently a judicial function.” (Wright, 63 Ill. 2d at 322; see also 147 Ill. 2d at 68, quoting Bainter, 126 Ill. 2d at 303 (“ ‘We have construed the concept of judicial power as including the adjudication and application of law’ ”).) Therefore, the legislature is generally prohibited from granting persons, who are not members of the judiciary, authority to apply principles of law to the facts of a case. (See Wright, 63 Ill. 2d at 322.) The sole exception to this general rule is that the legislature can grant an administrative agency authority to apply or construe legal principles in resolving questions that are before the agency. (See City of Waukegan v. Pollution Control Board (1974), 57 Ill. 2d 170, 181-82.) However, where such authority is granted, the doctrine of separation of powers requires that the judiciary be given an adequate opportunity to review the agency’s application of legal principles. City of Waukegan, 57 Ill. 2d at 181-82. Section 2 — 622 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622) grants health care professionals authority to apply legal principles in reviewing medical malpractice cases. Under section 2 — 622, a plaintiff who seeks to file an action for damages arising from medical malpractice must first have a health care professional review the facts in his case to determine whether the plaintiff has “a reasonable and meritorious cause for filing” the action. To make such a determination in a medical malpractice case, a health care professional must first determine the applicable standard of conduct, and then decide whether the defendant’s conduct measured up to that standard. The applicable standard of conduct, however, can only be determined by applying the legal test for standard of conduct (i.e., “the standard of conduct *** is that of a reasonable man under like circumstances” (Restatement (Second) of Torts §283, at 12 (1965))) to the facts of the case (Restatement (Second) of Torts §285(d), at 20 (1965)). Therefore, in order to decide whether to certify a cause of action as meritorious, a health care professional must apply legal principles to the facts of the case. Unlike cases involving an agency’s application of legal principles, a health care professional’s application of legal principles under section 2 — 622 is not subject to judicial review. Rather, if the health care professional finds that there is no “reasonable and meritorious cause for filing” the action, and the plaintiff is unable to find another health care professional who would conclude otherwise, any complaint filed by the plaintiff must be dismissed by the trial court under section 2 — 619 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 619). (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2— 622(g).) Section 2 — 622 therefore grants health care professionals authority to usurp the judiciary’s role in applying principles of law to the facts of a case. Legislation which allows such usurption of judicial authority, without a possibility for judicial review, violates the doctrine of separation of powers. See Bainter, 126 Ill. 2d at 303. The majority does not believe that a health care professional performing the functions specified by section 2 — 622 exercises a judicial power. Instead, according to the majority, a health care professional acting pursuant to section 2 — 622 “simply certifies that in his opinion the action has reasonable merit. Expression of that opinion does not become a judicial power simply because the failure to comply with the statute by submitting the certification of the health professional may result in the dismissal of the action.” 147 Ill. 2d at 69. I agree that a health care professional’s mere expression of his opinion as to whether a cause of action is meritorious does not constitute a judicial function. However, before a health care professional can develop such an opinion, the health care professional must first review the facts of the case, determine the applicable standard of care, and decide whether that standard of care was met. As I have explained, such a process involves the application of legal principles to the facts of the case, a process which, until this case, had always been recognized as being exclusively a judicial function. The majority later argues that “the function performed by the health professional under section 2 — 622 *** is essentially no different from the function he is later called upon to perform at trial.” (147 Ill. 2d at 70.) This simply is not true. At trial, it may be necessary for a health care professional to testify as to his opinion of what the applicable standard of care was in a certain case. (See Addison v. Whittenberg (1988), 124 Ill. 2d 287, 297; but see Walski v. Tiesenga (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 249, 256-57 (no expert testimony needed to establish standard of care “where the physician’s conduct is so grossly negligent or the treatment so common that a layman could readily appraise it”).) However, the health care professional’s opinion does not conclusively establish the standard of care. Rather, the trier of fact, after applying the appropriate legal principles to the evidence in the case (including the health care professional’s testimony), ultimately determines the applicable standard of care. See Walski, 72 Ill. 2d at 258-62. Under section 2 — 622, however, health care professionals do more than merely provide evidence as to standard of care. Instead, they must actually decide themselves the applicable standard of care. Thus, health care professionals acting pursuant to section 2 — 622 must perform the judicial function normally reserved for the trier of fact. The majority also gives a number of other reasons in support of its conclusion that section 2 — 622 is consistent with the doctrine of separation of powers. The majority notes that “ ‘statutory provisions governing procedure are not uncommon.’ Those legislative measures range from pleading requirements to statutes of limitations; some of the provisions may operate as conditions precedent to maintaining a particular cause of action.” (147 Ill. 2d at 69, quoting Strukoff v. Strukoff (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 53, 61.) This statement suggests that section 2 — 622 is constitutional because it is simply a statutory provision governing procedure. It is certainly true that the legislature shares concurrent jurisdiction with this court to regulate procedural aspects of judicial practice. (See O’Connell v. St. Francis Hospital (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 273, 281.) However, under the doctrine of separation of powers, legislative attempts at regulating judicial practice which “unduly infringe upon the inherent powers of the judiciary” are unconstitutional. (Agran v. Checker Taxi Co. (1952), 412 Ill. 145, 149.) Section 2 — 622, in allowing health care professionals authority to usurp the inherently judicial function of applying legal principles to the facts of a case, unduly infringes upon the judiciary’s inherent powers. Furthermore, the majority is incorrect in characterizing section 2 — 622 as being a statute that merely governs procedure. Procedural requirements, by definition, govern procedural aspects of a case; they do not involve questions concerning the substantive merits of a case. Section 2— 622, on the other hand, explicitly requires that a health care professional review the facts of a case to determine whether there is a “reasonable and meritorious” cause of action. (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622.) Because section 2 — 622 requires a determination as to the merits of a case, it cannot properly be characterized as being a statute that merely governs procedure. Another reason given by the majority for its decision is that section 2 — 622 serves the same purpose as Supreme Court Rule 137 (134 Ill. 2d R. 137) in that section 2 — 622 is intended to curtail or eliminate frivolous suits. (147 Ill. 2d at 70-71.) According to the majority, “the burdens imposed by the two provisions are similar *** [and] [i]t would be inconsistent to require parties in all instances to undertake reasonable investigation of the grounds for their actions [as required by Rule 137], yet invalidate what would only be a reasonable step in that process in cases involving healing art malpractice.” 147 Ill. 2d at 71. The majority improperly focuses upon the effects that section 2 — 622 may have upon plaintiffs. In assessing legislation under the doctrine of separation of powers, however, the only relevant inquiry is whether the legislation has any effect upon the judiciary’s exercise of its inherent powers. Legislation which unduly infringes upon the judiciary’s exercise of its inherent judicial powers violates the doctrine of separation of powers, whether the legislation has any effect upon litigants or not. See People ex rel. Stamos v. Jones (1968), 40 Ill. 2d 62, 66. The majority also fails to recognize several key distinctions between Rule 137 and section 2 — 622. Rule 137 is a requirement imposed upon the judiciary by this court under this court’s constitutionally authorized rulemaking authority (see Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, §16), while section 2 — 622 is a requirement imposed upon the judiciary by the legislature. Furthermore, under Rule 137, it is the trial court that reviews the facts and the law pertaining to a case to determine whether a pleading is so lacking in merit as to necessitate sanctions. Under section 2 — 622, however, a health care professional assesses the merits of a case. Finally, Rule 137 imposes no requirement upon the judiciary, but rather leaves to the discretion of the trial judge the question of whether sanctions should be imposed. Section 2 — 622, on the other hand, mandates that trial judges must dismiss medical malpractice complaints if a health care professional has not first certified that the complaint contains a meritorious cause of action. In sum, Rule 137 is a judicially promulgated rule which does not take away trial judges’ exclusive authority to apply principles of law in determining whether a cause of action is meritorious. Thus, Rule 137 attempts to curtail the filing of frivolous lawsuits in a manner that is entirely consistent with the doctrine of separation of powers. Section 2 — 622, on the other hand, is a legislatively imposed requirement on the judiciary which requires the usurption of judicial power by health care professionals. Section 2 — 622, therefore, attempts to achieve the same goals as Rule 137, but in a manner which violates the doctrine of separation of powers. I see nothing that would be inconsistent about this court’s enforcing the constitutional requirements of Rule 137, while at the same time invalidating the unconstitutional requirements of section 2 — 622. A final reason given by the majority in support of its conclusion is that “the statute permits the plaintiff to select his own health professional in obtaining the required certification.” (147 Ill. 2d at 69.) Although this statement is true, the fact remains that section 2 — 622 requires the application of legal principles by someone who is not a member of the judiciary. Such a statutory requirement violates the doctrine of separation of powers. This court long ago recognized that “[i]t is the undisputed duty of the court to protect its judicial powers from encroachment by legislative enactments, and thus preservé an independent judicial department.” (.Agran v. Checker Taxi Co. (1952), 412 Ill. 145, 149.) The majority, in holding that the legislature has a right to grant health care professionals the unreviewable power to decide whether medical malpractice actions should be allowed to be brought before the courts, has failed to fulfill its duty. If such a right exists in the medical malpractice context, what will prevent the legislature from enacting similar statutes in other areas of law? Could the legislature require, for example, that persons seeking to challenge the constitutionality of a statute first obtain the approval of an expert in constitutional law, or that persons seeking a dissolution of marriage first obtain approval of a marriage counsellor? Because I believe that section 2 — 622 is unconstitutional under the doctrine of separation of powers, I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 9739260 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:22.610269+00 ===

OPINION
GILBERT, Justice.
This case involves a challenge to an investigative stop made pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 168.0422 (2002); Appellant Joel Robert. Henning was charged in Olmsted County with driving after revocation, Minn.Stat. § 171.24, subd. 2 (2002), no driver’s license in possession, Minn.Stat. § 171.08 (2002), and no current proof of insurance, Minn.Stat. § 169.791(2) (2002).1 Appellant moved to dismiss the charges for the following reasons: 1) there was no reasonable articulable suspicion to justify the stop of the vehicle, and 2) Minn.Stat. § 168.0422 is unconstitutional. An omnibus hearing was held in Olmsted County District Court; the arresting officer was the only witness to testify. The court issued an omnibus order concluding: 1) Minn.Stat. § 168.0422 is unconstitutional; 2) the fact that the vehicle carried a WZ series plate provided reasonable and artic-ulable suspicion of criminal activity justifying the stop.
Appellant, pursuant to State v. Lothenbach, 296 N.W.2d 854 (Minn.1980), agreed to stipulate to the facts contained within the police reports and his certified driving record. A bench trial was held on May 11, 2001, in Olmsted County District Court. In an order and memorandum, the court incorporated the ruling from the earlier omnibus hearing concluding that Minn. Stat. § 168.0422 is unconstitutional and the fact that defendant’s vehicle carried special WZ series plates provided a reasonable and articulable suspicion of criminal activity justifying a stop. The court found appellant guilty of driving after revocation, Minn.Stat. § 171.24, subd. 2, and no driver’s license in possession, Minn. Stat. § 171.08. Appellant appealed to the Minnesota Court of Appeals. The court of appeals held that by applying for and displaying special series plates issued pursuant to MinmStat. § 168.041, subd. 6, a party implicitly consents to a vehicle stop based solely on the display of those plates and concluded Minn.Stat. § 168.0422 is constitutional under both the federal and state constitutions. State v. Henning, 644 N.W.2d 500 (Minn.App.2002). We reverse.
On July 12, 2000, at 7:30 p.m., an Olmsted County deputy sheriff, while on patrol in Rochester, Minnesota, noticed a vehicle with special series registration plates with the first two letters WZ. The deputy followed the vehicle, but did not observe any inappropriate driving, recognize the driver, discern any other traffic or other violations, nor did he run a vehicle registration check. The deputy stopped the vehicle being driven by appellant without reasonable suspicion that appellant was involved in any criminal activity. The vehicle was registered to appellant’s father. The regu*382larly issued registration plates on that vehicle had been impounded April 2, 2000, on account of appellant’s prior DUI conviction. The deputy testified that the only reason appellant was stopped was because his vehicle had special series registration plates issued when the previous plates were impounded because the operator of the vehicle was driving under the influence.
According to the deputy, appellant initially told the deputy that he knew he could be stopped based on the registration plates he had on the vehicle. However, appellant went on to tell the deputy that he had no reason to pull him over. Appellant expressed his belief that to pull him over the deputy needed a reason in addition to the registration plates. There were no indicators that appellant had been consuming alcohol. Appellant did not have a valid driver’s license in his possession at the time of the stop because his driver’s license had been revoked. Appellant was cited for driving after revocation, Minn. Stat. § 171.24, subd. 2, no driver’s license in possession, Minn.Stat. § 171.08 and no current proof of insurance, Minn.Stat. • § 169.791(2).
An omnibus hearing was held and the court issued an order concluding that Minn.Stat. § 168.0422 is unconstitutional, but that the presence of the special series plates provided the deputy with reasonable articulable suspicion to justify the stop of appellant’s vehicle. The parties stipulated to the police reports and appellant’s prior record for the purposes of a bench trial. The court convicted appellant of driving after revocation, Minn.Stat. § 171.24, subd. 2 (2002) and no driver’s license in possession, Minn.Stat. § 171.08 (2002). It adopted the conclusions from the earlier omnibus hearing that Minn.Stat. § 168.0422 is unconstitutional, but the special series plates provided reasonable artic-ulable suspicion of criminal activity to justify the stop. Appellant was ordered to pay a fine of $300 plus a $35 surcharge and a $5 library fee, with sentence stayed pending appeal. On appeal, the court of appeals held that by applying for and receiving special series plates, a party implicitly consents to police stops for the purpose of determining whether the driver has a valid license, based solely on those registration plates, and that Minn.Stat. § 168.0422 did not violate the state or federal constitutions. Henning, 644 N.W.2d at 502-04.
I.
Appellant argues that MinmStat. § 168.0422 is an unconstitutional attempt to override the Minnesota Court of Appeals ruling in State v. Greyeagle, 541 N.W.2d 326 (Minn.App.1995); violates the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution and its counterpart, Article I, Section 10 of the Minnesota Constitution; unconstitutionally interferes with and chills protected activities; and cannot form the sole basis for the stop of a motor vehicle.
We review the constitutionality of a statute de novo. State v. Grossman, 636 N.W.2d 545, 548 (Minn.2001). “Statutes are presumed constitutional.” Id. The party challenging the statute must show, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the statute violates the constitution. Id.
Minnesota Statutes § 168.0422 provides:
A peace officer who observes the operation of a motor vehicle within this state bearing special series registration plates issued under section 168.041, subdivision 6, or 169A.60, subdivision 13, may stop the vehicle for the purpose of determining whether the driver is operating the vehicle lawfully under a valid driver’s license.
*383Special plates may be issued under Minn.Stat. § 168.041, subd. 6, in the following circumstances:
if a member of the violator’s household has a valid driver’s license, the violator or owner has a limited license issued under section 171.30, or the owner is not the violator and the owner has a valid or limited license or a member of the owner’s household has'a valid driver’s license.2
Similar conditions are provided by Minn. Stat. § 169A.60, subd. 13:
(1) the violator has a qualified licensed driver whom the violator must identify;
(2) the violator or registered owner has a limited license issued under section 171.30;
(3) the registered owner is not the violator and the registered owner has a valid or limited driver’s license;
(4) a member of the registered owner’s household has a valid driver’s license.
The statute at issue here, Minn.Stat. § 168.0422, appears to have been passed in response to the court of appeals’ decision in Greyeagle. In Greyeagle, the court of appeals held that police may not make suspicionless stops of drivers based solely on special series registration plates, where the statute creating the special plates does not provide that the plates are issued under that condition. Greyeagle, 541 N.W.2d at 328, 330. The court of appeals also held that where the state produces no evidence that the policy of making suspicionless stops is more effective than the traditional system of stops based on particular suspicion, the routine stops of special series registered vehicles is unconstitutional. Id. at 329. Minnesota Statutes § 168.0422 was subsequently passed by the legislature in order to authorize the stops prohibited by the court of appeals ruling in Greyea-gle. The primary issue is whether the statute is prohibited by the Fourth Amendment or its counterpart, Article I, Section 10 of the Minnesota Constitution. If the statute violates the Fourth Amendment or Article I, Section 10 of the Minnesota Constitution, it cannot stand.
In Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 653-54, 99 S.Ct. 1391, 59 L.Ed.2d 660 (1979), the United States Supreme Court held that absent reasonable articulable suspicion, stopping an automobile driver to check whether he is properly licensed is prohibited by the Fourth Amendment. “The essential purpose of the proscriptions in the Fourth Amendment is to impose a standard of ‘reasonableness’ upon the exercise of discretion by government officials, including law enforcement agents, in order ‘to safeguard the privacy and security of individuals against arbitrary invasions ⅜ * Id. (citations omitted). “Thus, the permissibility of a particular law enforcement practice is judged by balancing its intrusion on the individual’s Fourth Amendment interests against its promotion of legitimate governmental interests.” Id. at 654, 99 S.Ct. 1391.
Generally, an officer stopping a vehicle on the open road in order to check the driver’s license is a “seizure” under the Fourth Amendment. Prouse, 440 U.S. at 653, 99 S.Ct. 1391. An officer must have reasonable articulable suspicion of wrongdoing in order to justify such a stop. Id. at 663, 99 S.Ct. 1391.
The state argues that by applying for and receiving the special series plates, ap*384pellant was aware that his use of that vehicle carried with it a condition giving the police the statutory authority to stop the vehicles bearing those plates without reasonable articulable suspicion. The state argues appellant “destroyed” any reasonable expectation of privacy he may have had which would allow him to object to the search. We disagree.
Here, appellant had a subjective expectation of privacy. He expressed his opinion that the officer needed to have a reason to stop him separate from the mere presence of the special series registration plates. It is not clear from the record that appellant was put on notice that these plates were accepted on the condition that law enforcement may stop the vehicle at any time to check the validity of the driver’s license. We decline to imply consent under these facts.
The special series registration plates are only issued upon a showing that someone will be legally driving the vehicle bearing those plates. This person may be the violator, who may be issued a limited license to drive under certain circumstances, such as attending work or school. Minn.Stat. § 171.30. However, the special series plates are also issued where someone other than the violator, either a member of the violator’s household or someone else identified to the commissioner of public safety, will be lawfully driving the vehicle. These qualified, licensed drivers of the specially registered vehicles are also subject to the possibility of numerous stops made each and every day, pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 168.0422, solely on account of driving a motor vehicle bearing special series registration plates. Thus, Minn. Stat. § 168.0422 subjects a number of licensed motorists, who were not party to the original revocation of the registration plates or the subsequent reissuing of the special series plates, to the possibility of being stopped by every law enforcement officer they encounter.
We look to the totality of the circumstances to determine whether a stop under these facts was reasonable. United States v. Knights, 534 U.S. 112, 122 S.Ct. 587, 151 L.Ed.2d 497 (2001). The degree of the intrusion must be weighed against the promotion of legitimate government interests. Id. at 119, 122 S.Ct. 587.
Minnesota Statutes § 168.0422 seeks to dispense with the individualized suspicion requirement. In Ascher v. Comm’r of Public Safety, we, exercising our independent authority to interpret the Minnesota Constitution, held that using roadblocks to stop all vehicles at sobriety checkpoints violates “Minn. Const, art. I, § 10, which we have long held generally requires the police to have an objective individualized articulable suspicion of criminal wrongdoing before subjecting a driver to an investigative stop.” 519 N.W.2d 183, 187 (Minn.1994). In Ascher, we “engaged in a judicial determination of the reasonableness of the use of a temporary roadblock to stop a large number of drivers in the hope of discovering evidence of alcohol-impaired driving by some of them.” Id. at 187. We concluded:
Based primarily on the state’s failure to meet its burden of articulating a persuasive reason for dispensing with the individualized suspicion requirement in this context, we conclude that the constitutional balance must be struck in favor of protecting the traveling public from even the “minimally intrusive” seizures which occur at a sobriety checkpoint.
Id. at 187.
Our reasoning in Ascher applies to stops under Minn.Stat. § 168.0422. Although a smaller number of drivers are potentially affected, those drivers may be stopped daily on numerous occasions without reason*385able articulable suspicion of any criminal activity, solely because the vehicle carries the special series registration plates. The state has not met its “burden of articulating a persuasive reason” for dispensing with the general requirement of individualized suspicion in this context. Ascher, 519 N.W.2d at 186. In Prouse, the Supreme Court pointed out that where individualized suspicion is not required to make a stop, other safeguards are relied upon to assure that a driver’s reasonable expectation of privacy may not be invaded at the discretion of a patrolling officer. 440 U.S. at 654-55, 99 S.Ct. 1391. Minnesota Statutes § 168.0422 seeks to eliminate the constitutional safeguard requiring an officer to have reasonable articulable suspicion of criminal activity before stopping a motorist, but provides no substitute to protect licensed motorists driving in vehicles with special series plates from repeated stops at the unchecked discretion of law enforcement officers. As we noted in Ascher, the police should not be allowed to define the reasonableness of their own conduct. Ascher, 519 N.W.2d at 186. Neither is the legislature empowered to redefine the constitutional parameters of police conduct. Therefore, based on Ascher and Prouse, we conclude Minn.Stat. § 168.0422 is unconstitutional under the Fourth Amendment and Article I, Section 10 of the Minnesota Constitution.
II.
The district court held Minn. Stat. § 168.0422 unconstitutional, but concluded the stop was lawful because there existed “a reasonable and articulable suspicion of criminal activity justifying the stop.” We agree that Minn.Stat. § 168.0422 is unconstitutional. To effectuate a stop of a vehicle an officer must have a reasonable articulable suspicion that the motorist is violating the law. Prouse, 440 U.S. at 663, 99 S.Ct. 1391. However, the mere presence of the special series plates does not amount to “reasonable articulable suspicion.”
We do not believe the presence of special series registration plates issued pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 168.041, subd. 6 or Minn.Stat. § 169A.60, subd. 13, amounts to reasonable articulable suspicion nor do the circumstances surrounding the issuance of the plates render a suspicionless stop of a driver in a vehicle with these plates “reasonable.” The U.S. Supreme Court has articulated that reasonable suspicion must be examined by the totality of the circumstances. United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417, 101 S.Ct. 690, 66 L.Ed.2d 621 (1981). An analysis of the totality of the circumstances “must raise a suspicion that the particular individual being stopped is . engaged in wrongdoing.” Id. at 418, 101 S.Ct. 690.
Special series registration plates 'are issued, upon the satisfaction of conditions set forth by statute, in order to enable continued legal use of a motor vehicle by licensed drivers. Minn.Stat. § 168.041, subd. 6; Minn.Stat. § 169A.60, subd. 13. The driver of the vehicle is not necessarily the one whose actions led to the original impoundment and subsequent issuing of special series plates. Because the special series plates are only issued when it is demonstrated that the vehicle may lawfully be driven, we hold that the mere presence of special series plates does not amount to reasonable articulable suspicion of criminal activity and, in fact, the special plates demonstrate that the vehicle may be lawfully driven. Nor is it reasonable to automatically infer that there is a substantial possibility that the driver of the vehicle does not possess a valid driver’s license. While the special series plates may be a factor for law enforcement to consider and would provide a basis for closer scrutiny of these *386vehicles, the special series plates may not provide the sole justification for a stop.
The dissent approves “this type of (sus-picionless) stop” and deems it “reasonable because [of the] substantial state interest in safeguarding our roads from drivers who repeatedly drive while impaired.” However, the dissent ignores the showing we required in Ascher. Ascher, 519 N.W.2d at 186. We have never before simply allowed the ends to justify the means when the means void our citizens’ constitutional protections. The dissent’s rationale would be a dramatic departure that demotes constitutional protections to a position inferior to that of traffic safeguards. The state has not met its burden of showing that it is impracticable for police to develop individualized suspicion and that a departure from the individualized suspicion requirement will significantly help police achieve a higher rate of arrest than would using more conventional means of apprehending alcohol impaired drivers. Ascher, 519 N.W.2d at 186. Therefore, the balance must be struck in favor of protecting the traveling public from even the “minimally intrusive” seizure present here. Id. at 187.
We recognize that the practice of impounding standard license plates may further the state’s interest in protecting the public from repeat drunken drivers. The state has an obvious and substantial interest in safeguarding our roads from such drivers. However, the subsequent issuance of special plates to allow the vehicle to again be driven does not necessarily further the state’s interest in protecting the public, but may enable or facilitate the impaired driver’s use of the same vehicle. Furthermore, the dissent fails to explain why these plates should be used to annul constitutional protections. Contrary to what the dissent surmises, these special plates do nothing to “ensur[e] that repeat offenders do not harm the motoring public by driving during their period of revocation.” Rather, these special plates may actually provide a further opportunity for repeat drunken drivers to drive again by making available a properly licensed vehicle.3
Having concluded that Minn.Stat. § 168.0422 is unconstitutional under the Fourth Amendment and Article I, Section 10 of the Minnesota Constitution, we need not address appellant’s other arguments. We reverse the court of appeals and hereby vacate appellant’s convictions for driving after revocation, Minn.Stat. § 171.24, subd. 2, and no driver’s license in possession, Minn.Stat. § 171.08, as the product of an unlawful seizure. We limit the retroactive application of this ruling to cases pending on the date of this decision in which the constitutionality of this statute has been properly raised in a timely fashion.
Reversed.
. The no proof of insurance charge was later dropped when proof of insurance coverage was provided to the court.
. Limited licenses are issued pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 171.30 when a person’s license has been suspended or revoked but the person needs a license to attend school, work, or treatment or to accomplish the tasks required as a homemaker.
. The dissent relies upon numerous studies, statistics and anecdotal conclusions, which are not part of the record, in order to justify an unconstitutional intrusion. There obviously are important policy considerations involved with addressing the problem of repeat drunken drivers. Other options are available to the legislature that could directly address the problem of repeat drunken drivers without trampling on the constitutional rights of our citizens, including simply declining to issue the special plates or subjecting the vehicle driven to forfeiture.

=== CASE 9739261 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:22.61534+00 ===

MEYER, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully disagree with the majority’s conclusion that Minn.Stat. § 168.0422 (2002) violates the Minnesota and federal constitutions. Officer Maitland’s stop of Joel Henning, limited as it was to inquiring *387about the validity of his driver’s license, was a reasonable seizure and therefore not prohibited by either the state or federal constitution. This type of stop, authorized by statute, is reasonable because the substantial state interest in safeguarding our roads from drivers who repeatedly drive while impaired, combined with the focused nature of the practice, outweigh the limited intrusion on individual liberty. Aside from whether the balancing test weighs in favor of the seizure’s reasonableness, the statute should be upheld because the owner of the vehicle gave consent to a suspi-cionless stop when he applied for the special plates.
The state has devised a system for impounding license plates as part of its overall scheme of keeping the traveling public safe on the roads. The legislature has passed laws making driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol a crime. Minn. Stat. ch. 169A (2002). Violating these statutes once is a gross misdemeanor, and repeat offenders can be sent to jail for months. Minn.Stat. § 169A.275 (2002). The state will revoke an individual’s license to drive and impound that individual’s license plates during the period of the revocation. Minn.Stat. §§ 169A.54-.60 (2002). Taking away the license plates is a particularly important step in this procedure, because it ensures that individuals who are repeat offenders of our driving laws will not be able to illicitly drive their vehicles unnoticed.
The record establishes that Henning had driven while impaired twice within 5 years. Because of those violations, the state impounded his license plates and revoked his driver’s license as required by statute. MinmStat. §§ 169A.54-.60.1 Then, in order to obtain plates denoted by the prefix WZ, Henning’s father requested these sper cial-issue plates and demonstrated to the court that he owned the vehicle and had a valid license to drive.2
The Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution, as well as Article I, Section 10 of the Minnesota Constitution, are implicated in this case because “stopping an automobile and detaining its occupants constitute a ‘seizure’ within the meaning of [the constitution], even though the purpose of the stop’ is limited and the resulting detention quite brief.” Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 653, 99 S.Ct. 1391, 59 L.Ed.2d 660 (1979). What both constitutions prohibit is “not all searches and seizures, but unreasonable searches and seizures.” Elkins, v. United States, 364 U.S. 206, 222, 80 S.Ct. 1437, 4 L.Ed.2d 1669 (1960); see also U.S. Const. amend. TV; Minn. Const. art. I, § 10; State v. Olson, 271 Minn. 50, 57, 135 N.W.2d 181, 186 (1965). After it has been established that a police practice amounts to a search or seizure, the analysis of what searches and seizures are unreasonable, and therefore unconstitutional, involves balancing competing interests. See Prouse, 440 U.S. at 654, 99 S.Ct. 1391; State v. Larsen, 650 N.W.2d 144, 148 (Minn.2002); Ascher v. Comm’r of Pub. Safety, 519 N.W.2d 183, 185-86 (Minn.1994). The balancing test involves three factors: the gravity of the public concern served by the seizure; the degree to which the seizure advances the public interests; and the severity of the interference with individual liberty. Ascher, 519 N.W.2d at 185 (citing Brown v. Texas, 443 U.S. 47, 50-51, 99 S.Ct. 2637, 61 *388L.Ed.2d 357 (1979)). The question presented in this case is whether it is.reasonable for a peace officer to stop a driver of a WZ vehicle and inquire about his or her driver’s license without any additional particularized suspicion.
The first factor to weigh in the balance is the gravity of the public concern served by the seizure. The state has a substantial interest in keeping our roads safe. See Prouse, 440 U.S. at 658, 99 S.Ct. 1391. As part of its efforts to keep roads safe, the state must grapple with the problem of people who drive under the influence. We have recognized on multiple occasions the seriousness of this problem. See, e.g., Ascher, 519 N.W.2d at 185 (citing the magnitude of the problem with drunk driving and the strong state interest in eradicating it); Heddan v. Dirkswager, 336 N.W.2d 54, 62-63 (Minn.1983) (discussing the relationship ' of drunk driving to tragedy on the highways). Despite the best efforts of legislators and law enforcement, impaired drivers continue to present a very real danger, causing a disproportionate number of traffic deaths each year.3 Thesé accidents exact a tragic cost on the families of the individuals involved and are a drain on the financial resources of the state.4
Even more specifically, the practice of impounding standard plates • and issuing special plates is intended to further the state interest in protecting the public from individuals who repeatedly drive under the influence or without a driver’s license. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) reports that approximately one-third of all drivers arrested or convicted of driving while impaired each year are repeat offenders. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Vehicle & License Plate Sanctions, at www.nhtsa.gov/people/outreaeh/safe sobr/19qp/factsheets/vehiele.html (last visited June 30, 2003). In addition, repeat offenders are “overrepresented in fatal crashes and have a greater relative risk of fatal crash involvement.” Id.5 In addition many second- and third-time convicted DWI offenders are involved in traffic offenses or crashes during their suspension. Id. I conclude that repeat offenders of our laws against driving while impaired pose a serious threat to the safety of other travelers, and the seizure authorized by this statute addresses that threat.
The second factor in the balancing test concerns the efficacy of the stops at issue. The court was presented with no statistics as to how frequently peace officers find legal drivers at the wheel when they stop cars with special-issue plates of this variety. However, a study of Minnesota’s *389plate impoundment system found “a significant decrease in recidivism for violators who had their plates impounded versus violators who did not. Violators whose license plates were impounded by the arresting officer showed a 50 percent decrease in recidivism over a 2-year period (when compared with DWI violators who did not experience impoundment).” Id. The decrease in recidivism suggests that the impoundment scheme is furthering the state’s interest in protecting the public from the unsafe driving habits of repeat offenders. As our WZ plates are a key aspect of ensuring that repeat offenders do not harm the motoring public by driving during their period of revocation, and this statute is narrowly tailored to the population of repeat offenders, it reasonably advances the public interest.
I turn now to the third factor, the “nature and quality” of the intrusion on liberty entailed by the seizure. See Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 24, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 20 L.Ed.2d 889 (1968). In this case, we face a situation in which a narrow class of people — individuals driving with WZ plates — can be stopped by an officer for the purpose of ensuring that they are operating the vehicle within the scope allowed them by our state licensing agency. Although potentially aggravating, intimidating, and embarrassing, the purpose of the stop is limited and the resulting detention is brief, just long enough for the officer to ensure the driver has a valid license.6
Having considered the gravity of the public concern presented by repeat offenders of our drunk driving laws, the focused nature of' this statute as part of the state’s enforcement scheme, and the extent of the intrusion involved when an officer asks to see the operator’s license to drive, I conclude this practice is a reasonable seizure and therefore the statute does not violate either the state or federal constitution. I emphasize here that the scope of the seizure authorized by statute is limited; it authorizes the stop of a vehicle in order to determine the validity of the driver’s license. Anything beyond that limited scope, justified by the state’s need to protect the public from individuals who repeatedly drive under the influence, could be unreasonable. See Terry, 892 U.S. at 29, 88 S.Ct. 1868 (noting that “evidence may not be introduced if it was discovered by means of a seizure and search which were not reasonably related in scope to the *390justification for their initiation” and that frisks justified by the protection of police officers and bystanders must be confined to an intrusion designed to discover hidden instruments that could be used in an assault); see also State v. Fort, 660 N.W.2d 415, 418 (Minn.2003) (“the scope and duration of a traffic stop investigation must be limited to the justification for the stop”).
The majority attempts to analogize this case to the unconstitutional police practices at issue in Prouse and Ascher. Those cases are distinguishable in part because the intrusion affected many more people than does the intrusion authorized by Minn.Stat. § 168.0422. In Prouse, the police practice at issue was the arbitrary stop of any car on the road. 440 U.S. at 650, 99 S.Ct. 1391. And in Ascher, the practice at issue was temporary roadblocks used for sobriety tests, which detained all vehicles at a particular intersection. 519 N.W.2d at 184. In both of these cases the practices could potentially impact large populations, limiting the efficacy of the stop.
An additional difference between the instant case and Ascher is that Ascher did not involve a police action authorized by statute. The sobriety checks at issue in Ascher were an attempt by the police to use innovative tools to decrease drunk driving, but there was no statute prescribing the roadblocks. Because the court was faced with the constitutionality of a police practice, not a statute, the court was free to place the burden of proof on the state. Ascher, 519 N.W.2d at 187. In this case a statute is at issue, which shifts the burden of proof. Statutes are presumed constitutional, and the court traditionally uses its power to declare a statute unconstitutional “only when absolutely necessary.” State v. Larsen, 650 N.W.2d 144, 147 (Minn.2002). The party challenging the constitutionality of the statute bears the heavy burden of establishing its invalidity. Heidbreder v. Carton, 645 N.W.2d 355, 372 (Minn.2002). The mere “possibility” that lawful drivers may be repeatedly stopped should not suffice to meet the appellant’s heavy burden of establishing the statute’s invalidity. Nothing in the record before us convinces me it is “absolutely necessary” to strike down this statute.
Even if we were to conclude that the state’s interest in regulating repeat DWI offenders does not outweigh the intrusion on those drivers’ liberty, I would nevertheless conclude that the statute is constitutional because the owner of the vehicle gave consent to a suspicionless stop by applying for the special plates. That consent eliminated Henning’s reasonable expectation of privacy, at least insofar as it included an expectation to be free from an investigative stop to confirm he was a licensed driver. See State v. Perkins, 588 N.W.2d 491, 493 (Minn.1999) (“But even a reasonable expectation of privacy may be waived if a defendant’s conduct, objectively viewed in light of the totality of the circumstances, ‘mandates the conclusion that any expectation of privacy was unreasonable’”) (quoting State v. Tungland, 281 N.W.2d 646, 650 (Minn.1979)) (internal ellipsis omitted).
The majority opinion refuses to imply consent to a suspicionless stop because (1) Henning stated his view that the officer needed a separate reason to stop him, and (2) there was no evidence that Henning was put on notice that the special plates were accepted on the condition that law enforcement could stop the vehicle at any time. But the existence of a reasonable expectation of privacy, as a prerequisite to an unlawful search and seizure, depends not merely on the party’s subjective expectations, but also on his or her objective expectations. In re Welfare of B.R.K, 658 N.W.2d 565, 571 (Minn.2003) (“First, we *391must determine whether B.R.K. exhibited an actual subjective expectation of privacy in the home and, second, whether that expectation is reasonable.”). Henning did admit to the officer that he was on notice of the conditions under which the special plates were issued (in fact, he debated with the officer about the appropriate interpretation of those conditions). Henning is charged with notice of the law, and the law expresses those conditions. See State v. Calmes, 632 N.W.2d 641, 648 (Minn.2001).7 Because consent is implied, neither the violator nor the person who applied for special plates has a reasonable expectation of privacy in the vehicle. The violator cannot rely upon any theoretical expectation of privacy that might be possessed by someone other than the violator or the applicant.
I would hold that MinmStat. § 168.0422 is constitutional, because it authorizes only reasonable seizures of individuals who have continually abused their driving privileges and, alternatively, it authorizes a stop of an individual who has revoked his or her reasonable expectation of privacy in the vehicle. Therefore, I would affirm the court of appeals.
BLATZ, Chief Justice (dissenting).
I join in the dissent of Justice Meyer.
HANSON, Justice (dissenting).
I join in the dissent of Justice Meyer.
. Joel Henning's plates were impounded under Minn.Stat. § 168.042 (1998), which is now repealed, but carried the same substantive provisions as sections 169A.54-.60.
. Other circumstances for issuance include when the violator himself has a limited license to perform essential tasks. See Minn. Stat. §§ 168.041, subd. 6; 169A.60, subd. 13; 171.30 (2002).
. In 2001, there were 226 alcohol-related traffic fatalities in Minnesota, which constituted 40% of all traffic deaths in that year. Mothers Against Drunk Driving, State-by-State Traffic Fatalities — 2001, at http:// www.madd.org/stats/0,1056,4809,00.html (last visited June 30, 2003)¿
. It is estimated that the average alcohol-related fatality costs the State bf Minnesota $3.5 million. Public Services Research Institute, Impaired Driving in .Minnesota, at www.nhtsa.gov/peopIe/iniury/alcohol/MN.htm (last visited June 30, 2003). Using the number of .traffic deaths reported in, note 3, alcohol-related fatalities cost Minnesota an estimated $791 million in the year 2001.
.Interestingly, the NHTSA includes among its recommendations for strengthening states’ license plate sanctions that states allowing special-issue plates "incorporate a provision that permits officers to stop the vehicle for the sole purpose of checking whether the driver is operating the vehicle while their license is under suspension.” National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Vehicle & License Plate Sanctions, at www.nhtsa.gov/people/out-reacb/safesobr/19qp/factsheets/vehicle.html (last visited June 30, 2003). Minnesota is one of three states that issue special license plates as part of its efforts to monitor repeat offenders. Id.
. The majority describes the statute as subjecting legitimate motorists "to the possibility of being stopped by every law enforcement officer they encounter.” The facts of this case do not establish that the actual government intrusion is unnecessarily invasive; there is no indication that other members of Hen-ning’s family were harassed while driving. In this case, Henning was the individual whose license had been revoked after he was caught driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs twice within 5 years. And Henning was the individual behind the wheel when Mait-land stopped the car after noticing the special plates. Regardless, I would defer that concern for another day and only decide the constitutionality of Minn.Stat. § 168.0422 as applied to the facts before us. See, e.g., Boutin v. LaFleur, 591 N.W.2d 711, 716 (Minn.1999) (finding .predatory offender registration statute constitutional as applied to appellant); State v. Chambers, 589 N.W.2d 466, 480 (Minn.1999) (finding life sentence without possibility of release, as applied to appellant, constitutional); Wheeler v. City of Wayzata, 533 N.W.2d 405, 407 (Minn.1995) (finding Wayzata’s zoning ordinance "not constitutionally invalid as applied here”). As applied to these facts, issues concerning the statute’s .breadth do not take on constitutional significance. The majority also expresses concern that the statute might authorize a suspicion-less stop of a qualified driver who was not a party to the original revocation. I would also defer that concern to another day because the facts before us involve a driver whose violation caused the original revocation.
. It is not clear whether the majority is of the view that the legislature could never condition the issuance of special plates on the applicant's consent to suspicionless searches or only that the legislature did not do so with sufficient clarity here. I do not read the majority opinion as foreclosing further efforts by the legislature to make the applicant’s consent more explicit.

=== CASE 9739262 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:22.86212+00 ===

ON PETITION TO TRANSFER
KRAHULIK, Justice.
The Auditor of Marshall County and Thomas and Jacqueline Read, tax sale purchasers, petition this Court to accept transfer after the Court of Appeals reversed the trial court's entry of summary judgment against Urbano and Irma Elizondo. Elizondo v. Read (1990), Ind.App., 553 N.E.2d 849, on reh'g. 556 N.E.2d 959. The Court of Appeals' decision effectively invalidated a tax sale of property owned by the Elizon-dos. The question squarely presented by the petition to transfer is whether the notice of tax sale utilized by the Auditor of Marshall County ("Auditor") was unconstitutionally defective. We accept transfer to answer this question.
*502The Elizondos purchased a recreational lot at Yogi Bear Jellystone Park camp resort in Plymouth, Marshall County, Indiana, in 1979. The deed was properly recorded with the Marshall County recorder's office in September of 1979. At the time the Elizondos purchased the lot, they executed a real estate mortgage with First Source Bank ("the Bank") acting as mortgagee. From 1981 to 1984, the real estate tax statements for the property were addressed to the Elizondos at 213 North See-ond Street, Plymouth, Indiana. During this period, the Elizondos moved twice. From 1983 to 1984, they resided at 8310 South Plum Street, Plymouth, Indiana. In 1984, they purchased a new residence and relocated again, moving to 1631 West Harrison, Plymouth, Indiana.
All notices sent to the Elizondos by the Auditor were sent to the 218 North Second Street address. Tax statements sent to this address were returned marked "Unclaimed" or "Undeliverable as addressed. No forwarding order on file." A review of the tax duplicate records first revealed that the Elizondos were in arrears and, thus, their property was eligible for tax sale.
A courtesy letter was sent, followed by a certified mailing of the formal notice of tax sale, dated July 23, 1984. This notice was returned to the Auditor stamped "Unclaimed." In compliance with statutory criteria, a notice of tax sale was placed in several local newspapers. The Reads purchased the property at a tax sale in August of 1984 for $85.
Two years later, in compliance with statute, the Auditor sent the Elizondos a "notice of tax sale redemption or issuance of tax deed" by certified mail to the Second Street address. The notice was returned to the Auditor marked "Undeliverable as addressed. No forwarding order on file." A tax title deed was issued to the Reads. The Elizondos failed to provide any change of address notice to the Auditor's office. In 1984, at the time the tax sale notices were mailed, the Auditor had available personal property records indicating that Ur-bano Elizondo resided at 310 South Plum Street. In 1986, at the time of the forwarding of the notice of redemption, the Auditor's office maintained a real estate tax file and an alphabetized real estate card file containing a listing for the Elizon-dos. Also, the Elizondos were listed in the phone directory at the proper address during the time period in question.
At the time the Auditor put the property up for sale, the Bank's mortgage existed as a valid lien on the property. In July of 1984, when the tax sale notice was mailed, there existed no statutory requirement that the auditor send notice to any party with a substantial interest in the property unless that party complied with the requirements of Ind.Code § 6-1.1-24-4.2. This section provided that any party wishing to receive notice must annually file such request with the auditor and pay a small fee. The Bank did not file such a request or pay the fee and it did not receive notice.
The Elizondos brought suit against the Auditor and the Reads. The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of the Reads and the Auditor. The Court of Appeals reversed, holding that the statutory provisions requiring the auditor to send notice by certified mail to the Elizondos' "last known address" are constitutionally insufficient with regard to the circumstances of the case.
In order to decide the constitutional question presented by the facts of this case, we must discuss and decide two separate issues of notice. The first addresses notice to the Elizondos' mortgagee, First Source Bank. The second concerns the notice given to the Elizondos themselves.
I. Notice to the Mortgagee
In July of 1984, when the Auditor issued the notice of tax sale, Ind. Code § 6-1.1-24-4.2 required the county auditor to send notice of sale to any mortgagee of real property subject to sale if the mortgagee annually, on a form provided by the State Board of Accounts, requested such notice and agreed to pay a fee to the county auditor to cover the costs of sending the notice.1 It is uncontested that First Source *503Bank did not take any action to request notice, including the filing of the necessary request form. Nonetheless, the Elizondos argue that the Auditor's failure to search the public records-in this case the recorded mortgages-led to a deprivation of the mortgagee's constitutional right to be notified of the tax sale.
As support for this argument, the Elizon-dos point to Mennonite Board of Missions v. Adams (1983), 462 U.S. 791, 103 S.Ct. 2706, 77 L.Ed.2d 180. The Mennonite Board of Missions ("MBM") took a mortgage as a security interest against a loan made to Alfred Jean Moore. The mortgage was recorded in the Elkhart County recorder's office in 1983. When Moore defaulted on property tax payments, the auditor placed the property up for tax sale.
At the time of the sale, this State did not have any provision for notification by mail or personal service to mortgagees that the property in which they held an interest would be sold. The U.S. Supreme Court's majority opinion notes that § 6-1.1-24-4.2, the statute applicable to our case, was added in 1980. Because the events in Mer-nonite occurred before this addition, the Court expressly declined to examine the constitutionality of the statute.
The Court in Mennonite held that a mortgagee has a legally-protected interest and is, thus, "entitled to notice reasonably calculated to appraise him of a pending tax sale." 462 U.S. at 798, 103 S.Ct. at 2711, 77 L.Ed.2d at 187. The Court said:
When the mortgagee is identified in a mortgage that is publicly recorded, constructive notice by publication must be supplemented by notice mailed to the mortgagee's last known available address, or by personal service. But unless the mortgagee is not reasonably identifiable, constructive notice alone does not satisfy the mandate of Mullane.
Id. The rule established in Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co. (1950), 339 U.S. 306, 70 S.Ct. 652, 94 L.Ed. 865, states that "[a)n elementary and fundamental requirement of due process in any proceeding which is to be accorded finality is notice reasonably calculated, under all the cireumstances, to appraise interested parties of the pendency of the action and afford them an opportunity to present their objections." Mullane, 339 U.S. at 314-15, 70 S.Ct. at 657, 94 L.Ed. at 873. Notice is deemed constitutionally adequate when "the practicalities and peculiarities of the case ... are reasonably met." Id. The issue of reasonableness of the notice given turns on the means chosen by the State. The Supreme Court has declined to create a formula for reaching the proper balance between these interests. "It is not our responsibility to prescribe the form of service that the [state] should adopt." Greene v. Lindsey (1982), 456 U.S. 444, 449-50, 102 S.Ct. 1874, 1878, 72 L.Ed.2d 249, 257. See also Mullane, 339 U.S. at 314, 70 S.Ct. at 657, 94 L.Ed. at 872. "[NJotice required will vary with circumstances and conditions." Walker v. City of Hutchinson (1956), 352 U.S. 112, 115, 77 S.Ct. 200, 202, 1 L.Ed.2d 178, 182.
By enacting Ind.Code § 6-1.1-24-4.2, the State sought to establish a procedure of notification that balanced both the interests of the State and the interests of the pertinent class, in this case mortgagees. The procedure protects the State's interest in receiving taxes while relieving it of the sometimes tremendous administrative burden of checking all public records to ascertain whether any mortgages have been taken on the property, whether these mortgag*504es are viable, and whether the address on the mortgages is dependable. The interest-holder will be certain to receive notice and take whatever action deemed appropriate by simply filing the necessary form in the auditor's office.
The U.S. Supreme Court's line of opinions addressing the issue of notice has never disregarded a party's ability to take steps to protect itself. Rather, the Court has considered the interest-holder's ability to take reasonable steps to protect his interest as a crucial aspect of the balancing test. As the dissent in Mennonite notes, these decisions holding constructive notice insufficient involved circumstances where the property owner could not easily learn of the state's action threatening his interest. Mennonite, 462 U.S. at 807, 103 S.Ct. at 2719, 77 L.Ed.2d at 193. See also Mullane, 339 U.S. at 316, 70 S.Ct. at 658, 94 L.Ed. at 874.
Such is not true in the instant case, however. The interest-holder needed only to complete a simple form to insure notice. The fact that the interest-holder chose not to avail itself of this method of protecting its interest is not sufficient grounds to demand that the State be required to conduct a more burdensome, costly search. We cannot say that the auditor's failure to go outside the prescribed statutory bounds resulted in a constitutional deprivation of due process.
II. Notice to Property Owners
The second notice issue which must be addressed in this case is whether notice to the Elizondos themselves was sufficient. Ind.Code § 6-1.1-24-4 requires that the auditor send notice of sale by certified mail to the owners of real property at their last known address. Specifically, as the Elizon-dos argued in their brief to the Court of Appeals, at the time the notice of redemption or issuance of deed notice was sent and subsequently returned to the Auditor, the Auditor had knowledge, from its own records, of a different address for the Eli-zondos.
At the time the Elizondos purchased the property in 1979, they resided at 218 North Second Street, Plymouth, Indiana. All statements sent from the Auditor's office to the Elizondos were sent to this address. It is uncontested that the Elizondos made no effort to update their address with the Auditor's office. The Auditor, however, had available, in his own records, several listings for the Elizondos. The 1982 and 1983 personal property tax records, which the Auditor used to send the Elizondos their personal property tax statements, contained the 310 South Plum address, a more recent address than 213 North Second Street. The Auditor's office also maintained in the Auditor's office real estate transfer cards that could have been used to determine a different address to send out the notices.
Like information in possession of other public officials, knowledge of information contained in records maintained by a county auditor may be imputed to the auditor. This means that the Auditor will be considered to have been aware of any address for the Elizondos that is contained in the auditor's own records to the extent that the alternate listing linked the persons therein to the property upon which taxes were delinquent. This also suggests, however, that the auditor does not have knowledge of, nor should be required to seek knowledge of, information contained in records or documents not routinely maintained by and within the auditor's office. For example, contrary to the Elizondos' argument, the auditor should not be required to resort to the most recent telephone directories to ascertain a different address, nor should the auditor be required to search the records of other offices such as the recorder or the court clerk. All that is required is that the auditor send notice to the owner's last known address, that is, the last address of the owner of the specific property in question of which the auditor has knowledge from records maintained in its office.
Here, although the Auditor's office maintained several types of records, and different addresses for the Elizondo's could be found within these listings, we are unable to discern from the trial record whether any of the alternate listings linked the Elli-*505zondos to the property in question. It is reasonable to require the auditor to search the records of his own office for other possible addresses upon the receipt of an undelivered notice. It is not, however, reasonable to require the auditor to speculate as to whether these possible alternatives are addresses for the property owner who owes taxes on the property in question or another taxpayer with the same name. This type of confusion may not be very great when the auditor is searching for an Urbano Elizondo in Marshall County. It does pose a problem, however, when the auditor of Marion County is attempting to find an address for Mary Smith, or the auditor of Lake County is searching for a John Jones. We must, however, keep in mind that the statute which we are interpreting has statewide application.
Certainly, the auditor must ascertain from the records which he keeps and maintains any alternate addresses for the owner of the specific piece of property at issue. Due process, however, does not require the auditor to engage in speculation as would be the case when there is nothing to link alternative address to the property at issue. Because we are unable to determine from the evidence submitted at trial whether any of the records which contained an address for the Elizondos other than the original Second Street address also contained reference to the tax sale lot, we cannot say that there is a genuine issue of material fact requiring reversal of the trial court's determination that the auditor used the last known address of the persons listed as owners of the lot in sending notices.
Accordingly, we grant transfer, vacate the opinion of the Court of Appeals, and reinstate the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of Thomas and Jacqueline Read and the Marshall County Auditor.
SHEPARD, C.J., and DeBRULER and DICKSON, JJ., concur.
GIVAN, J., dissents, with separate opinion.
. As the Elizondos point out, in March of 1986, approximately five months prior to the issuance *503of the notice of tax sale redemption or the issuance of deed, Ind.Code § 6-1.1-24-4.2 was amended to say only that the county auditor should send notice of sale to all persons having a substantial property interest of public record. There was no requirement for a request of such notice. This amendment, however, came into effect one year and seven months after the sale of the property. Both the original and the amended statute deal expressly with only notice of sale, and not notice of redemption or issuance of deed. Ind.Code § 6-1.1-25-6 addresses what notice must be sent to a former owner before the execution and delivery of a tax deed. There is no separate statute dictating that a mortgagee or any other substantial interest-holder should receive notice of redemption or of issuance of the tax deed. Rather, it is only necessary that a mortgagee be notified of a pending tax sale. Notably, Ind.Code § 6-1.1-24-4.2 has been repealed entirely. P.L. 83-1989, § 18, effective May 5, 1989.

=== CASE 9739263 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:22.866865+00 ===

GIVAN, Justice,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion. Although Ind.Code § 6-1.1-24-4.2 (repealed 1989; mow see § 6-1.1-24-3) was passed after the completion of the facts governing Mennonite Board of Missions v. Adams (1983), 462 U.S. 791, 103 S.Ct. 2706, 77 L.Ed.2d 180, the law set forth in Mennonite is applicable to the facts in the case at bar.
When the State undertakes to acquire real estate because of delinquent taxes, they should be required to follow any reasonable investigation to assure that all interested parties are notified of the pending tax sale. Real estate is too valuable an asset to permit slipshod inquiry into the ownership interests in such property.
There is no question that a county auditor should not be required to search through the entire court records of the county to ascertain possible interests in real estate. However, such is not the situation in the case at bar. As correctly quot ed by the majority, the United States Supreme Court in Mennonite held that where there is a publicly recorded mortgage, constructive notice by publication must be supplemented by notice mailed to the mortgagee.
The case at bar arose in a rural county with a relatively low population. As pointed out in the Court of Appeals opinion, Elizondo v. Read (1990), Ind.App., 553 N.E.2d 849, reh'g, 556 N.E.2d 959, if the statute is to be so strictly construed, as in the majority opinion of this Court, such construction would be unconstitutional in view of the holding in Mennonite as far as the mortgagee is concerned. So far as the Elizondos were concerned, the Court of Appeals correctly pointed out that their correct address was on file in the auditor's office although not in regard to the instant property. When the notice with regard to the delinquent taxes was returned to the auditor's office, it would have been a very simple operation to have ascertained the Elizondos' current address.
*506I believe the Court of Appeals correctly decided this case. I would therefore deny transfer.

=== CASE 2219180 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:04.424768+00 ===

588 N.E.2d 367 (1992)
225 Ill. App. 3d 581
167 Ill. Dec. 726
In re ESTATE OF Frank GOODLETT, Deceased (Walter James, Ex'r of the Estate of Frank Goodlett, Deceased, Petitioner-Appellant
v.
Ann Kent Goodlett, Respondent-Appellee).
In re ESTATE OF Frank GOODLETT, Deceased (Ann Kent Goodlett, Petitioner-Appellant
v.
Walter James, Ex'r of the Estate of Frank Goodlett, Deceased, Respondent-Appellee).
Nos. 2-91-0153, 2-91-0322.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Second District.
February 14, 1992.
*368 Paul W. Kaiser, argued, Waukegan, for Estate of Frank Goodlett.
Betty Burns Paden, argued, Evanston, for Ann Goodlett.
Justice UNVERZAGT delivered the opinion of the court:
Walter James, Jr., executor of the estate of decedent Frank Goodlett, appeals from the judgment of the circuit court of Lake County granting Frank's widow, Ann Goodlett, her statutory share of Frank's estate. Ann Goodlett appeals from the lower court's order finding that she was not entitled to a surviving spouse's award. As both appeals arose from the same cause in the lower court, we have consolidated the two cases for purposes of appeal.
On March 19, 1980, Frank executed a will leaving his entire estate to his former wife, Lillian M. Goodlett, or, if she did not survive him, to her son, Walter James, Jr. (James). Lillian died in January 1984.
On July 4, 1985, Frank married Ann Kent in Waukegan. At the time of their marriage Frank was 82 years of age and suffering from kidney disease. Ann was 77. Frank died on December 25, 1985, in Portland, Oregon, leaving Ann as the only heir surviving him.
As the executor of Frank's will, James filed a petition for probate of the will and for letters testamentary on February 4, 1986. These documents were admitted to probate on that same date. On February 20, 1986, attorney Betty Burns Paden (Paden) filed her appearance and the appearance of Ann. On that same date Paden wrote Paul Kaiser, Jr. (Kaiser), attorney for James, inviting an offer from James for a quick buy out or settlement of Ann's interest in the estate prior to probate. In a letter dated February 24, 1986, Kaiser replied to Paden's offer, stating that he and James believed Ann was entitled to no more than her statutory share, which was offset by damage Ann had allegedly caused to a house owned by Frank. The house had been damaged considerably when water pipes froze after the gas had been turned off leaving the house without heat. James offered Ann $2,000 for her interest in the estate.
Paden replied to James' offer on March 5, 1986, stating that Ann denied any responsibility for damage done to the house and rejecting Kaiser's "meager" and "ridiculous" offer of $2,000 as Ann's share of Frank's estate. Paden related that Ann "will wait until the house is sold for the fair market value."
On May 5, 1986, Paden filed a claim, signed by Ann, in the amount of $2,341.34 against the estate for funeral and other expenses paid by Ann. On that same date Paden wrote Kaiser of this claim and requested compensation. Ann's claim was scheduled for a hearing on July 18, 1986.
Prior to their court appearance on July 18, Kaiser and James met with Paden. According to Paden, James and Kaiser said they intended to give Ann her share of the estate. Paden related that James commented that he had boats and plenty of money and did not need to take money away from Ann. Paden stated that because the estate was small, Kaiser suggested the parties settle out of court. It was Paden's testimony that she subsequently spoke with Kaiser before the September deadline for filing for a renunciation and that they negotiated regarding Ann's statutory share.
In testimony given by James during his evidence deposition, James denied ever telling Paden at the July 18 meeting that he had plenty of money or that he had everything he needed and, therefore, did not need Frank's money. James stated that the only topic of conversation at the meeting was Ann's expense claim against the estate.
Kaiser's recollection of the July 18 meeting with Paden was that no conversation occurred concerning Ann's share of the estate nor was any agreement reached. Additionally, Kaiser testified that no renunciation of the will was mentioned and no discussion regarding waiver of the statutory *369 requirements pertaining to renunciation occurred during any of his contacts with Paden.
At the July 18 meeting with Paden, Kaiser informed Paden that he no longer considered Ann responsible for the damage to decedent's house and that he had filed a suit against the North Shore Gas Company which, Kaiser believed, was responsible. Kaiser also told Paden that he and James considered some of the items listed in Ann's claim against the estate as not legitimate. When Paden and Kaiser appeared in court on July 18, the two attorneys presented their positions concerning Ann's claim. The court suggested the parties settle the claim for $1,000. Subsequently, the parties did agree to settle for that amount. Kaiser informed Paden that he would have an order entered in the amount of $1,000 and would send her a copy, which he did.
On August 1, 1986, James, as executor, received an offer to purchase Frank's damaged residence for $15,000. Having received a request from Kaiser that Ann agree to the purchase price, Paden wrote Kaiser on August 13, 1986, asking Kaiser for a current appraisal on the property. Also, Paden advised Kaiser that Ann should be apprised of the lawsuit initiated by Kaiser against the gas company. On the same date Kaiser sent a copy of the real estate offer to Paden.
On August 18 and August 21, 1986, Kaiser wrote Paden requesting that she contact him regarding the prospective sale of the house and the lawsuit against the gas company.
On September 2, 1986, Paden wrote Ann informing Ann that, if she agreed, the estate would be settled out of court and Ann would receive the funeral expenses for Frank and her "widow's share of the estate." Paden told Ann that Frank's house was going to be sold, that the gas company was going to be sued for the damage to the residence, that the amount to be recovered would not be large, and that, therefore, it would be best to settle the estate out of court.
On September 30, 1986, Paden wrote Kaiser seeking a copy of the lawsuit against the gas company and a copy of the appraisal of the house which she had earlier requested. In a letter dated October 7, 1986, Kaiser enclosed a copy of the lawsuit and responded to Paden's appraisal request by explaining that he had not obtained an appraisal of the house because the sale had not occurred.
On March 25, 1987, Kaiser wrote Paden informing her that he needed to discuss litigation matters against the gas company with her and requesting that Paden contact him. On May 4 Paden wrote Kaiser conveying information she had received from Ann regarding Ann's dealings and conversations with the gas company regarding the damaged residence and Ann's availability to testify.
In June 1987, Kaiser learned that Ann had not filed a renunciation. Following a deposition in the lawsuit against the North Shore Gas Company, the attorney for the gas company made an inquiry regarding the identity of the interested parties in the estate. Kaiser explained that James was the sole beneficiary under the will and that Ann, as widow, possessed the right to renounce the will and receive a statutory one-half share of the estate. When asked if Ann had renounced, Kaiser replied that he assumed she had, as she had everything to gain and nothing to lose by renouncing. Later, Kaiser checked and discovered that Ann had not filed a renunciation. A month or two later Kaiser informed James, who had been out of town during this time, about the necessity for a timely filing of the renunciation and that Ann had not yet filed.
On September 11, 1987, Kaiser sent Paden a check for $1,000 in settlement of Ann's expense claim against the estate and a copy of James' final report as executor of Frank's estate to be filed on September 18. Ann filed a petition to vacate this final report which was allowed to stand as her objections to the report. That petition was later amended and filed on February 16, 1988.
*370 On March 15, 1988, Robert Smith was allowed to file his additional appearance on Ann's behalf. On July 12, 1988, Ann by her attorneys Paden and Smith filed her objections to the executor's final report. Ann sought her statutory share of the estate and blamed her failure to file a renunciation of decedent's will on the actions and negotiations of the executor's attorney in leading Ann to believe that she would receive her share. In his reply to Ann's objections, James admitted that he refused to pay Ann the share she would have been entitled to had she renounced the will as provided by statute. On April 3, 1990, Ann filed a renunciation.
Also on April 3, Ann filed an application for surviving spouse's award. (Ill.Rev. Stat.1989, ch. 110½, par. 15-1.) James moved to deny Ann's application for surviving spouse's award, asserting that prior to his death Frank had changed his domicile from Illinois to Oregon and that, therefore, at the time of his death Frank was not a resident of Illinois (as required under section 15-1 of the Probate Act of 1975). On May 16, 1990, the trial court denied Ann's application for surviving spouse's award, finding that Frank was domiciled in Oregon when he died. Subsequently, Ann moved to vacate this judgment.
Following a hearing on September 24, 1990, the trial court denied Ann's motion to reconsider the court's disallowance of her surviving spouse's award. The court did grant, however, Ann's petition for her statutory share of the estate, finding that because the negotiations and discussions between Paden and Kaiser were pursued with the idea that Ann would share in the estate, James was estopped from precluding Ann from taking her share based on her failure to timely renounce. In an amended order, entered December 18, 1990, the court made additional findings nunc pro tunc as of September 24, 1990. On January 14, 1991, the court denied James' motion to vacate these prior orders.
On February 1, 1991, James filed a notice of appeal, praying that the lower court's orders of September 24, 1990, December 18, 1990, and January 14, 1991, be reversed. On February 22, 1991, Ann moved to dismiss James' appeal based on Supreme Court Rule 309 (134 Ill.2d R. 309). The trial court denied Ann's motion, finding that Ann had no standing to present a motion pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 309.
On March 19, 1991, Ann filed a notice of appeal from the trial court's findings of May 16, 1990, and September 24, 1990, denying her a surviving spouse's award. We, however, find that we have no jurisdiction to hear Ann's appeal.
Illinois Supreme Court Rule 303(a)(3) provides:
"If a timely notice of appeal is filed and served by a party, any other party, within 10 days after service upon him, or within 30 days of the entry of the order disposing of the last pending post-trial motion, whichever is later, may join in the appeal, appeal separately, or cross-appeal by filing a notice of appeal, indicating which type of appeal is being taken." (134 Ill.2d R. 303(a)(3).)
In the instant case Ann was served with notice of the executor's appeal on February 4, 1990. Ann filed her separate appeal on March 19, 1990. As readily apparent from this filing date, Ann's notice was not filed within 10 days after service upon her of the executor's notice of appeal. To be timely filed, therefore, Ann's petition must have been filed within 30 days of the entry of the order disposing of the last pending post-trial motion. Here, that order occurred on January 14, 1991, when the court denied the executor's motion to vacate the court's prior September 24, 1990, and December 18, 1990, orders finding that Ann was entitled to her statutory share of the estate. These prior orders also denied Ann's motion for reconsideration of the denial of a surviving spouse's award. Ann, however, failed to file her notice of appeal within 30 days of the entry of the January 14 order, the last pending post-trial motion in the instant case.
Although both James and Ann filed motions after the January 14 order, neither motion constituted a post-trial motion. *371 Ann's motion was a motion to dismiss James' appeal. The motion, however, cannot be considered a post-trial motion. A post-trial motion must be one which specifically requests one or more of the statutorily authorized types of relief consisting of rehearing, retrial, modification or vacation of the judgment. (Lewis v. Loyola University (1986), 149 Ill.App.3d 88, 92, 102 Ill. Dec. 425, 500 N.E.2d 47.) Ann's motion to dismiss the appeal failed to specify any of these forms of relief. Rather, the only relief requested was dismissal of James' appeal. Thus, the motion could not be deemed a post-trial motion.
Parenthetically, Ann's request for dismissal was inappropriately based on Supreme Court Rule 309 (134 Ill.2d R. 309). Supreme Court Rule 309 allows dismissal of an appeal by the party bringing the appeal, James in this instance, or on stipulation of the parties. Neither of those situations occurred here.
Even if, however, Ann's motion to dismiss the executor's appeal were considered a post-trial motion, we would not have jurisdiction because the motion, filed on February 22, 1991, and later amended on February 27, 1991, was not brought within 30 days of the January 14, 1991, judgment disposing of the case.
In her motion to dismiss the executor's appeal Ann stated that the executor had not yet filed a final amended report within 45 days of January 14, 1991, as required by the trial court's order of that date. Subsequent to Ann's motion to dismiss, James filed, on March 5, 1991, a motion to stay proceedings, i.e., to stay the filing of the final account of the estate pending appeal. The trial court ordered that stay on March 11, 1991. Orders entered by a trial court after the filing of a notice of appeal are valid if substantive issues on appeal are not affected and if the nature of the appeal is not altered. (Homeowners Organized to Protect the Environment, Inc. v. First National Bank (1988), 167 Ill.App.3d 714, 720, 118 Ill. Dec. 509, 521 N.E.2d 1202.) Here, the order staying the enforcement of the judgment was a matter arising independent of and collateral to the court's judgment and did not affect the issues on appeal or change the nature of the appeal. James' motion to stay the court's final order did not attack the final judgment but, rather, asked the court to stay enforcement of the order pending appeal. Thus, the motion was not a post-trial motion for purposes of extending the time for filing a notice of appeal until entry of the order disposing of the motion.
Ann's March 19, 1991, notice of appeal, therefore, was not brought within 30 days of the court's order disposing of the last pending post-trial motion, as that order was entered on January 14, 1991, and not on February 27, 1991 when the court denied Ann's dismissal of James' appeal, or on March 11, 1991, when the court stayed the probate proceedings pending appeal.
Failure to file a timely notice of appeal is jurisdictional, and it is not within this court's authority to overlook Ann's failure to comply with the rules of civil procedure. (Kotalik v. Jensen (1990), 201 Ill.App.3d 838, 842, 147 Ill. Dec. 251, 559 N.E.2d 251.) Ann's failure to comply with the requirements of a timely notice of appeal requires us to dismiss her appeal for lack of jurisdiction. This court is, however, not deprived of its jurisdiction to review the issues raised by James in his appeal. His notice of appeal was timely filed on February 1, 1991, within 30 days of the entry of the court's January 14, 1991, order disposing of the last pending post-trial motion, i.e., James' post-trial motion to vacate and set aside the court's order of September 24, 1990, and amended order of December 18, 1990.
In regard to his appeal, James has filed in this court a motion to strike portions of Ann's brief, which James alleges pertain to matters extraneous to the record. It is James' position that James' counsel, Paul Kaiser, and Ann's additional counsel, Robert Smith, agreed that certain documents referred to in Ann's brief were superseded by subsequent documents filed with the court and that the court was informed of this agreement. According to James, these superseded documents should not have been included in the common-law record *372 and were not among those specifically requested by Kaiser for inclusion in the record. Ann has filed objections to James' motion to strike, and we ordered the motion and objections to be taken with the case.
Supreme Court Rule 321 (134 Ill.2d R. 321), which pertains to the contents of the record on appeal, provides in relevant part:
"The record on appeal shall consist of the judgment appealed from, the notice of appeal, and the entire original common law trial court record, unless the parties stipulate for, or the trial court, after notice and hearing, or the reviewing court, orders less." (134 Ill.2d R. 321.)
Thus, unless the parties stipulated for less than the entire common-law record to be included as the record on appeal, or the trial court orders less, the original common-law trial court record will be transmitted to the reviewing court as part of the record on appeal. 134 Ill.2d R. 321, Committee Comments.
Here, no evidence exists in the record that the trial court ordered less or that the parties stipulated for less. Although James maintains that Ann's counsel, Smith, agreed that certain documents superseded others filed with the case, the affidavit to this effect (prepared by attorney Kaiser) was never signed by Smith. Additionally, the trial court's orders pertaining to the merits of this appeal demonstrate that the court, in reaching its decisions, considered the documents which James alleges should have been excluded from the record on appeal. Thus, James has provided no evidence that the court ordered less or that the parties stipulated for less than the transmission of the entire original common law record to this court. We, therefore, deny his motion to strike those portions of Ann's brief referring to documents which James maintains should not have been included in the record on appeal. We now proceed to a discussion of James' issues and our disposition thereof.
On appeal, James argues the trial court erred in finding that he was estopped from asserting that the time-limiting provisions of section 2-8(b) of the Probate Act of 1975 (the Act) (Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 110½, par. 2-8(b)) barred Ann's right to a statutory share of Frank's estate. Section 2-8(b) of the Act provides:
"In order to renounce a will, the testator's surviving spouse must file in the court in which the will was admitted to probate a written instrument signed by the surviving spouse and declaring the renunciation. The time of filing the instrument is: (1) within 7 months after the admission of the will to probate or (2) within such further time as may be allowed by the court if, within 7 months after the admission of the will to probate or before the expiration of any extended period, the surviving spouse files a petition therefor setting forth that litigation is pending that affects the share of the surviving spouse in the estate. The filing of the instrument is a complete bar to any claim of the surviving spouse under the will." Ill.Rev.Stat.1989, ch. 110½, par. 2-8(b).
James maintains the time-limiting provision of section 2-8, requiring a surviving spouse to file a renunciation of a will within 7 months after the admission of the will to probate, is not an ordinary statute of limitations. Rather, James asserts, the provision is jurisdictional because the time limitation goes to the existence of the right itself and is, therefore, not subject to tolling by the doctrine of estoppel. Conversely, Ann argues that the time limitation constitutes a statute of limitations instead of a jurisdictional prerequisite and that, under appropriate circumstances, equitable tolling, waiver, and estoppel are available to excuse or extend the filing time.
In Fredman Brothers Furniture Co. v. Department of Revenue (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 202, 93 Ill. Dec. 360, 486 N.E.2d 893, our supreme court set forth the significant distinction which exists between statutes of limitations and statutes that both confer jurisdiction on a court and fix a time within which such jurisdiction may be exercised. The court stated:
*373 "Statutes of limitation only fix the time within which the remedy for a particular wrong may be sought. [Citation.] They `are procedural in nature [citations] and are not designed to alter substantive rights * * *.' Wilson v. Bishop (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 364, 373 [45 Ill. Dec. 171, 412 N.E.2d 522].
On the other hand, `statutes which create a substantive right unknown to the common law and in which time is made an inherent element of the right so created, are not statutes of limitation.' (Smith v. Toman (1938), 368 Ill. 414, 420 [14 N.E.2d 478].) Such a time period `is more than an ordinary statute of limitations' (North Side Sash & Door Co. v. Hecht (1920), 295 Ill. 515, 519 [129 N.E. 273]); it `is a condition of the * * * liability itself and not of the remedy, alone. * * * It goes to the existence of the right itself.' (295 Ill. 515, 519-20 [129 N.E. 273].) Such a provision is a condition precedent to the plaintiff's right to seek a remedy. [Citations.] Such statutes set forth the requirements for bringing the right to seek a remedy into existence. They do not speak of commencing an action after the right to do so has accrued. They are jurisdictional, not mandatory." 109 Ill. 2d at 209-10, 93 Ill. Dec. 360, 486 N.E.2d 893.
Our research has revealed several cases in which the courts have found that the time requirement of section 2-8(b) is mandatory. In In re Estate of Rosene (1978), 66 Ill.App.3d 999, 23 Ill. Dec. 693, 384 N.E.2d 487, a widow failed to file a renunciation within the statutory period although she knew of her right to renounce and was apparently not defrauded by the executor or relatives of the decedent. This court found no basis upon which to extend the statutory seven-month limitation and held that the provisions of section 2-8(b) are mandatory, not directory. 66 Ill.App.3d at 1001, 23 Ill. Dec. 693, 384 N.E.2d 487.
Likewise, in In re Estate of Duncan (1988), 171 Ill.App.3d 594, 121 Ill. Dec. 905, 525 N.E.2d 1212, the court stated that the provisions of section 2-8 governing renunciation are mandatory, not directory, and that the trial court does not have discretion to deviate from the statutory prescriptions therein. Accordingly, the court found that appellee's failure to renounce the will within the seven-month statutory period acted as an acceptance of the terms of the will. 171 Ill.App.3d at 598-600, 121 Ill. Dec. 905, 525 N.E.2d 1212.
Because section 2-8(b) speaks of commencing an action of renunciation after the right to do so has occurred by the admission of the will to probate, we believe it is procedural in nature and not designed to alter a spouse's substantive right to elect whether to take under the will or to renounce. The seven-month reference in section 2-8(b) merely refers to a time frame from which to commence the running of a limitation period, i.e., from the admission of the will to probate, and to the duration of that time, i.e., seven months. As such, the time limitation of section 2-8(b) does not constitute a condition precedent to the spouse's right to renounce but merely fixes the time within which she can exercise that right. We conclude, as we did in Rosene, that the time period of section 2-8(b) is mandatory and find that it should be treated as a statute of limitations.
As concepts of equitable estoppel, tolling, and waiver usually apply to statutes of limitations (Larrance v. Human Rights Comm'n (1988), 166 Ill.App.3d 224, 232-33, 117 Ill. Dec. 36, 519 N.E.2d 1203), we next determine whether the circumstances here justify the application of any of these equitable doctrines.
Ann maintains that she and her attorney, Paden, were misled by the conduct of James and his attorney, Kaiser, into believing that James intended Ann to receive her statutory share of the estate.
Specifically, Ann argues that the correspondence and telephone calls that transpired between Paden and Kaiser led her to believe that James planned to give Ann her statutory share of the estate and that it was, therefore, unnecessary for her to file a timely renunciation of the will for her to receive that share. Those same letters and phone calls, however, also reflect Kaiser's belief, albeit mistaken, that Ann had filed a *374 timely renunciation. In her initial letter of February 20, 1986, to Kaiser, Paden wrote:
"As you know, Mrs. Goodlett is entitled eventhough [sic] she is not named in the will. What do you want to do? Do you want to work something out currently or move along in the Court?"
In response, Kaiser accused Ann in his letter of February 24, 1986, of being responsible for damage which occurred to a house owned by Frank. (Kaiser later discovered that the North Shore Gas Company was at fault and sued it for the damage.) In his February 24 letter Kaiser referred to the diminution in "the value of Mrs. Goodlett's share of the property" (as a result of damage to the property) and that "my client [James] and I are of the view that she is entitled to no more than her statutory share, which is offset by the damage which my client has suffered by reason of her negligence." In so stating, Ann asserts that Kaiser acknowledged that she was entitled to her statutory share of Frank's property.
Indeed, Kaiser did acknowledge that fact, but nothing more. It cannot be said that by such an acknowledgment Kaiser induced Ann not to file a renunciation. Rather, we believe from the tone of Paden's February 20 letter that it could be equally said that she misled Kaiser into assuming that Ann was aware of her right to renounce Frank's will and had filed, or would be soon filing, a renunciation.
It was Paden's testimony at a hearing conducted on the renunciation issue that when she met with Kaiser and James on July 18, 1986, prior to a hearing on a claim Ann had against the estate, both men stated that they were going to give Ann her share of the estate. According to Paden, Kaiser suggested that the parties settle the matter out of court since the estate was so small. Additionally, at the meeting Kaiser told Paden he was going to sue the North Shore Gas Company (for damage to Frank's house). Paden stated that after this meeting she had several conversations with Kaiser regarding Ann's claim against the estate and Ann's share (of the estate). Paden testified that she understood Ann's "share" to mean what the statute (section 2-8) allowed her, i.e., one-half of the estate.
Conversely, Kaiser testified that during Paden's meeting with James and him, no conversation occurred concerning Ann's share of the estate or renunciation of Frank's will. According to Kaiser, the conversation centered on Ann's expense claim against the estate. Kaiser told Paden that he and James considered some of the items listed in her claim as not legitimate. Subsequently, the two attorneys appeared in court and presented their positions regarding Ann's claim. The court suggested the parties settle the claim for $1,000. Correspondence in the record shows the parties later agreed to this settlement.
The testimony given by James during his evidence deposition supported Kaiser's statement that the topic of conversation at the July 18 meeting was Ann's expense claim against the estate. James emphatically denied that any conversation concerning Ann's share of the estate occurred during this meeting.
Although the testimony of the attorneys was conflicting regarding the July 18 meeting, our review of that testimony, of James' testimony at the evidence deposition, and of the correspondence which occurred between the attorneys fails to convince us that Ann was misled or defrauded in any way by Kaiser or James into believing that she was not required to file a renunciation to claim her statutory share of Frank's estate. From the time Frank's will was admitted to probate, Ann was represented by an attorney, and any fault in Ann's failure to file a timely renunciation should be attributed to Ann and her attorney.
Under our previous finding in Rosene, we find that the statutory seven-month limitation set forth in section 2-8(b) is mandatory and that the trial court did not have discretion to deviate from that statutory prescription and apply equitable principles of estoppel where, as here, the widow was not defrauded by the executor or his attorney. Accordingly, the trial court erred in allowing Ann's untimely renunciation of Frank's will.
*375 For the reasons stated above, the judgment granting Ann her statutory share of Frank's estate is reversed. Ann's appeal for application for a surviving spouse's award is dismissed.
No. 2-91-0153, Reversed.
No. 2-91-0322, Dismissed.
DUNN and BOWMAN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2219183 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:04.479061+00 ===

666 N.W.2d 724 (2003)
In the Matter of the REVOCATION OF THE FAMILY CHILD CARE LICENSE OF GAIL BURKE.
No. C4-02-1886.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
August 5, 2003.
Jeffrey M. Johnson, Schurhammer & Johnson, Faribault, MN, for relator.
Jenel Kristen Wavra, Faribault, MN, for respondent Rice County.
Considered and decided by TOUSSAINT, Chief Judge, STONEBURNER, Judge, and MINGE, Judge.
OPINION
MINGE, Judge.
In this certiorari appeal from the commissioner's order revoking relator's child daycare license for failure to supervise and for violating licensing rules, relator argues *725 that the Commissioner of Human Services abused her discretion. Because the evidence in the record does not support the sanction of revocation, we reverse and remand.
FACTS
In April 1998, relator Gail Burke began operating a child daycare facility licensed by the Minnesota Department of Human Services (DHS). Daycare services were located primarily in the lower level of the building, which had been constructed as a split-level home. A paved biking and walking path runs behind the facility.
Burke's compliance problems with the DHS began on July 26, 2001, when she received her first correction order for failure to supervise. That afternoon, while the DHS licensor Colleen Peterson was visiting the daycare facility next door to Burke's, Peterson observed a group of children leave Burke's fenced backyard and walk down the bike path. Burke's ten-year-old daughter and two friends had unlocked the gate, intending to take a crayfish to a nearby shallow creek. One four year old and six school-aged daycare children tagged along. Peterson followed and found them one to two blocks away on the path. Burke's daughter released the crayfish into the shallow creek while the daycare children watched from the path. As Peterson and the children returned to the daycare, Burke's sixteen-year-old daughter, who had come to retrieve the daycare children, met them on the path.
Peterson estimated that twelve minutes passed from the time the children exited the backyard to their return to the daycare. Burke knew of the crayfish and had suggested that her daughter dispose of it. At the time the group left, she had been tending to an infant and preparing a celebration for a daycare child's birthday. When she discovered that the whole group had left, she sent her sixteen year old out to bring them back.
Based on the July 26, 2001 correction order, the DHS ordered a one-year conditional license. Burke timely requested reconsideration of the order. One year later, in August 2002, the one-year conditional license decision was affirmed.
In the interim, and apparently unrelated to the pending reconsideration, Burke was the subject of another sanction action by DHS. It was triggered by a death on the night of April 8, 2001 of an infant who had been at Burke's daycare center that day. The child died at the parent's home apparently of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). On April 9, Burke phoned the office of the DHS licensor to report the death. That same day, DHS licensor Peterson visited Burke's facility. When she arrived, Burke was on the upper level, and the door to the lower level was closed. When Peterson asked to see the room that the deceased infant had slept in, Burke unlocked the room where two children were sleeping. Burke explained to Peterson that she had locked the door to keep a disruptive child out so other children could nap without disturbance. Since the lock was on the inside, the children other than a toddler, could let themselves out and the key was just outside the room. On this visit, Peterson also observed a child enter the furnace room through an open door.
Based on this visit, the DHS issued another correction order, which noted four violations: failure to supervise, failure to notify the DHS of the SIDS death, failure to secure the furnace-room door, and locking the nap-room door. Three days later, the DHS issued an order revoking Burke's license. In addition to the incidents cited in the second correction order, the order of revocation erroneously stated that on April 8 an infant died while napping in Burke's care. The DHS based the revocation order *726 on Burke's "chronic failure to provide adequate supervision" and the "extremely serious nature of these licensing violations."
Burke appealed the DHS order of revocation. At a hearing before an administrative law judge (ALJ), Peterson and Burke testified, as well as five parents who were confident of Burke's ability to run a daycare and supervise children. Five additional parents, including a DHS employee, submitted affidavits to the effect that they and their children were pleased with the daycare. Burke stated that the children in her daycare have their parents' permission to use the path behind the daycare. As for the April 9 incident, Burke stated that it was not a typical day since it was the day after the apparent SIDS death. She also explained that normally the furnace-room door is closed, but she had just opened it to answer the phone located in the furnace room.
The ALJ recommended that Burke's license be suspended for two days and conditional for 18 months. In September 2002, the commissioner adopted all of the ALJ's findings. These included the correction that the SIDS death had occurred after the child left the daycare and that Burke had phoned the DHS and reported the incident the next day. With one minor change, the commissioner also adopted the ALJ's conclusions that on July 26 and April 9, Burke failed to supervise by being out of sight or hearing of an infant, toddler, or preschooler and had also failed to make the furnace inaccessible and had locked the nap-room door. But instead of the two-day suspension and 18-month conditional license recommended by the ALJ, the commissioner's order affirmed the DHS's revocation of Burke's license. In the commissioner's memorandum, she stated that Burke "violated numerous licensing rules on an ongoing basis that placed day care children at serious risk of harm." Burke petitioned for appeal by writ of certiorari.
ISSUE
Did the evidence support the commissioner's decision to revoke relator's daycare license?
ANALYSIS
Administrative-agency decisions enjoy a presumption of correctness and may be reversed only when they are arbitrary and capricious, exceed the agency's jurisdiction or statutory authority, are made upon unlawful procedure, reflect an error of law, or are unsupported by substantial evidence in view of the entire record. Minn.Stat. § 14.69 (2002) (also providing for reversal or modification if decision is in violation of constitutional provisions); Dep't of Human Servs. v. Muriel Humphrey Residences, 436 N.W.2d 110, 117 (Minn.App.1989), review denied (Minn. Apr. 26, 1989). In reviewing an agency's decision on a legal issue, this court is not bound by the agency's ruling. Id. A reviewing court must defer to the agency's fact-finding process and be careful not to substitute its findings for those of the agency. Dokmo v. Indep. Sch. Dist. No. 11, 459 N.W.2d 671, 674-75 (Minn.1990). Absent a clear abuse of discretion, a reviewing court must also defer to an agency's choice of sanction. In re Licenses of Kane, 473 N.W.2d 869, 877 (Minn.App.1991) (citing In re License of Haugen, 278 N.W.2d 75, 80 n. 10 (Minn.1979)), review denied (Minn. Sept. 25, 1991).
Minnesota's Human Services Licensing Act authorizes the commissioner to impose any one of various sanctions when a licensee fails to comply with an applicable law or rule or term of a correction order or conditional license. Minn.Stat. §§ 245A.06-.07 (2002). The commissioner *727 may issue a correction order or conditional license, suspend or revoke a license, impose a fine, or secure an injunction. Minn.Stat. §§ 245A.06, subds. 1-3, .07, subds. 1, 3. Licensors and inspectors may also place the license holder on probation. Minn. R. 9543.0100, subp. 5. Before imposing any sanction, the commissioner "shall consider the nature, chronicity, or severity of the violation of law or rule and the effect of the violation on the health, safety, or rights of persons served by the program." Minn.Stat. §§ 245A.06, subd.1, 245A.07, subd. 1.
DHS agency rules divide possible daycare license sanctions into three main types of enforcement actions: issuance of correction orders, probation, and negative licensing actions. Minn. R. 9543.1050, subps. 1, 7. Within the negative licensing actions are suspension, immediate suspension, and revocation. Minn. R. 9543.1060. The rules reflect a relative hierarchy of sanctions, increasingly severe based on the effect of the violations.
Revocation is appropriate when "continued operation of the program is not in the best interest of persons served by the program and would pose an unacceptable risk of harm to persons served by the program." Id., subp. 4. Suspension, a less severe sanction, is available when it is "in the best interests of persons served * * * and would not pose a risk of harm to persons served by the program." Id., subp. 5. Probation is available when the commissioner determines that revocation, suspension, and immediate suspension are not warranted. Minn. R. 9543.1050, subp. 7. Finally, correction orders, the least severe sanction, may be issued if the violation can be corrected within a reasonable time and the violation does not imminently endanger the health, safety, or rights of the people served by the program. See Minn.Stat. § 245A.06, subd. 1; Minn. R. 9543.1050, subp. 1.
The statutory standard for sanctioning violations of daycare rules requires consideration of the nature, chronicity, or severity of the violations and their effect on those served by the program. Minn.Stat. §§ 245A.06, subd. 1, .07, subd. 1. The rules elaborate on this standard by requiring that the commissioner also consider before imposing a negative licensing action:
A. the laws or rules that have been violated;
B. the nature and severity of each violation;
C. whether the violation is recurring or nonrecurring;
D. the effect of the violation on persons served by the program;
E. an evaluation of the risk of harm to persons served by the program;
F. any evaluations of the program by persons served or their families;
G. relevant facts, conditions, and circumstances concerning the operation of the program; and
H. any aggravating or mitigating factors related to the violation.
Minn. R. 9543.1060, subp. 2. While we are mindful that the commissioner has broad discretion in fashioning an appropriate sanction, we conclude that the statute and rules detail the many considerations involved in an enforcement action to ensure that the commissioner exercises that discretion within distinct parameters.
The record reflects that Burke had operated the daycare without incident for the three years prior to the first correction order. Then there were only two incidents in which a total of three rules were violated in a nine-month period. While the DHS considered the first incident "serious," it constituted one rule violationfailure to supervise a preschool child for approximately twelve minutes when he followed a group of children down a path. *728 The DHS did not place Burke on probation, and waited over 12 months to reconsider and affirm the conditional license decision. This delay does not indicate grave DHS concern over the incident. In contrast, one week after the second incident, the DHS issued an order of revocation. But that order was partially based on erroneous findings that Burke had failed to comply with the terms of the conditional license, an infant had died while napping in Burke's care, and Burke failed to report the death. Some of these erroneous findings are of utmost gravity. Absent these erroneous findings, the violations cited in the second correction order were failure to supervise by being out of sight and hearing of an infant, a toddler, or a preschooler, not securing the furnace-room door, and locking the nap-room door. These remaining violations do not appear to be significantly more serious than those cited in the first correction order.
The licensing act and rules also require that the sanction take into consideration the effect of the violation on the people served by the program. While Burke does not dispute the violations, she submitted the testimony of persons served by the program who indicated that revocation was not in their best interests or their children's best interests. The testimony indicated these people did not consider their children to be in any risk of harm. One of the parents was a DHS employee. The commissioner's decision was silent as to this testimony and other mitigating factors offered to explain the circumstances surrounding the violations.
This court has determined that the severity of an administrative sanction must reflect the seriousness of the violation. Revocation of a real estate broker's license for improperly withdrawing earnest money from a trust account was deemed too drastic a sanction in In re License of Haugen, 278 N.W.2d at 81. Similarly, in In re Licenses of Kane, this court reversed an insurance license revocation for misrepresentations to senior citizens finding that revocation exceeded the action necessary to protect the public and to deter such conduct in the future. 473 N.W.2d at 878. While licensing and monitoring of child-care facilities is unique and requires heightened scrutiny to protect a vulnerable segment of our population prone to harm and injury, we conclude that the statute and rules provide the guidelines necessary to provide balance to protect the license holder as well. As in Kane and Haugen, the commissioner's choice of sanction must not exceed the seriousness of the violation and must be supported by the record.
There is no evidence in this case of deliberate or callous disregard for the children. Nor is there evidence of injury or near injury to the children. In addition, parents have come to the defense of the license holder. The commissioner's decision to terminate Burke's daycare business by revoking her license was initially based on several erroneous grounds, and is too severe, and is not supported by the record. This court does not determine sanctions; we only review for abuse of discretion. If the commissioner determines that negative licensing action is necessary in this situation, an explanation of that decision should be provided considering the nature of the conduct and the choice among sanctions. Here, such an analysis was not made.
DECISION
We reverse the commissioner's order for revocation and remand for reconsideration of a lesser sanction consistent with this opinion and with the statutes and rules of the DHS.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9739264 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:26.82121+00 ===

DIANE S. SYKES, J.
¶ 1. We have this case on certification from the court of appeals for resolution of two issues: 1) does Chapter 655 of the Wisconsin Statutes (1999-2000),1 which exclusively governs medical malpractice claims in this state, permit a bystander claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress in a medical malpractice lawsuit; and 2) if such a claim is statutorily permitted, does a misdiagnosis leading to the patient's eventual death give rise to a claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress under Bowen v. Lumbermens Mut. Cas. Co., 183 Wis. 2d 627, 517 N.W.2d 432 (1994), where the claimant witnessed the patient's physical deterioration but did not witness an injury-producing event or its immediate aftermath?
¶ 2. Three members of the court — Justice Wilcox, Justice Prosser and the author of this lead opinion— conclude that Chapter 655 does not permit bystander claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress in medical malpractice lawsuits. Two members of the court — Justice Bablitch and Justice Crooks — conclude that bystander claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress are derivative claims that fall within and are actionable under Chapter 655. One member of the court — Chief Justice Abrahamson — concludes that if a Bowen bystander claim is an independent cause of *580action, it can be brought outside Chapter 655. Justice Bradley takes no position on the statutory question, concluding instead that the second certified question is dispositive.
¶ 3. The second issue on certification is a common-law question regarding whether a bystander claim can be maintained under Bowen where the injury-producing event is somewhat attenuated from the physical manifestation of injury and death that was witnessed by the claimant. Three members of the court (Justice Wilcox, Justice Prosser, and I) have concluded that this claim is statutorily impermissible, and therefore we need not necessarily address the separate common-law attenuation question presented in the certification. However, because of the split vote on the threshold statutory question, Justice Wilcox, Justice Prosser, and I join Part II of Chief Justice Abrahamson's opinion, in which she addresses Bowen and concludes that its factors have not been met. Justice Bradley also joins Part II of the chief justice's opinion on this second issue, which constitutes the opinion of the court. Justice Bablitch and Justice Crooks conclude that the Bowen factors have been met.
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
¶ 4. Jared Finnegan was born on March 3, 1997. During the first week of August, 1997, Jared stayed with his grandparents while his parents, Tanice and Joseph Finnegan, spent their five-year anniversary in Florida. During that time, Jared developed a low-grade fever. When the Finnegans returned on August 4th, Jared was still running a slightly elevated temperature of about 99.5 degrees. Tanice gave him Tylenol to bring his temperature down.
*581¶ 5. The next day, Jared became increasingly fussy. By 10:00 p.m., his temperature was up to 103.1 and he continued to run high temperatures through the morning of August 6th. Alarmed by Jared's persistent, unexplained fever, Tanice took Jared to the Manitowoc Clinic, where he was seen by the Finnegans' pediatrician, Dr. Kevin Molteni. Dr. Molteni ordered a complete blood count ("CBC") and blood culture. When the CBC indicated that Jared's white blood cell count fell within the normal range, Dr. Molteni advised Tanice to take Jared home, and to alternate doses of Tylenol and Motrin to combat the fever.
¶ 6. After the Finnegans returned home from the Manitowoc clinic, Jared's temperature spiked to 104 degrees, but came down somewhat after Tanice gave him the Tylenol and Motrin. Throughout the day, Jared continued to be very irritable. That evening he had episodes of vomiting, and Tanice called Dr. Molteni at home to report on his condition. Dr. Molteni advised Tanice to discontinue the Tylenol and to either phone the on-call physician or go to the emergency department if Jared got worse. Jared eventually fell asleep.
¶ 7. When Jared awoke at approximately 7:00 a.m. on August 7, 1997, he was moaning and appeared lethargic. The Finnegans took Jared back to the Mani-towoc Clinic at 8:30 a.m. Dr. Molteni noted that the results of Jared's blood culture showed bacteria in Jared's blood, and he told the Finnegans to immediately take Jared to the hospital for a lumbar puncture. Dr. Molteni indicated that the lumbar puncture would tell them whether the bacteria had entered Jared's spinal fluid. The Finnegans then drove Jared to Holy Family Hospital in Manitowoc, about five-to-ten minutes away.
¶ 8. The night before, on August 6, 1997, the laboratory had called Dr. Anne Schuette, who was *582on-call for Dr. Molteni. The lab advised Dr. Schuette that Jared's blood culture, ordered earlier that day by Dr. Molteni, had come back positive for bacteria. Dr. Schuette, however, failed to relate this information to either Dr. Molteni or the Finnegans themselves. It was not until Tanice returned with Jared to the Manitowoc Clinic the next morning that Dr. Molteni reviewed the test results.
¶ 9. Upon arriving at the hospital, Joseph Finnegan dropped Tanice and Jared off at the front door and Tanice took Jared up the elevator to the pediatric ward. Jared stopped breathing on the elevator. When Tanice entered the pediatric ward, she immediately called for the nurse's attention and the nurse motioned for her to take Jared into a room. Noting that Jared wasn't breathing, the nurse called a "code blue" and several hospital staff members rushed to help.
¶ 10. Tanice remained with Jared throughout and was asked to leave the room only when Dr. Molteni arrived to do the lumbar puncture. After performing the procedure, Dr. Molteni came out to Tanice and informed her that Jared's spinal fluid was cloudy and that a flight team was on its way from Children's Hospital in Milwaukee. When the flight team arrived, Jared was stabilized and prepared for the flight to Milwaukee. The Finnegans followed the helicopter by car. By the time Jared got to Children's Hospital, however, his infection had progressed too far and the doctors were unable to save his life. Jared died at Children's Hospital on August 7, 1997.
¶ 11. The Finnegans initially filed an action for wrongful death in Manitowoc County Circuit Court, alleging medical malpractice on the part of Dr. Schuette, Aurora Medical Group's on-call physician, based upon her failure to act upon the August 6th *583laboratory results. The Finnegans and Aurora Medical Group have settled the wrongful death claim for an undisclosed amount.
¶ 12. The Finnegans amended their complaint to assert an additional claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress under Bowen, arising out of the malpractice. This is the only remaining claim in the lawsuit.
¶ 13. Aurora moved for summary judgment to dismiss the negligent infliction of emotional distress claim, asserting that: 1) Bowen-type claims for emotional distress are not cognizable in actions arising from medical malpractice, which are governed exclusively by Chapter 655; and 2) even if bystander claims for emotional distress are statutorily permitted, Bowen itself precludes the Finnegans' claim.
¶ 14. The circuit court, the Honorable Fred H. Hazlewood, denied Aurora's motion for summary judgment, concluding that Chapter 655 recognizes Bowen claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress and that the Finnegans' claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress was not precluded by Bowen itself. The court of appeals granted Aurora's petition for interlocutory appeal, and certified the case to this court. We granted the certification to determine whether the Finnegans' bystander mental distress claim is permitted by Chapter 655, and if so, whether the claim is cognizable under Bowen itself. We now reverse.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
¶ 15. The first certified issue is whether Chapter 655 permits bystander claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress in medical malpractice actions. This *584is a question of statutory interpretation, subject to de novo appellate review. Czapinski v. St. Francis Hosp., 2000 WI 80, ¶ 12, 236 Wis. 2d 316, 613 N.W.2d 120 (citing Burks v. St. Joseph's Hosp., 227 Wis. 2d 811, 824, 596 N.W.2d 391 (1999)).
III. DISCUSSION
¶ 16. Wisconsin common law has "historically distrusted emotion" as the sole basis for a compensable tort claim. Bowen, 183 Wis. 2d at 638. For many years, courts treated the tort of negligent infliction of emotional distress with skepticism, devising "various criteria to balance a plaintiffs compensatory interests for emotional distress with the interests of the judicial system in authenticating claims and preventing unlimited liability for the tortfeasor." Id. at 640. Accordingly, our cases imposed rules limiting bystander emotional distress recovery to plaintiffs who 1) were in the "zone of danger" of the underlying accident or injury; 2) feared for their own safety; and 3) suffered physical injury in tandem with the emotional distress. Id. at 648.
¶ 17. Bowen eliminated these "rigid doctrinal limitations" on tort liability for bystander claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress. Id. at 651. Bowen held that "the traditional elements of a tort action in negligence — negligent conduct, causation and injury (here severe emotional distress) — should serve as the framework for evaluating a bystander's claim of negligent infliction of emotional distress." Id. at 652-53.
¶ 18. Bowen reiterated, however, the recurrent concerns about emotional distress claims: "Historically, the tort of negligent infliction of emotional distress has raised two concerns: (1) establishing authenticity of the claim and (2) ensuring fairness of the financial burden *585placed upon a defendant whose conduct was negligent." Id. at 655. Accordingly, the court in Bowen adopted three elemental requirements and applied a public policy analysis in order to "help assure that the claim ... is genuine, that allowing recovery is not likely to place an unreasonable burden upon the defendant, and that allowance of recovery will not contravene" public policy. Id. at 656.
¶ 19. The three prerequisites to a Bowen bystander claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress are: 1) the injury suffered by the victim must have been fatal or severe; 2) the claimant must be related to the victim as a spouse, parent, child, grandparent, grandchild, or sibling; and 3) the claimant must have witnessed the incident causing death or serious injury or "the gruesome aftermath of such an event minutes after it occurs." Id. at 656-58. In addition to these basic limitations, the court in Bowen said that liability for negligent infliction of emotional distress (like liability in ordinary negligence cases) may be precluded as a matter of law by considerations of public policy:
A court deals with ... concerns [about claim authenticity and fairness to the defendant] by exploring in each case such public policy considerations as: (1) whether the injury is too remote from the negligence; (2) whether the injury is wholly out of proportion to the culpability of the negligent tortfeasor; (3) whether in retrospect it appears too extraordinary that the negligence should have brought about the harm; (4) whether allowance of recovery would place an unreasonable burden on the negligent tortfeasor; (5) whether allowance of recovery would be too likely to open the way to fraudulent claims; or (6) whether allowance of recovery would enter a filed that has no sensible or just stopping point.
*586Id. at 655.
¶ 20. The Finnegans' bystander claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress is premised upon having witnessed the physical deterioration and death of their son as a result of an act of medical malpractice. Medical malpractice is governed by Chapter 655 of the Wisconsin Statutes, enacted in 1975 to "controlQ all claims for death or injury resulting from medical malpractice." Czapinski, 236 Wis. 2d 316, ¶ 18. Chapter 655 "provides medical patients a recourse for health care liability and establishes the Patients Compensation Fund."2 Id., ¶ 14.
¶ 21. We have previously recognized the legislative purposes that led to the enactment of Chapter 655:
The legislature cited a sudden increase in the number of malpractice suits, in the size of awards, and in
*587malpractice insurance premiums, and identified several impending dangers: increased health care costs, the prescription of elaborate "defensive" medical procedures, the unavailability of certain hazardous services and the possibility that physicians would curtail their practices.
Id. (citing State ex rel. Strykowski v. Wilkie, 81 Wis. 2d 491, 508, 261 N.W.2d 434 (1978)). Thus, Chapter 655 was intended to limit, not expand, medical malpractice liability. Northwest General Hosp. v. Yee, 115 Wis. 2d 59, 64, 339 N.W.2d 583 (1983).
¶ 22. It is now firmly established that Chapter 655 constitutes the exclusive procedure and remedy for medical malpractice in Wisconsin. Czapinski, 236 Wis. 2d 316, ¶ 14; Rineck v. Johnson, 155 Wis. 2d 659, 665, 456 N.W.2d 336 (1990);3 Strykowski, 81 Wis. 2d at 499; Ziulkowski v. Nierengarten, 210 Wis. 2d 98, 102, 565 N.W.2d 164 (Ct. App. 1997). Accordingly, any claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress arising out of medical malpractice must find expression within the statutory framework of Chapter 655.
¶ 23. Wisconsin Statutes § 655.005(1) provides:
Any person listed in s. 655.007 having a claim or a derivative claim against a health care provider or an employee of the health care provider, for damages for bodily injury or death due to acts or omissions of the employee of the health care provider acting within the scope of his or her employment and providing health care services, is subject to this chapter.
¶ 24. Wisconsin Statutes § 655.007 states:
*588On and after July 24,1975, any patient or the patient's representative having a claim or any spouse, parent, minor sibling or child of the patient having a derivative claim for injury or death on account of malpractice is subject to this chapter.
¶ 25. As a primary matter, neither Wis. Stat. § 655.005 nor Wis. Stat. § 655.007 specifically describes a Bowen-type claim for emotional distress or confers standing on a bystander to bring such a claim in a medical malpractice lawsuit. Section 655.005(1) refers to all claims or derivative claims "for damages for bodily injury or death," and Wis. Stat. § 655.007 refers to the claims of patients and the derivative claims of specified relatives "for injury or death on account of malpractice." Emotional distress claims arising from witnessing an injury-causing event as a related bystander constitute an entirely different class of claim and are not mentioned.
¶ 26. The statutes specify that a relative's claim must be derivative to fall within the scope of allowable medical malpractice recovery, and only certain relatives are included. See Wis. Stat. § 655.007 ("[A]ny spouse, parent, minor sibling or child of the patient having a derivative claim for injury or death on account of malpractice is subject to this chapter."); Wis. Stat. § 655.005(1) ("Any person listed in s. 655.007 having a claim or a derivative claim against a health care provider ... is subject to this chapter."). Our jurisprudence outlines the types of claims that are considered derivative. Claims for the loss of society, companionship, and consortium are derivative even though they technically "belong" to the close relative making the claim. Korth v. Am. Family Ins. Co., 115 Wis. 2d 326, 331, 340 N.W.2d 494 (1983) (a parent's claim for loss of society and *589companionship with a child is derivative); Peeples v. Sargent, 77 Wis. 2d 612, 643, 253 N.W.2d 459 (1977) (a claim for loss of consortium is derivative personal injury right which does not pass to bankruptcy trustee); Richie v. Am. Family Mut. Ins. Co., 140 Wis. 2d 51, 56, 409 N.W.2d 146 (Ct. App. 1987)([A] claim for loss of consortium is derivative in that "it derives from physical or mental injuries suffered by a family member.").
¶ 27. In contrast, a claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress is not considered derivative; although it arises from a shared set of underlying facts, as do loss of society, companionship, or consortium claims, negligent infliction of emotional distress is an independent tort injury suffered by the bystander himself or herself as a result of the shock of having witnessed an extraordinary and traumatic event. Bowen, 183 Wis. 2d at 657-58. As we explained in Bowen:
The emotional harm from the serious injury or loss of a spouse, parent, child, grandparent, grandchild or sibling is not the harm compensated in this tort. The shock of seeing efforts to sáve the life of an injured spouse in an ambulance or hospital, for example, will not be compensated because it is a life experience that all may expect to endure. The compensable serious emotional distress of a bystander under the tort of negligent infliction of emotional distress is not measured by the acute emotional distress of the loss of the family member. Rather the damages arise from the bystander's observance of the circumstances of the death or serious injury, either when the incident occurs or soon after."
*590Bowen, 183 Wis. 2d at 659-60 (emphasis added). A Bowen claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress does not depend on the primary tort victim's ability to make the claim.
¶ 28. A plaintiff who sues for negligent infliction of emotional distress under Bowen is asserting that he or she has been the victim of an independent tort, not that he or she has a separate but dependent damages claim deriving from a tort injury to another, as in a derivative claim such as loss of consortium or society and companionship. We have held that a parent's derivative claim for loss of society and companionship must be joined with the child's personal injury claim. See Shockley v. Prier, 66 Wis. 2d 394, 404, 225 N.W.2d 495 (1975). Unlike a Bowen bystander claim, a derivative claim for loss of consortium or loss of society and companionship does not have its own elements distinct from the negligence claim to which it attaches; juries are instructed that loss of consortium or loss of society and companionship are categories of damages, not separate negligence inquiries. See Wis JI—Civil 1815 (loss of consortium), 1837 (parent's loss of society and companionship), 1838 (minor child's loss of society and companionship) (all appearing in the jury instruction manual under the subheading "Damages").
¶ 29. A Bowen bystander claim, as has been noted, has its own separate and distinct elements and rigorous proof prerequisites. See, supra, ¶¶ 16-18. A Bowen claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress is not merely a separate but dependent damages claim attaching to the primary negligence claim, but, rather, is a distinct and independent tort, on which the jury is separately instructed and must make separate, *591elemental findings in the special verdict.
See Wis JI — Civil 1510 (negligent infliction of emotional distress) (classified in the jury instruction manual among the negligence instructions, not the damages instructions).
¶ 30. Thus, I conclude (joined by Justices Wilcox and Prosser) that a claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress under Bowen is independent, not derivative'; as such, a Bowen claim premised upon medical malpractice is not recognized in Chapter 655. See Kosieradzki v. Matheys, 2002 WI App 191, ¶ 10,256 Wis. 2d 839, 649 N.W.2d 717 (concluding that under Bowen, "emotional distress claims are independent, not derivative"). Because Chapter 655 exclusively governs all claims arising out of medical malpractice, and because the legislature did not include Bowen-type claims in Wis. Stat. §§655.005(1) or 655.007, I conclude (joined by Justices Wilcox and Prosser) that negligent infliction of emotional distress claims arising out of medical malpractice are not actionable under Wisconsin law.4
*592¶ 31. Furthermore, Wis. Stat. § 893.55 does not, as the Finnegans contend, operate to expand the categories of claims or claimants allowed by Chapter 655 to encompass Bowen bystander claims arising out of medical malpractice. Entitled "Medical malpractice; limitation of actions; limitation of damages; itemization of damages," Wis. Stat. § 893.55 details certain procedural and substantive limits placed upon medical malpractice actions in this state. Specifically, Wis. Stat. § 893.55(1), (2), and (3) contain statutes of limitation for medical malpractice actions; subsection (4) specifies monetary limits on non-economic damages; subsection (5) requires an itemization of the categories of damages awarded in the special verdict; subsection (6) incorporates the rules of contributory negligence into medical malpractice actions; and subsection (7) alters the collateral source rule for purposes of medical malpractice actions. Thus, the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 893.55 enumerate and limit the damages that may be collected in niedical malpractice actions which, as a primary matter, remain governed by Chapter 655.
*593¶ 32. More specifically, Wis. Stat. § 893.55(4)(a) defines "noneconomic damages" as compensation for "pain and suffering; humiliation; embarrassment; worry; mental distress; noneconomic effects of disability including loss of enjoyment of the normal activities, benefits and pleasures of life and loss of mental or physical health, well-being or bodily functions; loss of consortium, society and companionship; or loss of love and affection." Wisconsin Statute § 893.55(5) provides that:
Every award of damages under ch. 655 shall specify the sum of money, if any, awarded for each of the following for each claimant:
(a) Pain, suffering and noneconomic effects of disability.
(b) Loss of consortium, society and companionship or loss of love and affection.
(c) Loss of earnings or earning capacity.
(d) Each element of medical expenses.
(e) Other economic injuries and damages.
¶ 33. While Wis. Stat. § 893.55(4) enumerates "mental distress" as a noneconomic damage in a medical malpractice action, that section does not specifically address whose mental distress is included. However, loss of consortium, society, and companionship and loss of love and affection — the categories of damages traditionally recoverable by close relatives in derivative claims — are listed separately in Wis. Stat. § 893.55(4). Loss df consortium, society, companionship, love, and affection are also listed separately in Wis. Stat. § 893.55(5); the statute specifies that damages for the patient's "pain, suffering and noneconomic effects of *594disability" is to be itemized separately from the relative's damages for "loss of consortium, society and companionship or loss of love and affection." Wis. Stat. § 893.55(5)(a) and (b). We note that Wis. Stat. § 893.55(5)(b) makes no mention of "mental distress" damages, instead listing only "loss of consortium, society and companionship, or loss of love and affection." Wis. Stat. § 893.55(5)(b). Thus, the legislature has distinguished between damages that are recoverable by the patient and those that are recoverable by the patient's relatives. Relatives' recovery is confined to damages for loss of consortium, society, companionship, love, and affection, and does not include mental distress damages associated with an independent Bowen tort claim.
¶ 34. In Czapinski we rejected the argument that Wis. Stat. § 893.55 operates to expand the class of claimants entitled to recover for medical malpractice under Chapter 655. Czapinski, 236 Wis. 2d 316, ¶¶ 13, 19. Czapinski held that adult children do not have standing to sue for loss of society and companionship arising out of medical malpractice under Wis. Stat. § 655.007, and also concluded that Wis. Stat. § 893.55 does not operate to confer standing or expand the allowable scope of medical malpractice claims or claimants under Chapter 655. Id.
¶ 35. Similarly here, Wis. Stat. § 893.55 does not authorize bystander claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress arising out of medical malpractice where such claims are otherwise impermissible under Chapter 655. Wisconsin Statute § 893.55 limits recoverable damages in medical malpractice actions and requires separate itemization of each element of damage. Wis. Stat. § 893.55(4) and (5). The statute does not *595expand the scope or nature of medical malpractice liability beyond that which is permitted by Chapter 655.
¶ 36. This conclusion is consistent with the court of appeals' decision in Ziulkowski, 210 Wis. 2d at 102-06. Ziulkowski presented the narrower question of whether adult children of victims of medical malpractice can maintain a Bowen claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress. The court of appeals concluded that neither Bowen nor Chapter 655 permits such a claim. Ziulkowski, 210 Wis. 2d at 102, 106. The question in this case is broader, and my analysis differs somewhat from the analysis in Ziulkowski; nevertheless, Ziulkowski; conclusion is consistent with the conclusion reached here.
¶ 37. In Chapter 655, the legislature has established an exclusive framework for medical malpractice litigation in this state, and has limited the classes of allowable claims and eligible claimants. I conclude that neither Wis. Stat. §§ 655.005 nor 655.007 explicitly or implicitly allows a Bowen-type bystander claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress. Wisconsin Statute § 893.55 enumerates and limits the types of damages that are recoverable when authorized by Chapter 655 in the first instance; it does not operate to expand the classes of allowable claims or eligible claimants under Chapter 655. I conclude that the independent bystander tort of negligent infliction of emotional distress is not actionable in the medical malpractice context.
¶ 38. As a result of our conclusion on the statutory question, Justices Wilcox, Prosser, and I need not necessarily resolve the second certified question, which presents a common-law issue regarding the scope of Bowen. Specifically, the second certified question is whether a bystander claim for negligent infliction of *596emotional distress can be made where there is some attenuation between the injury-causing event and the physical deterioration and death from that injury, and where the claimant witnesses the deterioration and death of the victim, but not the injury-causing event or its immediate aftermath. Because the court is split on the statutory question, Justices Wilcox, Prosser, and I join Part II of Chief Justice Abrahamson's opinion, in which she addresses the Bowen issue and concludes that the Bowen factors are not met. Justice Bradley also joins Part II of the chief justice's opinion. Accordingly, the order of the circuit court is reversed.
By the Court. — The order of the Manitowoc County Circuit Court is reversed.
¶ 39. I am authorized to state that Justices JON R WILCOX and DAVID T. PROSSER, JR. join this opinion.
All subsequent references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 1999-2000 version.
Wisconsin Statute § 655.27 "create[s] a patients compensation fund for the purpose of paying that portion of a medical malpractice claim which is in excess of [the limits expressed in the chapter]" for "paying future medical expense payments under § 655.015" and for "paying claims under" § 655.27(1m). The fund "provide[s] occurrence coverage for claims against health care providers that have complied with th[e] chapter, and against employees of those health care providers, and for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in payment of claims and fund administrative expenses." The chapter provides a detailed outline for the administration of the fund, including "Peer Review Activities," § 655.27(1m); "Fund Administration and Operation," § 655.27(2); Fee Assessment, Establishment, Limitation, and Collection, § 655.27(3); "Fund Accounting and Audit," § 655.27(4); "Claims Procedures," § 655.27(5); a legislatively designated "Integrity of [the] Fund" which ensures that it "shall be held in trust for the purposes of th[e] chapter and may not be used for purposes other than those of th[e] chapter," § 655.27(6); and, finally, for "Actions Against Insurers, Self-insurers, or Providers." § 655.27(7).
Rineck v. Johnson, 155 Wis. 2d 659, 665, 456 N.W.2d 336 (1990), was overruled on other grounds in Chang v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 182 Wis. 2d 549, 514 N.W.2d 399 (1994).
Chief Justice Abrahamson's opinion contends that negligent infliction of emotional distress arising out of medical malpractice is actionable as "a valid tort claim outside chapter 655," citing Johnson v. Rogers Memorial Hospital, Inc., 2001 WI 68, 244 Wis. 2d 364, 627 N.W.2d 890; McEvoy v. Group Health Cooperative of Eau Claire, 213 Wis. 2d 507, 570 N.W.2d 397 (1997); and Northwest General Hospital v. Yee, 115 Wis. 2d 59, 339 N.W.2d 583 (1983). Chief Justice Abrahamson's opinion, ¶¶ 47-50. Yee was a contract action on a medical debt. Yee, 115 Wis. 2d at 66. McEvoy was a bad faith insurance claim against an HMO. McEvoy, 213 Wis. 2d at 513. Neither case involved a claim for personal injury arising out of or premised upon medical malpractice. In Johnson, the plaintiff parents sued *592their adult daughter's therapists on negligence and contract theories for allegedly implanting false memories about childhood abuse. We only very summarily addressed the applicability of Chapter 655 in Johnson, citing Sawyer v. Midelfort, 227 Wis. 2d 124, 595 N.W.2d 423 (1999), and Schuster v. Altenberg, 144 Wis. 2d 223, 424 N.W.2d 159 (1988), for the proposition that "such claims... [may] move forward outside the realm of chapter 655." Johnson, 244 Wis. 2d 364, ¶ 20. However, neither Sawyer nor Schuster specifically addressed the applicability or exclusivity of Chapter 655. Accordingly, because Johnson's treatment of the issue was very cursory and was based entirely on two cases that did not even address the issue, I conclude that Johnson is neither helpful nor controlling here.

=== CASE 9739265 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:26.827341+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, CHIEF JUSTICE
¶ 40. (concurring). I conclude that if a parent's claim of negligent infliction of emotional distress resulting from medical malpractice in treating his or her child is an independent cause of action, the claim can be brought outside chapter 655.
¶ 41. Nevertheless, I conclude that the "bystander claim"1 urged by the parent in this case cannot proceed because it does not fall within the requirements of *597Bowen v. Lumbermen's Mutual Casualty Co., 183 Wis. 2d 627, 517 N.W.2d 432 (1994).2
¶ 42. I would therefore reverse the order of the Circuit Court for Manitowoc County.
¶ 43. Justice Sykes's lead opinion concludes that chapter 655 constitutes the exclusive procedure and remedy for medical malpractice in Wisconsin, and that a parent's claim against a health care provider for negligent infliction of emotional distress resulting from medical malpractice in treating his or her child must be dismissed because the claim does not fall within the list of claims covered by chapter 655, specified in Wis. Stat. §§ 655.005(1)3 and 655.007.4
¶ 44. The lead opinion reasons that a parent's claim of negligent infliction of emotional distress resulting from medical malpractice in the treatment of his or her child is not covered by chapter 655 as follows: (1) a parent's claim is not for medical malpractice and is *598independent of his or her child's claim, that is, it is not a derivative suit;5 (2) chapter 655 explicitly states that *599it applies only to patients or patients' representatives *600having a malpractice claim and to specified persons having a derivative claim for death on account of malpractice; and (3) in the present case, the parent suing for negligent infliction of emotional distress (rather than for injury to the child) is not a patient, is not a patient's representative, and is not suing on a derivative claim on account of malpractice.6
¶ 45. Taking the lead opinion at its word, I fail to understand how it can then conclude that a parent's negligent infliction of emotional distress claim is "impermissible" under chapter 655. The only explanation I can come up with for its conclusion is that it assumes that the legislature intended to sweep away all claims having a connection with medical malpractice unless the claim is specifically included in the scope of chapter 655.
¶ 46. To the contrary, however, several of our cases hold that chapter 655 does not govern every claim having a connection with medical malpractice. Claims having a connection with medical malpractice can be brought outside chapter 655.
¶ 47. For example, in Johnson v. Rogers Memorial Hospital, Inc., 2001 WI 68, 244 Wis. 2d 364, 627 N.W.2d 890, this court held that parents may sue their child's therapists for negligent infliction of emotional distress resulting from malpractice in treating the child. The therapists argued that the claims were barred because they did not fall within the scope of chapter 655, but *601this court allowed the claims "to move forward outside the realm of chapter 655" because "chapter 655 is not the exclusive remedy for such claims . . . ."7
¶ 48. In another case, McEvoy v. Group Health Cooperative of Eau Claire, 213 Wis. 2d 507, 570 N.W.2d 397 (1997), the court allowed a suit for the tort of bad faith against a health maintenance organization, refusing to accept the organization's argument that it could not be sued because the suit was subject to chapter 655. The court concluded, "[T]he legislature did not intend [in chapter 655] to go beyond regulating claims for medical malpractice," defining medical malpractice as "professional misconduct or unreasonable lack of skill."8
¶ 49. In still another case, Northwest General Hospital v. Yee, 115 Wis. 2d 59, 339 N.W.2d 583 (1983), the court refused to read chapter 655 as governing all claims involving medical malpractice against a health care provider, allowing a patient to assert the defense of medical malpractice in a health care provider's suit for payment for services rendered. The health care provider argued that the patient was asserting a claim for malpractice but not for bodily injury, and that the claim was not within the scope of chapter 655 and was thus prohibited. Examining the words of the statute and the legislative purpose, the court concluded that if the malpractice claim was not a claim for bodily injury, it *602did not fall within chapter 655 and therefore was not barred. According to the court, contract law would apply regardless of chapter 655.
¶ 50. That the parent's claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress falls outside of chapter 655 does not mean that the claim is barred. Rather, it means that the claim may be a valid tort claim outside chapter 655. Thus, the proper conclusion for the lead opinion to reach (assuming that the claim is independent) is that chapter 655 does not govern a parent's claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress from a health care provider's negligent infliction of physical harm on a third person.
II
¶ 51. Assuming arguendo that a parent's claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress resulting from medical malpractice is not barred by chapter 655, I conclude that summary judgment for the defendant was appropriate here. This case is a bystander case, unlike the court's other cases described above concerning a third party's claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress involving medical malpractice. The leading case on a tortfeasor's liability to a bystander is Bowen v. Lumbermen's Mutual Casualty Co., a case not involving medical malpractice.
¶ 52. In Bowen, this court set forth three factors for determining whether a plaintiff could recover on his or her bystander claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress: (1) that "the injury suffered by the victim must have been fatal or severe"; (2) that "the victim and the plaintiff must be related as spouses, parent-child, grandparent-grandchild or siblings"; and *603(3) that "the plaintiff must have observed an extraordinary event, namely the incident and injury or the scene soon after the incident with the injured victim at the scene."9 In bystander cases, a court rules on these factors on a case-by-case basis.10
¶ 53. The parties dispute whether the case at bar satisfies the third factor. I conclude that the claim in the present case does not fit within the third factor.
¶ 54. The parent's experiences were horrific. The mother witnessed a prolonged and unsuccessful attempt to save their baby's life. In the context of Bowen, however, the compensable serious emotional distress of a bystander is not measured by the acute emotional distress of the loss of a family member. Rather, the damages arise from the bystander's observation of an extraordinary event. The hallmark of negligent infliction of emotional distress is a contemporaneous or nearly contemporaneous sensory perception of a sudden, traumatic, injury-producing event. "Witnessing either an incident causing death or serious injury or the gruesome aftermath of such an event minutes after it occurs is an extraordinary experience . . . ."11
¶ 55. In the present case, as in many cases, the failure to make the proper medical diagnosis is not an event that itself is perceived by a family member. To extend Bowen to an injury caused by an improper diagnosis when the plaintiff observes the suffering of the victim and not the event that causes that suffering conflicts with the historical foundations for negligent infliction of emotional distress and would be a significant broadening of the Bowen rule.
*604¶ 56. For the reasons set forth, I would reverse the order of the Circuit Court for Manitowoc County.
¶ 57. I am authorized to state that Justices JON E WILCOX, ANN WALSH BRADLEY, DAVID T. PROSSER, JR., and DIANE S. SYKES join Part II of this opinion.
"Bystander claim" refers to the claim of a plaintiff who alleges emotional distress arising from a tortfeasor's negligent infliction of physical harm on a third person. Bowen v. Lumbermen's Mut. Cas. Co., 183 Wis. 2d 627, 632, 517 N.W.2d 432 (1994).
Justices Wilcox, Bradley, Prosser, and Sykes join this sentence and Part II of the opinion. Part II is the majority opinion.
Wisconsin Stat. § 655.005(1) provides:
Any person listed in s. 655.007 having a claim or a derivative claim against a health care provider or an employee of the health care provider, for damages for bodily injury or death due to acts or omissions of the employee of the health care provider acting within the scope of his or her employment and providing health care services, is subject to this chapter.
Wisconsin Stat. § 655.007 provides:
On and after July 24, 1975, any patient or the patient's representative having a claim or any spouse, parent, minor sibling or child of the patient having a derivative claim for injury or death on account of malpractice is subject to this chapter.
The lead opinion's conclusion that a parent's claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress is an independent, not derivative, claim is suspect. The court of appeals has held that an adult child's suit against a health care provider for negligent infliction of emotional distress arising from medical malpractice in the care of a parent was not within Wis. Stat. § 655.007. See Ziulkowski v. Nierengarten, 210 Wis. 2d 98, 104-06, 565 N.W.2d 164 (Ct. App. 1997). The adult child plaintiff was barred from bringing suit in Ziulkowski because derivative claims were held to be limited to minor children under chapter 655. Id. The implication is that a suit for negligent infliction of emotional distress is a derivative suit.
But see Kosieradzki v. Mathys, 2002 WI App 191, ¶ 10, 256 Wis. 2d 839, 649 N.W.2d 717 (concluding that under Bowen, "emotional distress claims are independent, not derivative"). The lead opinion at ¶ 27 cites to and quotes from Bowen, but Bowen does not address or decide the question whether the claim for emotional distress is independent or derivative.
The lead opinion attempts to distinguish a claim for loss of society (which the lead opinion characterizes as derivative) from a claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress (which the lead opinion characterizes as independent) to support its suspect conclusion. The distinction between derivative and independent actions is, however, neither crystal clear nor absolute. Indeed the distinction appears to depend on the purpose for which the distinction is being made; the characterization depends on whether the court is addressing, for example, contributory negligence, limits on amount of recovery, or statutes of limitations. See, e.g., Korth v. Am. Family Ins. Co., 115 Wis. 2d 326, 340 N.W.2d 494 (1983):
The minor's cause of action for physical injury and the parents' causes of action for the invasion of the parents' interests are separate in the sense that each is predicated upon the invasion of different interests of different persons. The parents' claims are derivative, however, in the sense that they arise from the same tortious act that inflicted injury upon the child.... labels are not *599helpful in deciding the particular questions that come before the court. The preferred approach is to examine the legal context in which the question . . . arises ....
id. at 331; Peeples v. Sargent, 77 Wis. 2d 612, 253 N.W.2d 459 (1977):
The cause of action for consortium occasioned by an injury to one marriage partner is a separate cause of action belonging to the spouse of the injured marriage partner. A wife's loss of consortium' is derivative "in the sense it arose out of or was occasioned by an injury to her husband." However, loss of consortium is a direct injury to the spouse who has lost the consortium.
id. at 643 (citations omitted); White v. Lunder, 66 Wis. 2d 563, 225 N.W.2d 442 (1975):
[Tjhat the question of whether a spouse's cause of action for loss of consortium arising in personal injury actions is derivative is not clearly settled and the cases are confusing.
We deem it appropriate to declare, for the purpose of applying our comparative negligence statute, that both the causes of action for medical expenses and loss of consortium shall be deemed derivative.
To declare both of these causes of action derivative might not be entirely logical....
id: at 574; Schwartz v. Milwaukee, 54 Wis. 2d 286, 195 N.W.2d 480 (1972):
[T]he wife's action [for loss of consortium] was derivative only in the sense it arose out of or was occasioned by an injury to her husband. This is not the usual meaning of the word "derivative" and it might be more accurate to say a wife's damage was dependent upon the husband's injury and her cause of action must include the common factor of the accident and injury to her husband.
id. at 293; Lord v. Hubbell, 210 Wis. 2d 150, 168, 563 N.W.2d 913 (Ct. App. 1997) ("we are mindful that we are to look beyond the labels of'derivative' and 'separate' claims").
This claim is not a medical malpractice claim per se because a medical malpractice claim arises when there is a physician-patient relationship. Ande v. Rock, 2002 WI App 136, ¶ 10, 256 Wis. 2d 365, 647 N.W.2d 265. In the present case, a physician-patient relationship does not exist between the complaining parent and the doctor. The child was the physician's patient.
Johnson v. Rogers Mem'l Hosp., Inc., 2001 WI 68, ¶¶ 17, 20, 244 Wis. 2d 364, 627 N.W.2d 890. The Johnson court cited Sawyer v. Midelfort, 227 Wis. 2d 124, 595 N.W.2d 423 (1999), as another case allowing third party claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress in the medical malpractice arena. In Sawyer the allegation was that the child's false accusations of the parent's sex abuse caused harm to the parent.
McEvoy v. Group Health Coop. of Eau Claire, 213 Wis. 2d 507, 527-30, 570 N.W.2d 397 (1997).
Bowen, 183 Wis. 2d at 633.
Id. at 660.
Id. at 658.

=== CASE 9739266 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:26.831773+00 ===

WILLIAM A. BABLITCH, J.
¶ 58. (dissen-, ting). The majority holding in this case, authored by Chief Justice Abrahamson, is that the Finnegans' claim does not fit within the third factor in Bowen. I disagree and will address this issue first. The lead opinion, authored by Justice Sykes, concludes that the Finne-gans' claim is not permissible under chapter 655 because it is not derivative. I disagree and will address this issue second.
I
¶ 59. The majority holding, which concludes that Bowen does not permit recovery in this case, is simply wrong. The majority holding does not, because it cannot, articulate a principled distinction between the facts in this case and the facts in Bowen.
¶ 60. Bowen set forth three factors for determining whether a bystander may recover for negligent infliction of emotional distress: (1) the injury suffered by the victim must have been fatal or severe; (2) the victim and the plaintiff must be related as spouses, parent-child, grandparent-grandchild or siblings; and (3) the plaintiff must have observed an extraordinary event, namely the incident and injury, or the scene soon after the incident with the injured victim at the scene. Bowen v. Lumbermen's Mut. Cas. Co., 183 Wis. 2d 627, 633, 517 N.W.2d 432 (1994). In sum, the court in Bowen concluded that
*605[T]o determine on the basis of public policy considerations whether to preclude liability for severe emotional distress to a bystander a court must consider three factors: the severity of the injury to the victim, the relationship of the plaintiff to the victim, and the extraordinary circumstances surrounding the plaintiffs discovery of the injury. These factors relate to the underlying principles of the tort; they are relevant to measuring the authenticity of the claim and the limits of liability for emotional harm resulting from a defendant's negligence. Courts must rule on these factors and the public policy considerations on a case-by-case basis.
Id. at 660.
¶ 61. It is undisputed that the Finnegans satisfy the first two prongs of Bowen: (1) Jared died due to egregious medical malpractice and (2) Jared was the Finnegans' son. Only the third prong is at issue here: whether the Finnegans observed an extraordinary event — either witnessing an incident causing death, or serious injury or the gruesome aftermath of such an event. Bowen reasoned that either witnessing an incident causing death or serious injury or witnessing its aftermath was different from "learning of a family member's death through indirect means;" therefore, this "is an appropriate place to draw the line between recoverable and non-recoverable claims." Id. at 658. According to the majority holding, "the damages [for a Bowen claim of negligent infliction of emotional distress] arise from the bystander's observation of an extraordinary event." Chief Justice Abrahamson's opinion, ¶ 54. In other words, "the damages arise from the bystander's observance of the circumstances of the death or serious injury, either when the incident [of negligence] occurs or soon after." Bowen, 183 Wis. 2d at 660. This is exactly what happened in this case.
*606¶ 62. Similar to the facts in Bowen, the Finnegans did not witness the negligent act that caused the death of their baby, but rather, they personally and directly experienced the traumatic aftermath. See id. at 657-58. Just as Sharon Bowen "saw her severely injured son trapped beneath the defendant's car .. . [and] watched the prolonged rescue attempt... ," the Finnegans directly experienced a prolonged attempt to save their dying baby's life. Id. at 634-35. The horrific experience of the Finnegans encompassed a series of events: receiving the news that the lab results of Jared's blood came back positive for bacteria and that this had been communicated to Dr. Schuette, who failed to notify them or act upon the results; observing Jared stop breathing when they were rushing him to the hospital for an emergency lumbar puncture; watching Jared stop breathing a second time while holding him in the hospital elevator; observing Jared change color and his head swelling; and finally witnessing Jared's death.
¶ 63. How can we say that recovery is allowed for witnessing the aftermath of a negligent act resulting in death or serious injury in a single incident, but not if one witnesses the aftermath through a series of incidents? If anything, it seems that witnessing multiple mind-numbing events due to a negligent act causing death or serious injury provides an even greater basis for recovery than witnessing just a single event. Regardless of whether the majority holding now believes that Bowen is too broad and should be limited, it is evident from comparing the facts in Bowen with those in the present case that if Sharon Bowen was allowed to recover, then the Finnegans should as well. There is no principled way to distinguish the two. Accordingly, I respectfully dissent.
*607HH HH
¶ 64. Second, I conclude that the Finnegans' claim is derivative and is therefore a permissible claim under chapter 655. The lead opinion concludes that a claim for emotional distress that is derived from the effects of medical malpractice on an immediate family member is not a "derivative" claim. This is contrary to the common and well-acceptéd meaning of the word derivative. It is also contrary to law and logic.
¶ 65. The term "derivative" has a common and well-accepted definition: "something that derives from, grows out of, or results from an earlier or fundamental state or condition." Webster's International Dictionary 608 (3d ed. 1961). A "derivative action" is defined as "[a] lawsuit arising from an injury to another person ...." Black's Law Dictionary 455 (7th ed. 1999). Although it is not necessarily absolute that an accepted definition of an English word has the same legal definition, it should give one at least great pause when the two are so diametrically opposed. To say that a claim derived from another is not derivative but is instead independent does strain credulity.
¶ 66. The lead opinion is also contrary to law and logic. The lead opinion cannot deny and indeed admits that claims for loss of consortium and loss of society and companionship are derivative claims. Further, the lead opinion acknowledges that a claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress is similar to claims for loss of consortium and loss of society and companionship, in that they all arise from a shared set of underlying facts. Lead op., ¶ 27. Nevertheless, the lead opinion treats them entirely different by reaching the conclusion that claims for loss of consortium, society and companionship are "derivative," but claims for negligent infliction *608of emotional distress are "independent." Simply put, that does not logically, nor does it legally, follow.
¶ 67. The lead opinion attempts to make this distinction by asserting that "[a] Bowen claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress is not merely a separate but dependent damages claim attaching to the primary negligence claim. ..." Lead op., ¶ 29.1 In support, the lead opinion claims that unlike a derivative claim for loss of consortium or society and companionship, "a Bowen bystander claim . . . has its own separate and distinct elements . ..." Id. While a Bowen claim does have distinct elements that must be met, so do claims for loss of consortium, society and companionship. In order to prevail on a claim for loss of consortium or society and companionship, a plaintiff must establish the existence of death or injury, and that the death or injury was caused by the defendant's negligent conduct. Theodore V Lyons, Jr., "Loss of Consortium, Society and Companionship," Law of Damages in Wisconsin, vol. 2, § 14.6 (2000). In addition, such a claim "must be proved separately from the underlying claim in that distinct damages must be shown . . . ." Giese v. Montgomery Ward, Inc., 111 Wis. 2d 392, 405, 331 N.W.2d 585 (1983).
*609¶ 68. Furthermore, similar to the current disagreement regarding the nature of Bowen claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress, early case law illustrates that there was also confusion regarding the "derivative" nature of claims for loss of consortium, society and companionship. For example, this court stated in 1975 that "it is apparent. . . that the question of whether a spouse's cause of action for loss of consortium ... is derivative is not clearly settled and the cases are confusing." White v. Lunder, 66 Wis. 2d 563, 574, 225 N.W.2d 442 (1975). But ultimately, our case law has characterized claims for loss of consortium and loss of society and companionship as "derivative," based on reasoning that applies equally to Bowen claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress. See, e.g., Kottka v. PPG Indus., Inc., 130 Wis. 2d 499, 521, 388 N.W.2d 160 (1986); Korth v. Am. Family Ins. Co., 115 Wis. 2d 326, 331, 340 N.W.2d 494 (1983); Gragg v. Am. Family Mut. Ins. Co., 2001 WI App 272, ¶ 12, 248 Wis. 2d 735, 637 N.W.2d 477.
¶ 69. Those cases, in contrast to the lead opinion's attempted distinction, described what makes a claim "derivative." "The claim for a loss of consortium is derivative, in the sense that it does not arise unless the other spouse has sustained a personal injury." Kottka, 130 Wis. 2d at 521 (citing Fitzgerald v. Meissner & Hicks, Inc., 38 Wis. 2d 571, 579, 157 N.W.2d 595 (1968)). In the context of a claim for loss of society and companionship, we have stated that:
The minor's cause of action for physical injury and the parents' causes of action for the invasion of the parents' interests are separate in the sense that each is predicated upon the invasion of different interests of different persons. The parents' claims are derivative, *610however, in the sense that they arise from the same tortious act that inflicted injury upon the child.
Korth, 115 Wis. 2d at 331 (emphasis added). In other words, "but for [a] primary tort victim's personal injury, a claim for loss of society and companionship or for loss of consortium would not exist." Lyons, Law of Damages in Wisconsin, § 14.7 (emphasis added).
¶ 70. I see no difference in the derivative nature of claims for loss of consortium, society, and companionship and Bowen claims for negligent infliction of emotional distress — they all depend on and derive from the injury or death of someone else. Admittedly, the court of appeals has stated in dicta that "[i]n Bowen v. Lumbermen's Mut. Cas. Co., 183 Wis. 2d 627, 517 N.W.2d 432 (1994), our supreme court... held that emotional distress claims are independent, not derivative." Kosieradzki v. Mathys, 2002 WI App 191, ¶ 10, 256 Wis. 2d 839, 649 N.W.2d 717. However, the court in Bowen did not address this issue, much less hold that claims for emotional distress are independent instead of derivative. See Chief Justice Abrahamson's opinion, ¶ 44 n.5.
¶ 71. In Kosieradzki, the court of appeals held that an insurance policy's "each person" limit applied instead of the "each accident" limit based on the terms of the insurance policy. The court acknowledged that its statement about Bowen was pure dicta, stating that "[h]ow the law defines particular claims is immaterial. At issue [in this case] is how the policy treats them, which is determined by the language of the policy." Kosieradzki, 256 Wis. 2d 839, ¶ 10.
¶ 72. Further, just because a claim is "derivative" does not mean that it cannot involve a separate and independent loss. As we reasoned in Kottka, even *611though a claim, such as for the loss of society and companionship of a spouse, is derivative, it "is not for the other spouse's personal injury but for the separate and independent loss which the noninjured spouse sustains." Kottka, 130 Wis. 2d at 521 (emphasis added) (citing Fitzgerald, 38 Wis. 2d at 579).2 Therefore, despite Bowen's distinction between the emotional harm due to serious injury or death of a family member and the emotional distress from observing a family member's death or serious injury, the relevant point is that both of these depend on and derive from the injury or death of someone else — i.e., they are both derivative. Thus, the statement in Kosieradzki that Bowen claims are independent is not only dicta, it is incorrect.
¶ 73. Accordingly, I respectfully dissent. Based on the above, I would hold that the Finnegans' claim is derivative and is therefore a permissible claim under chapter 655.
¶ 74. I am authorized to state that Justice N. PATRICK CROOKS joins this dissenting opinion.
With respect to the lead opinion's reference to Shockley v. Prier, 66 Wis. 2d 394, 404, 225 N.W.2d 495 (1975), regarding the joinder of claims, we note that we have also held that while it is "preferable that the claims of both husband and wife for loss of consortium be joined... if this cannot be done because of procedural obstacles or the inability or unwillingness of the husband to assert his claim, the wife should not be prevented from pursuing her own independent cause of action." Fitzgerald v. Meissner & Hicks, Inc., 38 Wis. 2d 571, 581, 157 N.W.2d 595 (1968).
"An action may be considered 'derivative' in the sense that it is dependent on the existence of a separate claim based on injury to a family member, but it may be considered 'independent' in the sense that it must be based on a loss sustained personally by the parent." Robert Michael Ey, "Cause of Action by Parent for Loss of Child's Consortium," 7 Causes of Action 2d 319 (2003) (citing Giese v. Montgomery Ward, Inc., 111 Wis. 2d 392, 331 N.W.2d 585 (1983)).

=== CASE 2219190 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:04.690278+00 ===

588 N.E.2d 1281 (1992)
THE METROPOLITAN DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION OF MARION COUNTY, Appellant-Plaintiff,
v.
Kenneth M. GOODMAN, and Carolyn B. Coulam, Appellee-Defendant.
No. 49A05-9105-CV-161.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Fifth District.
March 19, 1992.
*1283 Larry F. Whitham, Whitham, McColley & Ross, Indianapolis, for appellant-plaintiff.
Frederick A. Roetter, Kurt F. Pantzer, III, Hendrickson, Travis, Pantzer & Miller, Indianapolis, for appellee-defendant.
RUCKER, Judge.
The Metropolitan Development Commission of Marion County (Commission) appeals the trial court's denial of the Commission's request to enjoin Kenneth M. Goodman and Carolyn B. Coulam (Homeowners) from maintaining rental units in a carriage house on the grounds of Homeowners' dwelling on north Meridian Street in Indianapolis.
The Commission presents three issues for our review which we rephrase as follows:[1]
*1284 1) Did the trial court err in determining that Homeowners' apartment use of the carriage house did not violate existing zoning ordinance restrictions?
2) Did the trial court err in determining that the apartment use of the carriage house was legally established before the effective date of the existing zoning ordinance and therefore qualified for the nonconforming use exception to the zoning restrictions?
3) Did the trial court err in determining that Homeowners' nonconforming use of the carriage house was not terminated by abandonment or expansion of the use after the effective date of the existing zoning ordinance?
We affirm in part and reverse in part.
The real estate property which is the subject of this litigation was originally owned and occupied by the noted Indiana author, Booth Tarkington. Situated upon the real estate are two structures: the "main house" and the "carriage house" both of which were first constructed in 1911. The main house has always been maintained as a single family residence. The carriage house originally contained a downstairs garage and stable, and an upstairs set of rooms which were used as servants' quarters.
In 1951 the property was purchased by Helen Willkie and her husband. The Willkies immediately remodeled the carriage house which resulted in the construction of two apartment units; by 1952 the units were being rented to tenants. In the late 1960's or early 1970's there was a fire in the carriage house. The fire damage was not repaired at that time and the carriage house was not used as a rental apartment for approximately 10 to 15 years.
Sometime after the fire, the exact date of which is not clear, the Willkies sold the property to parties whose names do not appear in the record. However, in 1984 the then owners undertook a restoration project of the carriage house in conjunction with preparing the main house for a 1985 Decorator's Home Show. The owners received the required approval to reconstruct the carriage house from the Meridian Street Preservation Commission. The owners also obtained an improvement location permit from the Permit Section of the Division of Development Services, Department of Metropolitan Development of the City of Indianapolis. The floor plans submitted to the City in order to obtain the latter permit indicated the owners intended to construct an additional apartment inside the carriage house. The Board of Zoning Appeals granted a variance to the owners to allow the use of the main house for the home show and also to restore the roof line of the carriage to a pitched gable roof.
The carriage house renovation was performed in accordance with the historical significance of the property and after renovation was complete, the carriage house contained three apartment units. The present Homeowners purchased the property in 1986 and since that time have used the apartments as separate rental units.
In 1989, the Commission filed a complaint for injunctive relief seeking to enjoin Homeowners from using the real estate for multi-family residential purposes. After a hearing, the trial court entered judgment denying the Commission's request. However, the court did enjoin Homeowners from expanding the use. This appeal ensued.
In an action to enjoin alleged zoning violations we will reverse if the trial court has abused its discretion by failing to grant injunctive relief. An abuse of discretion will be found only if the trial court's decision is against logic. Metro. Dev. Comm'n of Marion County v. Hair (1987), Ind. App., 505 N.E.2d 116.
Our review is further constrained by the trial court's entry of special findings of fact and conclusions of law which were requested by the Commission before the trial began. Such findings must include all of the facts necessary for recovery by a party in whose favor the conclusions of law are found. Dahnke v. Dahnke (1989), Ind. App., 535 N.E.2d 172, reh. denied. The *1285 purpose of special findings is to serve as a theory of the judgment. Willett v. Clark (1989), Ind. App., 542 N.E.2d 1354. Our standard of review of special findings is two-tiered; we first determine whether the evidence supports the findings and we then determine whether the findings support the judgment. W & W Equipment Co., Inc. v. Mink (1991), Ind. App., 568 N.E.2d 564, trans. denied. Special findings and the judgment flowing therefrom will be set aside only if they are clearly erroneous. Id.
Findings of fact are clearly erroneous if the record lacks any facts or reasonable inferences to support them. DeHaan v. DeHaan (1991), Ind. App., 572 N.E.2d 1315, trans. denied. In determining whether the special findings and judgment are clearly erroneous, we will not reweigh the evidence or judge witness credibility. Id. However, a judgment is contrary to law if it is contrary to the trial court's special findings. Id. That is, special findings are adequate only if sufficient to support a valid legal basis for the judgment. Dahnke, supra.
I.
The Commission correctly asserts that in seeking injunctive relief concerning a violation of a zoning ordinance, the moving party must first prove the existence of an applicable ordinance and a violation of that ordinance. Harbour Town Associates, Ltd. v. City of Noblesville (1989), Ind. App., 540 N.E.2d 1283. In the case before us the Commission has carried its initial burden of proof. The real estate here in question is zoned D-2 for single family residential occupancy. The D-2 provisions are set forth in the Dwelling Districts Zoning Ordinance of Marion County (DDZO) which was adopted July 18, 1966. The present use of the carriage house as a multi-family apartment dwelling is in clear violation of the DDZO. However, the analyses does not end here.
The use of land or buildings may be protected from existing zoning restrictions if the use is one which existed and was lawful when the restrictions became effective and which continued to exist since that time. Hair, supra; Metropolitan Dev. Comm'n of Marion County v. Marianos (1980), 274 Ind. 67, 408 N.E.2d 1267. This nonconforming use is an affirmative defense which must be proven by the party asserting it. O'Banion v. State ex rel. Shively (1969), 146 Ind. App. 223, 253 N.E.2d 739, trans. denied.
In the case before us, Homeowners alleged nonconforming use as one of their affirmative defenses to the Commission's complaint for injunctive relief. The trial court concluded that Homeowners proved by a preponderance of the evidence that the apartment use of the carriage house was legally established as a nonconforming use prior to the effective date of any relevant zoning ordinance. The Commission attacks this conclusion on two grounds. First, the Commission contends the trial court's findings are insufficient because they do not indicate that the use of the carriage house as an apartment was lawful at the time such use first began. Thus, argues the Commission, the trial court's conclusion is not supported by the findings. Second, according to the Commission, the trial court's conclusion and judgment are contrary to law because Homeowners failed to prove the two essential elements of their affirmative defense of nonconforming use, namely: (1) the use of the carriage house as an apartment dwelling was lawful at the time such use first began, and (2) the use of the carriage house as an apartment dwelling existed on the effective date of the DDZO, July 18, 1966.
We disagree with the Commission that the trial court's findings are insufficient. In its finding of fact No. 12 the trial court indicated, "Prior to December 2, 1952, the accessory use of the apartments, a non-conforming use of the Carriage House was established." Although not a model of clarity and specificity, this finding sufficiently establishes that the carriage house was lawfully used as an apartment unit before the effective date of the DDZO.
The record in this case also supports the trial court's finding and conclusion *1286 that the use of the carriage house as an apartment unit was established on the effective date of the DDZO. The carriage house was remodeled in or around 1952 for the specific purpose of accommodating rental units. Apartment use of the carriage house continued at various times thereafter until damaged by fire in the late 1960's or early 1970's. Thus, there was sufficient evidence that the apartment use of the carriage house was "in existence" on July 18, 1966, even though there was no evidence of the use on that specific date. A previously established nonconforming use may be deemed to be in existence on the day a zoning ordinance becomes effective even though it is not being exercised on that very day. Dandy Co., Inc. v. Civil City of South Bend (1980), Ind. App., 401 N.E.2d 1380.
There is also evidence in the record demonstrating that apartment use of the carriage house was lawful at the time such use first began. Mrs. Willkie testified that she and her husband had employed legal counsel in 1952 to insure that the conversion of the carriage house into two apartment units was permissible under then-existing zoning ordinances; she recalled that approval was obtained at that time. This unobjected to testimony is consistent with the parties' stipulation that Homeowners' property was zoned U-1 under the provisions of a 1922 zoning ordinance. The ordinance, which was introduced into evidence, prohibits "apartment houses" only if they consist of three or more units. Prior to 1952, the carriage house here in question consisted of two apartment units and the Commission introduced no evidence demonstrating the 1922 ordinance was not in effect in 1952.
Because the record supports an inference that the apartment use of the carriage house was a permissible use under applicable zoning ordinances in existence in 1952, we may not say that the trial court's conclusion is clearly erroneous. DeHaan, supra.
II.
The Commission argues that even if the use of the carriage house as an apartment dwelling initially began as a permissible nonconforming use, the use was extinguished by either abandonment, destruction or expansion. The Commission contends the evidence is clear that the use was abandoned after July 18, 1966, the effective date of the DDZO, because the owners at that time allowed the carriage house to remain unrepaired and unused for ten or more years after the fire. The Commission also argues that even if the apartment use was not abandoned, the 1985 renovation created three apartments where there had been only two, thereby extinguishing the nonconforming use by an impermissible expansion of the use.
As a general rule the defense of nonconforming use is unavailing if that use is subsequently abandoned. Dandy, supra. However, once the moving party demonstrates a nonconforming use, the adverse party carries the burden of proving the use was terminated by abandonment. Jacobs v. Mishawaka Bd. of Zoning Appeals (1979), 182 Ind. App. 500, 395 N.E.2d 834. The Commission in this case has failed to carry its burden.
Contrary to the Commission's argument, the trial court was not required to find that the former owners of the property abandoned its nonconforming use by virtue of their long failure to restore the carriage house. Mere discontinuance of a nonconforming use is not per se sufficient to constitute abandonment. Stuckman v. Kosciusko County Bd. of Zoning Appeals (1987), Ind., 506 N.E.2d 1079; Dandy, supra. Rather, there must exist "the concurrence of an intent to abandon and a voluntary act or failure to act signifying abandonment." Stuckman, 506 N.E.2d at 1080. Here, the record does not support the notion that there was any intent to abandon the nonconforming use. In the 1970's, the then owners of the property made an affirmative expression of their intent to renovate the carriage house. There was also evidence indicating the eventual cost of renovation of the carriage house was substantial. A period of non-use will not constitute abandonment if the non-use is the *1287 result of the financial inability of the owner to continue in business. Smith v. Howard (1966), Ky., 407 S.W.2d 139, 141-42, quoted with approval in Dandy, supra, 401 N.E.2d at 1383.
The Commission correctly points out that nonconforming uses are not favored since they detract from the purpose of a zoning ordinance, namely: (a) to restrict certain classes of uses to certain areas, (b) to secure the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses and, (c) to restrict or diminish such uses. Misner v. Presdorf (1981), Ind. App., 421 N.E.2d 684, trans. denied. However, in this case, consistent with such a policy, the DDZO permits reconstruction of nonconforming uses which are damaged or partially destroyed by fire when the damage or destruction does not exceed two-thirds of the gross floor area of the structure. DDZO, Ch. II, Sec. 2.00. The trial court specifically found that the damage or destruction to the carriage house did not exceed two-thirds of the gross floor area. The evidence of record supports the finding and therefore is not clearly erroneous.
We next turn to the Commission's argument that the nonconforming use of the carriage house was extinguished by expansion of the use. According to the Commission, as a matter of law, the addition of a third apartment terminated the nonconforming use of the carriage house as an apartment rental unit. The Homeowners counter that we must uphold the trial court because the addition of a third apartment to the carriage house was a mere intensification of a nonconforming use which neither changed the character of the use as rental apartments nor adversely affected the neighborhood.
We cannot agree with Homeowners' contention. As indicated elsewhere in this opinion, use of the carriage house as an apartment rental unit was lawful only because the use was not in violation of the 1922 zoning ordinance. However, the 1922 ordinance did not permit an apartment dwelling, in a residential district, containing three or more units. Thus the addition of a third apartment constitutes an impermissible expansion of the initial nonconforming use.
However, a finding of an impermissible expansion in this case does not necessitate the drastic remedy urged by the Commission, namely to completely enjoin apartment use of the carriage house altogether. For example, in O'Banion, supra, we held that if the use of property to sell beer before the effective date of the applicable zoning ordinance constituted a nonconforming use, then continuation of the use would not permit other alcoholic beverages but would be limited to the sale of beer only. In Chizum v. Elkhart County Plan Comm'n, (1990) 147 Ind. App. 691, 263 N.E.2d 654, we held that the installation of lights at a drag strip to afford night-time racing was an illegal expansion of the nonconforming use. This court upheld the trial court's order to remove the lights and to allow continuation of daytime racing. In Stuckman, supra, our supreme court held that a nonconforming use of certain lots of property for an automobile salvage yard could not be expanded onto adjoining lots after the effective date of the applicable zoning regulation. The case was remanded to the trial court with directions to restore the status quo.
Consistent with the foregoing authority we reverse that portion of the trial court's judgment which permanently enjoins Homeowners from increasing the nonconforming use of the property from its current apartment use. We remand with instructions to enter an appropriate order permanently enjoining Homeowners from apartment use of the carriage house which exceeds two rental units.
In all other respects the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
SHARPNACK and BARTEAU, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The Commission as well as Homeowners also raise issues which were not addressed by the trial court. The Commission argues that Homeowners failed to carry their burden of proof concerning the affirmative defense of variance, and Homeowners contend the trial court's judgment can be upheld on the basis of equitable estoppel. The specific findings of fact and conclusions of law made no reference to either variance or equitable estoppel. Therefore, we do not address these issues because we are not at liberty to sustain the judgment on grounds not addressed by the trial court. City of Hammond v. Conley (1986), Ind. App., 498 N.E.2d 48, rejected on other grounds by Osler Ins., Inc. v. Inglert (1991), Ind., 569 N.E.2d 636.

=== CASE 2219191 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:04.696213+00 ===

666 N.W.2d 427 (2003)
Paula HARE, Respondent,
v.
STATE of Minnesota, DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES, Appellant.
Hennepin County Welfare Board, Respondent,
UCare Minnesota, Respondent.
No. C9-03-33.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
July 29, 2003.
*428 Mike Hatch, Attorney General, Patricia Sonnenberg, Assistant Attorney General, St. Paul, MN, for Appellant.
Philip A. Duran, Minneapolis, MN, and Constance Hope, Maple Grove, MN, for Respondent Paula Hare.
Amy Klobuchar, Hennepin County Attorney, Arthur W. Katzman, Assistant County Attorney, Minneapolis, MN, for Respondent Hennepin County Welfare Board.
Lora Esch Mitchell, Fredrikson & Byron, P.A., Minneapolis, MN, for Respondent UCare Minnesota.
Considered and decided by LANSING, Presiding Judge, PETERSON, Judge, and WRIGHT, Judge.
OPINION
WRIGHT, Judge.
After respondent Paula Hare was denied coverage for gender reassignment surgery by UCare Minnesota (UCare), her health plan, she appealed to the health plan's contracting agency, the Minnesota Department of Human Services (DHS), which affirmed UCare's decision. Hare sought judicial review in district court, and the district court reversed DHS's order. DHS now appeals, arguing that the district *429 court erred when it ruled that (1) Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a (2002), the provision addressing coverage for gender reassignment, is unconstitutionally vague and (2) DHS failed to follow rulemaking procedures when it adopted a definition for "gender reassignment services" in Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a. Because we conclude that Hare's treatments for gender dysphoria and for chemical dependency required to begin hormone therapy are "gender reassignment services" under Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a, we affirm.
FACTS
Since she was a small child, respondent Paula Hare, although born male, has had the desire to be female. In mid-1997, Hare consulted with Dr. Sharon Satterfield, a gender-identity-disorder specialist, seeking treatment for gender dysphoria.[1] Dr. Satterfield concluded that, because Hare suffered from a substance-abuse problem, hormone drug therapy and gender reassignment surgery, both necessary for the physical transformation from male to female, were not appropriate unless Hare was free of chemicals for one year. Following her initial consultation with Dr. Satterfield, Hare successfully completed chemical-dependency treatment and participated in group and individual therapy for gender dysphoria. Under Dr. Satterfield's care, Hare began hormone therapy in September 1998.
Hare is a member of the MinnesotaCare health program and received services from UCare, a health plan that provides services to MinnesotaCare participants under contract with DHS. In December 1998, Hare began treatment for gender dysphoria with Dr. William Robiner of the Fairview University Medical Center. On August 21, 2000, Dr. Robiner requested authorization from UCare for Hare to undergo gender reassignment surgery.
MinnesotaCare will pay for gender reassignment surgery only if a person began receiving "gender reassignment services" prior to July 1, 1998. Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a (2002). UCare denied Hare's request for coverage for gender reassignment surgery based on its determination that Hare, having begun hormone therapy in September 1998, had not commenced "gender reassignment services" before July 1, 1998. Hare appealed this decision to DHS, and an administrative referee affirmed UCare's decision. Hare then sought judicial review. Before the district court, Hare argued that Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a, (1) was misinterpreted by DHS; (2) violates her constitutional right to privacy and bodily integrity; and (3) violates her equal protection rights. The district court requested additional briefing on whether Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a, is void for vagueness and whether DHS properly adopted the definition of "gender reassignment services." Because there is no statutory definition of "gender reassignment services," the district court ruled that Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a, is unconstitutionally void for vagueness. The district court also concluded *430 that, because DHS failed to adopt a definition of "gender reassignment services" by rule, its application to Hare is void. DHS now appeals.
ISSUE
Did the district court err in determining that MinnesotaCare is obligated to pay for gender reassignment surgery where, before July 1, 1998, the patient received services that included only treatment for gender dysphoria and chemical-dependency treatment that was required to begin hormone therapy?
ANALYSIS
I.
The initial question before the district court was one of statutory interpretation, which we review de novo. Schons v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 621 N.W.2d 743, 745 (Minn.2001). In interpreting Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a, we must "ascertain and effectuate the intention of the legislature." Minn.Stat. § 645.16 (2002). Thus, we examine the language of Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a, to determine how it applies to Hare. The language of the statute contemplates a cutoff date after which an individual may no longer secure insurance coverage for gender reassignment. "Gender reassignment surgery and other gender reassignment medical procedures including drug therapy for gender reassignment are not covered unless the individual began receiving gender reassignment services prior to July 1, 1998." Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a (emphasis added). The phrase "gender reassignment services" is crucial in determining whether a person may secure coverage for gender reassignment. If an individual began receiving "gender reassignment services" prior to July 1, 1998, he or she is entitled to coverage. But a person who began receiving these services after July 1, 1998, is not.
Hare sought gender-dysphoria treatment from Dr. Satterfield, a gender-identity-disorder specialist, in mid-1997. Almost immediately after Dr. Satterfield's first interview with her, Hare began the chemical-dependency treatment. In a letter to UCare, Dr. Satterfield stated that such treatment was required to begin hormone therapy. During this time, Hare also participated in group and individual therapy for gender dysphoria.
Because DHS does not dispute that prior to July 1, 1998, Hare sought gender-dysphoria treatment with Dr. Satterfield and participated in chemical-dependency treatment in preparation for hormone therapy, we must determine whether these activities constitute "gender reassignment services" for purposes of Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a. The phrase "gender reassignment services" is not expressly defined by Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a. In 1995, however, DHS issued a policy clarification stating that "gender reassignment services include hormone therapy and sex reassignment surgery."
When we interpret a statute, we must first decide whether the statutory language, on its face, is ambiguous. Am. Tower, L.P. v. City of Grant, 636 N.W.2d 309, 312 (Minn.2001). If the legislative intent "is clearly discernable from plain and unambiguous language, statutory construction is neither necessary nor permitted and courts apply the statute's plain meaning." Id. (citation omitted). DHS asserts that "gender reassignment services" refers only to hormone therapy and surgery; Hare argues that the phrase is unconstitutionally vague. The definition urged by DHS is not explicitly stated in the words of the statute. Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a, contains no explicit language that defines the limits of "gender *431 reassignment services." "We retain the authority to review de novo errors of law which arise when an agency decision is based upon the meaning of words in a statute." In re Eller Media, 664 N.W.2d 1, 7 (Minn.2003) (citation omitted).
We begin by examining the individual words constituting the disputed phrase. The Minnesota Supreme Court has defined the term "gender" in the context of a similar case. See Doe v. State, Dept. of Pub. Welfare, 257 N.W.2d 816, 818 (Minn.1977). In that case, Jane Doe appealed from a denial of medical-assistance benefits to pay for "sex conversion surgery." Id. at 817. In defining both terms, the supreme court distinguished "sex" from "gender": "Sex connotes the anatomical qualities that determine whether one is male or female, while gender relates to behavior, feelings, and thoughts and does not always correlate with one's physiological status." Id. at 818 (emphasis added). "Courts presume that the legislature acts with full knowledge of previous statutes and existing caselaw." Pecinovsky v. AMCO Ins. Co., 613 N.W.2d 804, 809 (Minn.App.2000), review denied (Minn. Sept. 26, 2000); cf. Minn.Stat. § 645.17(4) (2002) (stating that "[w]hen a court of last resort has construed the language of a law, the legislature in subsequent laws on the same subject matter intends the same construction to be placed upon such language"); W. Union Tel. Co. v. Spaeth, 232 Minn. 128, 132, 44 N.W.2d 440, 442 (1950) (stating that "reenactment of a statute without change, after construction * * * by the court, presumptively constitutes an adoption of such construction"); State v. Newman, 538 N.W.2d 476, 478 (Minn.App.1995) (stating that "after the supreme court ruled that a BB gun could be a firearm under the aggravated robbery and mandatory minimum sentence statutes, the legislature has reenacted the criminal statutes without giving `firearm' another definition and, thus, has presumptively adopted the supreme court's definition"), review denied (Minn. Nov. 30, 1995).
DHS asserts that "gender reassignment services" are only those services that "cause physical transformation of the body"hormone therapy and surgery. In light of the supreme court's determination that gender "does not always correlate with one's physiological status," Doe, 257 N.W.2d at 818, the limited definition of "gender reassignment services" that DHS advocates is unavailing. We must assume that, in drafting legislation addressing nearly identical subject matter as that in Doe, the legislature chose the word "gender" with full knowledge of its prior judicial interpretation.
"Reassign" means "[t]o assign a new position, distribution or function[.]" American Heritage Dictionary 1506 (3d ed.1992). The parties do not dispute the definition of this word. DHS urges us to conclude that the word "services" means "deeds instrumental toward attaining some object." It maintains that the disputed phrase must mean acts instrumental to changing a person's sex. In addition to the above-discussed distinction between gender and sex, we conclude that the plain meaning of "services" is not so narrow. "Services" means "[w]ork done for others as an occupation or a business[.]" Id. at 1649. Applying the plain language of the statute, we do not conclude that DHS's preferred definition of "gender reassignment services" reflects the legislature's intent as it applies to Hare. We conclude that "gender reassignment services" means work done, most likely by a medical professional, for a person seeking, at a minimum, treatment to address the behavior, feelings, and thoughts of the biological sex different than his or her own.
*432 As defined above, the plain meaning of these words demonstrates that "gender reassignment services" reasonably includes the treatment for gender dysphoria and chemical dependency that Hare underwent prior to July 1998. Doe's interpretation of "gender" permits treatment necessary to address gender dysphoria, even if the treatment itself does not directly result in physical transformation, to be a "gender reassignment service." Thus, we conclude that the plain meaning of the disputed phrase includes treatments for gender dysphoria and for chemical dependency required to begin hormone therapy.
DHS urges us to conclude that, because "gender reassignment services" are "technical words," they must be construed according to their special meaning. See Minn.Stat. § 645.08 (stating that such terms should be "construed according to such special meanings or their definition"). As a source for the term's technical meaning, DHS cites the Benjamin Standards, maintaining that their use of the term "reassignment" only refers to hormone therapy and surgery. DHS further contends that the University of Minnesota lists only hormone therapy and sex reassignment surgery when it defines the term "sex reassignment services." Our review of the Benjamin Standards shows otherwise. While the Benjamin Standards expressly define "hormonal sex reassignment" and "surgical sex reassignment," they do not define "gender reassignment services," "gender reassignment," or even "sex reassignment." Accordingly, the Benjamin Standards do nothing to assign a special meaning for purposes of the instant case and do not guide us in determining legislative intent.
The phrase "gender reassignment" is used four times in Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a: (1) "gender reassignment surgery," (2) "gender reassignment medical procedures," (3) "drug therapy for gender reassignment," and (4) "gender reassignment services." In ascertaining legislative intent, we presume that "the legislature intends the entire statute to be effective." Minn.Stat. § 645.17(2) (2002); see also Amaral v. St. Cloud Hosp., 598 N.W.2d 379, 384 (Minn.1999) (stating that "no word, phrase, or sentence should be deemed superfluous, void, or insignificant"). Within the single sentence comprising section 256B.0625, subdivision 3a, the legislature employed these four phrases using similar modifying words. To give meaning to the entire statute and thus avoid rendering any phrase superfluous, each of the four phrases employed by the legislature must have a distinct and separate meaning. Thus, "gender reassignment services" must have a definition that is distinct from gender reassignment surgery and drug or hormone therapy for gender reassignment. If the legislature intended "gender reassignment services" to be limited to surgery and hormone therapy, it would have chosen language that explicitly demonstrates this intention. We decline to go beyond our role as interpreters of the language employed by the legislature and infer legislative intent from evidence that simply is not present.
We conclude that the term "gender reassignment services" is not ambiguous as it applies to Hare. When the statute's words are given their plain meaning, it is clear that the legislature intended the phrase "gender reassignment services" to comprise more than just surgery and hormone therapy. Successful completion of chemical-dependency treatment was an integral part of Hare's treatment for gender dysphoria and a necessary first step in the process of obtaining the physically transformative procedures of hormone therapy and gender reassignment surgery. Because the language of the statute does not place a discernable exclusion on the types *433 of services Hare received, we conclude that seeking treatment for gender dysphoria and completing the requisite chemical-dependency treatment are encompassed by the statutory language. Hare commenced these gender reassignment services prior to July 1, 1998. She, therefore, meets the statutory coverage requirements for gender reassignment surgery.
DHS argues that the district court erred when it ruled that Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a (2002), is unconstitutionally vague as applied to Hare. Although the district court based its decision on an analysis of the constitutionality of the statute in question, we first determine if there is an alternative ground upon which we may resolve the dispute between the parties. See State v. Hoyt, 304 N.W.2d 884, 888 (Minn.1981) (stating that "[w]e do not decide constitutional questions except when necessary to do so in order to dispose of the case at bar"); Minn. Baptist Convention v. Pillsbury Acad., 246 Minn. 46, 62, 74 N.W.2d 286, 296 (1955) (stating that "[u]nder well-settled rules the court refrains from deciding, where it is unnecessary to do so, constitutional and other legal questions"); State v. One Oldsmobile Two-Door Sedan, Model 1946, 227 Minn. 280, 288, 35 N.W.2d 525, 530 (1948) (stating that "[c]ourts will not decide questions relating to the constitutionality of statutes unless it is absolutely necessary to do so"). In light of our ruling that Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a, is not ambiguous as applied to Hare, we need not reach the district court's application of the constitutional vagueness doctrine[2] to this case. See Hoyt, 304 N.W.2d at 888 (stating that constitutional questions are decided only if necessary to dispose of case).
Hare argues that the definition for "gender reassignment services" adopted by DHS in its 1995 policy clarification failed to adhere to rulemaking requirements. A rule is "every agency statement of general applicability and future effect." Minn.Stat. § 14.02, subd. 4 (2002). An agency must promulgate as rules all formal and informal procedures "to the extent that those procedures directly affect the rights of or procedures available to the public." Minn.Stat. § 14.06(a) (2002). The 1995 policy clarification stated that "gender reassignment services include hormone therapy and sex reassignment surgery." Our review of this language establishes that the policy clarification provides no greater definition of "gender reassignment services" than the statute itself. By using the term "include," the policy clarification, like the statute, does not exclude Hare's pre-July 1998 treatment for gender dysphoria and chemical-dependency treatment. In the absence of any limiting language, the policy merely includes hormone *434 therapy and sex reassignment surgery in the definition of "gender reassignment services;" but the definition is not limited to these components. Because we do not rely on the policy clarification for our analysis of the statute's plain language, we need not reach the issue of whether proper rulemaking procedures were followed.
DECISION
The phrase "gender reassignment services" in Minn.Stat. § 256B.0625, subd. 3a (2002), includes treatment for gender dysphoria and chemical-dependency treatment that must be completed in order to receive hormone therapy and gender reassignment surgery. Because Hare began "gender reassignment services" prior to July 1, 1998, she meets the statutory coverage requirements for gender reassignment surgery.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  "Gender dysphoria" is a "psychological state whereby a person demonstrates dissatisfaction with their sex of birth and the sex role, as socially defined, which applies to that sex, and who requests hormonal and surgical sex reassignment." The Harry Benjamin Standards of Care for Gender Dysphoric Persons (1990). The Benjamin Standards, which UCare uses when it reviews a request for coverage of gender reassignment surgery, "are protocols used by qualified professionals in the United States to treat individuals suffering from gender identity disorders." Kosilek v. Maloney, 221 F.Supp.2d 156, 158 (D.Mass.2002).
[2]  See St. Cloud Newspapers, Inc. v. Dist. 742 Cmty. Schs., 332 N.W.2d 1, 7 (Minn.1983) (stating that "[a] statute is impermissibly vague when `men of common intelligence must necessarily guess at its meaning'" (quoting Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601, 607, 93 S.Ct. 2908, 2913, 37 L.Ed.2d 830 (1973))); Humenansky v. Minn. Bd. of Med. Exam'rs., 525 N.W.2d 559, 564 (Minn.App.1994) (stating that a phrase is unconstitutionally vague only when its meaning "is neither commonly understood nor established by judicial construction" (citing Minn.Stat. § 645.08(1) (1992))), review denied (Minn. Feb. 14, 1995); but see Nyeholt v. Secretary of Veterans Affairs, 298 F.3d 1350, 1357 (Fed.Cir.2002) (stating that where statute defining eligibility for veterans medical benefits "[did] not purport to define what is lawful and unlawful conduct," veteran's petition "fail[ed] to present a constitutional challenge that is cognizable under the void-for-vagueness doctrine"); Woodruff v. United States, 954 F.2d 634, 642 (11th Cir.1992) (stating that challenge to provision in procedural manual determining injured employee's eligibility for compensation under Federal Employees' Compensation Act was meritless because the provision was mere interpretive rule and did not attempt to guide conduct).

=== CASE 2219194 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:04.913011+00 ===

588 N.E.2d 1126 (1992)
146 Ill. 2d 413
167 Ill. Dec. 996
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Appellant and Cross-Appellee,
v.
Lawrence ANDREWS, Appellee and Cross-Appellant.
No. 67718.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
February 20, 1992.
*1130 Roland W. Burris, Atty. Gen., Springfield, and Jack O'Malley, State's Atty., Chicago (Terence M. Madsen, Asst. Atty. Gen., Chicago, and Renee Goldfarb, Randall Roberts and Marilyn Schlesinger, Asst. State's Attys., of counsel), for the People.
Michael J. Pelletier, Deputy Defender, and Kenneth L. Jones, Asst. App. Defender, of the Office of the State App. Defender, Chicago, for appellee and cross-appellant.
Justice BILANDIC delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Lawrence Andrews, was convicted in a jury trial of murder (Ill.Rev. Stat.1987), ch. 38, par. 9-1), armed robbery (Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 38, par. 18-2), and aggravated battery (Ill.Rev.Stat.1987, ch. 38, par. 12-4). The trial court sentenced defendant to an extended term of 70 years' imprisonment on the murder conviction, 30 years' imprisonment on the armed robbery conviction, and 5 years' imprisonment on the aggravated battery conviction. Subsequent to defendant's trial, but during the pendency of his direct appeals, the United States Supreme Court handed down its decision in Batson v. Kentucky (1986), 476 U.S. 79, 106 S. Ct. 1712, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69. On defendant's first appeal, the appellate court held that defendant had established a prima facie case of discrimination in the selection of his jury in violation of Batson. The appellate court remanded the cause to the trial court with directions to conduct a hearing to allow the State to come forward with race-neutral reasons for the use of its peremptory challenges. (People v. Andrews (1988), 172 Ill.App.3d 394, 122 Ill. Dec. 369, 526 N.E.2d 628.) On the parties' cross-appeals to this court, we held that defendant was not eligible for an extended-term sentence and that the appellate court erred in deciding the Batson prima facie case issue. (People v. Andrews (1989), 132 Ill. 2d 451, 139 Ill. Dec. 469, 548 N.E.2d 1025 (Andrews I).) We retained jurisdiction over the matter and remanded the cause to the trial court for a hearing to allow defendant to attempt to establish a prima facie case of racial discrimination under Batson. The trial court conducted a hearing and determined that defendant had failed to establish a prima facie case. The trial court proceeded to resentence defendant to 40 years' imprisonment for murder, 20 years' imprisonment for armed robbery, to run consecutively, and 5 years' imprisonment for aggravated battery, to run concurrently. We granted defendant's motion to set a briefing schedule in this court, limiting the issues to those concerning defendant's jury selection only.
The limited nature of our review requires only a brief recitation of the facts. Additional procedural facts will be discussed as needed in our analysis of each issue. On February 20, 1984, the murder victim, Richard Steinbrecher, and his girlfriend, Angela Atiles, exited the Eisenhower Expressway in their automobile and stopped at a traffic signal. While they waited for the light to change, two men, one of whom Atiles identified as defendant, approached the vehicle. Defendant entered the automobile and pointed a gun at both occupants. Defendant then fatally shot Steinbrecher, hit Atiles in the eye with the gun and demanded money from Atiles. Atiles gave defendant *1131 all the money she had and defendant and the other man left.
Two issues are presented for our review: (1) whether the trial court improperly prevented defendant from presenting certain testimony at the Batson hearing; and (2) whether the trial court's determination that defendant had failed to establish a prima facie case was against the manifest weight of the evidence.
I
Defendant first contends that the trial court erroneously prevented defendant from presenting certain testimony at the Batson hearing. Defendant was tried twice for the crimes perpetrated upon Steinbrecher and Atiles. At the first trial, defendant's codefendant was acquitted of murder and the jury was unable to reach a verdict on the issue of defendant's guilt. Defendant's second trial commenced in January 1986 and resulted in defendant's convictions. The same prosecutors and the same defense attorneys participated in both trials.
At the Batson hearing conducted pursuant to this court's mandate, defendant presented the testimony of the attorney who represented him at both trials, Donald Bertelle. Defendant attempted to elicit from Bertelle testimony regarding an alleged conversation Bertelle had engaged in with members of defendant's first (hung) jury after the mistrial was declared. The State's objection to this line of questioning was sustained. After the objection was sustained, defense counsel made the following statement: "[J]ust for the record I would introduce that or offer that to show if in fact the prosecutors were present this goes into their thinking when selecting the second jury." Defense counsel then proceeded to continue her examination of Bertelle, without revisiting that line of questioning.
Defendant asserts that the trial court erroneously sustained the State's objection to this testimony. Defendant argues that the offered testimony would have revealed that the prosecutors heard something during that conversation which might have led them to believe that the presence of blacks on the first jury contributed to the failure to convict. Thus, the argument goes, the prosecutors would then have had a motive to discriminate against blacks in choosing the second jury. Defendant points out that Batson directs that a trial court should consider "all relevant circumstances" in resolving the prima facie case issue. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 96, 106 S. Ct. at 1723, 90 L.Ed.2d at 87-88.) Defendant argues that this evidence was a relevant factor which should have been considered in determining whether he had established a prima facie case.
The essence of defendant's argument is that evidence he attempted to present was wrongly excluded. It is well recognized that the key to saving for review an error in the exclusion of evidence is an adequate offer of proof in the trial court. (See People v. Jackson (1989), 180 Ill.App.3d 78, 91, 129 Ill. Dec. 321, 535 N.E.2d 1086; Yassin v. Certified Grocers of Illinois, Inc. (1986), 150 Ill.App.3d 1052, 1066, 104 Ill. Dec. 52, 502 N.E.2d 315; M. Graham, Cleary & Graham's Handbook of Illinois Evidence § 103.7, at 19 (5th ed. 1990).) The purpose of an offer of proof is to disclose to the trial judge and opposing counsel the nature of the offered evidence and to enable a reviewing court to determine whether exclusion of the evidence was proper. (Jackson, 180 Ill.App.3d at 91, 129 Ill. Dec. 321, 535 N.E.2d 1086.) The failure to make an adequate offer of proof results in a waiver of the issue on appeal. Jackson, 180 Ill.App.3d at 91, 129 Ill. Dec. 321, 535 N.E.2d 1086; M. Graham, Cleary & Graham's Handbook of Illinois Evidence § 103.7, at 20 (5th ed. 1990).
Where an objection is sustained to the offered testimony of a witness, an adequate offer of proof is made if counsel makes known to the trial court, with particularity, the substance of the witness' anticipated answer. (M. Graham, Cleary & Graham's Handbook of Illinois Evidence § 103.7, at 21 (5th ed. 1990).) An offer of proof that merely summarizes the witness' testimony in a conclusory manner is inadequate. (Mulhern v. Talk of the Town, Inc. *1132 (1985), 138 Ill.App.3d 829, 834, 93 Ill. Dec. 282, 486 N.E.2d 383.) Neither will the unsupported speculation of counsel as to what the witness would say suffice. (Yassin, 150 Ill.App.3d at 1066, 104 Ill. Dec. 52, 502 N.E.2d 315.) Rather, in making the offer of proof, counsel must explicitly state what the excluded testimony would reveal and may not merely allude to what might be divulged by the testimony. (People v. Brown (1982), 104 Ill.App.3d 1110, 1119, 60 Ill. Dec. 843, 433 N.E.2d 1081.) The offer serves no purpose if it does not demonstrate, both to the trial court and to reviewing courts, the admissibility of the testimony which was foreclosed by the sustained objection. People ex rel. Fahner v. Hedrich (1982), 108 Ill.App.3d 83, 91, 63 Ill. Dec. 782, 438 N.E.2d 924.
We find that, in the instant case, defense counsel failed to make an adequate offer of proof as to the substance of Bertelle's testimony concerning the alleged conversation. Defense counsel's sole "offer of proof," if it can be termed that, consisted of her statement that "if in fact the prosecutors were present this goes into their thinking when selecting the second jury." No specifics were offered concerning the content of the statements that were made during the alleged conversation. In fact, no offer whatsoever was made as to what was said in this conversation. There is thus no record from which this court can determine if the excluded evidence had any relevance to the proceedings at hand. Defense counsel's statement amounted to no more than mere speculation as to what she believed the relevancy of the testimony might be, without any reference to what the testimony would actually consist of. Such speculation is not sufficient to preserve the issue for review. (See Yassin, 150 Ill.App.3d at 1066, 104 Ill. Dec. 52, 502 N.E.2d 315.) We thus conclude that defendant's failure to make an adequate offer of proof resulted in the waiver of this issue on appeal.
II
Defendant next argues that the trial court erred in determining that defendant had failed to establish a prima facie case of discriminatory jury selection. Defendant, who is black, contends that the evidence was sufficient to raise the inference that the prosecution had used its peremptory challenges to exclude black venire-persons based solely on their race.
As noted, defendant's second trial commenced in January 1986. Following the voir dire and selection of defendant's jury, defense counsel made a motion for a mistrial on the grounds that the prosecution had used its peremptory challenges to exclude blacks from the jury based solely on their race. The trial court, relying on pre-Batson law, denied defendant's motion.
Prior to the United States Supreme Court's decision in Batson v. Kentucky (1986), 476 U.S. 79, 106 S. Ct. 1712, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69, a defendant could obtain a reversal based upon racially discriminatory jury selection only by establishing a systematic and purposeful pattern of excluding venire members on the ground of race in "case after case, whatever the circumstances, whatever the crime and whoever the defendant or the victim may be." (Swain v. Alabama (1965), 380 U.S. 202, 223, 85 S. Ct. 824, 837, 13 L. Ed. 2d 759, 774.) The evidentiary burden enunciated in Swain was in effect at the time of both of defendant's trials. During the pendency of defendant's direct appeals, Batson, was handed down and a new test for discriminatory exclusion was announced.
In Batson, the Supreme Court reaffirmed the principle "that the State denies a black defendant equal protection of the laws when it puts him on trial before a jury from which members of his race have been purposefully excluded." (Batson, 476 U.S. at 85, 106 S. Ct. at 1716, 90 L.Ed.2d at 80.) Batson held that a defendant could establish a case of racial discrimination in the selection of his jury solely on evidence concerning the prosecutor's use of peremptory challenges at defendant's own trial. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 96, 106 S. Ct. at 1723, 90 L.Ed.2d at 87.) The Supreme Court subsequently announced in Griffith v. Kentucky (1987), 479 U.S. 314, 107 S. Ct. 708, 93 L. Ed. 2d 649, that the rule of Batson would *1133 apply to all cases that were pending on direct review at the time of the Batson decision. In light of the new and substantially altered evidentiary burden announced in Batson, this court, on defendant's first appeal, held that defendant was entitled to a second opportunity to make his case for discriminatory jury selection. Accordingly, we remanded this cause to the trial court for an evidentiary hearing on the Batson issue.
Batson established a two-step procedure for the resolution of a defendant's claim that the prosecution used its peremptory challenges in a racially discriminatory manner. First, the defendant must establish a prima facie case of purposeful discrimination in the selection of his jury. Once the defendant makes a prima facie showing, the burden shifts to the State to come forward with a race-neutral explanation for challenging each of the venirepersons. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 96-97, 106 S.Ct. at 1723, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 87-88.) The trial court must then consider those explanations and determine if the defendant has established purposeful discrimination. Batson, 476 U.S. at 98, 106 S. Ct. at 1724, 90 L.Ed.2d at 88-89.
A prima facie showing of discrimination under Batson requires that the defendant raise the inference that the prosecutor exercised peremptory challenges to remove venire members based upon their race. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 96, 106 S. Ct. at 1723, 90 L.Ed.2d at 87; People v. Edwards (1991), 144 Ill. 2d 108, 161 Ill. Dec. 788, 579 N.E.2d 336.) The defendant is entitled to rely on the fact that peremptory challenges "constitute a jury selection practice that permits `those to discriminate who are of a mind to discriminate.'" (Batson, 476 U.S. at 96, 106 S. Ct. at 1723, 90 L.Ed.2d at 87, quoting Avery v. Georgia (1953), 345 U.S. 559, 562, 73 S. Ct. 891, 892, 97 L. Ed. 1244, 1247-48.) The defendant must establish that this fact and the relevant circumstances of his case raise an inference of racial discrimination by the State in the selection of the defendant's jury. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 96, 106 S. Ct. at 1723, 90 L.Ed.2d at 87-88.) Batson mandates that the trial court should consider "all relevant circumstances" in determining whether the requisite showing has been made. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 96, 106 S. Ct. at 1723, 90 L.Ed.2d at 87-88.) This court has determined that the standard for reviewing a trial court's decision on this issue is whether the determination is against the manifest weight of the evidence. People v. Mahaffey (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 388, 413, 132 Ill. Dec. 366, 539 N.E.2d 1172; People v. Evans (1988), 125 Ill. 2d 50, 64, 125 Ill. Dec. 790, 530 N.E.2d 1360.
Under Batson, in order to establish a prima facie case of discriminatory jury selection, a defendant had to show that he was a member of a cognizable racial group and that the prosecutor had exercised peremptory challenges to remove from the venire members of the defendant's race. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 96, 106 S. Ct. at 1723, 90 L.Ed.2d at 87.) The United States Supreme Court eliminated this requirement in Powers v. Ohio (1991), 499 U.S. ___, 111 S. Ct. 1364, 113 L. Ed. 2d 411, where it held that "a criminal defendant may object to race-based exclusions of jurors effected through peremptory challenges whether or not the defendant and the excluded juror share the same race." (Powers, 499 U.S. at ___, 111 S.Ct. at 1366, 113 L. Ed. 2d at 419.) Thus, in light of Powers, a defendant is no longer required to show that he is a member of a cognizable racial group whose members have been excluded in order to have standing to pursue a Batson claim. (See Edwards, 144 Ill.2d at 152, 161 Ill. Dec. 788, 579 N.E.2d 336.) However, we find that racial identity between the defendant and the excluded venireperson, while not required, remains a relevant factor in determining if a prima facie case of discrimination has been established. (See Powers, 499 U.S. at ___, 111 S.Ct. at 1373-74, 113 L. Ed. 2d at 429.) As noted, defendant herein is black and he is challenging the prosecution's exclusion of black venirepersons. That circumstance supports the finding of a prima facie case of racial discrimination in the selection of defendant's jury.
In addition to shared race, a number of other factors are relevant in determining *1134 whether a prima facie case of discriminatory jury selection has been established. These factors include:
"a `pattern' of strikes against black jurors; `the prosecutor's questions and statements during voir dire examination and in exercising his challenges' [citations]; the disproportionate use of peremptory challenges against blacks [citations]; the level of black representation in the venire as compared to the jury [citations]; whether the excluded blacks were a heterogeneous group sharing race as their only common characteristic [citation]; the race of the defendant and victim [citations]; and the race of the witnesses [citation]." Evans, 125 Ill.2d at 63-64, 125 Ill. Dec. 790, 530 N.E.2d 1360.
The trial judge in the case at bar determined that defendant had failed to establish a prima facie case of racial discrimination. In making this ruling, the trial judge relied almost exclusively on his observations regarding the prosecutors involved and the local conditions in Cook County. The judge first observed that these prosecutors had practiced before him on numerous occasions and that he believed that they were not racially prejudiced persons. The judge also stated that "every" jury in his courtroom included a number of black jurors and that the percentage of black representation on those juries usually exceeded the percentage of blacks in Cook County. The record contains no data from which the accuracy of the judge's observations on these statistics can be verified. The judge went on to comment that he found that middle-class blacks generally make strong State jurors. The judge also referred to the fact that three black jurors sat on defendant's jury and that one of those three was an older man who was, in the judge's opinion, a very strong person. Finally, the judge stated that certain "intangibles," which he could not articulate, led him to rule against a prima facie case. The judge made no reference to any of the other relevant considerations that determine whether a prima facie case has been established. At the hearing on defendant's motion to reconsider, the trial judge stated that his ruling was "primarily" based upon the fact that he, as the trial judge, was in a "superior position" to determine whether a prima facie case had been established, and went on to reiterate his observations regarding the prosecutors and the local conditions in the county.
Defendant argues that the trial judge improperly overemphasized his observations concerning the prosecutors and the conditions in Cook County and neglected to adequately consider the other relevant factors mandated by this court's decisions. We agree.
It is apparent from the trial judge's oral ruling that he placed far too much emphasis on these "observations," to the exclusion of other relevant factors. Aside from his statements regarding his experience with the prosecutors and the local conditions, the trial judge made no mention of any of the factors which this court has found to be relevant to the prima facie case analysis. Specifically, the judge made no analysis of: whether a "pattern" of strikes against blacks was present (Batson, 476 U.S. at 97, 106 S. Ct. at 1723, 90 L.Ed.2d at 88); whether the State had made a disproportionate use of its strikes against blacks (Evans, 125 Ill.2d at 63, 125 Ill. Dec. 790, 530 N.E.2d 1360); whether the excluded venirepersons were a heterogeneous group (People v. McDonald (1988), 125 Ill. 2d 182, 196, 125 Ill. Dec. 781, 530 N.E.2d 1351); whether prosecutorial statements indicated racial motivation (Batson, 476 U.S. at 97, 106 S. Ct. at 1723, 90 L.Ed.2d at 88); whether the level of black representation on the venire as compared to the jury indicated racial discrimination (Mahaffey, 128 Ill.2d at 413, 132 Ill. Dec. 366, 539 N.E.2d 1172); or whether the crimes with which defendant was charged were interracial (Evans, 125 Ill.2d at 66, 125 Ill. Dec. 790, 530 N.E.2d 1360).
While the trial judge's experience with local prosecutors and knowledge of local conditions are relevant factors in a prima facie case analysis, this court has never intimated that such considerations are dispositive of this issue. We find that the trial judge erred in failing to consider all of *1135 the relevant factors in determining whether a prima facie case had been established. See People v. Holman (1989), 132 Ill. 2d 128, 173, 138 Ill. Dec. 155, 547 N.E.2d 124 (holding that the trial judge erred in not considering factors other than the number of black venirepersons excluded in ruling on the defendant's prima facie case).
We thus conclude that the trial judge's ruling on defendant's prima facie case was based upon an improperly limited consideration of the evidence. We further find that the ruling is contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. We note that the standard we apply in reviewing the trial judge's determination on this issue is not whether the judge abused his discretion. Rather, it is our role to review the evidence in its entirety and to determine if the trial judge's ruling is against the manifest weight of the evidence. (Mahaffey, 128 Ill.2d at 413, 132 Ill. Dec. 366, 539 N.E.2d 1172.) Where the record reveals that the opposite conclusion is clearly warranted or that the trial judge's determination is unreasonable and not based upon the evidence, we have a duty to reverse that determination. (Lynch v. Board of Education of Collinsville Community Unit District No. 10 (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 415, 423, 45 Ill. Dec. 96, 412 N.E.2d 447; Netzel v. United Parcel Service, Inc. (1989), 181 Ill.App.3d 808, 812, 130 Ill. Dec. 879, 537 N.E.2d 1348.) Our review of the evidence in light of all the relevant factors reveals that a prima facie case of discrimination under Batson was clearly established and that the trial court's ruling was contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence.
The evidence in this case established a "pattern" of strikes by the State against black venire members. The record reveals the following evidence pertinent to this factor. While making his motion for a mistrial following the voir dire of defendant's second jury, defense counsel stated that "the record should also show that the State exercised eight out of the eight peremptories against blacks." The State neither objected to this statement nor made a contrary statement for the record. At the Batson hearing, defendant's trial counsel Bertelle gave sworn testimony that the State had used eight out of eight peremptory challenges to exclude black venire members.
A "pattern" of strikes is created where the strikes affect members of a certain race to such a degree or with such a lack of apparent nonracial motivation that it suggests the possibility of racial motivation. The record shows that the prosecution exercised a total of eight peremptory challenges and that all of those challenges were directed toward black venirepersons. We find that the State's use of all of its challenges to exclude black venirepersons is strongly suggestive of racial motivation and thus constitutes a "pattern" of strikes against black venire members. See People v. Harris (1989), 129 Ill. 2d 123, 173, 135 Ill. Dec. 861, 544 N.E.2d 357 (State's use of 15 out of 20 peremptory challenges to exclude blacks constituted a "pattern" of strikes against blacks); McDonald, 125 Ill.2d at 196, 125 Ill. Dec. 781, 530 N.E.2d 1351 (State's use of 16 out of 18 peremptory challenges to strike blacks constituted a "pattern" of strikes against blacks).
The State argues that the evidence was insufficient to establish the number of strikes used by the State to exclude black venirepersons. However, this court has previously found that the sworn testimony of trial counsel at a Batson hearing should be considered as evidence of the number of strikes exercised against black venirepersons. (McDonald, 125 Ill.2d at 197-98, 125 Ill. Dec. 781, 530 N.E.2d 1351.) Moreover, in Andrews I, this court recognized that defense counsel herein had made a record as to the number of strikes used against black venirepersons in the form of his statement following the original voir dire. (Andrews I, 132 Ill.2d at 460, 139 Ill. Dec. 469, 548 N.E.2d 1025.) The State offered no evidence to contradict defendant's evidence on this factor. Most significantly, the State offered no objection or correction when defense counsel stated for the record, at the original voir dire, that the State had exercised eight out of eight peremptory challenges against blacks. Had the State disagreed with that *1136 number, it should have made its own record as to the "correct" number. We conclude that the evidence was more than sufficient to establish that the State exercised eight out of eight strikes against black venirepersons. The State suggests that defendant should have been required to call the excluded venirepersons to testify at the Batson hearing to establish their race. To require a defendant to locate and subpoena excluded venire members in cases such as this, where the Batson hearing is conducted years after the trial, would impose an unreasonably onerous burden on the defendant. We find that the contemporaneous making of a record as to the number of black venirepersons excluded, combined with the uncontradicted sworn testimony of trial counsel, is sufficient to establish this number.
The evidence in this case also demonstrated the disproportionate use of strikes by the State against black venire members. The number of blacks stricken compared to the number of nonblacks stricken may reveal whether a disproportionate number of strikes was used to exclude blacks. (See Evans, 125 Ill.2d at 65, 125 Ill. Dec. 790, 530 N.E.2d 1360; Holman, 132 Ill.2d at 176, 138 Ill. Dec. 155, 547 N.E.2d 124.) Here, 100% of the State's peremptory challenges were exercised against black venire members, with 0% being exercised to exclude nonblack venire members. This huge disparity certainly constitutes the disproportionate use of strikes against black venirepersons.
Thus, the State's use of eight out of eight peremptory challenges to exclude black venirepersons demonstrates both a pattern of strikes, and the disproportionate use of strikes, against black venire members. These two very relevant factors are strongly suggestive of the inference of discrimination required for a prima facie case. We are conscious that, in determining whether a prima facie case has been made, a court should consider more than simply the number of black venire members excluded. (People v. Young (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 1, 19, 131 Ill. Dec. 78, 538 N.E.2d 453.) However, the significance of figures such as these cannot be disregarded. A prosecutor's use of 100% of his peremptory challenges to exclude black venirepersons is a factor weighing heavily in favor of a finding that the inference of discrimination was raised. (See People v. Daniels (1987), 164 Ill.App.3d 138, 115 Ill. Dec. 215, 517 N.E.2d 626 (prima facie case established where State used six out of seven peremptory strikes to exclude blacks); People v. Cannon (1987), 153 Ill.App.3d 245, 106 Ill. Dec. 481, 505 N.E.2d 1272 (prima facie case established where State used five out of six peremptory strikes to exclude blacks).) However, we are by no means relying on those numbers alone in reaching our determination that a prima facie case was established.
The heterogeneity of the peremptorily excluded black venire members is also a circumstance that is highly relevant for Batson purposes. (McDonald, 125 Ill.2d at 197, 125 Ill. Dec. 781, 530 N.E.2d 1351.) The excluded venirepersons in this case were a diverse group, with no apparent shared characteristics aside from race distinguishing them from the accepted nonblack jurors. The excluded venire members included five males and three females ranging in age from 26 to 54. Three of the venire members were married, three were divorced, and two were single. Three of the venire members were childless and the others had parented from one to 10 children. Three of the venirepersons owned homes while five rented. Four members of the group had been crime victims themselves, or had crime victims within their family. The other four had never been crime victims nor had any member of their families. The diverse occupations of the eight excluded venire members consisted of plumber, secretary/sales representative, shoe store manager, baker, laid-off lamp polisher, housewife, unemployed welfare recipient, and unemployed truck driver. Thus, the prosecutor's challenges resulted in the exclusion of a group that was "`as heterogeneous as the community as a whole,' sharing race as their only common characteristic". McDonald, 125 Ill.2d at 197, 125 Ill. Dec. 781, 530 N.E.2d 1351; see *1137 also Harris, 129 Ill.2d at 173, 135 Ill. Dec. 861, 544 N.E.2d 357.
The State argues that the excluded venire members shared characteristics other than race and points to the fact that all eight were or had been engaged in nonprofessional occupations. This is an accurate observation. However, the record reveals that all 12 of the venirepersons that were impaneled as jury members were also engaged in nonprofessional occupations. Thus, the lack of professional status was not a common characteristic of the excluded venirepersons that distinguished them from the accepted nonblack jurors. Cf. Holman, 132 Ill.2d at 176, 138 Ill. Dec. 155, 547 N.E.2d 124 (excluded blacks not a heterogeneous group because three of the four shared a nonracial characteristic that was not shared by the impaneled nonblack jurors); see also People v. Johnson (1990), 199 Ill.App.3d 798, 804, 145 Ill. Dec. 795, 557 N.E.2d 565 (excluded venirepersons were a heterogeneous group even though several of them shared one characteristic, because this characteristic was also shared by several of the accepted nonblack jurors); but see People v. Henderson (1990), 142 Ill. 2d 258, 290, 154 Ill. Dec. 785, 568 N.E.2d 1234 (excluded venirepersons not a heterogeneous group because they shared some characteristics other than race, even though several of the accepted white jurors shared those characteristics as well).
The State also argues that five of the excluded venirepersons had some contact with the legal system; four had been crime victims, or someone in their family had been a crime victim, and one's wife was a legal secretary. The State fails to consider, however, that 6 out of the 12 accepted jurors also had some contact with the legal system; five had been crime victims, or someone in their family had been a crime victim, and one was a court reporter. Thus, we find that the excluded black venirepersons were a heterogeneous group with race as their only common characteristic distinguishing them from the accepted nonblack jurors.
Furthermore, it is highly significant that the crimes with which defendant was charged were interracial in nature. The racial characteristics of a crime are important factors to be considered by the trial court in determining whether a prima facie case has been established. (See Evans, 125 Ill.2d at 66, 125 Ill. Dec. 790, 530 N.E.2d 1360.) Here, defendant is black and the victims were white. In addition, one of the white victims testified as an eyewitness at defendant's trial. The potential for racial discrimination in the selection of a jury is undisputedly heightened where the defendant is black and the victims and the key prosecution witness are white. (See Henderson, 142 Ill.2d at 289, 154 Ill. Dec. 785, 568 N.E.2d 1234.) Thus, the interracial nature of the crimes with which defendant was charged supports the inference that the prosecutors' peremptory challenges were racially motivated.
We conclude that the above factors, in combination, were more than sufficient to raise the inference of discrimination required to establish a prima facie case under Batson. The evidence presented an interracial crime, a "pattern" of strikes against blacks, the disproportionate use of strikes against blacks, and an excluded group of black venirepersons that was "as heterogeneous as the community as a whole." The trial judge's contrary determination was against the manifest weight of the evidence.
We note that the fact that three black venirepersons were impaneled on defendant's jury, while relevant, is by no means dispositive of this issue. The inquiry in this case is whether the State discriminated against the eight excluded black venirepersons, not whether the State failed to discriminate against the three accepted black jurors. Batson teaches that the equal protection clause is violated when the State excludes a black venireperson on the assumption that he will be biased in favor of the defendant simply because of their shared race. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 97, 106 S. Ct. at 1723, 90 L.Ed.2d at 88.) Thus, if the State excludes one black venireperson on that basis, regardless of how many black venirepersons are not excluded, the *1138 rule of Batson is violated. This court as well has repeatedly recognized that "the exclusion of even just one minority venireperson on account of race is unconstitutional and would require reversal of the conviction below." Harris, 129 Ill.2d at 175, 135 Ill. Dec. 861, 544 N.E.2d 357; see also McDonald, 125 Ill.2d at 200, 125 Ill. Dec. 781, 530, N.E.2d 1351.) Thus, the complete exclusion of a racial group is not required for a prima facie case to be established under Batson. (See Harris, 129 Ill.2d at 173-74, 135 Ill. Dec. 861, 544 N.E.2d 357 (prima facie case established even though two black jurors sat on the defendant's jury); People v. Mack (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 231, 238, 131 Ill. Dec. 551, 538 N.E.2d 1107 (prima facie case established even though one black juror sat on defendant's jury); People v. Seals (1987), 153 Ill.App.3d 417, 423, 106 Ill. Dec. 316, 505 N.E.2d 1107 (prima facie case established despite the presence of one black juror on the defendant's jury); People v. Chevalier (1987), 159 Ill.App.3d 341, 350, 111 Ill. Dec. 460, 512 N.E.2d 1001 (presence of black jurors on the defendant's jury does not insulate the prosecution from a Batson claim).) Were this not the rule, prosecutors could immunize themselves from Batson claims by allowing one or two minority venirepersons to be impaneled. (People v. Johnson (1987), 159 Ill. App. 3d 991, 996, 112 Ill. Dec. 243, 513 N.E.2d 852.) We thus do not believe that the presence of three black jurors on defendant's jury is sufficient to defeat the prima facie case of racial discrimination established by the evidence.
The State points out that defendant failed to establish the number of blacks that were on the jury venire. Therefore, a comparison of that number to the number of blacks impaneled could not be made. It is true that, under this court's precedents, such a comparison is a relevant factor on this issue. (Evans, 125 Ill.2d at 64, 125 Ill. Dec. 790, 530 N.E.2d 1360.) However, we do not believe that the absence of this figure overcomes the strong evidence which weighs in favor of a prima facie case. We note that the State does not provide the missing figure and thus cannot contend that the comparison would weigh against a prima facie case. Rather, the State argues that the absence of this figure should, by itself, negate a prima facie case. We disagree. We find that the absence of evidence on this figure renders it a neutral factor in this determination.
The State further argues that the trial judge's determination that no prima facie case was established was sufficiently supported by the judge's observations regarding the character of the prosecutors and his knowledge of "local conditions." This court has recognized that trial judges are "`familiar with local conditions and prosecutors, and can draw upon [his] power of observation and judicial experience as a guide in distinguishing a true case of discrimination from a false one.'" (Andrews I, 132 Ill.2d at 463, 139 Ill. Dec. 469, 548 N.E.2d 1025, quoting Evans, 125 Ill.2d at 67, 125 Ill. Dec. 790, 530 N.E.2d 1360.) However, as noted, we believe that the trial judge in this case improperly placed far too much emphasis on these considerations to the exclusion of the other relevant factors mandated by this court's precedents. Under the teaching of Batson, we cannot hold that the prosecutors' alleged failure to previously act in a discriminatory manner is dispositive of this issue. The Court in Batson emphasized that a prosecutor's discriminatory act is not "`immunized by the absence of such discrimination in the making of other comparable decisions.'" (Batson, 476 U.S. at 95, 106 S. Ct. at 1722, 90 L.Ed.2d at 87, quoting Village of Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Housing Development Corp. (1977), 429 U.S. 252, 266 n. 14, 97 S. Ct. 555, 564 n. 14, 50 L. Ed. 2d 450, 465 n. 14.) With all appropriate deference to the trial judge's findings regarding the "local conditions" and the personalities of the prosecutors, we find that his observations were not sufficient to negate the prima facie case clearly established by the overwhelming weight of the evidence. We thus hold that defendant established a prima facie case of racial discrimination under Batson.
Accordingly, for the aforesaid reasons, we reverse the trial court's determination that defendant failed to establish a prima *1139 facie case of discrimination in the selection of his jury. Pursuant to this court's supervisory authority, we retain jurisdiction and remand this cause to the circuit court of Cook County for a hearing to allow the State to come forward with race-neutral explanations for the use of its peremptory challenges. The trial court shall determine whether the State's explanations are sufficient to rebut defendant's prima facie case. The trial court shall make appropriate findings of fact and conclusions of law and shall file those findings and conclusions with the clerk of this court within 60 days of this decision together with a record of the proceedings on remand.
Circuit court reversed; remanded with directions.
FREEMAN, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 9739267 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:31.779077+00 ===

JUSTICE MORAN delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant, Vincent Patterson, a prison inmate serving a natural life sentence for offenses unrelated to this case, was indicted for the unlawful possession of a weapon by a person confined in a correctional facility. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 24—1.1(b).) At trial, defendant moved to suppress statements he made to a prison official investigating the weapons incident, claiming that he had not been given Miranda warnings before the questioning. (Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 86 S. Ct. 1602.) The circuit court of Livingston County granted defendant’s motion to suppress. The appellate court affirmed the order of suppression, with one justice dissenting. (207 Ill. App. 3d 104.) This court allowed the State’s petition for leave to appeal (134 Ill. 2d R. 315). Briefs in support of the State’s position have been filed by amici curiae, the Lincoln Legal Foundation and the Illinois Department of Corrections. This case presents the question of whether a prison inmate must be given Miranda warnings prior to interviews with prison officials who are investigating security matters within the prison. For the reasons below, we hold that, under the circumstances peculiar to this case, such warnings need not be given. While serving a natural life sentence at the Pontiac Correctional Center in Pontiac, Illinois, defendant was placed in segregation for six months after two “shanks” (knife-like instruments) were found in his one-person cell during a routine shakedown on June 29, 1989. Segregation is imposed by correctional institutions as a disciplinary measure. It limits an inmate’s access to the general prison population, and is the most restrictive type of housing available in the institution. Inmates in segregation are locked in their cells 24 hours per day; are not permitted to attend classes or job assignments; are allowed limited opportunities to shower or exercise; are riot permitted to make telephone calls; and are escorted in restraints when removed from their cells. On August 1, 1989, Richard C. Irvin, an internal investigator with the Department of Corrections (Department) at Pontiac, acting upon directions from his superiors, requested an interview with defendant to discuss his possession of the “shanks.” Irvin’s primary duty at Pontiac is to investigate incidents and prepare cases for prosecution. If defendant had refused to speak with Irvin, Irvin could not have disciplined him. However, if such were the case here, a uniformed correctional officer might have given defendant a ticket (disciplinary report). Defendant consented to the interview. Although Irvin knew that defendant was in segregation, he did not know that the segregation had been imposed as punishment for the “shanks” incident. Defendant was handcuffed and escorted to Irvin’s office. Defendant’s handcuffs were not removed until he returned to his cell. Irvin’s name and title were on the door of his office, which is in a group of offices connected to the cellhouse. The office contains a desk, three chairs, a credenza, and a filing cabinet. Irvin was dressed in civilian clothes, and was wearing a tag identifying him as an internal affairs official. No other prison personnel were in Irvin’s office during the ensuing conversation. The guard who had escorted defendant waited outside the office door during the 10-minute interview. The purpose of Irvin’s interview was to discover whether defendant had possessed the shanks in order to protect himself from enemies within the prison, and in that case whether defendant wanted to be placed in protective custody. Further, Irvin wished to determine whether defendant would have grounds for a “necessity” defense at a possible criminal trial. No charges had been filed against defendant at the time of this interview, and he was not given Miranda warnings prior to his conversation with Irvin. It is the policy of investigators at Pontiac, following instructions from the State’s Attorney of Livingston County, not to give Miranda warnings in interviews with inmates who have been found with “shanks” during a shakedown for weapons. The policy was put into effect after a prisoner brought a successful necessity defense to a charge of possession of a weapon while in the institution. Moreover, Irvin had found that inmates become “terrorized” after receiving Miranda warnings, and thus refuse to speak of their safety concerns. During the interview, defendant declined protective custody, and stated that he had no enemies at Pontiac. Although he did not specifically mention a necessity defense, defendant did indicate that he would be inclined to possess a weapon because he had seen a friend stabbed at another prison. Irvin did not ask defendant whether he had a shank on the day of the shakedown, and defendant did not comment on the events of that day. After the interview, defendant was taken back to segregation. On October 2, 1989, defendant was indicted for the offense of unlawful possession of weapons by a person confined in a Department facility in violation of section 24—1.1(b) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Code) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 24—1.1(b)). This is a Class 1 felony offense, and could result in additional incarceration for a term of 4 to 15 years or an extended term of 15 to 20 years. The State later filed a second charge against defendant, alleging possession of a weapon by a convicted felon in violation of section 24—1.1(a) of the Code. This charge is a Class 3 felony, carrying a potential prison term of 2 to 5 years, or an extended term of 5 to 10 years. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, pars. 24—1.1(a), (d), 1005—8—1(a)(6), 1005-8-2(a)(5). On December 18, 1989, defendant filed a motion to suppress the statements made to Irvin, contending that their use was in violation of defendant’s fifth amendment privilege against self-incrimination as defined in Miranda. The trial court heard evidence that defendant could have refused the interview with Irvin or could have terminated it at any time. However, the court was persuaded that Miranda-type warnings were required prior to the interview, because defendant had been identified as a primary suspect for an offense, and an investigation had focused on him. Thus, the court granted defendant’s motion to suppress. The State appealed. On appeal, the appellate court, with one justice dissenting, affirmed. The court found that defendant was interrogated while “in custody” for Miranda purposes. Consequently, the failure of prison authorities to give Miranda-type warnings rendered any statements by defendant inadmissible. The dissenting justice concluded that Miranda has no application to the interrogation of prison inmates. We begin our analysis with a review of the standards set out in Miranda. In Miranda, the United States Supreme Court held that when an individual is taken into custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom by the authorities in any significant way and is subjected to questioning, his fifth amendment privilege against self-incrimination is jeopardized. (U.S. Const., amend. V; Miranda, 384 U.S. at 478, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 726, 86 S. Ct. at 1630.) Procedural safeguards must be put into effect to protect the privilege; the individual must be warned prior to questioning that he has the right to remain silent, that anything he says can be used against him in court, that he has the right to an attorney, and that if he cannot afford an attorney one will be provided for him prior to questioning if he so desires. (Miranda, 384 U.S. at 479, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 726, 86 S. Ct. at 1630.) In the absence of a Miranda warning or waiver, no evidence obtained as a result of interrogation can be used against the individual. Miranda, 384 U.S. at 479, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 726, 86 S. Ct. at 1630. The Miranda safeguards arose out of a concern that individuals interrogated while in custody might incriminate themselves due to physical or psychological coercion. (Miranda, 384 U.S. at 446-58, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 707-14, 86 S. Ct. at 1613-19.) The Miranda Court pointed out that the object of custodial interrogation is to subjugate the individual to the will of his examiner. The interrogation environment “carries its own badge of intimidation.” (Miranda, 384 U.S. at 457, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 714, 86 S. Ct. at 1619.) Thus, unless adequate protective measures are employed to dispel the coercion inherent in the custodial environment, no statement obtained from the individual can truly be the product of his free choice. Miranda, 384 U.S. at 457, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 714, 86 S. Ct. at 1619. Miranda safeguards become applicable as soon as a suspect’s freedom of movement is curtailed to a “ ‘degree associated with formal arrest.’ ” (Berkemer v. McCarty (1984), 468 U.S. 420, 440, 82 L. Ed. 2d 317, 335, 104 S. Ct. 3138, 3150, quoting California v. Beheler (1983), 463 U.S. 1121, 1125, 77 L. Ed. 2d 1275, 1279, 103 S. Ct. 3517, 3520.) In Berkemer the Court determined that a traffic stop does not exert sufficient pressure upon a detained person so as to impair the free exercise of his privilege against self-incrimination. The Court distinguished such a stop from a station house interrogation, which frequently is prolonged, and in which the person interrogated feels completely at the mercy of the police. “Fidelity to the doctrine announced in Miranda requires that it be enforced strictly, but only in those types of situations in which the concerns that powered the decision are implicated.” Berkemer, 468 U.S. at 437, 82 L. Ed. 2d at 333, 104 S. Ct. at 3148-49. Miranda is particularly applicable to situations where persons whose freedom has previously not been limited are taken into a highly restricted environment for questioning. (Oregon v. Mathiason (1977), 429 U.S. 492, 495, 50 L. Ed. 2d 714, 719, 97 S. Ct. 711, 719.) However, the Supreme Court has also applied Miranda to situations where a prison inmate was questioned concerning a matter unrelated to the offense for which he was imprisoned. In Mathis v. United States (1968), 391 U.S. 1, 20 L. Ed. 2d 381, 88 S. Ct. 1503, the Court held that incriminating statements made to an Internal Revenue agent by a prison inmate were inadmissible. However, Federal courts interpreting Mathis have rejected the proposition that any interrogation during prison confinement constitutes custodial interrogation for Miranda purposes. To do so would “create a per se rule that *** could totally disrupt prison administration.” (Cervantes v. Walker (9th Cir. 1978), 589 F.2d 424, 427.) Such a rule would torture Miranda “to the illogical position of providing greater protection to a prisoner than to his nonimprisoned counterpart.” (Cervantes, 589 F.2d at 427.) In United States v. Conley (4th Cir. 1985), 779 F.2d 970, 973, the court emphasized that nothing in Miranda suggests that an inmate is “in custody” and thus entitled to Miranda warnings merely by virtue of his prisoner status. To interpret the Mathis decision in such a way “would seriously disrupt prison administration by requiring, as a prudential measure, formal warnings prior to many of the myriad informal conversations between inmates and prison guards which may touch on past or future criminal activity and which may yield potentially incriminating statements useful at trial.” Conley, 779 F.2d at 973. In Baxter v. Palmigiano (1976), 425 U.S. 308, 47 L. Ed. 2d 810, 96 S. Ct. 1551, the Court rejected the contention that, under Miranda, counsel must be provided at prison disciplinary hearings which are not part of a criminal prosecution. And, in a more recent ruling which further limits Miranda, the Court determined that a law enforcement officer posing as a fellow inmate was not required to give Miranda warnings to a suspect before asking questions that might have led to an incriminating response. (Illinois v. Perkins (1990), 496 U.S. 292, 110 L. Ed. 2d 243, 110 S. Ct. 2394.) In reaching its decision, the Court pointed out that the inmate had no reason to feel that the undercover agent had any legal authority to force him to answer questions or that the agent could affect the inmate’s future treatment. Parenthetically, the Court remarked that “[tjhe bare fact of custody may not in every instance require a warning even when the suspect is aware that he is speaking to an official, but we do not have occasion to explore that issue here.” Perkins, 496 U.S. at 299, 110 L. Ed. 2d at 252, 110 S. Ct. at 2398. The State contends that defendant was not “in custody” for Miranda purposes. Since a prisoner is never free to leave, to apply Miranda standards would be tantamount to a per se finding of custody for prison inmates. (Cervantes, 589 F.2d at 427.) The coercive effects that Miranda found to be associated with custodial interrogation arise in the prison context only if an inmate’s liberty is limited beyond the usual conditions of his confinement. Cervantes, 589 F.2d at 427. Defendant asserts that he was in custody when speaking with Irvin, as he had experienced a change of circumstances which further limited his freedom of movement. Thus, we first address the question of whether defendant, while in Irvin’s office, was “in custody,” within the meaning of Miranda. Custodial interrogation is questioning initiated by law enforcement officers after a person has been deprived of his freedom in any significant way. (People v. Brown (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 116, 124, citing Miranda, 384 U.S. at 474, 16 L. Ed. 2d at 723, 86 S. Ct. at 1627-28.) Federal courts have found that incarceration is not in itself custody. (Cervantes, 589 F.2d 424; United States v. Cooper (4th Cir. 1986), 800 F.2d 412; Leviston v. Black (8th Cir. 1988), 843 F.2d 302; United States v. Rogers (10th Cir. 1990), 899 F.2d 917.) The test in identifying police custody is whether there is a restraint on the defendant’s freedom of movement of the degree associated with a formal arrest. Brown, 136 Ill. 2d at 124, citing California v. Beheler (1983), 463 U.S. 1121, 1125, 77 L. Ed. 2d 1275, 1279, 103 S. Ct. 3517, 3520. The determination of whether an interrogation is custodial requires an examination of all the circumstances surrounding the questioning. Among the factors to be considered are: the location, length, mood and mode of the interrogation; the number of police officers present; any evidence of restraint; and the intentions of the officers and focus of their investigation. (People v. Lucas (1989), 132 Ill. 2d 399, 417.) No single factor is determinative. (People v. Fasse (1988), 174 Ill. App. 3d 457, 461.) The trial court must examine and weigh these factors and then make an objective determination as to what a reasonable man would perceive if he were in the defendant’s position. Lucas, 132 Ill. 2d at 417-18. Defendant points out that his placement in segregation had limited his freedom of movement to the greatest extent possible within the prison. He was put in restraints whenever leaving his cell, and his handcuffs were not removed during the interview with Irvin. Defendant’s argument assumes that the limitation of freedom imposed on him by his segregation was a particular limitation on him at the time of his interview with Irvin. However, defendant had been in segregation for the two previous months. Thus, when he was taken to Irvin’s office, defendant’s freedom of movement was increased rather than further limited. Defendant notes that inmates refer to their cells as their “homes.” The inference is that, by being taken from his familiar cell to Irvin’s unfamiliar office, defendant’s freedom had been further limited, as is the case when a free man is taken from his home to the station house for questioning. However, defendant fails to consider that he could have requested to leave Irvin’s office; he could not have requested to leave his cell had the questioning taken place there. Thus, in that sense, defendant’s freedom was greater in the office than in his own cell. Although defendant was escorted to the interview in restraints, his handcuffs did not place any greater burden on his freedom at that time than when he was taken in handcuffs to shower or exercise. The only factor relating to defendant’s questioning which further limited his freedom of movement was that he remained in handcuffs during the interview. Irvin has testified that handcuffs are sometimes removed from prisoners whom he questions in his office. Defendant has not alleged, in response, that he asked for his handcuffs to be removed during the interview. In light of all the circumstances related above, we conclude that defendant’s freedom of movement was not more severely restricted during the interview than it had been previously. Moreover, even where an individual is taken into custody, it is only when he is subjected to interrogation that Miranda protection must be provided. Rhode Island v. Innis (1979), 446 U.S. 291, 300, 64 L. Ed. 2d 297, 307, 100 S. Ct. 1682, 1689. “ ‘Interrogation,’ as conceptualized in the Miranda opinion, must reflect a measure of compulsion above and beyond that inherent in custody itself.” (Innis, 446 U.S. at 300, 64 L. Ed. 2d at 307, 100 S. Ct. at 1689.) “Interrogation” under Miranda refers not only to express questioning but also to any words or actions on the part of police officers that they should know are reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response. Innis, 446 U.S. at 301, 64 L. Ed. 2d at 308, 100 S. Ct. at 1689-90. Defendant contends that Irvin, acting as an agent of the police, attempted to elicit incriminating statements from him as to whether defendant could mount a necessity defense to potential weapons charges. However, Irvin did not know at the time that any such charges were contemplated. Defendant acknowledges that the questions posed by Irvin were also designed to determine whether defendant wished or needed to be placed in protective custody. Nevertheless, defendant asserts that Irvin’s motives were not benign. Defendant’s arguments are similar to those brought by the defendant in Minnesota v. Murphy (1984), 465 U.S. 420, 79 L. Ed. 2d 409, 104 S. Ct. 1136. Murphy was concerned with the admissibility in a subsequent criminal prosecution of statements made by a probationer to his probation officer. The Court found that the mere fact that the probation officer could compel the probationer’s attendance and truthful answers did not transform a routine interview into an inherently coercive setting. (Murphy, 465 U.S. at 431, 79 L. Ed. 2d at 422, 104 S. Ct. at 1144.) In answer to the probationer’s objection that the probation officer consciously sought incriminating evidence, the Court emphasized that this factor does not give rise to a self-executing privilege; police officers questioning persons suspected of crimes often seek incriminating statements. (Murphy, 465 U.S. at 431, 79 L. Ed. 2d at 422, 104 S. Ct. at 1144.) When the probationer protested that he was unprepared for the officer's questions and should have been represented by counsel, the Court likened the situation to the questioning of grand jury witnesses who are unaware of the scope of an investigation or of the fact that they are considered potential defendants. A reasonable person should have expected that his answers could incriminate him. Murphy, 465 U.S. at 432, 79 L. Ed. 2d at 422, 104 S. Ct. at 1144-45. Here, defendant, like the probationer in Murphy, does not deny that Irvin’s questions were legitimately related to defendant’s needs. Moreover, defendant, like the probationer, was not led to believe that his questioning would continue until some sort of confession was obtained. The Supreme Court found that the probationer’s statements were not coerced. Applying the Court’s criteria to this case, we find that defendant similarly was not coerced in making his statements to Irvin. The purpose of Irvin’s questioning was to determine whether defendant’s possession of the shanks was in response to fear of an attack by fellow inmates. Thus, Irvin restricted his questioning to inquiries about defendant’s safety concerns. He did not try to elicit any incriminating response from defendant. That defendant’s answers were later released to the State’s Attorney for use at trial does not in itself demonstrate that the questioning was within the scope of Miranda protection. Further, Irvin’s office was not an inherently coercive environment. No police officers were present during the interview, and Irvin was not wearing a uniform. Although defendant could have received a ticket for refusing to speak with Irvin, as he could have been given a ticket for any refusal to comply with orders given by a guard, Irvin himself had no power to impose such a disciplinary measure. Moreover, there is no indication in the record that tickets had ever been "written in similar circumstances. Irvin spoke with defendant for only 10 minutes. During the 10-minute interview, Irvin put no physical or psychological pressure on defendant to answer in one way or another. A reasonable man in defendant’s position would not have thought that his will was being subjugated to that of his questioner. After examining all the factors noted above, we find that defendant was not “in custody,” and was not coerced into incriminating himself during his interview with Irvin. Because there was no coercion, the concerns underlying Miranda are not implicated in this case. Thus, defendant’s statements should have been admitted at trial. A court of review should leave in place the trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress unless it is manifestly erroneous. (People v. Brown (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 116, 125.) Here, the trial court found that defendant was entitled to Miranda warnings because he was the primary suspect and an investigation had focused on him. It is the element of coercion rather than the mere focus of an investigation that calls Miranda safeguards into play. (Beckwith v. United States (1976), 425 U.S. 341, 347, 48 L. Ed. 2d 1, 8, 96 S. Ct. 1612, 1616.) Thus, finding the circuit court’s ruling to be manifestly erroneous, we reverse. The appellate court rejected the reasoning of the circuit court, but affirmed its ruling on the grounds that defendant was interrogated while in custody. Because we find that defendant did not experience the sort of custodial interrogation contemplated by Miranda, we reverse the judgments of the appellate and circuit courts, and remand the cause to the circuit court for proceedings consistent with this opinion. Appellate court reversed; circuit court reversed; cause remanded.

=== CASE 9739268 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:31.784909+00 ===

JUSTICE HEIPLE, specially concurring: This case raises the issue of whether a prison inmate must be given Miranda warnings prior to interviews with prison officials who are investigating security matters within the prison. The majority opinion concludes that since defendant was not “in custody,” and was not coerced into incriminating himself, the concerns underlying Miranda are not implicated, and thus, defendant did not have a right to Miranda warnings. The Miranda warnings arose out of a concern for the inherent coerciveness which exists in situations where suspects, previously at liberty, are cut off from the outside world and placed in an antagonistic police-dominated environment. (Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436, 457-58, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 714, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 1619.) These concerns are not present in situations where an individual is already serving a sentence in a State penitentiary. Appellate Justice Steigmann, dissenting in the cause below (207 Ill. App. 3d 104, 116-22 (Steigmann, J., dissenting)), carefully, fully, and accurately analyzes the goals and objectives of Miranda warnings. He concludes that Miranda has no application to the interrogation of prison inmates. I concur and fully endorse the reasoning set forth in Justice Steigmann’s well-written dissent. Since it is my belief that Miranda does not, and should not, apply to the interrogation of prison inmates, I agree that the trial and appellate courts erroneously suppressed defendant’s statements and that reversal is indicated. Accordingly, I specially concur with the result reached by the majority opinion in this case. JUSTICE BILANDIC joins in this special concurrence.

=== CASE 9739269 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:31.788386+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN, dissenting: The majority concludes that under the circumstances of this case, Miranda warnings were not required. The majority reaches this conclusion by determining that the defendant was not subjected to custodial interrogation. I believe this conclusion to be clearly erroneous. Therefore, I dissent. The procedural safeguards of Miranda warnings did not develop in contemplation of the prison inmate being questioned concerning an offense during his incarceration. They developed, instead, in response to the need to protect fifth amendment rights of persons previously at liberty, cut off from the outside world, and placed in a police-dominated environment. (See Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 86 S. Ct. 1602.) Thus, the traditional Miranda formulation does not lend itself to easy application in prisoner interrogation cases. Despite his prisoner status, the prison inmate is just as susceptible to compelled self-incrimination as is the person taken off the street. Although I recognize that Miranda clearly is not implicated in every prison inmate interrogation situation (see, e.g., Illinois v. Perkins (1990), 496 U.S. 292, 110 L. Ed. 2d 243, 110 S. Ct. 2394), nevertheless, the inmate, like his unincarcerated counterpart, may be subjected to criminal penalty based upon his incriminating statements. Therefore, I remain firm in my conviction that the prison inmate’s fifth amendment rights should be no less vigorously protected. In order for Miranda warnings to be required, the suspect must be in custody. Given the peculiar nature of the prison setting, every inmate is literally “in custody.” Thus, it is apparent that the test for Miranda in the prison setting requires that some special attention be given to the particular circumstance of each case. The relevant inquiry is whether a reasonable person in the inmate’s position would have understood himself to be in custody. Leviston v. Black (8th Cir. 1988), 843 F.2d 302, 304. As the court in Cervantes v. Walker (9th Cir. 1978), 589 F.2d 424, 428, noted, restriction, with regard to a person’s liberty, is a relative concept, one not determined exclusively by the lack of freedom to leave. In the prison setting, restriction necessarily implies a change in the surroundings of the prison inmate, greater than that already existing in the prison environment, which results in an added imposition on his freedom of movement. To determine whether Miranda warnings are implicated, it is necessary, then, to look to some act which places further limitations on the prison inmate. Cervantes further noted that this approach best reconciles Mathis v. United States (1968), 391 U.S. 1, 20 L. Ed. 2d 381, 88 S. Ct. 1503, with the principles of Miranda. The Cervantes court reasoned that, in Mathis, the questioning of the defendant by a government agent, not himself a member of the prison staff, on a matter not under investigation within the prison itself, may be said to have constituted an additional imposition on the defendant’s limited freedom of movement, requiring Miranda warnings. Cervantes, 589 F.2d at 428. A similar conclusion results by application of the Cervantes analysis to the facts here. Defendant was questioned by an investigator, not the prison warden or a counselor, whose primary duty was to investigate incidents and prepare cases for prosecution. The interview, while conducted in part for security purposes, also served an additional purpose of determining whether defendant would have a necessity defense available in the event of his prosecution. Thus, this investigation, like the investigation in Mathis, could also be viewed as having constituted an additional imposition on defendant’s limited freedom of movement, necessitating Miranda warnings. The majority considers the physical aspects of defendant’s restriction, and concludes that he was not in custody for purposes of Miranda because his “freedom of movement was not more severely restricted during the interview than it had been previously.” (146 Ill. 2d at 455; see also Cervantes, 589 F.2d at 428.) In applying the Cervantes test, the majority acknowledges that a further limiting restriction was posed because defendant remained handcuffed during the interview with Irvin. However, the majority then apparently discounts the relevance of this fact on the basis that defendant did not ask to have the handcuffs removed. I believe, as the majority finds, that defendant was further restricted as a result of the continued handcuffing. However, unlike the majority, I do not believe that defendant’s perceived acquiescence in being so restricted negates the fact of that restriction. The majority places great stock in the fact that defendant did not request to have the handcuffs removed. From this fact, the majority seems to infer that defendant felt unrestricted. I note with equal vigor that there is no mention in the majority’s discussion that Irvin ever offered to have the cuffs removed. Yet the majority does not then suggest that the absence of such an invitation contributed to defendant’s restriction. Moreover, Irvin testified that handcuffs are sometimes removed from prisoners whom he questions in his office. This fact supports a finding that since defendant’s handcuffs were not removed, he was further restricted, not only in relation to the prison population as a whole, but in relation to those other inmates whose handcuffs are removed during an interview with Irvin. Additionally, defendant posited the argument that he was further restricted during the interview than if he had remained at “home,” in his cell. The majority’s response is that defendant failed to consider that, while defendant could have requested to leave Irvin’s office, he could not have requested to leave his cell. I agree with defendant. At least while in his. cell, defendant was not handcuffed. However, once he was taken inside the interview room, he was deprived, not only of his normal freedom of movement within the prison setting, but also of the familiarity of his jail cell. Further, the majority overlooks the potential consequence of defendant’s request to leave the interview. Any thought given by defendant to request leave would naturally have been tempered by his knowledge of the potential consequence of such conduct. Absent advice from Irvin or a belief by defendant that he could leave without threat or fear of punishment for his failure to cooperate, the fact that he could request to leave had no diminishing effect on defendant’s compelled presence at the interview. The questioning here took place in a context where defendant’s freedom to depart was restricted. (See Oregon v. Mathiason (1977), 429 U.S. 492, 50 L. Ed. 2d 714, 91 S. Ct. 711.) Thus, I believe that a reasonable person in defendant’s position would have understood himself to be in custody. The majority next concludes that defendant was not interrogated, as that term is understood for Miranda purposes. It rejects defendant’s contention that Irvin attempted to elicit incriminating statements from defendant as to whether defendant would mount a necessity defense to a potential weapons charge. It concludes, instead, that the purpose of Irvin’s questioning was to determine whether defendant’s possession of the shanks was in response to fear of an attack by fellow inmates. The majority views Irvin’s questioning as having been limited to inquiries regarding safety concerns. I note that Irvin had been instructed by the State’s Attorney not to give Miranda warnings to prison inmates being investigated in shank cases. Further, I note that, subsequent to the interview, criminal charges were filed against defendant. I am not persuaded that Irvin’s questions were as innocuous as the majority perceives. Irvin’s questions to defendant regarding safety were the functional equivalent of questions concerning the availability of a necessity defense. Even though his questions may have been framed in terms of safety concerns, they, nonetheless, elicited the incriminating responses regarding the necessity defense. Moreover, application of Miranda warnings is not dependent upon the reason the questions were asked at the time. (See Mathis v. United States (1968), 391 U.S. 1, 20 L. Ed. 2d 381, 88 S. Ct. 1503.) The fact that the primary purpose of the questioning here was related to safety concerns for defendant is not determinative on the issue of when the Miranda interrogation occurred. See Mathis, 391 U.S. 1, 20 L. Ed. 2d 381, 88 S. Ct. 1503 (fact that questions were asked as part of a routine tax investigation where no criminal proceedings might even be brought did not negate Miranda requirement since tax investigations frequently lead to criminal prosecutions). As Professor Kamisar has stated: “[S]o long as the police conduct is likely to elicit incriminating statements and thus endanger the privilege, it is police ‘interrogation,’ regardless of its primary purpose or motivation, and that if it otherwise qualifies as ‘interrogation,’ it does not become something else because the interrogator’s main purpose is [something other] than the procuring of incriminating statements, even though self-incrimination may be foreseen as a windfall.” (Emphasis in original.) Kamisar, Brewer v. Williams, Massiah, and Miranda: What is “Interrogation”? When does it Matter?, 67 Georgetown L.J. 1, 9 (1978). Defendant was subjected to words which Irvin should have known were reasonably likely to elicit testimony by defendant against himself. Thus, the duality of purpose in Irvin’s interview of defendant did not serve to preclude the necessity of Miranda warnings. Additionally, I believe that Irvin’s attempt to determine the availability of a necessity defense belies any claimed unawareness that criminal charges were contemplated. Finally, the majority attempts to accommodate its decision within the confínes of Miranda by concluding that Irvin’s office was not an inherently coercive environment. It supports this conclusion on the basis that no police officers were present during the interview; Irvin was not wearing a uniform at the time of the interview; Irvin had no power to impose any disciplinary measure; and the interview lasted 10 minutes. I am not persuaded that these facts had any trans-formative effect on defendant’s perception of the coercive nature of the interview process. There is no suggestion that defendant was unaware of Irvin’s position and authority. Thus, the fact that Irvin was not in uniform made him no less an investigator in defendant’s eyes. Further, I cannot believe that defendant would feel any less compelled to cooperate because Irvin would not himself mete out the punishment for defendant’s uncooperative conduct. Arguably, there are some facts, for example, the absence of police during the interview, which might tend to support a finding that Miranda was not implicated. However, on the whole, the facts that: (1) defendant was restricted during the interview to a greater extent than he was while in his prison cell; (2) defendant could have been penalized for his failure to cooperate; (3) Irvin was an investigator who had a primary duty to prepare cases for prosecution; (4) Irvin took direction in investigating shank cases from the prosecuting arm of the State; and (5) defendant was indirectly questioned about a necessity defense, strongly support the opposite conclusion. Under these circumstances, defendant had sufficient reason to feel that Irvin had legal authority to compel him to be present at the interview and to answer questions; and that Irvin, whether directly or indirectly, could affect the defendant’s future treatment. Compare Illinois v. Perkins (1990), 496 U.S. 292, 110 L. Ed. 2d 243, 110 S. Ct. 2394. Necessarily, prison inmates must surrender some of their constitutional rights in order to permit proper prison administration and discipline. Notwithstanding this concern, the fifth amendment guarantee against compulsory self-incrimination must be carefully guarded and must not be unnecessarily compromised by the needs of penal administration. For the reasons stated, I would affirm the lower courts’ decisions that Miranda warnings were required. JUSTICE CLARK joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9739270 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:33.086977+00 ===

CONOVER, Judge.
Plaintiff/Counter-Defendant-Appellant Timothy Kelly appeals the grant of partial summary judgment in favor of Defendants/Counter-Claimants-Appellees J.B. Smith, Robert Parker, Randall J. Nye, Andrew J. Fetsch, and Daniel Glavin (Firm).
We affirm.
Kelly presents three restated issues for our review:
1. whether the trial court erred as a matter of law in its entry of partial summary judgment for the Firm, the counter-claimants;
2. whether summary judgment should be entered for Kelly, the counter-defendant; and
3. whether the trial court erroneously construed the Articles of Partnership.
Firm presents one issue in its cross-appeal:
1. whether the trial court erred in not granting summary judgment on the issue of Kelly's distribution percentage at the time of his withdrawal.
This action began when Elizabeth D. Kelly and Timothy F. Kelly filed a verified complaint for preliminary injunction with the Lake Superior Court asking the court to restrain the Firm from using the "Kelly" name in their law firm title. The Firm had continued to practice under the name of Beckman, Kelly and Smith after the termination of their partnership with Kelly on March 31, 1989.
The Firm filed a counterclaim. In count I, it asserted Kelly was liable to the Firm for all fees generated by legal matters which were part of the business of the Firm as of the date of his withdrawal, less the applicable proportion of the Firm income to which Kelly was entitled. Both sides filed motions for partial summary judgment on this count. The trial court rendered its partial summary judgment on count I in favor of the Firm on December 7, 1990.
*1309Kelly filed a motion to correct errors, which the trial court denied. This appeal followed. More facts will be added as necessary.
Summary judgment is only proper where there is no genuine issue as to any material fact. City of Evansville v. Moore (1990), Ind., 563 N.E.2d 113, 114. In reviewing a trial court's entry of summary judgment, the reviewing court is bound by the same standards as the trial court; we must consider all the pleadings, affidavits, depositions, admissions, answers to interrogatories, and testimony in a light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Scott v. Bodor, Inc. (1991), Ind.App., 571 N.E.2d 313, 318; Reed v. Dillon (1991), Ind.App., 566 N.E.2d 585, 588. If any doubt as to the existence of a factual issue is present, the same should be resolved against the moving party. Ind.Trial Rule 56(C), City of Evansville, 563 N.E.2d at 114. Even if the facts are undisputed, summary judgment is inappropriate when evidence before the court reveals a good faith dispute as to the inferences to be drawn from such facts. Lawlis v. Kightlinger & Gray (1990), Ind.App., 562 N.E.2d 435, 439, rek. denied, trans. denied.
However, irrelevant or unnecessary factual disputes will not be considered. Id. A factual issue is "genuine" only when it cannot be foreclosed by reference to undisputed facts and requires a trier of fact to resolve the opposing parties' differing versions. Id.
Kelly contends the trial court should have considered only his affidavit denying a breach of fiduciary duty and not have interpreted the partnership agreement in considering the Firm's summary judgment motion. He points out J.B. Smith's affidavit, attached to the Firm's motion for summary judgment, does not address the issue of fiduciary duty but instead recites the Firm's calculation of the amount to which Kelly is entitled under the partnership agreement. This he contends forms an inadequate basis for resolving liability under count I.
Affidavits are to be liberally construed in favor of the non-movant. Woodward Ins., Inc. v. White (1982), Ind., 437 N.E.2d 59, 62. However, pursuant to TR. 56(C), in effect at the time of the action, judgment sought shall be rendered if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, admissions, and affidavits together with any testimony show no genuine issue exists as to any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
While Kelly's denial in his affidavit must be viewed as true since it is uncontra-dicted, the trial court properly examined the pleadings, deposition, interrogatory answers, and admissions as well. Frink v. State (1991), Ind., 568 N.E.2d 535, 536; T.R. 56(C) (1990). The partnership agreement was an exhibit in the Firm's counterclaim. Moreso, the resolution of how the partnership agreement is to be interpreted is implicit in count I of the counterclaim. The trial court need not limit itself to a review of the Smith and Kelly affidavits in ascertaining the Firm's right to recovery as Kelly suggests.
Furthermore, Kelly has cited no authority for the proposition the Firm is prevented from recovering on count I of the counterclaim because it contained an allegation of breach of fiduciary duty or for the proposition that proof of such a claim is an essential element of an action for an accounting under principles of partnership. In fact, other jurisdictions in addressing this precise question have held a fiduciary duty exists upon the termination of a partnership absent an agreement to the contrary.
In Resnick v. Kaplan (1981), 49 Md.App. 499, 484 A.2d 582, 587, the Maryland court explicitly rejected the proposition a firm needs to prove a breach of fiduciary duty before it can recover fees. The court held whether there was a violation of the partnership agreement "was not relevant or material to the rights of both sides to an accounting." 434 A.2d at 588. The Maryland court also held that whether there was a breach of a fiduciary duty is relevant to the issue of other damages but not the *1310right of partners to an accounting and a division of assets on winding up. Berkson v. Berryman (1985), 62 Md.App. 79, 488 A.2d 504. We agree.
Therefore, the trial court did not err in construing the partnership agreement while considering the motion for partial summary judgment. The trial court correctly found no issue of material fact existed, and as a matter of law the Firm was entitled to partial summary judgment.
Kelly urges this court to enter judgment for him on count I of the counterclaim under his interpretation of Ind.Appellate Rule 15(N). He presents the same arguments discussed above to support his contention.
This court has the inherent power in the review of a summary judgment to reverse the grant of a summary judgment for one party and enter summary judgment for the appropriate party. Davidson v. Cincinnati Ins. Co. (1991), Ind.App., 572 N.E.2d 502, 508. For reasons set out below, we find no trial court error. Therefore, we will not grant summary judgment for Kelly.1
Kelly contends the trial court erred in construing the partnership agreement to include a duty of the withdrawing partner to wind-up unfinished business. He points to two provisions of the agreement which he suggests control all the Firm's and the withdrawing partner's duties in this regard.
Paragraph 6 of the partnership agreement, titled Termination and Buy-out, in pertinent part, states:
This agreement and this partnership may be terminated by any partner beginning One Hundred Twenty (120) days after notice in writing or intention so to do is given to the other partners. In the event of the death, retirement, or withdrawal of a partner, such partner shall be paid in accordance herewith, and as computed hereunder, his net capital account, his vested interest in receivables, and his vested interest in contingent fee cases.
[[Image here]]
Paragraph 15, titled Winding Up, reads:
Upon the termination of the partnership for any cause, a full account shall be taken and settled of all the moneys, debts and effects belonging to or due the firm and of all debts and liabilities of the firm.
The Indiana Uniform Partnership Act (UPA) encourages partnerships to enter into contracts to control the rights and duties of the various partners to each other. IND.CODE 28-4-1-18. If there is no contract, the UPA controls. IC 28-4-1-1 through 23-4-8-8. It is undisputed the parties entered into a partnership agreement which provides the UPA will govern in areas the agreement does not cover.
The trial court correctly found the partnership agreement has no specific provision which describes the remaining parties' interest in cases removed from the firm after partner withdrawal. Accordingly, the UPA provides
Every partner must account to the partnership for any benefit and hold as trustee for it any profits derived by him without the consent of the other partners from any transaction connected with the formation, conduct, or liquidation of the partnership.
IC 28-4-1-21.
Dissolution of a partnership is the change in the relation of the partners caused by any partner ceasing to be associated in the carrying on as distinguished from the winding up of the business.
IC 23-4-1-29. Thus, the withdrawing partner remains as a trustee when the partnership is dissolved and terminated. Boushehry v. Ishak (1990), Ind.App., 550 N.E.2d *1311784, 788 (modified on rehearing on other grounds, 560 N.E.2d 116)2
In Boushehry, Indiana joined the long line of jurisdictions which hold the fiduciary duties of the partners remain intact during the winding up process with respect to partnership business pending at the time of dissolution. Rosenfeld, Meyer & Susman v. Cohen (1983), 194 Cal.Rptr. 180, 146 Cal.App.3d 200; Resnick v. Kaplan (1981), 49 Md.App. 499, 434 A.2d 582; Woodruff v. Bryant (1977), Tex.App., 558 S.W.2d 535; Lavin v. Ehrlick (1974), Sup., 80 Misc.2d 247, 363 N.Y.S.2d 50; Frates v. Nichols (1964), Fl.App., 167 80.2d 77; Fouchek v. Janicek (1950), 190 Or. 251, 225 P.2d 783; 59A Am.Jur.2d Partnership § 483 (1987).
If there is no contrary agreement, this fiduciary duty extends to work in progress at the time of dissolution. This is true even if the work is completed after the dissolution. In Hammes v. Frank (1991), Ind.App., 579 N.E.2d 1348, a law firm dissolved with no partnership agreement. We held that in absence of a partnership agreement, the Indiana Partnership Act governed. Under UPA the income produced by winding up unfinished partnership business was to be distributed to former partners in proportion to their respective shares. Id. at 1356. A class action was pending at the time of the dissolution of the law firm. The new firm continued to work on the case to the conclusion but had substituted a class representative. We found the post-dissolution work on that litigation was unfinished work of the former partnership. As unfinished work, we ordered the income the new firm received for this case divided with the old firm. Id.
This decision applies the general rule holding all partners are entitled to share in fees for pre-dissolution work in progress paid after dissolution to the dissolved partnership or to withdrawing partners even if the client has exercised a right to discharge the attorney who is sharing the fees. Bromberg and Ribstein on Partnership (1991 Ed.) § 7.08(e). Only in a situation where a partner dies is the surviving partner of a law firm entitled to compensation completing litigation in pending IC 23-4-1-18(f). However, in an inter vivos case, the general rule is the partner who completed the project is not entitled to extra compensation and the fee should be divided on a pre-dissolution basis. Id.
Kelly argues the trial court's decision is illogical because it allows the UPA to control the disposition of assets Kelly removed from the Firm after withdrawal but allows Paragraph 6 of the partnership agreement to control the disposition of those assets remaining with the Firm. He claims the result is an uneven distribution of Firm assets. Further, Kelly argues if his with drawal clearly terminates the partnership, all the partners should participate in the wind up of all partnership business as provided in Paragraph 15.
The UPA provides for an equal distribution of firm assets on withdrawal of a partner. The only reason to contract regarding dissolution distribution is to depart from this scheme. Here, the partnership agreement covers the majority of issues involved in a partnership. Paragraph 6 of the agreement specifies how the assets from the work in progress are to be valued for the departing partner only. -It is written in the singular and the language refers to the interest of the departing partner, not the remaining partners. This limitation favors the continuity of the Firm and discourages partner withdrawal with its attendant *1312disruption and economic consequences. Thus, the agreement permits the Firm to mitigate the harsh and sudden effects of solicitation of clients and discourages partners from orchestrating matters prior to withdrawal so they would be in a position to take the most lucrative cases with them in the event of withdrawal. The court does not go behind the parties' agreement and assess the adequacy of consideration in contract cases to assure equal benefits. See, e.g., Herrera v. Collection Service, Inc. (1982), Ind.App., 441 N.E.2d 981, 983-984.
Kelly's argument the court erred by not ordering an accounting of the Firm assets as required by Paragraph 15 misses the point. Paragraph 15 of the partnership agreement provides a full accounting shall be taken upon termination in order to settle up debts, effects, and moneys. Logically, it is to benefit creditors, not departing partners, since Paragraph 6 specifically limits the amount a withdrawing partner is entitled to receive to his net capital account, his vested interest in receivables, and his vested interest in contingent fee cases.
Indiana permits the remaining partners to agree the entity of the partnership may continue notwithstanding the withdrawal of one partner. See Lawlis, 562 N.E.2d at 441-444. Here, the partnership agreement foresees the possibility of the continuation of the partnership if one partner should withdraw. Paragraph 17 provides remaining partners shall be entitled to retain possession of the premises and equipment. The remaining partners of the Firm are continuing in business although it is not clear under what type of agreement. Thus, there is no need for an accounting. Further, a court order forcing an accounting would not be relevant to Kelly's duty to the Firm or entitle him to receive more than provided by Paragraph 6 of the agreement.
Additionally, Kelly strongly contends the trial court's reading of the partnership agreement violates two Indiana rules of professional conduct. First, he maintains it violates Ind. Professional Conduct Rule 1.5(e), which prohibits fee splitting between lawyers not in the same firm where the division of fees was not in proportion to the work performed.3
In support of his arguments, Kelly cites cases from many jurisdictions. However, they all have very different factual situations. In Champion v. Superior Court (1988), 201 Cal.App.3d 777, 247 Cal.Rptr. 624, reh. denied, the court refused to enforce an agreement which entitled the law firm to almost all the legal fees recovered after an attorney withdrew regardless of how much preparation was performed by the firm. The court specifically concluded this was not a termination or winding up of a partnership and noted the fees were unconscionable. In In re Silverberg (1980), 75 A.D.2d 817, 427 N.Y.S.2d 480, the court affirmed an arbitration award. The agreement under dispute provided each partner in a dissolving partnership was to pay the other a specified percentage of fees earned from their clients in the eighteen months following dissolution. This agreement was found to be unenforceable as a restriction on the practice of law and an impermissible fee division.
Other jurisdictions have enforced agreements challenged as violating the fee splitting rule. In Roy v. Gravel (1990), La.App., 570 So.2d 1175, the court enforced a dissolution contract allocating fees received after dissolution on the grounds it did not involve prohibited fee splitting. It concluded the firm continued a fictional existence as it was being wound up so there was no fee division within the meaning of Prof. Cond.R. 1.5(e). The client knew his lawyer was in a firm so he implicitly agreed to allow the firm to split those fees however the partners in the firm saw fit. Likewise, *1313in Hendler & Murray v. Lambert (1989), 537 N.Y.S.2d 560, 147 A.D.2d 444, a later New York case, the court enforced an arbitration award which awarded termination payments paid out of the new ongoing business proceeds to a retired partner. It opined the fee splitting rule did not apply to payments to a former partner.
Adopting the reasoning in Roy, we held the fee splitting prohibition contained in Prof.Cond.R. 1.5(e) is not violated when fees earned by the firm during wind up of partnership business after dissolution are allocated among partners, including those who withdraw. The partners have a fiduci ary duty to do so, absent an agreement to the contrary expressed in the partnership agreement. Such a result is consistent with our determination that income produced by the winding up of unfinished partnership business is to be distributed to the former partners in proportion to their respective shares in the absence of a contrary agreement. See, Hammes, 579 N.E.2d at 1356; Boushehry, 550 N.E.2d at 788.
Second, Kelly maintains the court's interpretation of the partnership agreement also violates Prof.Cond.R. 5.6, which prohibits lawyers from entering into agreements which restrict the right of a lawyer to practice after termination of a partnership.4
Kelly argues the effect of the trial court's order requiring him to pay 80% of the fees received on removed matters restricts his right to practice law. He urges, "{nlo lawyer can sustain a practice by giving to another firm 80% of the fees he collects on a case." Brief of Appellant at 28.
Clauses which restrict competition when a partner withdraws or requires the partner to forfeit his portion of earned fees which had not been collected upon withdrawal have been held to violate Prof. Cond.R. 5.6. Jacob v. Norris, McLaughlin & Marcus (1991), 247 N.J.Super. 266, 588 A.2d 1287 (lawful restriction on practice of law to impose a monetary penalty on partners taking the firm's staff or client since moneys were not earned money); Anderson v. Aspelmeier, Fisch, Power, Warner & Engbeg (1990), Iowa, 461 N.W.2d 598 (firm's refusal to pay departing partner full value of his earned interest not sanctioned under disciplinary rules) Cohen v. Lord, Day & Lord (1989), 551 N.Y.S.2d 157, 550 N.E.2d 410, 75 N.Y.2d 95 (an agreement entered into by parties which restricted the practice of law as a condition to receipt of already earned benefits was unenforceable) Hagen v. O'Connell (1984), 68 Or.App. 700, 683 P.2d 563 (provision of a buy-sell agreement was unenforceable because it provided a 40% penalty in corporation stock value if shareholder did not sign noncompetition agreement); Gray v. Martin (1983), 68 Or.App. 173, 663 P.2d 1285 (agreement penalizing partner for withdrawing from the firm by giving him only one-half of that to which he was otherwise entitled was unenforceable).
In the instant case, the conditions of departure as governed by Paragraph 6 of the partnership agreement were reasonably limited and plausibly related to preventing a double adverse impact on the Firm as a result of Kelly's departure. It prevented the subjection of the Firm to loss of part of its client base at the same time it was requiring the Firm to pay the partner substantial compensation. The agreement does not seek to divest Kelly of the partnership interest to which he became entitled at the time of withdrawal. He is not prevented from representing new clients or representing the Firm's former clients in new matters. He is not prevented from retaining his percentage of the fees in removed matters. Therefore, Kelly is not prevented from practicing law.
The agreement does not violate Prof. Cond.R. 1.5(e) and 5.6 as they apply in the factual circumstances between the Firm *1314and Kelly. The trial court did not err in interpreting the agreement or in finding there were no issues of material fact in dispute, and as a matter of law partial summary judgment should be entered in favor of the Firm.
The Firm contends, by way of cross-appeal, the trial court erred in determining a genuine issue of material fact existed with respect to Kelly's distribution percentage at the time of withdrawal. Kelly, in his motion opposing summary judgment, claimed his interest percentage in the Firm is at least 20.91%. The Firm alleged his interest was 18.09%.
The trial court stated, in pertinent part: The court further finds as to the above facts there are no genuine issues of any material fact in dispute, that the law is with the Counter-Claimants, and that partial summary judgment in their favor should be entered. There are other genuine issues of material fact in dispute, including the precise percentage allocation to which Timothy F. Kelly is entitled; the appropriate cases of the law firm of Beckman, Kelly, and Smith whose work was in progress at the time of his departure and for which fees were subsequently earned or collected by the Counter-Defendant, Timothy F. Kelly; and the amount of fees earned or collected or to be earned or collected in the future by Timothy F. Kelly for such cases.
[[Image here]]
7. The issues covered by the Order being sufficiently distinct from the other issues raised by the complaint and by the Counter-Claim, the Court now finds pursuant to TR. 54(B) and TR. 54(C) that there is no just reason for delay and hereby directs the entry of a final and appealable judgment in favor of the Counter-Claimants and against the Counter-Defendant on Count I of the Counter-Claim.
Interlocutory orders are not ap-pealable in the absence of proper certification by the trial court. Any order which disposes of less than all issues is not final and appealable unless the trial court (1) expressly determines in writing there is no just reason for delay, and (2) in writing expressly directs the entry of judgment thereon. Radbel v. Midwestern Electric, Inc. (1990), Ind.App., 550 N.E.2d 340, 341.
Paragraph 7 of the court's order specifically certifies under T.R. 54(B) and T.R. 56(C) this order is final and appealable as to the issues covered by the order.5 The issue covered by the order was whether the Firm was entitled to recover all fees already or to be collected in the future by Kelly in all legal matters from clients who were removed by him or in connection with his withdrawal from the Firm. Consequently, other issues not covered by the order including this one were not certified as final. Therefore, the issue the Firm here attempts to present is not appealable.
Further, we are unwilling to exercise our discretion to consider this issue pursuant to Ind.Appellate Rule 4(E). App.R. 4(E) permits the appellate court at its discretion to pass on issues which are severable and can be addressed without prejudice to the parties. While considering this issue, we would be required to determine the percentage of fees Kelly is entitled to keep from removed matters and his vested interest in the Firm's accounts receivable and contingent fee cases. This is a matter the trial court reserved for its later determination. We defer to the trial court.
Thus, we decline both the Firm's and Kelly's urgings to enter judgment on this issue.
Affirmed.
MILLER, J., concurs.
GARRARD, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. Kelly urges the trial court's findings of fact were not based on affidavits, admissions or properly designated sworn testimony. However, we find no error in this regard. After reviewing the material before the court, Kelly's *1311brief, and answers to the Firm's interrogatories, we find the trial court's findings were correct.
. Kelly cites Bane v. Ferguson (7th Cir.1989), 890 F.2d 11, for the proposition upon termination, a withdrawing partner no longer has a fiduciary duty to the old partnership to wind up affairs. This case is not on point. The facts of the case involved a retired partner's suit against the new firm for the loss of his retirement benefits. The circuit court held no common law or statutory claim of liability attaches upon the dissolution of a partnership, even though the dissolution results in a breach of contract, if the dissolution is motivated by good faith judgment for the benefit of the partnership rather than personal gain of the managing partner. Dissolution of the partnership was not at issue. Also the court did not address the duties of partners in winding up the partnership.
. Prof.Cond.R. 1.5(e) provides in part as follows:
A division of fee between lawyers who are not in the same firm may be made only if:
(1) the division is in proportion to the services performed by each lawyer or, by written agreement with the client, each lawyer assumes joint responsibility for the representation;
(2) the client is advised of and does not object to the participation of all the lawyers involved; and (3) the total fee is reasonable.
. Prof.Cond.R. 5.6 reads:
A lawyer shall not participate in offering or making (a) a partnership or employment agreement that restricts the rights of a lawyer to practice after termination of the relationship, except an agreement concerning benefits upon retirement; or (b) an agreement in which a restriction on a lawyer's right to practice is part of the settlement of a controversy between private parties.
. Since this case involves a summary judgment, the trial rule involved is TR. 56(C) which states in pertinent part: gt
A summary judgment upon less than all the issues involved in a claim or with respect to less than all the claims or parties shall be interlocutory unless the court in writing expressly determines that there is not just reason for delay and in writing expressly directs entry of judgment as to less than all the issues, claims or parties.

=== CASE 9739271 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:33.093685+00 ===

*1315GARRARD, Judge,
dissenting.
I dissent. While I agree with the majority that the only question available for appellate review is the partial summary judgment entered on the remaining partners' first count of counterclaim, I disagree with its resolution of that issue.
In that count the remaining partners alleged that when Kelly left the partnership he took with him clients and potential clients of the partnership; that he performed legal services for them, and accepted payment therefor; and that the partnership was entitled to all the fees earned in those employments both before and after the partnership dissolution (subject, of course, to Kelly's partnership percentage.) The trial court agreed and granted partial summary judgment so ordering. In my view this was error.
One of the precepts of our legal system is that litigants should be entitled to legal representation by the lawyer(s) of their choosing, assuming the litigant is willing and able to pay the bill and the lawyer is admitted before the court in question. That view is reflected in Rule 5.6 of the Rules of Professional Conduct.
Of course, the former partnership is entitled to treat as an asset work which was in progress on the date of dissolution. The partnership agreement details the manner of valuing that business for hourly matters, flat fee matters and contingent fee cases. The agreement should be applied to all work in progress on the date of dissolution whether retained by the remaining partners or by Kelly.
Recently, in Hammes v. Frank (1991) Ind.App., 579 N.E.2d 1348, the court was confronted with the dissolution of a law partnership caused by a split up of the firm. There had been no written partnership agreement, and accordingly (unlike the circumstances present here) no provision covered how work-in-progress was to be handled upon a dissolution. Looking to the Uniform Partnership Act, IC 28-4-1-1 et seq. as controlling under those cireum-stances, the court determined that income produced through the winding up of unfinished partnership business should be distributed to the former partners according to their respective partnership shares. See IC 23-4-1-80. I do not disagree with the analysis in Hommes except to the extent the court's reasoning appears to focus on the inquiry as to what constitutes "unfinished business" rather than what constitutes "winding up."
Under IC 23-4-1-80, when a dissolution is caused by the withdrawal of a partner, the existence of the partnership continues "until the winding up of partnership affairs is completed." The term "winding up" has special legal significance in the context of partnership law. It refers to the process of settling partnership affairs after dissolution, often called liquidation, and involves reducing the assets to cash to pay creditors and distribute to partners the value of their respective interests. Dreifuerst v. Dreifuerst (1979) 90 Wis.2d 566, 280 N.W.2d 335, 338; see also Weisbrod v. Ely (1989) Wyo., 767 P.2d 171, 174; Smith v. Kennebeck (1973) Mo., 502 S.W.2d 290, 293.
Thus, in the absence of some agreement among the partners as to how work- in-progress assets are to be valued, winding up activity is necessary to determine their worth. But this does not mean that work performed after a dissolution in the ordinary course of business, as opposed to winding-up activity, should or does belong to the previous partnership. This may, additionally, be inferred from IC 28-4-1-18(f) which provides that while a partner is not entitled to remuneration for acting in the partnership business, a surviving partner is entitled to reasonable remuneration for his services performed in winding up the partnership affairs. In other words, the line of demarcation is to be drawn at the time of dissolution with recognition that some winding up activity may be necessary.
In the case before us the partnership agreement covers both how work-in-progress assets are to be valued and how partners are to receive payment for their shares. Potentially, minimum winding up activity will be, or was, necessary.
On the other hand, the former partners are not entitled as a matter of partnership law to the fruits of the new, or continuing, *1316services Kelly performs for former clients of the firm.
The court erred in holding that they were. The partial summary judgment should be reversed.

=== CASE 9739272 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:34.956945+00 ===

JUSTICE MORAN delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, James W. McAlister, filed a four-count complaint in the circuit court of Winnebago County against defendants, Larry Schick, M.D., and Rockford Anesthesiologists Associated, alleging medical malpractice. Counts I and III were brought against Larry Schick, M.D., and counts II and IV were brought against Rockford Anesthesiologists Associated. In his complaint, plaintiff stated that he was admitted to the Swedish American Hospital for treatment of a small bowel obstruction, and that he subsequently underwent exploratory laparotomy, omental biopsy, lysis of adhesions and small bowel resection. Plaintiff alleged that defendant Dr. Schick, a member of defendant Rockford Anesthesiologists Associated, failed to inform him of the risks involved in the surgery, and failed to properly insert and monitor a right internal jugular venous catheter. Consequently, plaintiff allegedly received unspecified injuries and suffers from a right pneumothorax. The court dismissed the complaint with prejudice for failure to comply with requirements of section 2 — 622 of the Code of Civil Procedure (the Code) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622). The appellate court affirmed the dismissal. (203 Ill. App. 3d 1105 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23).) Plaintiff’s petition for leave to appeal to this court was allowed (134 Ill. 2d R. 315(a)). The sole issue presented for review is whether section 2 — 622 of the Code is.unconstitutional. This provision is applicable to “any action, whether in tort, contract or otherwise, in which the plaintiff seeks damages for injuries or death by reason of medical, hospital, or other healing art malpractice.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622(a).) To conform with section 2 — 622, the plaintiff’s attorney or the plaintiff, if proceeding pro se, must attach to the complaint an affidavit certifying that he has consulted and reviewed the facts of the case with a health professional, who has determined in an attached report that there is “a reasonable and meritorious cause” for filing the action. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622(a)(1).) If the applicable statute of limitations is near expiration or if there is a delay in receiving medical records, an extension of time is available. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, pars. 2 — 622(a)(2), (a)(3).) Failure to file the required certificate “shall be grounds for dismissal under Section 2 — 619.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622(g). Plaintiff attached to his medical malpractice complaint, filed on June 15, 1989, an affidavit stating that he had been unable to obtain a consultation with a health professional, and could not obtain one before the expiration of the statute of limitations. Section 2 — 622(a)(2) of the Code “allows for a 90-day extension for the filing of the affidavits if the statute of limitations is near expiration.” (McCastle v. Sheinkop (1987), 121 Ill. 2d 188, 190.) Plaintiff subsequently requested, and defendants agreed, to extend the required filing date an additional three months, Until December 15, 1989. On December 22, 1989, when plaintiff had not submitted the mandatory affidavit and report, defendants moved to dismiss. The plaintiff then filed a written response to the motion, arguing that section 2 — 622 was unconstitutional. At the hearing on the motion, plaintiff also argued that the delay was excusable because of the holidays and an illness in the family of plaintiffs attorney. The trial court granted defendants’ motion and dismissed the cause with prejudice. It is established that a court has discretion to dismiss a case governed by section 2 — 622 with or without prejudice. McCastle, 121 Ill. 2d at 194. Plaintiff appealed, arguing that section 2 — 622 is unconstitutional because it violates section 1 of article II and section 1 of article VI of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. II, §1; art. VI, §1) regarding separation of powers. As authority, plaintiff cited the holding of the Appellate Court, First District, in DeLuna v. St. Elizabeth’s Hospital (1989), 184 Ill. App. 3d 802. Plaintiff noted the similarity of DeLuna to the case at bar. In DeLuna the plaintiff brought an action for medical and hospital negligence against the defendants, but failed to attach an affidavit of merit and written report by a health professional, as required by section 2— 622(a)(1) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2-622(a)(l)). Retracing the reasoning in DeLuna, plaintiff contended that section 2 — 622 sets up a prerequisite to filing a malpractice suit which usurps the judiciary’s power to hear and decide medical negligence cases. Plaintiff argued that, as the constitution empowers the judicial branch alone to adjudicate and apply principles of law, section 2 — 622 directly violates the constitutional concepts of separation of powers and reservation of judicial power. The Appellate Court, Second District, rejected plaintiff’s contention, noting that, in Bloom v. Guth (1987), 164 Ill. App. 3d 475, it had upheld the constitutionality of section 2 — 622 against an almost identical argument. The court pointed out that its holding in Bloom was followed by the Third District in Sakovich v. Dodt (1988), 174 Ill. App. 3d 649, 652, and the Fourth District in Alford v. Phipps (1988), 169 Ill. App. 3d 845, 851. Thus, the court rejected the First District’s reasoning in DeLuna, and affirmed the judgment of the circuit court. We accepted plaintiff’s appeal in order to resolve the dispute within the appellate court as to the constitutionality of section 2 — 622. For the reasons set out below, we hold that section 2 — 622 is constitutional, and accordingly affirm the judgment of the appellate court. We point out that, concurrent with the announcement of our opinion in this cause, we are reversing the judgment of the Appellate Court, First District, in DeLuna v. St. Elizabeth’s Hospital (1992), 147 Ill. 2d 57. We note at the outset the strong presumption that legislative enactments are constitutional. (Bernier v. Burris (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 219, 227.) Courts have a duty to sustain legislation whenever possible and to resolve all doubts in favor of constitutional validity. Agran v. Checker Taxi Co. (1952), 412 Ill. 145,148. Plaintiff contends that limiting access to the courts to only those plaintiffs who have secured an affidavit of merit and written report by a health professional singles out medical malpractice plaintiffs from all other personal injury plaintiffs. In so doing, plaintiff argues, the legislature has, in effect, created a special class of plaintiffs, and imposed on them a burden greater than on any other class, in violation of the due process clauses and the equal protection clauses of the Illinois and United States Constitutions. In reviewing the constitutionality of section 2 — 622, we reject plaintiffs equal protection and due process claims, as such claims have been similarly rejected by our appellate court. (Bloom v. Guth (1987), 164 Ill. App. 3d 475; Sakovich v. Dodt (1988), 174 Ill. App. 3d 649; Alford v. Phipps (1988), 169 Ill. App. 3d 845.) The authorities cited applied the rational basis standard, as set out in Bernier, to test the constitutionality of medical malpractice legislation under guarantees of due process and equal protection. The standard is whether the provisions bear a rational relationship to a legitimate governmental interest. (Bernier, 113 Ill. 2d at 228.) The courts found section 2 — 622 to be rationally related to a legitimate purpose of the legislature — that of eliminating frivolous lawsuits at the pleading stage. Thus, we concentrate on a determination of whether, as plaintiff alleges, section 2 — 622 usurps. the judicial power, violating the separation of powers provisions of article II, section 1, and article VI, section 1, of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. II, §1; art. VI, §1). Article II, section 1, of the Illinois Constitution of 1970 states that “[t]he legislative, executive and judicial branches are separate. No branch shall exercise powers properly belonging to another.” (Ill. Const. 1970, art. II, §1.) This court has historically regarded the doctrine of separation of powers as meaning that “ ‘the whole power of two or more of the branches, of government shall not be lodged in the same hands.’ ” (Strukoff v. Strukoff (1979), 76 Ill. 2d 53, 58, quoting In re Estate of Barker (1976), 63 Illl. 2d 113, 119.) Article VI, section 1, declares that “[t]he judicial power is vested in a Supreme Court, an Appellate Court and Circuit Courts.” (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, §1.) “Judicial power is not defined in the Constitution, but all such power is granted exclusively to the courts.” Strukoff, 76 Ill. 2d at 57-58, citing People v. Jackson (1977), 69 Ill. 2d 252, 256. Because judicial power is reserved exclusively to the courts, this court has consistently held that the sharing or even the potential sharing of judicial power is unconstitutional. (Bernier, 113 Ill. 2d at 234; Wright v. Central Du Page Hospital Association (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 313, 322.) In Wright the court examined the constitutionality of the medical malpractice act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 110, pars. 58.2 through 58.10), which created the requirement of a review panel, composed of a doctor, a lawyer, and a circuit judge, to hear and determine malpractice claims. The circuit judge was to preside over the hearing and decide procedural and evidentiary issues, leaving substantive issues of law and fact to be decided by the panel as a whole. Although the party was not bound by the findings of the panel and could proceed to the circuit court, he faced the possibility of paying fees and costs if he did not ultimately prevail in that court. This court found such legislation unconstitutional, holding that it “empowers the nonjudicial members of the medical review panel to exercise a judicial function in violation of sections 1 and 9 of article VI of the Constitution.” Wright, 63 Ill. 2d at 322. In Bernier this court once again addressed an attempt by the legislature to limit malpractice actions by creating a review panel of a doctor, a lawyer and a judge to determine liability and assess damages. In distinction to the review panel in Wright, the judicial member of the review panel considered in Bernier was vested with sole authority over all legal issues. Issues of fact remained to be decided by the panel as a whole. This court found that the statute in Bernier also violated the Illinois Constitution. The court held that the issue was not whether the judicial member exclusively or the panel as a whole determined questions of law. Rather, the panel procedures were unconstitutional because they failed to distinguish between the functions and roles of the judicial and the nonjudicial members. The procedures examined in Wright and Bernier differed essentially from the procedure required by section 2 — 622. In Wright and Bernier, the roles of the judicial and nonjudicial members of the review panels overlapped, and were at times indistinguishable. Under the procedure set out in section 2 — 622, on the other hand, there is no sharing of judicial power. Section 2 — 622 mandates that an advisory opinion, in the form of a report made by a health care professional, be attached to the complaint. The judge presumably takes the medical report into account in determining the sufficiency of the complaint. However, the judge alone has power to dismiss the cause if he finds the complaint to be insufficient. Relying upon DeLuna, plaintiff asserts that when a medical professional’s determination completely bars a cause of action, there is an infringement upon the judiciary’s inherent power to determine whether a cause of action can be maintained. The DeLuna court, defining judicial power as “[t]he power which adjudicates upon and protects the rights and interests of individual citizens, and to that end construes and applies the law,” stated: “[I]n section 2 — 622, the legislature unconstitutionally delegates to a professional group the function of deciding whether a plaintiff’s claim should proceed to a hearing, for it is the role of the court, applying the law concerning the sufficiency of allegations in a complaint, to determine whether there is any set of facts under which the plaintiff may state a cause of action in a particular case and move on in the judicial process. *** It is one thing to require a medical malpractice plaintiff to provide expert opinion testimony at trial supporting his claim, yet quite another to give control over the ability of our courts to hear and decide medical malpractice cases to those experts.” DeLuna, 184 Ill. App. 3d at 806-07. Defendants criticize the DeLuna holding, contending that it is premised on two incorrect assumptions: (1) that the General Assembly’s enactment of the pleading requirements encroaches upon judicial power and (2) that the health professional’s review of a case is in itself an exercise of judicial power. Defendants point out that judicial power is coterminous with jurisdiction and that, absent a conflicting supreme court rule, it is always concurrent with the legislature’s power to enact laws governing judicial practice in the exercise of the legislature’s charge to determine and effectuate public policy. (People v. Cox (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 268; People v. Jackson (1977), 69 Ill. 2d 252.) The most salient example of the legislature’s concurrent powers is the enactment of the Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 1 — 101 et seq.). It was stated in- Strukoff that this court possesses rulemaking authority to regulate the trial of cases, and that a conflicting statute would infringe upon the power of the judiciary. (Strukoff, 76 Ill. 2d at 58.) However, in this case, as in Strukoff, no conflict exists between a supreme court rule and the statute at issue. As we held in reversing the appellate court in DeLuna, 147 Ill. 2d at 71, section 2 — 622 is consistent with Supreme Court Rule 137 (134 Ill. 2d R. 137), which requires that, before filing a complaint, an attorney must conduct a “reasonable inquiry” into whether a claim is well-founded in fact. In Agran v. Checker Taxi Co. (1952), 412 Ill. 145, the court held invalid a statute requiring the giving of a five-day notice to every attorney of record prior to an ex parte action to dismiss a case for want of prosecution. The court further found that the legislature had intruded upon the inherent power of the court to adjudge, determine and render a judgment. Agran, 412 Ill. at 150. The statute in Agran specified the court procedure to be followed after the court’s jurisdiction had been properly invoked and it had begun to exercise its purely judicial duties. Here, we confront a statutory requirement affecting procedure prior to attachment of the court’s jurisdiction. In this, section 2 — 622 is similar to statutes of repose or limitations governing medical malpractice suits, which have been found constitutional. Mega v. Holy Cross Hospital (1986), 111 Ill. 2d 416, 424; Anderson v. Wagner (1979), 79 Ill. 2d 295, 313. The doctrine of separation of powers does not contemplate that there should be “ ‘rigidly separated compartments’ ” or “ ‘a complete divorce among the three branches of government.’ ” (Strukoff, 76 Ill. 2d at 58, quoting In re Estate of Barker (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 113, 119.) Nor does the constitution forbid every exercise by one branch of government of functions which are usually exercised by another branch. (People v. Farr (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 209, 213, citing City of Waukegan v. Pollution Control Board (1974), 57 Ill. 2d 170, 174-75.) The separate spheres of governmental authority may overlap. (County of Kane v. Carlson (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 186, 208.) Legislative enactments may regulate the court’s practice so long as they do not dictate to the court how it must adjudicate and apply the law or conflict with the court’s right to control its procedures. (O’Connell v. St. Francis Hospital (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 273, 281.) This court has repeatedly recognized that the legislature may impose reasonable limitations and conditions upon access to the courts. Buzz Barton & Associates, Inc. v. Giannone (1985), 108 Ill. 2d 373, 383. The requirement that an affidavit be attached to a pleading is not new to Illinois law. In 1862 this court upheld dismissal of the defendant’s plea because he had failed to submit with it an affidavit of merits, as required by the statute. (Roberts v. Thomson (1862), 28 Ill. 79.) The court remarked that it had no wish to exalt the “salutary rule of practice” to the “dignity of a constitutional question,” but had no doubt of the legislature’s competency to exact such a rule of practice. Roberts, 28 Ill. at 81. In People ex rel. County Collector v. Jeri, Ltd. (1968), 40 Ill. 2d 293, this court rejected the contention that the statutory requirement of attaching a transcript of evidence relating to the findings of the trial court to a court order for the issuance of a tax deed constituted a legislative infringement on the power of the judiciary. The court pointed out that the requirement did not purport to direct how a court should decide cases, nor did it limit the power of a judge to determine facts and apply the law to them. (County Collector, 40 Ill. 2d at 302.) Similarly, section 2 — 622 does not direct the judge to accept or dismiss a medical malpractice complaint to which the required medical report and affidavit have been attached. The judge must still examine the facts as laid out in the complaint and determine whether the allegations are sufficient to state a cause of action. Thus, the court does not relinquish its decisionmaking authority. The court examined another alleged legislative invasion of judiciary authority in People v. Youngbey (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 556, where the challenged statute required a nonwaivable presentence report in felony cases. Although the imposition of a criminal sentence is a judicial function (People v. Phillips (1977), 66 Ill. 2d 412), the court found that the statute at issue in Youngbey did not infringe upon the inherent powers of the judiciary, as it related solely to a presentencing procedure. (Youngbey, 82 Ill. 2d at 560.) The presentence report was found to be a useful tool for the sentencing judge, insuring that he would have all the necessary information before the sentence was imposed. (Youngbey, 82 Ill. 2d at 564.) Similarly, we believe that section 2 — 622 serves the purpose of informing the judge, who cannot be expected to have the medical knowledge of a professional in the field, of the learned opinion of a health professional with training and experience in a specialized area. Although he could recognize the elements of breach of contract on the face of a complaint, a judge without medical training might well be unable to determine that a “right pneumothorax” could be related to an “improper jugular catheterization.” Thus, rather than limiting the power of a judge to determine facts, the statute helps him to understand the facts. Consequently, we find that the legislature, in enacting section 2 — 622, did not encroach on judicial power. Under section 2 — 622, the health care professional is to make a factual determination concerning the quality of care given the plaintiff. If the health professional believes that the plaintiff was not given proper care, he states his opinion that there is a “reasonable and meritorious cause” for filing suit. The health professional offers that opinion from the point of view of a layman with a specialty in the same medical field as that of the defendant, rather than from the standpoint of a legal professional. The statute does not require that the health care professional base his opinion upon legal principles. Nor must the health professional make the ultimate decision on any facts. He simply states, based upon the assumption that the information supplied by the plaintiff is true, that, in his view, the plaintiff’s cause is reasonable and has merit. Whether the information is indeed true is a matter to be decided by the court. The health care professional is not asked to give his views concerning the outcome of the suit. Rather, he is to base his determination on a “review of the medical record and other relevant material involved in the particular action.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622(a)(1).) Thus, the health professional certifies the underlying claim rather than the cause of action. It is the court’s responsibility,' then, to judge the legal sufficiency of the complaint. Consequently, we find that the health care professional does not exercise judicial power. Plaintiff’s final contention is that the prerequisites of section 2 — 622 deny him a remedy guaranteed by the Illinois and the United States Constitutions. Article I, section 12, of the Illinois Constitution provides: “Every person shall find a certain remedy in the laws for all injuries and wrongs which he receives to his person, privacy, property or reputation. He shall obtain justice by law, freely, completely, and promptly.” (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §12.) This court has stated that the “certain remedy” provision is merely an expression of philosophy, and does not mandate that a certain remedy be provided in any form for any alleged wrong. (Mega v. Holy Cross Hospital (1986), 111 Ill. 2d 416, 424.) In Mega the court found that the constitutional right to a remedy was not violated by application of a four-year medical malpractice limitations period, even though its effect was to bar injuries discovered after that time. Mega, 111 Ill. 2d at 423-24. We recognize that obtaining the affidavit and report of a medical care professional places an added burden on the medical malpractice plaintiff. However, the medical malpractice plaintiff already has a burden not required in other cases — that of presenting expert medical testimony at trial. We find that the benefits of preventing frivolous suits outweigh the burden on the plaintiff. Further, the plaintiff is not required to accept the determination of a medical professional who might be hostile to his claim. Just as he selects his own expert witness at trial, the plaintiff can interview any number of medical professionals before finding one who agrees with him that his case has merit. Finally, under section 2 — 622(a)(2), a plaintiff unable to secure the required medical report at the time of filing his complaint because a statute of limitations would impair the action is permitted an additional 90 days to obtain the report. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2— 622(a)(2).) Here the plaintiff received two 90-day extensions, yet apparently was unable to obtain a favorable medical consultation within that time. That the plaintiff is unable to fulfill pleading requirements does not mean that he has been denied a constitutionally guaranteed remedy. The medical malpractice plaintiff who finds the court house door locked because his complaint is not in conformity with section 2 — 622 need only ask a qualified health care professional for the key. By consulting with the health care professional whom he has selected, the plaintiff will have the means of ascertaining that his pleadings are factually correct. If the plaintiff cannot find at least one health care professional willing to report that the plaintiff’s claim is reasonable and meritorious, it is unlikely that he will be able to fulfill the requirements of Supreme Court Rule 137, which requires the plaintiff or his attorney to certify that, “to the best of his knowledge, information, and belief formed after reasonable inquiry,” the pleading is well-grounded in fact. (Emphasis added.) 134 Ill. 2d R. 137. Before the medical malpractice plaintiff is entitled to a remedy, he must show the existence of a wrong. Section 2 — 622’s requirements are simply a means of ensuring the factual validity of the plaintiff’s allegations. Thus, we find that section 2 — 622 does not deprive the plaintiff of a constitutionally guaranteed remedy. For the reasons stated above, we affirm the judgment of the appellate court. Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9739273 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:34.962076+00 ===

JUSTICE CUNNINGHAM, specially concurring: Although I concur with my colleagues in the disposition of the present appeal, I write separately to explain an additional basis for my agreement. In my opinion the adjudicatory process has not yet come into play when certification is required under section 2 — 622. The affidavit with attached written report of a health professional is a pleading requirement. If noncompliance is not raised by the defendant, the requirement is waived. The argument that the certification requirement violates the constitutional separation of powers is not valid because the health professional is not applying legal principles to the facts of a particular case. Rather, the health professional is only rendering an opinion which will assist the court in applying legal principles to the facts of a particular case. The health professional is not making a legal judgment but is making a professional judgment derived from the particular health professional’s own training and experience. Section 2 — 622 provides in part “that the reviewing health professional has determined in a written report, after a review of the medical record and other relevant material involved in the particular action that there is a reasonable and meritorious cause for the filing of such action ***.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2— 622(a)(1).) The health professional who must review the medical record, in order to make a medical judgment, must also have some knowledge of the facts of the particular situation in order to render an opinion. This does not mean that the health professional is applying legal principles to the facts. While the word “meritorious” has a legal connotation (defined as “[possessing or characterized by ‘merit’ in the legal sense of the word” (Black’s Law Dictionary 892 (5th ed. 1979)), its use in section 2 — 622 does not grant the health professional the power to make the final determination as to whether the cause has merit. Rather, the court makes that final determination vis-avis section 2 — 619 because section 2 — 622 provides that “[t]he failure to file a certificate required by this Section shall be grounds for dismissal under Section 2 — 619.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 622(g). Section 2 — 619 sets forth the provisions for involuntary dismissal and 2 — 619(c) permits the plaintiff to establish facts “obviating the grounds of defect” and authorizes the court to hear and determine the same and to grant or deny the motion. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 619.) It is the involuntary dismissal proceeding under section 2 — 619 that brings the adjudicatory or judicial function into play. Thus, it is the trial judge, not the health professional, who makes the final determination whether a cause is to be dismissed. The trial judge is merely assisted in that determination by the opinion of the health professional. It should also be noted that section 2 — 622(c) provides that a certificate of a health professional is also required when the plaintiff relies on res ipsa loquitur. However, section 2 — 622(c) refers to res ipsa loquitur as defined in section 2 — 1113. Section 2 — 1113 provides that the court shall determine whether res ipsa loquitur applies and provides that the court, in making that determination, shall rely upon either the common knowledge of laymen, if it determines that to be adequate, or upon expert medical testimony. Thus, in deciding a motion for involuntary dismissal under section 2 — 619, not only may the court hear and determine matters obviating the defects, but in cases involving res ipsa loquitur the court may also determine whether the alleged malpractice is of the nature that does not require medical testimony but is within the common knowledge of laymen. It is not the health professional who makes that determination but the court, just as the court makes the determination whether the plaintiffs complaint is to be dismissed for failing to contain the necessary affidavit and accompanying health professional’s report. In summary, section 2 — 622 simply sets forth pleading requirements as do many other sections of the Code. The judicial function is performed under section 2 — 619 when the trial judge determines whether the case should be dismissed for failure to comply with section 2 — 622. If the required certification is not filed and the court, under section 2 — 619, determines that one should have been filed, the court may dismiss the case. That is exactly what the court is required to do at the end of the plaintiff’s case at trial if the plaintiff fails to present the testimony of an expert witness to establish the applicable standard of care and its violation. At the pleading stage, the case may be dismissed because of the plaintiff’s failure to present the affidavit of the attorney and accompanying report of a health professional with the complaint. At the end of the plaintiff’s case, it may be dismissed for failure to present evidence from a health professional. In neither case has a health professional usurped any judicial function, because in neither case has a health professional done anything but render an opinion. It is the plaintiff who has failed, in one instance, to plead properly, and in the other, to present the necessary evidence.

=== CASE 9739275 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:35.563531+00 ===

N. PATRICK CROOKS, J.
¶ 1. This is a review of a court of appeals' decision, which reversed the circuit court's conviction of John E Hunt (Hunt) on six criminal counts, including two counts of first-degree sexual assault of a child, one count of repeated sexual assault of the same child, one count of first-degree sexual assault causing pregnancy of a child, one count of *9exposing a child to harmful materials, and one count of second-degree sexual assault by use of force.1
¶ 2. This court is presented with the following issues: (1) Does a circuit court commit reversible error if it fails to provide a detailed Sullivan2 analysis for admitting other-acts evidence? (2) Is an appellate court required to perform an independent review of the record for permissible bases for admitting other-acts evidence if the circuit court fails to adequately provide a Sullivan analysis, or alternatively states an impermissible basis for the admission of such evidence? (3) Is an appellate court required to reverse a defendant's convictions on all counts if the circuit court states an improper basis for the admission of other-acts evidence? (4) Is the court afforded greater latitude when applying the Sullivan analysis in cases dealing with sex crimes, especially where a child victim is involved?
¶ 3. We hold that the appellate court erred in reversing the conviction of Hunt on all six counts. Accordingly, we reverse the decision of the court of appeals. Although the circuit court could have provided a more detailed or exhaustive Sullivan analysis for admitting the other-acts evidence in this case, reversal was not appropriate here.
¶ 4. Additionally, pursuant to the well-established independent review doctrine in Wisconsin, we hold that the court of appeals is required independently to review the record if the circuit court fails to provide a detailed Sullivan analysis. Based upon our independent review of the record, we hold that there were reasonable bases justifying the circuit court's decision to admit the other-*10acts evidence pursuant to Sullivan. The other-acts evidence was properly admitted pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 904.04(2) (1999-2000)3 to prove motive, opportunity, intent, absence of mistake or accident, and context.4 The circuit court properly admitted the other-acts evidence to provide the necessary background for understanding Hunt's behavior and to provide an indepen*11dent source as to the victims' credibility, as well as their state of mind, in light of their recantations of prior charges against Hunt.
¶ 5. In addition to holding that there were permissible purposes, we hold that the other-acts evidence was relevant and probative. Moreover, we hold that the circuit court's cautionary jury instructions on the other-acts evidence mitigated any potential danger of causing unfair prejudice, confusion, misleading the jury, or undue delay.
¶ 6. Here, where permissible purposes existed for the admission of other-acts evidence, and where strong DNA evidence had been introduced, we hold that the court of appeals was not correct in reversing the convictions on all counts. The conviction on the charge of first-degree sexual assault causing pregnancy should have been upheld, even if there were not permissible purposes for the admission of other-acts evidence.
¶ 7. Finally, we hold that the circuit court properly applied the greater latitude rule in allowing other-acts evidence in this case where there were charges of sex crimes, especially since child victims were involved.
I. FACTS
¶ 8. The facts of this case are undisputed. John Patrick Hunt (Hunt) lived with his wife, Ruth,5 and their six children. In 1988 Angelica J. and her three children, 15-year-old Tiffany and two other daughters, Lana and April, moved in with Hunt in a marital-type relationship. Angelica and her children resided with Hunt, Ruth, and the other children, in what was a *12functionally bigamist household. After Angelica arrived Hunt had another child with Ruth and three more with Angelica.
¶ 9. In 1998 Tiffany J. (Angelica's daughter from a previous relationship and 15 years old at the time) gave birth to a son, Isaiah. The DNA testing subsequently established that Hunt was the father of Tiffany's child. At the time of this dispute, the Hunt household had 13 people living in it: Hunt; his two "wives," Ruth and Angelica; and ten minor children.
¶ 10. On September 21, 1999, Ruth and Angelica took the children to the police station and reported that Hunt had threatened them and others in the household. Ruth informed Milwaukee police officers that she was afraid to return home, and that her husband had threatened their lives.
¶ 11. Based on the information provided in the police report the police officers accompanied them back to their home. Ruth and the others waited in the car about a half-block away, while the officers went to the premises. At the home the officers arrested Hunt and allowed the others back inside.
¶ 12. After the arrest of Hunt police officers interviewed members of the family. Officers learned that Hunt frequently smoked crack cocaine and would force the entire family into the upstairs portion of the home, which was without running water, for the duration of his drug use. It was also revealed, through these interviews, that Hunt would force either Tiffany or Angelica J. to have sexual intercourse with him while he was smoking crack cocaine.
¶ 13. Hunt was charged by the Milwaukee County District Attorney, E. Michael McCann, with six criminal counts, including two counts of first-degree sexual assault of a child, one count of repeated sexual assault *13of the same child, one count of first-degree sexual assault resulting in the pregnancy of a child, one count of exposing a child to harmful materials, and one count of second-degree sexual assault by use of force.
¶ 14. After the charges were filed the victims and witnesses recanted their statements to police officers and refused further cooperation with the prosecution.
¶ 15. On February 28, 2000, as a result of the women's refusal to cooperate, the prosecutor filed a pre-trial motion in limine seeking, inter alia, the introduction of other-acts evidence that Hunt had physically and sexually abused Ruth, Tiffany, and Angelica. Under Wis. Stat. § 904.04(2) (1997-98) evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove character of a person to show that he acted in conformity therewith, but may be permitted for purposes such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or accident.6 In support of its motion, the prosecution *14argued that the other-acts evidence was admissible under Wis. Stat. § 904.04(2) as relevant and probative of the context in which these sexual offenses occurred, and was part of the corpus of the crimes with which Hunt had been charged. The prosecution asserted that the other-acts evidence related directly to the victims' state of mind, and their past acts of recanting prior charges against Hunt.
¶ 16. With respect to the other-acts evidence of Hunt's drug use, the prosecution argued that those allegations ie.g., that he constantly smoked crack) provided the necessary background for understanding Hunt's behavior and provided an independent source of information about the credibility of the victims' stories. *15Moreover, the prosecution argued that the other-acts drug evidence was highly relevant in light of the victims' current recantations.
¶ 17. Defense counsel, Thomas M. Bartell,7 filed a brief in opposition to the motion in limine, and the prosecutor later filed a supplemental motion to admit evidence that Hunt had previously used drugs. The supplemental motion listed three reasons for the inclusion of the other-acts evidence: (1) as part of the corpus of the crimes; (2) context and necessary background information; and (3) for corroboration of the information previously given to police, since the witnesses were recanting their §tories.
¶ 18. The circuit court held a pre-trial motion hearing, where the prosecutor repeated the arguments for the other-acts evidence, and also pointed out that the evidence would help the jury understand the recantations by the witnesses, as well as the circumstances of the case. In addition, the prosecutor argued that the evidence showed an absence of mistake on Hunt's part and that the evidence showed opportunity and motive. Over defense objections Judge Dennis E Moroney granted the State's motion in limine and allowed the State to introduce some of the other-acts evidence it requested.8
*16¶ 19. In its analysis, the circuit court specifically referred to the Sullivan test for admitting the evidence of other-acts. State v. Sullivan, 216 Wis. 2d 768, 576 N.W.2d 30 (1998). The circuit court judge said:
The Court would find that the threshold requirements of a 904.04 other acts evidence have been satisfied in this case. I think there is not much question about that just based upon what I have heard, and also what I have read in the case and also the certain *17amount of information that has been provided but then certainly — certainly denied at various times, and it goes to the credibility of the people, I grant you, but it — but it also goes to whether or not contextually in this case here to show whether or not he acted in conformity therewith under the — you know, under the rules of the other acts evidence.
So therefore I think that there is relevancy under the three-prong test of Sullivan. There is no — certainly the appropriate reasons under the 904.04. There certainly is a relevancy connected with this which would give some corroborative effect to the initial statements, at least of the witnesses, and certainly then you have got to take a look and, yes, it is prejudicial to the extent that any evidence that could be received in the case against Mr. Hunt would be prejudicial. I mean that goes without saying. Anything contrary or anything against him is prejudicial, but whether or not the relevancy under the appropriateness of the other acts evidence, particularly in a sexual assault case which historically is more of a one-on-one situation, the rule is that, and especially in view of the issues affecting Ruthie Hunt and may very well be involved though the same things enter into as far as Tiffany is concerned.
(R. 71:38-39); see also Pet'r App. at 129-30.
¶ 20. In addition to allowing the evidence, the circuit court judge reasoned that the application of the greater latitude rule was appropriate because the case involved a sexual assault of a child.9
¶ 21. In light of the circuit court's ruling the prosecution introduced evidence that: (1) Hunt had *18been reported to the police for using drugs; (2) Ruth *19had sought restraining orders against him on three prior occasions; (3) Hunt had verbally threatened Ruth and others in the household; and (4) Hunt had physically abused Angelica and Ruth in the past. The jury also heard evidence concerning DNA testing, which established Hunt's paternity of 15-year-old Tiffany's child. The DNA test established the likelihood of Hunt's paternity of the child at 99.989 percent.
¶ 22. At the conclusion of the trial the circuit court judge instructed the jury, using the standard jury instruction, Wis JI — Criminal 275, that it could only use the evidence of Hunt's prior bad acts for specific permissible purposes, such as Hunt's opportunity, intent, the absence of mistake or accident, motive, and preparation or plan. No mention was made of context in the instruction given. The circuit court also warned the jury that it could not make any conclusions of Hunt's character or propensity to commit the crime charged based on the other-acts evidence.10 No objection was *20made by the defense, and the jury found Hunt guilty on all six counts. Hunt received a sentence totaling 122 years in prison on four counts, and he was placed on probation on the two remaining counts.
¶ 23. Hunt appealed arguing, inter alia, that the circuit court erred when it allowed the prosecution to introduce evidence that Hunt had engaged in prior bad acts, including illegal drug use and the physical and sexual abuse of Ruth.
*21¶ 24. The court of appeals concluded that the circuit court erred in admitting the other-acts evidence and that the error was not harmless. As a result the court of appeals reversed Hunt's judgment of conviction and remanded the entire matter to the circuit court for a new trial.
¶ 25. In reaching its decision the court of appeals reasoned that the circuit court had committed two errors. First, when addressing the "context" rationale for admitting the other-acts evidence in the pre-trial ruling, the circuit court stated that the evidence "also goes to show whether or not he acted in conformity therewith." The court of appeals found that clearly was an erroneous basis for admitting other-acts evidence, as the State had conceded. The court of appeals, however, did not discuss the permissible bases on which the circuit court held the other-acts evidence admissible; instead, the appellate court concluded that the judge's "propensity rationale" required reversal of all of Hunt's convictions. Contrary to the cautionary jury instructions given by the circuit court, the court of appeals nevertheless opined:
Although the circuit court could have mitigated the unfairly prejudicial effect of the evidence by giving a cautionary instruction to the jury about the purposes for which the evidence was admitted and the proper use of that evidence in their deliberations it gave no such instruction... While it is doubtful that, given the nature of the other acts evidence allowed, a cautionary instruction could have reduced the prejudice to Hunt to such a degree that the evidentiary.ruling could have been upheld, the circuit court's failure to give such an instruction further solidifies our conclusion that admission of the evidence was erroneous and unfairly prejudiced Hunt's defense.
*22State v. Hunt, No. 01-0272-CR, unpublished order at 6 (Wis. Ct. App. Jul. 17, 2002).
¶ 26. Second, the court of appeals reasoned that the circuit court had erroneously applied the greater latitude rule for admitting other-acts evidence in a case involving the sexual assault of a child. According to the court of appeals the greater latitude test did not apply because the other acts that were identified to the jury were not sufficiently similar to the sexual assault crimes with which Hunt was charged in this case. In reaching its decision, the court of appeals said:
We are satisfied that the prejudicial effect of the admitted evidence substantially and unfairly outweighed its probative value, primarily because the other acts evidence involved behavior significantly different than that for which Hunt was being tried.
Id.
¶ 27. The State petitioned this court for review, which we granted on November 12, 2002.
II. WISCONSIN STATUTE § 904.04(2) AND OTHER-ACTS EVIDENCE LAW
¶ 28. Before engaging in an analysis of the issues presented it is necessary to understand the historical background of Wisconsin's other-acts evidence law.
¶ 29. Generally, "[e]vidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show that the person acted in conformity therewith." Wis. Stat. § 904.04(2). However, Wis. Stat. § 904.04(2) allows other-acts evidence to be admitted "when offered for other purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, *23knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or accident." As we noted in State v. Hammer:
. . . not all of the exceptions under Wis. Stat. § (Rule) 904.04(2) must be met. "The exceptions listed in the statute [§ (Rule) 904.04(2)] are not mutually exclusive. The exceptions slide into each other; they are impossible to state with categorical precision and the same evidence may fall into more than one exception." State v. Tarrell, 74 Wis. 2d 647, 662, 247 N.W.2d 696 (1976) (Abrahamson, J., dissenting). What is required is "one" acceptable purpose. State v. Sullivan, 216 Wis. 2d 768, 772, 576 N.W.2d 30 (1998); State v. Alsteen, 108 Wis. 2d 723, 729, 324 N.W.2d 426 (1982).
State v. Hammer, 2000 WI 92, ¶ 29, 236 Wis. 2d 686, 613 N.W.2d 629.
¶ 30. In Whitty v. State, 34 Wis. 2d 278, 292, 149 N.W.2d 557 (1967), this court noted the danger in admitting prior acts evidence. The court set forth reasons for limiting the use of such evidence: (1) The overwhelming tendency to presume the defendant is guilty because he is a person likely to commit such acts; (2) the tendency to condemn not because of the defendant's actual guilt, but because he may have escaped punishment for previous acts; (3) the injustice in attacking a person who is not prepared to show that the evidence used for attack is fabricated; and (4) the confusion of issues that may result in the introduction of other crimes.
¶ 31. This court reaffirmed the cautionary rationale behind admitting other-acts evidence expressed in Whitty in our decision in Sullivan. In Sullivan the defendant was convicted of battery and disorderly conduct, apparently in part due to evidence introduced at trial of a prior act of domestic disturbance. The defendant's ex-wife and neighbor testified about the *24prior act of domestic disturbance. The defendant appealed and the court of appeals affirmed. On review this court held that the other-acts evidence was offered for a permissible purpose but was not probative of defendant's intent or absence of accident. In reaching our decision, we set forth a three-part analytical test for determining when other-acts evidence can be admitted.
¶ 32. The Sullivan test provided circuit courts with an analytical framework for deciding the admissibility of other-acts evidence. The three-part test asks the court to consider: (1) Whether the evidence is offered for a permissible purpose; (2) whether the evidence is relevant; and (3) whether the probative value of the evidence is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the jury or needless delay.11 Sullivan, 216 Wis. 2d at 772.
III. ISSUES
¶ 33. As noted previously, this court is presented with the following issues: (1) Does a circuit court commit reversible error if it fails to provide a detailed Sullivan analysis for admitting other-acts evidence? (2) Is an appellate court required to perform an indepen*25dent review of the record for permissible bases for admitting other-acts evidence under Sullivan if the circuit court fails to adequately provide a Sullivan analysis or states an impermissible basis? (3) Is an appellate court required to reverse a defendant's convictions on all counts if the circuit court states an improper basis for the admission of other-acts evidence? (4) Is the court afforded greater latitude when applying the Sullivan analysis in cases dealing with sex crimes especially where a child victim is involved?
IV STANDARD OF REVIEW
¶ 34. The applicable standard for reviewing a circuit court's admission of other-acts evidence is whether the court exercised appropriate discretion. State v. Pharr, 115 Wis. 2d 334, 342, 340 N.W.2d 498 (1983). An appellate court will sustain an evidentiary ruling if it finds that the circuit court examined the relevant facts, applied a proper standard of law, used a demonstrated rational process, and reached a conclusion that a reasonable judge could reach. Loy v. Bunderson, 107 Wis. 2d 400, 414-415, 320 N.W.2d 175 (1982) (citing McCleary v. State, 49 Wis. 2d 263, 182 N.W.2d 512 (1971)). A circuit court's failure to delineate the factors that influenced its decision constitutes an erroneous exercise of discretion. See McCleary, 49 Wis. 2d at 282. When a circuit court fails to set forth its reasoning, it has been held that an appellate court independently should review the record to determine whether it provides an appropriate basis for the circuit court's decision. See Pharr, 115 Wis. 2d at 343.
*26V APPLICATION OF THE SULLIVAN TEST
¶ 35. The State asks this court to reverse the decision of the court of appeals. The State argues that by failing to conduct an independent review of the record, as required by Sullivan, the court of appeals erroneously reversed the circuit court's admission of other-acts evidence and, therefore, erroneously reversed Hunt's convictions. The State maintains that the court of appeals' decision reflects an unanticipated interpretation of the Sullivan test and such an interpretation implies that per se reversible error occurs when a circuit court does not adequately explain its reasons for admitting other-acts evidence. The State argues that the aforementioned interpretation of Sullivan is problematic because it relieves the appellate court of any obligation independently to review the record to sustain the circuit court's decision. In support of its position the State maintains that independent review has previously been recognized in many cases, and that, therefore, the appellate court ignored well-established case law.
¶ 36. Next, the State contends that had the court of appeals engaged in an independent review of the record, it would have discovered that in addition to the alleged improper "propensity" rationale expressed by the circuit court, the circuit court based the admission of the other-acts evidence on five additional permissible bases. The State argues that instead of analyzing the circuit court's proper reasons for admitting the other-acts evidence (i.e., motive, opportunity, intent, absence of mistake or accident, and context) the court of appeals simply relied on the one concededly erroneous "propensity rationale" expressed by the circuit court.
¶ 37. Moreover, the State asserts that the court of appeals' improper and inadequate analysis is reflected *27in the court's erroneous statement that the circuit court never instructed the jury that the other-acts evidence could not be used as propensity evidence. The State points out that a cautionary instruction was given to the jury, twice.
¶ 38. Hunt disagrees and argues that the court of appeals was correct in its summary reversal of all counts. Hunt maintains that Sullivan requires all parts of the three-prong test to be satisfied. Because the court of appeals determined the probative value of the other-acts evidence was substantially outweighed by the potential prejudicial effect, the evidence should have been excluded. Hunt asserts that the court of appeals was not suggesting that no cautionary instruction was given, but rather that a proper instruction was not given.12 Hunt argues that a proper instruction should have included a definition of "context" by which the court allowed the other-acts evidence to be admitted.
¶ 39. Moreover, Hunt maintains that while the State gave an extensive list of permissible purposes for the other-acts evidence, it was really introduced for propensity purposes. Hunt argues that the great number of other-acts admitted at trial prejudiced the jury and led to confusion of the jury.
*28¶ 40. Next, Hunt claims that the court of appeals had no obligation independently to review the record when the circuit court failed to provide a detailed Sullivan analysis and admitted other-acts evidence for an impermissible purpose. Moreover, Hunt argues that the court of appeals was not required independently to review the record given the sheer size of the record. Hunt maintains that independent review of each prior act admitted into evidence would be impractical. Hunt also argues that independent review would have led the court of appeals to the same conclusion because the alleged prior bad acts were not admitted for a permissible purpose, were not relevant, and did not accurately explain the recantation of witnesses.
¶ 41. Hunt argues that an appellate court is required to reverse a judgment of conviction if the circuit court erroneously admits evidence for propensity purposes. Hunt maintains that reversal is required when prior acts are improperly admitted into evidence without conducting a proper Sullivan analysis for each prior act, and without giving the jury a proper instruction based upon this analysis. Moreover, Hunt argues that because the cautionary instruction was too broad and most likely ineffective, the jury likely used the other-acts evidence for the impermissible purpose of propensity.
VI. ANALYSIS
¶ 42. Upon review of evidentiary issues, "[t]he question on appeal is not whether this court, ruling initially on the admissibility of the evidence, would have permitted it to come in, but whether the trial court exercised its discretion in accordance with accepted legal standards and in accordance with the facts *29of the record." Pharr, 115 Wis. 2d at 342 (citations omitted). This court will not find an abuse (now an erroneous exercise) of discretion, if there is a reasonable basis for the circuit court's determination. Id. (citing Boodry v. Byrne, 22 Wis. 2d 585, 589, 126 N.W.2d 503 (1964)). However, in order for a discretionary decision to be upheld, "there should be evidence in the record that discretion was in fact exercised and the basis of that exercise of discretion should be set forth." Id. (citing State v. Hutnik, 39 Wis. 2d 754, 764, 159 N.W.2d 733 (1968)).
A. Automatic Reversal/Duty To Review The Records
¶ 43. The State maintains that the court of appeals erred in interpreting Sullivan. We agree. Sullivan does not state, as the decision of the court of appeals suggests, that in situations where the circuit court fails to set forth a detailed analysis for admitting or excluding other-acts evidence, the reviewing court should summarily reverse all counts. Here the circuit court did explain its reasons for the admission of other-acts evidence, but it could have provided a more detailed Sullivan analysis for the decisions made.
¶ 44. Rather, Sullivan requires that the circuit court "articulate its reasoning for admitting or excluding the evidence, applying the facts of the case to the analytical framework." Sullivan, 216 Wis. 2d at 774. A circuit court's failure to delineate, with sufficient detail, the factors that influenced its decision in admitting other-acts evidence would seem to be contrary to the requirements we set forth in Sullivan. That case declared that ordinarily the appropriate recourse for the court of appeals should be to review the record inde*30pendently, to determine the existence of a reasonable basis for the circuit court's discretionary decision.13 As noted in Sullivan:
A circuit court's failure to delineate factors that influenced its decision constitutes an erroneous exercise of discretion. When a circuit court fails to set forth its reasoning, appellate courts independently review the record to determine whether it provides a basis for the circuit court's exercise of discretion.
Id. at 781 (citations omitted).
¶ 45. The independent review doctrine set forth in Sullivan is well-settled law in Wisconsin. See Hammen v. State, 87 Wis. 2d 791, 800, 275 N.W.2d 709 (1979) (holding this court will uphold a discretionary decision of the trial court, if the record contains facts which would support the trial court's decision had it fully exercised its discretion); State v. Alsteen, 108 Wis. 2d 723, 728, 324 N.W.2d 426 (1982); and Pharr, 115 Wis. 2d at 343.14
*31¶ 46. Upon review of this case it is clear that the court of appeals ignored the independent review doctrine and its duty independently to review the record in this case. The court of appeals failed even to mention such duty. Instead, the court of appeals stated that its standard of review of evidentiary decisions was the "erroneous exercise of discretion" standard. Although the court of appeals cited portions of Sullivan, it failed to cite Sullivan's independent review rule. State v. Hunt, No. 01-0272-CR, unpublished order at 6 (Wis. Ct. App. Jul. 17, 2002) (citing State v. Chambers, 173 Wis. 2d 237, 255, 496 N.W.2d 191 (1992), and Sullivan, 216 Wis. 2d at 780-81).
¶ 47. Hunt now attempts to argue that the court of appeals did not opine that no cautionary instruction was given, but rather, indicated that a proper instruction should have included a definition of context.
¶ 48. The court of appeals stated: "Although the circuit court could have mitigated the unfairly prejudicial effect of the evidence by giving a cautionary instruction to the jury about the purposes for which the evidence was admitted and the proper use of that evidence in their deliberations, it gave no such instruction." Hunt, unpublished order at 6 (citations omitted). The court of appeals' statement clearly conflicts with the record. The circuit court properly instructed the jury regarding the proper purposes for which it should consider the evidence. Moreover, the circuit court properly instructed the jury on two separate occasions that *32it could not consider the evidence for improper purposes, such as propensity, or to conclude that Hunt was a bad man.
¶ 49. In addition to ignoring the cautionary instruction given by the circuit court, had the court of appeals conducted an independent review of the record it would have discovered at least five permissible bases pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 904.04(2) to admit the other-acts evidence.
¶ 50. In failing to review the record independently the court of appeals essentially rewrote the independent review doctrine, set forth in Sullivan, to require summary dismissal if the circuit court does not give what the court of appeals considers to be a clear explanation. We hold that such an interpretation of Sullivan is in error.
B. Admissibility Of Other-Acts Evidence
¶ 51. After our own independent review of the record we hold that the circuit court did not erroneously exercise its discretion in admitting the other-acts evidence. We hold that the circuit court had a reasonable basis for finding threshold requirements of a 904.04 other-acts evidence had been satisfied in this case, and admitting the other-acts evidence.
¶ 52. When reviewing a circuit court's determination for erroneous exercise of discretion an appellate court may consider acceptable purposes for the admission of evidence other than those contemplated by the circuit court, and may affirm the circuit court's decision for reasons not stated by the circuit court. See Sullivan, 216 Wis. 2d at 784-85. "Regardless of the extent of the trial court's reasoning, we will uphold a discretionary *33decision if there are facts in the record which would support the trial court's decision had it fully exercised its discretion." State v. Shillcutt, 116 Wis. 2d 227, 238, 341 N.W.2d 716 (Ct. App. 1983), aff'd on other grounds, 119 Wis. 2d 788, 350 N.W.2d 686 (1984).
¶ 53. As noted previously it is the party seeking to use other-acts evidence that bears the burden of establishing the relevance of other-acts evidence. Sullivan, 216 Wis. 2d at 774. However, it is the opponent of the admission of the evidence who must show that the probative value of the evidence is substantially outweighed by unfair prejudice. Id. at 773; State v. Speer, 176 Wis. 2d 1101, 1114, 501 N.W.2d 429 (1993).15
C. First Prong — Evidence Offered For A Permissible Purpose
¶ 54. We conclude under the first prong of Sullivan, that the other-acts evidence was properly admitted under Wis. Stat. § 904.04(2) as an exception. As noted previously, Wis. Stat. § 904.04(2) is not exhaustive.
¶ 55. The State's pre-trial motion in limine sought to introduce the other-acts evidence on the grounds that such evidence was admissible under Wis. Stat. § 904.04(2) for purposes of establishing the "context" in which these sexual offenses occurred, and part of the corpus of the crimes with which Hunt had been charged. The prosecution also asserted, both in its motion in limine and pre-trial argument to the circuit court, that the other-acts evidence related directly to *34the victims' state of mind and their past acts of recanting prior charges against Hunt.
¶ 56. With respect to the other-acts evidence of Hunt's drug use, the prosecution argued that those allegations (e.g., that he constantly smoked crack), provided the necessary background for understanding Hunt's behavior and provided an independent source of information about the credibility of the victims' stories. Moreover, the prosecution argued that the other-acts evidence was highly relevant in light of the victims' current recantation.
¶ 57. The circuit court agreed with the prosecution. Explicitly referring to the Sullivan test, the circuit court recognized permissible purposes under Wis. Stat. § 904.04(2) to admit the other-acts evidence. Those purposes included: (1) showing the context in which events (including the recantations) occurred in the case; (2) opportunity; (3) intent; (4) absence of mistake or accident; and (5) motive. Although the circuit court recognized the permissible purposes in admitting the other-acts evidence, the circuit court nevertheless stated:
... I think there is not much question about that just based upon what I have heard, and also what I have read in the case and also the certain amount of information that has been provided but then certainly— certainly denied at various times, and it goes to the credibility of the people, I grant you, but it — but it also goes to whether or not contextually in this case here to show whether or not he acted in conformity therewith under the — you know, under the rules of the other acts evidence.
(R. 71:38) As stated earlier, we recognize that the circuit court's reference to conformity was in error. *35However, we note that the statement was made during a pre-trial hearing, and was not made in the presence of the jury.
¶ 58. First, the circuit court could reasonably have concluded, as it did, that the other-acts evidence was admissible for the purpose of establishing context. Other-acts evidence is permissible to show the context of the crime and to provide a complete explanation of the case. Pharr, 115 Wis. 2d at 348-49; Shillcutt, 116 Wis. 2d at 236. The context of other-acts evidence in this case provided insight as to the unique circumstances in the Hunt household. The other-acts evidence provided an understanding of the abuse that took place in the home, and the authority and control Hunt possessed over Ruth, Angelica, and the children living with them. Moreover, the other-acts evidence of abuse toward Ruth, and drug use, provided a context in which the jury could understand the victims' and witnesses' fear of the defendant and their pattern of recantations.
¶1 59. The other-acts evidence was permissible to show the victims' state of mind, to corroborate information provided to the police, and to establish the credibility of victims and witnesses in light of their recantations. Such purposes have been held to be permissible purposes in Wisconsin. See State v. C.V.C., 153 Wis. 2d 145, 450 N.W.2d 463 (Ct. App. 1989) (holding that the other-acts evidence that husband had been charged with false imprisonment and sexual assault of his wife and had threatened his wife's life some two years earlier was properly admitted for limited purpose of showing the wife's state of mind on issue of whether she consented to acts of sexual intercourse); Kluck v. State, 223 Wis. 381, 389, 269 N.W. 683 (1936) (holding that, where other criminal acts are so connected with the offense *36charged that their commission directly tends to prove some element of the latter, such as guilty knowledge, or some specific intent, evidence of such other acts is admissible to explain or to corroborate the evidence showing the act charged); State v. Schaller, 199 Wis. 2d 23, 43, 544 N.W.2d 247 (Ct. App. 1995) (holding that evidence of the defendant's abuse of his child in a public park as testified to by third-party witnesses was admissible to illustrate extent to which his wife would go to extricate her husband, the defendant, from potential criminal prosecution and to assist jury in evaluating whether the wife was being truthful when she later recanted sexual assault charges against husband). While only mentioned in the cautionary instructions given, preparation or plan was also a permissible purpose for admission of other-acts evidence.
¶ 60. Next, the circuit court could reasonably have concluded that the other-acts evidence was admissible for the purpose of establishing opportunity and motive. When a defendant's motive for an alleged Sexual assault is an element of the charged crime, we have held that other crimes evidence may be offered for the purpose of establishing opportunity and motive. State v. Davidson, 2000 WI 91, ¶ 57, 236 Wis. 2d 537, 613 N.W.2d 606 (citations omitted). As noted before, Hunt was charged with two counts of first-degree sexual assault of a child (Wis. Stat. § 948.02(1)), one count of repeated sexual assault of the same child (Wis. Stat. § 948.025(1)), one count of first-degree sexual assault resulting in the pregnancy of a child (Wis. Stat. § 940.225(1)(a)), one count of exposing a child to harmful materials (Wis. Stat. § 948.11(2)(a)), and one count of second-degree sexual assault by use of force (Wis. Stat. § 940.225(2)(a)). As such, five out of the six crimes *37Hunt was charged with related to sexual assault. There is no doubt that sexual assault, involving either sexual contact or sexual intercourse, requires an intentional or volitional act by the perpetrator. See State v. Olson, 2000 WI App 158, ¶ 6-12, 238 Wis. 2d 74, 616 N.W.2d 144. As an example, under Wis. Stat. § 948.01(5)(a), sexual contact is defined as:
Intentional touching by the complainant or defendant, either directly or through clothing by the use of any body part or object, of the complaintant's or defendant's intimate parts if that intentional touching is either for the purpose of sexually degrading or sexually humiliating the complaintant or sexually arousing or gratifying the defendant.
The other-acts evidence was properly admitted to prove motive because purpose is an element of sexual assault, and motive and opportunity are relevant to purpose. State v. Plymesser, 172 Wis. 2d 583, 593-96, 493 N.W.2d 367 (1992). Thus, Hunt's motive or opportunity for allegedly touching or having intercourse with Tiffany J. was part of the corpus of the crimes charged, and evidence relevant to the motive or opportunity was therefore admissible. Id.
¶ 61. Similarly, according to the meaning of "sexual contact" under Wis. Stat. § 948.01(5)(a), the defendant had to intentionally touch the victims. The admission of the other-acts evidence was therefore relevant to show that the Hunt did not touch the victims by accident or mistake, but intended to do so.
D. Second Prong — Evidentiary Relevance
¶ 62. Under the second step of Sullivan we hold that the circuit court properly found the other-acts *38evidence to be relevant for the purposes of showing context, opportunity, intent, absence of mistake or accident, and motive.
¶ 63. Wisconsin Stat. § 904.01 defines "relevant evidence" as "evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more or less probable than it would be without the evidence."
¶ 64. "The measure of probative value in assessing relevance is the similarity between the charged offense and the other act." State v. Gray, 225 Wis. 2d 39, 58, 590 N.W.2d 918 (1999). Similarity is demonstrated by showing the "nearness of time, place, and circumstance" between the other act and the alleged crime. State v. Scheidell, 227 Wis. 2d 285, 305, 595 N.W.2d 661 (1999). It is within a circuit court's discretion to determine whether other-acts evidence is too remote. See Hough v. State, 70 Wis. 2d 807, 235 N.W.2d 534 (1975). There is no precise point at which a prior act is considered too remote, and remoteness must be considered on a case-by-case basis. State v. Friedrich, 135 Wis. 2d 1, 25, 398 N.W.2d 763 (1987). Even when evidence may be considered too remote, the evidence is not necessarily rendered irrelevant if the remoteness is balanced by the similarity of the two incidents. See State v. Mink, 146 Wis. 2d 1, 16, 429 N.W.2d 99 (Ct. App. 1988). For example, this court has, in other cases, upheld the admission of other-acts evidence, where the remoteness was over ten years. Plymesser, 172 Wis. 2d 583 at 596 (upholding the admissibility of 13-year-old evidence); State v. Kuntz, 160 Wis. 2d 722, 467 N.W.2d 531 (1991) (upholding the admissibility of 16-year-old evidence).
*39¶ 65. In the State's motion in limine, and in the State's oral argument to the circuit court, the State argued that the other-acts evidence involving the physical abuse of Ruth Hunt was relevant to show context, the defendant's state of mind, the victims' and witnesses' state of mind, absence of mistake or accident, as well as motive and opportunity.16
*40¶ 66. The circuit court judge agreed and stated: "There certainly is a relevancy connected with this which would give some corroborative effect to the initial statements, at least of the witnesses. ..." (R. 71:38)
¶ 67. We agree with the reasons offered by the State and the decision of the circuit court and hold that the other-acts evidence admitted by the circuit court satisfied the second-prong of the Sullivan test.
E. Third Prong — Evidentiary Balancing Test
¶ 68. Finally, under the third step of Sullivan, we hold that the circuit court properly determined that the *41probative value of the other-acts evidence was not outweighed by unfair prejudice.
¶ 69. Even if the evidence is found to be probative, we must address whether the probative value of the other-acts evidence is substantially outweighed by any of the concerns listed in Wis. Stat. § 904.03.17 As such, in order to prevent admissibility, the probative value of the evidence must be substantially outweighed by danger of unfair prejudice and not be merely prejudicial. See Gray, 225 Wis. 2d at 64. Hunt bears the burden of showing that such probative value is outweighed.
¶ 70. In the pre-trial motion arguments, the State repeatedly argued that the other-acts evidence was not unfairly prejudicial, because the court could, and should give a cautionary instruction to the jury regarding the other-acts evidence.
¶ 71. In reaching its decision to admit the other-acts evidence, the circuit court, while recognizing the danger of prejudice inherent in the other-acts evidence, seems to have concluded that the evidence was not unfairly prejudicial. See Pet's App. at 129-30.
*42¶ 72. In determining whether a piece of evidence is unfairly prejudicial, we have held that cautionary instructions help to limit any unfair prejudice that might otherwise result. Plymesser, 172 Wis. 2d at 596-97.
¶ 73. Contrary to Hunt's argument and the court of appeals' decision, the circuit court offered proper cautionary instructions on the other-acts evidence. Accordingly, any unfair prejudicial effect caused by the admittance of the other-acts evidence was substantially mitigated by the circuit court's cautionary instructions to the jury.
¶ 74. As noted before, the circuit court's cautionary instructions to the jury specifically told the jurors that they should not conclude from the evidence that the defendant has a certain character or a certain character trait and that the defendant acted in conformity with that trait or character. After listing proper purposes for which the jury could consider the other-acts evidence, the circuit court specifically instructed the jury that it should not conclude from the other-acts evidence that the defendant was a "bad person."
¶ 75. The cautionary instructions given by the circuit court in this case are the type of cautionary instructions that we affirmed in State v. Fishnick, 127 Wis. 2d 247, 262, 378 N.W.2d 272 (1985), and Gray, 225 Wis. 2d at 65. In light of the mitigating effect of the circuit court's cautionary instructions, we hold that Hunt failed to meet his burden of showing that the probative value of the other-acts evidence was substantially outweighed by any alleged unfair prejudicial effect. Further, we affirm the circuit court's decision to admit the other-acts evidence because it satisfies all *43three prongs of the three-part Sullivan test for admissibility of prior acts evidence.18
F. Harmless Error
¶ 76. Assuming arguendo, that the circuit court erroneously admitted other-acts evidence based upon an impermissible propensity/character basis, the fact remains that five other permissible bases existed for admitting the other-acts evidence. If there was error here, it was harmless.
¶ 77. The test for harmless error is "if it is 'clear beyond a reasonable doubt that a rational jury would have "found the defendant guilty absent the error.'" State v. Harvey, 2002 WI 93, ¶ 49, 254 Wis. 2d 442, 647 N.W.2d 189; see also Wis. Stat. § 805.18(2).
¶ 78. The court of appeals based its summary reversal upon an erroneous interpretation of Gross v. Hoffman, 227 Wis. 296, 300, 277 N.W 663, 665 (1938). Gross states that if one argument out of many sufficiently supports a judgment, that one argument is sufficient to uphold a ruling, not overturn it. Id.
¶ 79. As noted before, unlike the court of appeals' belief, Sullivan states that if the circuit court errone*44ously admitted other-acts evidence based upon an impermissible purpose, there must be an independent determination whether it constituted reversible or harmless error. See Sullivan, 216 Wis. 2d at 792.
¶ 80. Upon this court's independent review, we believe that the circuit court judge set forth five permissible bases for admitting the other-acts evidence under Wis. Stat. § 904.04(2). Although the State concedes that the circuit court judge improperly made reference to propensity, that statement was never heard by, or revealed to, the jury.
¶ 81. As a result, we hold that the court of appeals erred by reversing the convictions on the grounds that the lower court had made reference to an impermissible basis (the propensity basis) even though the circuit court relied upon five other permissible bases consistent with Wis. Stat. § 904.04(2) (context, motive, opportunity, intent, and absence of mistake or accident). Had the court of appeals conducted an independent review of the record, in all likelihood it would have determined, as we do, that the record contained proper reasons for admitting the other-acts evidence.19
¶ 82. Moreover, it is noted that the court of appeals reversed the conviction on the charge of first-degree sexual assault causing pregnancy where the *45DNA evidence established the likelihood that the defendant was the father of the child at 99.989 percent. Even if the other-acts evidence was admitted improperly, it seems "clear beyond a reasonable doubt that a rational jury would have found the defendant guilty absent the error." Harvey, 254 Wis. 2d at 469, ¶ 51 (Crooks, J. concurring).
G. Application Of The Greater Latitude Test
¶ 83. The State maintains that by peremptorily dismissing the application of the greater latitude rule in this case, the court of appeals has revealed a fundamental misunderstanding of the rule. According to the State, the greater latitude rule, as applied in child sexual assault cases, does not depend on the similarity between the other-acts evidence offered and the charged conduct. Rather, the rule concerns the difficulty sexually abused children experience in testifying, and the difficulty prosecutors have in obtaining admissible evidence in child sexual abuse cases. Davidson, 236 Wis. 2d 537, ¶ 42. According to the State, the degree of similarity and remoteness factors between the charged acts and other-acts evidence offered might influence the determination of the probative value of the other-acts evidence. However, neither a lack of similarity nor remoteness necessarily precludes the use of other-acts evidence under the appropriate application of the greater latitude rule. The State argues that a correct interpretation of the greater latitude rule requires discretion when assessing the relevance and probative value of the other-acts evidence.
¶ 84. Hunt maintains that the circuit court misapplied the greater latitude rule by concluding that this rule may be applied when the current crime charged *46involves the sexual assault of a child, because, here, the defendant's acts were not substantially similar to the crimes charged. According to Hunt, the greater latitude rule should only apply when the prior act involves the sexual assault of a child. Moreover, Hunt argues that the State's interpretation of Davidson is incorrect; the greater latitude rule is to be used only to admit into evidence similar prior acts to the crime charged, not any prior bad act.
¶ 85. As noted previously, an appellate court will sustain an evidentiary ruling if it finds that the circuit court examined the relevant facts, applied a proper standard of law, and used a demonstrative rational process, and reached a conclusion that a reasonable judge could reach. Loy, 107 Wis. 2d at 414-415 (citing McCleary, 49 Wis. 2d 263 (1971)).
¶ 86. We have ruled that "Wisconsin courts permit a more liberal admission of other crimes evidence in sexual assault cases than in other cases." Davidson, 236 Wis. 2d 537, ¶ 44; State v. Hammer, 2000 WI 92, ¶ 23, 236 Wis. 2d 686, 613 N.W.2d 629. Accordingly, in a sex crime case, the admissibility of other-acts evidence must be viewed in light of the greater latitude test. As we noted in Hammer:
The greater latitude rule was first stated in 1893 in Proper v. State, 85 Wis. 615, 628-30, 55 N.W 1035 (1893).... The rule helps other acts evidence come in under the exceptions stated in Wis. Stat. § (Rule) 904.04(2). State v. Fishnick, 127 Wis. 2d 247, 256, 378 N.W.2d 272 (1985).
Id.
*47¶ 87. In Davidson, a case mandated with Hammer, the defendant was convicted of second-degree sexual assault of his 13-year-old niece. At trial, under the greater latitude rule, the circuit court allowed evidence of a previous conviction for sexual assault to be introduced, with a cautionary instruction given to the jury. The defendant appealed, the court of appeals reversed, and the State sought review. On review to this court, we held that admitting evidence of defendant's prior conviction for sexual assault was not an erroneous exercise of discretion. We held that other-acts evidence is relevant to sexual assault cases (particularly those of children), because a normal juror would presume that the defendant was incapable of such a depraved act. Davidson, 236 Wis. 2d 537, ¶ 42. We also noted the "difficulty sexually abused children experience in testifying, and the difficulty prosecutors have in obtaining admissible evidence." Id. In light of such difficulty, we held that the greater latitude rule "support[s] the more liberal standard of admissibility in child sexual assault cases." Id. (citing State v. Friedrich, 135 Wis. 2d at 30-33 and n.17. However, the greater latitude rule does not relieve the court of the duty to ensure that the other-acts evidence is offered for a proper purpose under Wis. Stat. § 904.04(2). Davidson, 236 Wis. 2d 537, ¶ 52 (citing Plymesser, 172 Wis. 2d at 598).
¶ 88. Applying the above rules to the facts of this case, we hold that that the circuit court was correct here in applying the greater latitude rule in the determination of whether other-acts evidence was admissible. Accordingly, we hold that the court of appeals was in error in its determination regarding the applicability of greater latitude in sex crimes cases, particularly when a child victim is involved.
*48V CONCLUSION
¶ 89. In summary, we hold that the court of appeals erred in reversing the circuit court's conviction of Hunt on all six counts. Although the circuit court could have provided a more detailed Sullivan analysis for admitting other-acts evidence, reversal was not appropriate here.
¶ 90. We hold that pursuant to the well-established independent review doctrine in Wisconsin, the court of appeals is required independently to review the record if the circuit court fails to provide a detailed Sullivan analysis. As a result, based upon our own independent review of the record, we hold that the circuit court had reasonable bases for admitting the other-acts evidence under Wis. Stat. § 904.04(2). Such evidence was properly admitted for the purposes of motive, opportunity, intent, absence of mistake or accident, and context. The circuit court properly admitted the other-acts evidence to provide the necessary background for understanding Hunt's behavior and to provide an independent source to judge the victims' credibility, and their state of mind, in light of their past acts of recanting prior charges against Hunt. The other-acts evidence was relevant. Also, its probative value was not substantially outweighed by danger of unfair prejudice due to the circuit court's cautionary jury instructions, which were important in offsetting any prejudicial effect.
¶ 91. Next, we hold that here, where permissible purposes existed for the admission of other-acts evidence, and where strong DNA evidence had been introduced, the court of appeals was not correct in reversing the convictions on all counts. The conviction on the charge of first-degree sexual assault causing pregnancy *49should have been upheld, even if there were not permissible purposes for the admission of other-acts evidence.
¶ 92. Finally, we hold that the circuit court properly applied the greater latitude rule in allowing other-acts evidence in this case where there were charges of sex crimes, especially since child victims were involved.
¶ 93. We therefore reverse.
By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is reversed.
The complaint alleged Tiffany J. was the victim of counts one through five, and Angelica J. the victim of count six.
State v. Sullivan, 216 Wis. 2d 768, 576 N.W.2d 30 (1998).
Wisconsin Stat. § 904.04(2) provides:
(2) OTHER CRIMES, WRONGS, OR ACTS. Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show that the person acted in conformity therewith. This subsection does not exclude the evidence when offered for other purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or accident.
All references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 1999-2000 version unless otherwise noted.
THE COURT: Just based on what I am hearing you are talking about a contextual framework because I am not exhaustive as to these reasons. If there is other appropriateness, especially in view of the prior inconsistent statements being the substantive basis for the charge, context takes more — actually it may very well he moved to the fore in this case because of that issue under Shillcut. But certainly there is a motive involved here as to what is involved with the ongoing nature of the alleged allegations. Certainly there is an opportunity for doing these things. They are in the same household under the circumstances involved. His intent was to gain access by whatever means he felt was appropriate, and certainly to say well that is crazy but the ongoing nature of the allegations which certainly go to absence of mistake or accident.
(Emphasis added.) (R. 71:39-40); see also Pet'r App. at 129-30. We note that the trial court record refers to Shillcutt as Shillcut. State v. Shillcutt, 116 Wis. 2d 227, 341 N.W.2d 716 (Ct. App. 1983), aff'd on other grounds, 119 Wis. 2d 788, 350 N.W.2d 686 (1984).
The record reflects that Ruth Hunt is also referred to as "Ruthie" Hunt.
The State sought to introduce the following other-acts evidence concerning the defendant:
1. That the defendant's wife, Ruthie Hunt, had been the victim of both physical and sexual abuse at the hands of her husband. This included the time period involved in the sexual abuse to the child Tiffany J.
2. That Jennifer M., another stepdaughter of the defendant, was sexually abused by the defendant when she was approximately the same age as Tiffany J. That sexual abuse was reported to the police in 1995. It consisted of defendant asking Jennifer to hug and kiss him, telling her she could feel his erect penis. He would also kiss her on the neck and fondle her breasts on top of her clothing. This occurred during the time period that Jennifer lived in the same residence as John E Hunt, and was related to him as a stepdaughter.
3. That John E Hunt molested his daughter Cleopatrick M., at a time when she was approximately the same age as the victim *14Tiffany J. The defendant was also in the position of stepfather and was residing in the same residence with her. He fondled her bare breasts and vagina, and also exposed his penis to her, asking if she would like to have sex with him. This was also reported to the police.
4. That the defendant was physically abusive to the victim, Tiffany J., as well as to the victim, Angelica J. All of the reports had either been submitted to the defense in this matter, or were being provided along with the motion.
5. That under Section 904.04(2), with regard to the prior acts of sexual conduct with his stepdaughters, that these acts were relevant and probative of the issues of the defendant's intent and motive. With respect to the issues relating to the physical abuse of the parties mentioned above, it was the State's position that these acts were relevant to the "context' in which the sexual assaults occurred, and also part of the corpus of the crimes with which the defendant was charged. They also related directly to the victims' state of mind. State v. C.V.C., 153 Wis. 2d 145, 450 N.W.2d 463 (Ct. App. 1989).
(Emphasis added.) (R. 16:3-4); see also Pet'r App. at 116-17 (state's motion in limine); see also R. 33:1 (state's supplemental motions in limine asking the court to consider Hunt's prior drug use).
The record indicates that Hunt was dissatisfied with his counsel. Thomas M. Bartell, his first attorney, eventually withdrew as counsel. David K. Ziemer was then retained as counsel but later withdrew. The record also indicates that Attorney Brendan Rowen had been assigned as counsel to Hunt's case but decided to leave the legal profession.
As noted by Hunt in his brief at pages 37-39, at least fifteen other acts were introduced in this case:
1. Hunt had been reported to police for using drugs.
*162. Ruth had sought a restraining order against Hunt on three separate occasions, alleging on one occasion that Hunt said his friends could kill her.
3. Ruth had alleged Hunt had pushed her around and hit her with a big knife.
4. Hunt threatened to mess Ruth up so much that nobody would recognize her.
5. Hunt had "busted [Ruth's] head."
6. Hunt "busted [Ruth's] mouth open causing her to need 22 stitches back in the early 1970s when they were teenagers."
7. Hunt had slapped, kicked and put a knife to Ruth.
8. Hunt struck Ruth in the face causing a cut to the inside of her cheek.
9. Hunt threatened to kill Ruth with a gun and a gun was found in Hunt's bedroom.
10. Hunt hit Ruth in the chest with a closed fist.
11. Hunt had punched a pregnant Angelica three or four times to her ribs, bruising her ribs.
12. Hunt had done physical, bad, painful and harmful things to Ruth, Angelica, and Tiffany in the past.
13. Hunt stole money from Angelica's purse.
14. On another occasion, Hunt was arrested by the police for physically abusing Angelica.
15. Hunt had been seen choking Ruth.
THE COURT: Well, and they [other acts evidence] are even more so [prejudicial] that the Court is supposed to allow more leniency and more latitude when it involves particularly sexual assaults of children, and that is what we have in this case at least at the time. And certainly with the prior inconsistent *18statements being the basis of the substantive proof in this case, the Court does feel that it is appropriate and I will allow 10-1 in, Number 2, 10-2.
MR. ZIEMER: Actually, your Honor, I think although there is more latitude with sexual abuse of children, I think that what is generally meant there is that you can bring in other instances of child sexual.
THE COURT: Not every act here of child sexual abuse was charged in this case, obviously.
MR. ZIEMER: Well what exactly as far as is it motive or to show motive or to show mistake of?
THE COURT: Just based on what I am hearing you are talking about a contextual framework because I am not exhaustive as to these reasons. If there is other appropriateness, especially in view of the prior inconsistent statements being the substantive basis for the charge, context takes more — actually it may very well be moved to the fore in this case because of that issue under Shillcut. But certainly there is a motive involved here as to what is involved with the ongoing nature of the alleged allegations. Certainly there is an opportunity for doing these things. They are in the same household under the circumstances involved. His intent was to gain access by whatever means he felt was appropriate, and certainly to say well that is crazy but the ongoing nature of the allegations which certainly go to the absence of mistake or accident.
So for those four reasons the Court feels that the other acts evidence that were specifically identified plus the contextual aspect will be allowed in this case. And it is particularly true not only as to Ruthie Hunt, even though she was an uncharged victim in this ease, alleged victim, but it is particularly true when it comes to Tiffany, because she was a minor, which gives the Court even further latitude under the circumstances and requirements of law, which allows for the Court to have greater latitude when allowing in other acts evidence, especially when there is alleged actions of child molestation involved.
I am doing that.
(R. 71: 39-41); see also Pet'r App. at 130-32.
Jury Instructions:
Evidence has been received regarding other incidents involving the defendant for which the defendant is not on trial.
Specifically, evidence has been received that the Defendant made threats of death or physical harm to each of the Hunt/J. family as same resided at 2433 North 22nd Street, City and County of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, on September 21st, 1999.
Further, there have been other acts of reported physical abuse on the part of the Defendant regarding Ruthie Hunt and/or Angelica J. reported to the police and/or District Attorney's Office which were subsequently not prosecuted due to the said alleged victims not following through with the prosecution.
Further, there have been other acts of alleged sexual abuse of Jennifer M. and/or Cleopatrick M. on the part of the Defendant. The same were reported to the police and/or District Attorney's Office which were subsequently not prosecuted due to the said *20alleged victims not following through with the prosecution, or the prosecution not being pursued by the State.
If you find that this conduct did occur, you should consider it only on the issues of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation or plan, or absence of mistake or accident.
You may not consider this evidence to conclude that the defendant has a certain character or a certain character trait and that the defendant acted in conformity with that trait or character with respect to the offenses charged in this case. The evidence was received on the issues of:
Motive; that is, whether the defendant has a reason to desire the result of the crime.
Opportunity; that is, whether the defendant had the opportunity to commit the offense charged.
Intent; that is, whether the defendant acted with the state of mind that is required for the offense.
Preparation or plan; that is, whether such other conduct of the defendant was part of a design or schedule that led to the commission of the offense charged.
Absence of mistake or accident; that is, whether the defendant acted within the state of mind required for this offense.
You may consider this evidence only for the purposes I have described, giving it the weight you determine it deserves. It is not to be used to conclude that the defendant is a bad person and for that reason is guilty of the offense or offenses charged.
(Emphasis added.) Pet'r App. at 141-43.
This three-part test has sometimes been worded differently, apparently combining the second and third step into one step. See State v. Pharr, 115 Wis. 2d 334, 340 N.W.2d 498 (1993) (holding that trial courts must apply a two-prong test in determining whether evidence of other crimes is admissible. The first prong requires the trial court to determine whether evidence fits within one of the exceptions set forth in Wis. Stat. § 904.04, and the second prong requires the trial court to determine whether the probative value of the evidence is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant).
As noted in the statement of facts, Hunt failed to object to the jury instructions at trial. Failure to object to the jury instructions waives the issue. State v. Perkins, 2001 WI 46, 243 Wis.2d 141, 626 N.W.2d 762 (holding that failure to object at conference about jury instructions constitutes a waiver of any error in the proposed instructions or verdict); State v. Johnston, 184 Wis. 2d 794, 823, 518 N.W.2d 759 (1994)(citing State v. Zelenka, 130 Wis. 2d 34, 43-44, 387 N.W.2d 55 (1986). Even though this matter could be resolved on the issue of waiver, we feel that it is necessary to discuss the matter thoroughly.
See McCleary v. State, 49 Wis. 2d 263, 282, 182 N.W.2d 512 (1971). In McCleary, we said that we would not set aside a sentence where the trial judge failed to give the reasons for a lengthy sentence, but rather, we recognized the obligation "to search the record to determine whether in the exercise of proper discretion the sentence imposed can be sustained." See also State v. Pharr, 115 Wis. 2d at 343 (holding that, where the trial court fails to set forth its reasoning in exercising its discretion to admit evidence, the appellate court should independently review the record to determine whether it provides a basis for the trial court's exercise of discretion).
Recently, this court has upheld and emphasized the independent review doctrine. State v. Davidson, 2000 WI 91, 236 Wis. 2d 537, 613 N.W.2d 606, and State v. Hammer, 2000 WI 92, 236 Wis. 2d 686, 613 N.W.2d 629. In discussing the independent review doctrine, we want to emphasize its applicability in *31other-acts evidence cases. We recognize that there are cases where independent review may he too onerous for the appellate court to undertake, or may he inappropriate under the circumstances presented.
It is important to note that though it did not have the burden to do so, the State offered reasons why the other-acts evidence was not unduly prejudicial.
In the motion hearing before the circuit court, the State argued that the above evidence was relevant:
... for two reasons. First of all, she was one of a large number of people who showed up at the police station that opened the door to this investigation. Her information was confirmed by the statements that were made by Angelica and Tiffany relating to what was going on within that household. So they were all telling the same story, and they were all describing physical abuse to various parties including Miss Hunt by Mr. Hunt.
So the physical evidence in this case corroborates the information that had been provided by Ruthie Hunt. Why this is relevant — it takes on a particular importance in fight of the fact that everybody is recanting their stories now.. ..
... I believe that this information is relevant,.... It is part of the corpus of the crime. It is the reasoning behind why these people reported to the police, and they did not report because Tiffany was being sexually abused. They reported because they were all in dire fear of their fives because of the threats to physical harm and to killing them that had been going on by Mr. Hunt....
... It is necessary to explain what was going on in this household, why the finding of the baseball bat and why the exodus of these 12 people out of the house in the night hours of September 21 even occurred. All of those things are relevant to this case, and I believe that the Court should allow its admissibility.
*40THE COURT: What specific under 904.04(2), what specific, appropriate reasons do you believe the State would be using this for?
MS. FALK: Well other than the context which is not — the Court knows that under 904.04(2) that is illustrative and not exhaustive, and I will again state to the Court the State v. Shillcut, that proposition that is where it was very clearly set, and is 116 Wis. 2d — I think it is 325. It is a 1983 case from the Court of Appeals.
In addition, I believe that this also goes to the defendant's state of mind, and it goes to both of the victims, both of the victims and the witnesses' state of mind as well. It also goes to the absence of mistake or accident on the part of the defense, and this relates to what I have been explaining to the Court about it is just unlikely that this number of people could provide this level of detail relating to the same story and it all just be a conjecture.
THE COURT: Well you are saying — I mean it would almost have motive and opportunity as well being within the same household and within the same context of the behavior ostensibly with others in the household besides the named defendant.
MS. FALK: That is correct.
(R. 71:29-34)
Wisconsin Stat. § 904.03 provides:
Exclusion of relevant evidence on the grounds of prejudice, confusion, or waste of time. Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.
Despite the "kitchen sink" claim of the dissent, see dissent, ¶ 95, we are satisfied that it is not necessary, to meet the requirements of Sullivan, that we now evaluate in this opinion, each of the other-acts admitted, separately, in light of permissible purposes, relevancy, and probative value vis-á-vis unfair prejudice. We are satisfied, based on our review of the record before us, that the circuit court did not erroneously exercise its discretion in admitting the other-acts evidence at issue here. We are satisfied that our review and analysis is sufficient under the circumstances presented.
The failure of the circuit court to include "context" in the cautionary instruction is also subject to review under the harmless error test. Again, assuming error, it seems that it is "clear beyond a reasonable doubt that a rational jury would have found the defendant guilty absent the error." Harvey, 254 Wis. 2d at 469, ¶ 51 (Crooks, J. concurring). We also note, as discussed previously, that this matter could be resolved on the basis of waiver, since there was no objection to the instructions. See supra note 11.

=== CASE 9739276 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:11:35.572305+00 ===

ANN WALSH BRADLEY, J.
¶ 94. (dissenting).
The majority takes the circuit court to task for failing to provide a detailed or exhaustive Sullivan three-prong analysis in determining the admissibility of other acts evidence. It criticizes the court of appeals for avoiding the careful step-by-step analysis set forth in Sullivan. Then, after explaining the careful analysis required by Sullivan and reaffirming its vitality, the majority inexplicably neglects to engage in the mandated analysis.
¶ 95. The majority, like the circuit court, fails to carefully analyze each item of other acts evidence to ensure that it does not merely color the defendant's character, but legitimately serves a permissible purpose. Its "kitchen sink" listing of permissible purposes without adequate analysis of how each item of other acts evidence is relevant to the identified purpose falls short of the approach required by Sullivan. I write to emphasize that the Sullivan mandate includes a careful statement of a clearly articulated purpose of each piece of other acts evidence and an analysis of whether that evidence is relevant to the purpose.
¶ 96. In Sullivan, we observed that the introduction of other acts evidence creates a risk that jurors will punish the accused for being a bad person regardless of *50his or her guilt of the crime charged. State v. Sullivan, 216 Wis. 2d 768, 783, 576 N.W.2d 30 (1998). We cited Whitty which set forth the following reasons for excluding other acts evidence:
"(1) The overstrong tendency to believe the defendant guilty of the charge merely because he is a person likely to do such acts; (2) the tendency to condemn not because he is believed guilty of the present charge but because he has escaped punishment from other offenses; (3) the injustice of attacking one who is not prepared to demonstrate the attacking evidence is fabricated; and (4) the confusion of issues which might result from bringing in evidence of other crimes."
Id. at 782-83 (citing Whitty v. State, 34 Wis. 2d 278, 292, 149 N.W.2d 557 (1967).
¶ 97. To protect against the improper admission of other acts evidence, the Sullivan court described a three-pronged analysis to be used in determining whether to admit other acts evidence. This analysis requires a circuit court to consider (1) whether the other acts evidence is offered for a permissible purpose; (2) whether the other acts evidence is relevant; and (3) whether the probative value of the other acts evidence is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues or misleading the jury, or by consideration of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence. Sullivan, 216 Wis. 2d at 772.
¶ 98. The Sullivan court observed that the absence of careful statements regarding the rationale for admitting or excluding other acts evidence substantially increases the likelihood for trial court error and makes appellate review more difficult. Id. at 774. The analysis set forth in Sullivan requires a clearly articu*51lated purpose of each piece of other acts evidence and an assessment of whether that evidence is relevant to the purpose.
¶ 99. The proponent of other acts evidence must clearly articulate the purposes for which it is intended and apply the facts to the analytical framework. Id. Similarly, the court's obligation is to clearly articulate its reasoning for admitting or excluding other acts evidence, applying the facts of the case to the three-prong analysis. Id. Thus, I agree with the majority opinion that the circuit court erred in failing to perform the required analysis and neglecting to clearly articulate its reasoning for admitting the other acts evidence. Majority op., ¶ 3.
¶ 100. The majority, however, fares little better in its attempt to articulate its reasoning in a manner that satisfies Sullivan. Its inadequate analysis is particularly apparent in its explanation of how the other acts evidence satisfies the first and second prongs of Sullivan.
¶ 101. The majority cites to a litany of permissible purposes that it considers to be applicable in this case. In ¶ 59, the majority opines that the other acts evidence was permissible to show the victims' state of mind, to corroborate information provided by the police, and to establish the credibility of victims and witnesses in light of their recantations. The opinion, however, fails to reference which of the 15 enumerated other acts related to which purpose.1
*52¶ 102. After listing these purposes as applicable to this case, some of them disappear from sight. The opinion does not take any of these purposes through the second and third prongs of the Sullivan analysis and does not include them in the list of purposes for which the evidence was properly admitted. See majority op., ¶ 90. Likewise, in a tag along line at the end of ¶ 59, the majority raises the purposes of preparation or plan. They also disappear from the opinion without further analysis.
¶ 103. Next, in ¶ 60, the majority adds the dual purposes of establishing opportunity and motive. Yet it never explains what other acts evidence is offered for those purposes. In ¶ 61, the majority again makes a generic reference to other acts evidence and concludes that it is "relevant to show that Hunt did not touch the victims by accident or mistake." Without a proffered analysis, it is difficult to understand the relevance given that Hunt never raised accident or mistake as part of his defense.
¶ 104. Even more troubling is the majority's discussion of why the other acts evidence satisfies the second prong of the Sullivan analysis. In this discussion, the majority concludes that the other acts evidence was relevant for the purposes of showing context, opportunity, intent, absence of mistake or accident, and motive. Majority op., ¶ 62.
¶ 105. To support this conclusion, the opinion cites excerpts from a motion hearing which contain arguments regarding admitting the evidence for the purposes of showing context. These excerpts also vaguely refer to the purposes of showing the defendant's state of mind, the victims' and the witnesses' state of mind, absence of mistake or accident, motive, and opportunity. The reference to these ex*53cerpts is the extent of the majority's articulation of the reasons why the other acts evidence was relevant.
¶ 106. The excerpts are woefully inadequate in articulating the reasons for relevance. Rather than attempt to set forth the reasons, the majority simply concludes that the other acts evidence was relevant for the purposes of showing context, motive, opportunity, intent, and absence of mistake or accident because of "the reasons offered by the State and the decision of the circuit court." Majority op., ¶ 67. Apparently the majority now decides to rely on the reasoning of the circuit court even though it determined that the circuit court "could have provided a more detailed or exhaustive Sullivan analysis for admitting the other-acts evidence in this case ...." Majority op., ¶ 3.
¶ 107. Nowhere in the paragraphs leading up to this conclusion does the majority state the reasons offered by the State and the circuit court for why the other acts evidence was relevant to motive, opportunity, intent, or absence of mistake or accident. Nowhere in the analysis assessing relevance is there any discussion of similarity between the other acts and the charged offenses. A comparison of the nearness of time, place, and circumstance is central to, but completely absent from the majority's analysis. Yet, in ¶ 64, the majority acknowledges that such a discussion is mandated by the Sullivan second prong.2
"The measure of probative value in assessing relevance is the similarity between the charged offense and the other act." State v. Gray, 225 Wis. 2d 39, 58, 590 N.W.2d 918 (1999). Similarity is demonstrated by showing the "nearness of time, place, and circumstance" between the other act and the alleged crime. State v. Scheidell, 227 Wis. 2d 285, 305, 595 N.W.2d 661 (1999).. .. Even *54when evidence may be considered too remote, the evidence is not necessarily rendered irrelevant if the remoteness is balanced by the similarity of the two incidents....
¶ 108. It is not surprising that the majority does not attempt to explain the reasons because, with respect to many of the identified purposes, it is difficult to articulate any persuasive justification for why the other acts evidence is relevant. It is also not surprising because, as predicted by the Sullivan court, the absence of a circuit court's careful statements regarding the rationale for admitting other acts evidence makes appellate review difficult. Sullivan, 216 Wis. 2d at 774.
¶ 109. Nevertheless, the majority criticizes the court of appeals for failing to conduct an independent Sullivan analysis. Curiously, although paying lip service to the Sullivan framework, the majority itself fails to engage in the step-by-step analysis mandated by Sullivan. Given the laundry list of other acts evidence admitted, the litany of permissible purposes accepted by the circuit court, and the lack of the development of the record regarding the nature of each item of other acts evidence, I think this case should be remanded to the circuit court for a proper Sullivan analysis.
¶ 110. In sum, Sullivan mandates a careful statement of a clearly articulated purpose of each piece of other acts evidence and an analysis of whether that evidence is relevant to the purpose. Because neither the circuit court nor the majority conducted a proper Sullivan analysis of the other acts evidence admitted in this case, I respectfully dissent.
¶ 111. I am authorized to state that CHIEF JUSTICE SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON joins this dissent.
Hunt's brief-in-chief before this court contained a list of 15 other acts introduced at trial. According to Hunt, this list was not exhaustive and the admission of the other acts permeated the proceedings.
In ¶ 64, the majority emphasizes the import of the mandated analysis: