=== CASE 9740405 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:43.157297+00 ===

Wenke, J.
Guy A. Hamilton, as the elected, qualified, and acting county judge of Fillmore County, brought this action in the district court for Fillmore County against the county of Fillmore seeking a declaratory judgment to determine his rights as to salary during his present term of office, particularly since January 1, 1951. The trial court found that when plaintiff took office on January *906, 1949, Fillmore County was classified under section 23-1101, R. S. 1943, as amended by Laws 1947, c. 62, § 4, p. 199, as class (4) for the purpose of fixing the salaries of its county officers; that section 23-1105, R. S. 1943, as amended by Laws 1947, c. 70, § 4, p. 224, then in effect, provided a county judge in a class (4) county should be paid an annual salary of $2,900; that since January 6, 1949, and during plaintiff’s present term of office, the population of the county had decreased so as to make it a class (3) county for the purpose of fixing the salaries of county officers; that such change in population did not, because of the provisions of the Nebraska Constitution, affect plaintiff’s salary; and that plaintiff is entitled to be paid a salary of $2,900 during all of his present term of office. The court, in view thereof, awarded judgment against the county accordingly. Defendant filed a motion for new trial and, from the overruling thereof, has appealed.
The facts are stipulated and not in dispute. Appellee was elected county judge of Fillmore County for a term of four years at the general election held on November 2, 1948. He qualified for the office and has .been acting in that capacity since his present term began on January 6, 1949.
Prior to November 2, 1948, the board of supervisors of Fillmore County had, by resolution adopted July 28, 1948, determined the population of the county to be more than 13,000 or class (4) for the purpose of fixing county officers’ salaries under section 23-1101, R. S. 1943, as amended by Laws- 1947, c. 62, § 4, p. 199. Under this classification the holder of the office of county judge was entitled to receive an annual salary of $2,900 and appellee was paid that salary for the years of 1949 and 1950. See section 23-1105, R. S. 1943, as amended by Laws 1947, c. 70, § 4, p. 224.
On December 21,1950, the board of supervisors passed a resolution for the purpose of fixing the salaries of county officers wherein it fixed the population of Fillmore *91County at 11,693 or class (3) under section 23-1101, R. S. 1943, as amended by Laws 1947, c. 62, § 4, p. 199. After January 1, 1951, pursuant to this resolution, the county commenced to pay plaintiff $2,100 per annum as provided for by section 23-1104, R. S. 1943, as amended by Laws 1947, c. 70, § 3, p. 223, the salary of a county judge in a class (3) .county.
The salary changes effected by the 1949 Legislature (Laws 1949, c. 40, p. 134) and effective August 27, 1949, are not here applicable. Appellee’s rights are controlled by the laws in effect at the time he was elected, qualified, and took over the duties of his office. These are sections 23-1101, R. S. 1943, as amended by Laws 1947, c. 62, § 4, p. 199, and 23-1104 and 23-1105, R. S. 1943, as amended by Laws 1947, c. 70, §§ 3 and 4, pp. 223-4. Ramsey v. County of Gage, 153 Neb. 24, 43 N. W. 2d 593. See, County of Yuma v. Sturges, 15 Ariz. 538, 140 P. 504; State ex rel. Moss v. Hamilton, 303 Mo. 302, 260 S. W. 466; State ex rel. Harvey v. Linville, 318 Mo. 698, 300 S. W. 1066.
Therefore the singular question presented by the appeal is, what was the effect, if any, of the reclassification of Fillmore County on December 21, 1950, upon the salary of the county judge during the balance of the term of office he was then serving?
The Constitution provides for the office of county judge and fixes his term of office at four years and provides his “salary shall be fixed by law.” Article V, section 15, of the Constitution of Nebraska.
The statute in effect at the time appellee was elected and took office fixed his salary at the sum of $2,900 per annum. Section 23-1105, R. S. 1943, as amended by Laws 1947, c. 70, § 4, p. 224.
Article III, of the Constitution of Nebraska relating to legislative power provides by section 19 thereof, as amended in 1920, that: “The Legislature shall never grant any extra compensation to any public officer, agent or servant after the services have been rendered *92nor to any contractor after the contract has been entered into, nor shall the compensation of any public officer, including any officer whose compensation is fixed by the Legislature subsequent to the adoption hereof be increased or diminished during his term of office(Italics ours.)
We said of this section in Ramsey v. County of Gage, supra: “It was designed to protect the individual officer against legislative oppression and, further, to curb the activities of public officers in lobbying to induce the Legislature to increase salaries. By the amendment the people simply said that the Legislature shall not increase or diminish the compensation of any public officer during his term of office, and that this inhibition should include any, and therefore all, public officers whose compensation is fixed by the Legislature.” See, also, State ex rel. Randall v. Hall, 125 Neb. 236, 249 N. W. 756.
It is appellants’ thought that since the classification statute for the purpose of fixing county officers’ salaries, being section 23-1101, R. S. 1943, as amended by Laws 1947, c. 62, § 4, p. 199, was in force and effect when appellee was elected and took office that it does not come within the inhibitions of Article III, section 19, of the Constitution of Nebraska, as amended in 1920, and that when the board of supervisors passed the resolution of December 21, 1950, a salary change came into effect by operation of law and that appellee took his office subject thereto. This precise question has apparently never been answered by this court. It was raised in Shambaugh v. Buffalo County, 133 Neb. 46, 274 N. W. 207, and Shambaugh v. Buffalo County, 137 Neb. 434, 289 N. W. 873, but, for reasons therein stated, it was not necessary to determine it.
An annotation of this subject will be found in 139 A. L. R. 737. Therein, at page 742, referring to a “Statute enacted before officer’s appointment or election, automatically increasing or decreasing salary upon
*93change in population or assessed valuation during term,” it states: “In a majority of jurisdictions in which the question has been considered, it is held that such an increase or decrease brought about solely because of a change in the population or assessed valuation does not violate the constitutional inhibition.”
Basically, “In the absence of any constitutional prohibition, or affirmative provision, fixing the term of office of any officer or his compensation, the legislature may change such term or compensation, and such change of term or compensation will apply as well to the officers then in office as to those to be thereafter elected.” County of Douglas v. Timme, 32 Neb. 272, 49 N. W. 266. See, also, County of Yuma v. Sturges, supra.
Of the casés examined, which includes all those cited by the parties, we find the courts follow the majority rule when the constitutional provision involved is like our own.
In County of Yuma v. Sturges, supra, under a constitutional inhibition upon the Legislature like ours, it was said:
“It is at once seen that the constitutional restriction is an abridgment of the law-making power to either increase or diminish that compensation of the officer during his term, and which was prescribed for and as an incident to the office at the beginning of his term; that during his term of office the public officer enjoys exemption from legislative interference and control over the amount of his compensation, and at the same time has a curb put upon his activity in the direction of an increase of compensation, whether such activity be worthy or pernicious. In fine he may devote his attention to the performance of his official duties, unembarrassed by any feeling that his worth is being niggardly rewarded in money, and the offspring of such a feeling which usually moves in the direction of increased compensation. At the same time there is the counterpart which attends him with a security from the wretched *94thought that others may become imbued with the conviction that his stipend is much too large for one of his capacity, and thus move with the pruning-hook by way of economy in the public funds, or that desire which might in time find congenial soil in the breast of a people desiring to get rid of an officer altogether, and to that end take away that compensation which he hath.
“The matter of paramount importance here, then, is to ascertain what compensation was fixed or prescribed by law when the term of office of the appellee commenced.”
The court then found: “When his term of office began, his compensation was definitely fixed and prescribed according as the assessed valuation of the county may be ascertained, if less than $9,000,000 a certain sum, and if $9,000,000 and over a certain sum; the fluctuation not being occasioned by any subsequent legislative action, but by operation of the very law in force and effect and controlling the compensation of the office at the beginning of appellee’s term of office — by the ■ operation of that law automatically.”
It held: “Under the classification in force when appellee went into office, Yuma county was a county of the first class, with an assessed valuation less than $9,-000,000; his compensation was therefore fixed at $2,200 per annum. In August, 1913, Yuma county, while still remaining a county of the first class, nevertheless its equalized assessed valuation became more than $9,000,-000, and appellee’s compensation was therefore fixed at $2,500 per annum.' Not by virtue of any subsequent legislative action, but solely by the automatic operation of the very law in effect at the beginning of the term, and which law definitely prescribed and fixed the compensation incident to the office, the amount thereof being graded according to the determination of an extraneous fact, to wit, the fact of the equalized assessed valuation. * * * The constitutional inhibition has no application here, and the judgment of the lower court *95awarding appellee compensation for the month of September, 1913, in the sum of $208.33, being at the rate of $2,500 per annum, is correct.”
In State ex rel. Mack v. Guckenberger, 139 Ohio St. 273, 39 N. E. 2d 840, 139 A. L. R. 728, under a constitutional provision like ours, the court stated the question involved as follows: “The question presented by the respondent’s demurrer is whether a statute, effective before the commencement of the term of a common pleas judge, whereby his compensation is automatically increased during the term by reason of the increase of the population of his county as shown by a federal census effective after the beginning of the term, is in conflict with Section 14, Article IV of the Constitution, * * It then states: “The purpose of the constitutional inhibition now under consideration is to make sure that the judge and the electorate are advised before he is-appointed or elected what his compensation will be, with the assurance that it cannot be changed by the Legislature during the term; that the judge is precluded from using his personal influence or official action to have the Legislature increase his salary; and that at the same time he is protected against, the Legislature and the people from decreasing his compensation after his term begins. These same salutary purposes are fully and effectually preserved by the terms of the present statute, albeit the compensation of the judge is made variable, from and after the last federal census becoming effective during his term.” And holds:- “The inhibition, according to the language of the Constitution thus directed to the Legislature, is that it shall not by legislative act during his term diminish or increase the compensation of any common pleas judge. Such compensation must be fixed before his term begins, but there is no inhibition against the Legislature fixing such compensation before the term begins on a basis which may vary it in amount as time advances, provided that basis, within the contemplation and understanding of both the *96judge and the people who elect him, is fixed, certain and unchangeable during his term. Such action upon the part of the Legislature does not thereby sanction or attempt to legalize an evil or vice which the Constitution prohibits.”
Other cases discussing the question and arriving at the same conclusion are Puterbaugh v. Wadham, 162 Cal. 611, 123 P. 804; State v. Hamilton, supra; State v. Linville, supra; Board of Commissioners v. Crowe, 214 Ind. 437, 14 N. E. 2d 907, on rehearing 214 Ind. 441, 15 N. E. 2d 1016; State ex rel. Jaumotte v. Zimmerman, 105 Mont. 464, 73 P. 2d 548.
We have held:
“* * * question in respect of the population of the state, or of the population of any of its subdivisions, is purely a question of fact to be determined by the court the same as other fact questions.” Gordon v. Lowry, 116 Neb. 359, 217 N. W. 610.
“What the number of inhabitants may be is a question of fact which must be determined by some competent authority. The duty of settling with county officers, auditing their accounts, fixing the salaries of their deputies, as well as the general management of the affairs of the county, rests upon the county board. Before they can perform the duties devolved upon them by law, it becomes necessary that some determination should be made of the number of inhabitants of the county in order to classify the officers. * * * And where the board of county commissioners in good faith ascertain and determine the number of inhabitants of a county for the purpose of classification of the county officers, such determination is not subject to collateral attack, but is conclusive as to those to whom it applies until set aside or vacated by such county board or some other forum of competent jurisdiction in a direct proceeding instituted for that purpose.” Buffalo County v. Bowker, 111 Neb. 762, 197 N. W. 620.
“The salary of the county attorney for any year de*97pends upon the number of inhabitants of the county during that year, and that fact is to be determined, as are other facts in litigation, by the best competent evidence that can be adduced under the circumstances.” O’Connell v. Sioux County, 94 Neb. 826, 144 N. W. 779.
“By the provisions of the foregoing statute, the plaintiff was entitled to receive an annual salary, the amount of which depended upon the population of defendant county during each year that plaintiff served as county treasurer.” Shambaugh v. Buffalo County, 137 Neb. 434, 289 N. W. 873. See, also, Shambaugh v. Buffalo County, 133 Neb. 46, 274 N. W. 207.
We are of the opinion that when a statute enacted and in effect prior to the election of a public officer fixes the compensation of such officer upon the basis of population and an increase or decrease in compensation occurs during the officer’s term because- of a change in population after his election, such increase or decrease in compensation does not violate our constitutional provision that the compensation of a public officer shall hot be increased or diminished during his term. It is a factual and not a legislative change.
When appellee was elected to, qualified for, and took over the duties of the office of county judge, section 23-1101, R. S. 1943, as amended by Laws 1947, c. 62, § 4, p. 199, provided for the classification of counties by population for the' purpose of fixing the salaries of county officers. The law in effect at that time fixing the salaries of county officers according to their classification was Chapter 70, Laws 1947, p. 221. Since Fillmore County was at that time a class (4) county the salary of the county judge was fixed by section 4 of Chapter 70, Laws 1947, p. 224, at the sum of $2,900 per annum. Appellee was properly paid this salary for the years of 1949 and 1950. However, on December 21, 1950, the board of supervisors determined the population to be 11,693. The validity of this determination is not questioned. This resulted in Fillmore County becoming a class (3) county *98for the purpose of fixing the salaries of its county officers. Consequently, under section 3 of Chapter 70, Laws 1947, p. 223, the salary of the appellee for the remainder of his term, or for the years 1951 and 1952, became $2,100 per annum.
In view of the foregoing we find the judgment of the trial court to be in error and it is reversed and the cause remanded -with directions that it enter a judgment in accordance herewith, that is that appellee for the balance of his term, or for the years of 1951 and 1952, is entitled to a salary of $2,100 per annum.
Reversed and remanded with directions.

=== CASE 9740406 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:43.161537+00 ===

Yeager, J.,
dissenting.
The majority opinion in this case finds support in decisions from some jurisdictions. In other jurisdictions an opposite viewpoint has been expressed. It is but fair to say that in the jurisdictions wherein the question has been considered the majority hold to the view expressed in the majority opinion herein.
With that view I cannot agree and in consequence I respectfully dissent.
Article III, section 19, of the Constitution of Nebraska to the extent that it is important here is the following: “The Legislature shall never grant any extra compensation to any public officer, agent or servant after the services have been rendered nor to any contractor after the contract has been entered into, nor shall the compensation of any public officer * * * be increased or diminished during his term of office.”
In the words employed in this provision, taken either in or out of context or in relation to any other constitutional provision, I fail to find any confusion or ambiguity. The language to me is simple, plain, and clear and thus, under rules so well known that citation of authority therefor would be superfluous, it is entitled to be accorded its common and ordinary meaning. It says, and I cannot escape the belief that it means, that-the com*99pensation of no public officer shall be increased or diminished during his term of office.
As I interpret, this county judge was entitled to receive without increase or decrease the salary which was appropriate under law at the commencement of his term of office.

=== CASE 9740407 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:43.396047+00 ===

SICKEL, J.
This action was brought by Loye S. Jewett, as plaintiff, against David G. Jewett, her husband, as defendant, for divorce. She asked for the custody of their two *229children aged six and two, and for support. Defendant answered denying plaintiff’s alleged cause of action and asking for custody of the children. The circuit court denied the plaintiff a divorce and granted the custody of the children to defendant. Plaintiff appealed.
The parties were married in Sioux Falls on November 5, 1944, during a period when defendant was home from military service in the South Pacific on emergency furlough. They lived together until the commencement of this action. The plaintiff’s alleged cause of action is based on mental cruelty. Defendant’s case consists of denial or justification for the conduct of which the plaintiff complains. The facts which she relies upon to support her cause are summarized in her proposed finding of fact number eight, which reads as follows: “That Defendant has inflicted grievous mental suffering upon Plaintiff prior to the commencement of this action. That Defendant has treated the Plaintiff with contempt, has refused to talk and converse with Plaintiff in a decent manner, has been morose and sullen, has insulted and offended mutual friends of the parties, and has falsely insinuated that the Plaintiff was guilty of infidelity. That the Defendant took a vacation trip to Flordia in late February, 1950, and failed to offer to take Plaintiff with him on said trip. That Defendant has refused to cooperate with Plaintiff in the supervision of the minor children”.
The circuit court refused to adopt the above finding and decided specifically that the appellant is a woman of highly nervous temperament; that she indulged in a continuous course of faultfinding, nagging and arguing; that she is subject to attacks of temper and rage during which she abused respondent in a coarse, rude and opprobrious manner, often in the presence of the children; that she advised respondent that she had lost all affection for him and attempted to oust him from the home. She demanded that respondent permit her to obtain a divorce. The circuit court also found that the appellant was frequently in the company of another man despite the protests of respondent.
The court further decided that respondent did not treat appellant with contempt nor did he refuse to converse with her except that he refused to engage with her in bitter argu*230ment or to discuss the subject of divorce; that respondent has not unreasonably refused to provide appellant with proper entertainment, and has not insulted their mutual friends. Among the findings is also the fact that respondent never insinuated that appellant was guilty of infidelity; that his trip to Flordia in February 1950 was not an act of cruelty toward the appellant; that respondent cooperated in the supervision of the children and was at all times devoted to their proper care and training; that he provided appellant with comfortable, reasonable and adequate support and has supplied her with sufficient money to purchase clothing, food and other essentials. Finding number fifteen reads as follows: “The defendant has devoted substantially all of his available time outside of his employment to the care and training of the children and their physical, mental, moral and religious development with parental affection and devotion and is of a calm and even disposition and is capable of providing the necessary discipline with such care and affection and is a fit and proper person to be awarded the custody of said children”. As to the custody of the children the court found that for the best interests of the children their custody should be awarded to the respondent.
Appellant contends that the evidence does not support the findings of the trial court but on the contrary conclusively establishes extreme cruelty on the part of respondent. On this is'sue the rule stated by this court in Habeck v. Habeck, 51 S. D. 455, 214 N.W. 846, 847, applies: “The judge of the trial court had the parties before him and heard the witnesses testify and he had better opportunity than this court to determine the weight to be given to the evidence submitted. Where there is a conflict of evidence, and no clear preponderance of evidence against the findings of the trial court, its findings will not be disturbed by this court”.
The material evidence in this case consists almost entirely of the testimony of the interested parties. We have reviewed this evidence by a careful reading of the entire transcript in the light of the contentions of the parties as set forth in their briefs. There is a conflict in the evidence as to all material issues and the circuit court has made specific findings of fact on each one of them. The record shows that *231each finding so made is supported by substantial evidence, and we find no clear preponderance of the evidence against those findings. We therefore conclude that no error appears in the findings. No useful purpose would be served by reviewing the evidence at length in this opinion.
It is also contended by appellant that the circuit court had no jurisdiction to award the custody of the children to the father after denying the mother a divorce. Whether this may be done in the absence of statutes is a matter upon which the courts of other jurisdictions are divided. Urbach v. Urbach, 52 Wyo. 207, 73 P.2d 953, 113 A.L.R. 889 and annotation page 901; Dovi v. Dovi, 245 Wis. 50, 13 N.W.2d 585, 151 A.L.R. 1368; White v. White, 70 R.I. 48, 36 A.2d 661, 151 A.L.R. 1374, annotation page 1380. In this state, however, the authority of the court is statutory. SDC 14.0724 provides: “In an action for divorce the court may, before or after judgment, give such direction for the custody care, and education of the children of the marriage as may seem necessary or proper, and may at any time vacate or modify the same.” SDC 14.0727, first paragraph, declares: “Though judgment of divorce is denied, the court may in an action for divorce provide for maintenance of the wife and her children, or any of them, by the husband”. Similar statutes have been considered -by the courts of California in deciding this issue.
In the case of Ex parte Saul, 31 Cal.App. 382, 160 P. 695, 697, the action was for divorce and the defendant counterclaimed. The court found both parties guilty of misconduct and denied a divorce to both of them. Custody of the children was awarded, some to plaintiff and the others to defendant. The children awarded to the wife were taken from her by the husband without her consent and she brought habeas corpus proceedings to recover them relying upon the decree in the divorce action. The husband claimed, as in this case, that where judgment denies divorce the court is without power, then or thereafter, in said action to make an order affecting the custody of the children. The court quotes section 138 of the Civil Code of California, corresponding to SDC 14.0724, quoted above, and says: “If the court at the final hearing, in making its decree granting or refusing *232a divorce, is silent with respect to the custody of children and fails to make any provision for this custody and care, it would seem that this is a complete and final determination of that case. But if the court, in view of the facts found by it, deems that the welfare of the children requires that some order for the custody and maintenance of the children be made and makes that order as a part of 'its decree, or in specific- terms retains the case for the purposes of such custody and maintenance, we find no sufficient reason for holding that such action by the court is beyond its powers- as declared in section 138. The section itself does not state any limitation of its effect to cases in which divorce is denied. If such limitation be imposed upon the language of the statute, it must be a limitation by construction”. The order of the trial court in the habeas corpus proceeding awarding custody according to the decree in the divorce action was upheld.
The case of Morrow v. Morrow, 60 Cal.App. 688, 214 P. 239, was brought by the wife for divorce and the husband filed a counterclaim for divorce. Neither party prevailed in the trial court and custody of the children was awarded to the father. The situation was similar to that in this case. It was held that the order of custody was authorized by Civil Code of California §§ 138 and 246.
The case of Jacobs v. Jacobs, 68 Cal.App. 725, 230 P. 209, was one in which the wife brought action for divorce and the defendant also filed a cross-complaint. Both alleged cruelty and both were denied a divorce. Custody of the child was given to the mother with a provision for its support. No appeal was taken. Later a motion was made to modify the judgment on the ground that the court had exceeded its jurisdiction in awarding custody of the child. It was held that under sections 136 and 138 of the Civil Code of California the court was authorized to make such order for the custody, care, education, maintenance and support of the minor child as may seem necessary and proper. Section 136 of the Civil Code of California is the same as SDC 14.-0727.
The matter was again before the appellate court in California in the case of O’Connor v. O’Connor, 91 Cal.App. *2332d 147, 204 P.2d 916, 917, where it was again stated: “[N]or by a denial of a divorce does the court lose jurisdiction to deal with the custody and support of the children”.
We approve the above decisions of the California courts as a sound and reasonable construction of our own statutes, and therefore conclude that the circuit court had the power in this case to award the custody of the children to respondent though the appellant was denied a divorce.
Appellant states that “neither party to this appeal raised the issue of custody of the children in the event no' divorce was granted”, and contends that this issue was net tried. The plaintiff’s complaint alleged that “the plaintiff is a suitable and proper person to have the custody and care of said minor children”, and she asked that she be given custody of them. Defendant in his answer denied that the plaintiff is a proper person to have custody of the children. He alleged that he “is a suitable and proper person to have the custody of the children” and that in case divorce be granted he be given their custody. The issue of custody was therefore raised by both parties in the pleading. All matters of fact having a bearing on that issue were thoroughly explored at the trial by both parties. After the trial the court indicated that a divorce would not be granted the plaintiff, .and the defendant then asked and obtained leave to amend his answer so as to include a prayer for custody of the children whether plaintiff be granted a divorce or not. This amendment was authorized by SDC 33.0914. This rule also afforded the plaintiff an opportunity to present additional evidence on this question and to a continuance if necessary for that purpose, but plaintiff offered no additional evidence and made no request for a continuance in order that this might be done. Appellant is not now in a position to contend that the issue of custody was not fully persented.
Appellant also claims that the evidence is insufficient to justify the award of custody of the children to defendant. The issue'under this assignment is the fitness of the parents and the best interests of the children. What has been said herein on the issue of extreme cruelty is also applicable to this question. There is here also a conflict in *234the evidence. We find no clear preponderance of the evidence against the findings of the trial court and they will not be disturbed.
Judgment affirmed.
RUDOLPH, P. J., and ROBERTS and SMITH, JJ, concur.
LEEDOM, J., dissents.

=== CASE 9740408 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:43.400836+00 ===

LEEDOM, J.
(dissenting). I concur with that part of the opinion that affirms the denial of the divorce. I cannot agree with the award of the custody of the children to the father in the absence of both a divorce and legal separation.
I seriously doubt the wisdom of the rule that permits a grant of custody under such circumstances. Apart from statutory authority the majority rule I believe to be contra. The California cases amply support the majority opinion of the court in the construction placed on our statutory provisions. I am not satisfied however that we should adopt the California construction. Our statutes seem, quite clearly to me, to grant the court authority as to custody only pending a divorce action, or if divorce is denied, then only when legal separation is granted.
Furthermore I seriously doubt if the record reveals evidence to support the circuit court’s findings as to child custody. In the first place there is no direct evidence that the parties to the action intend to live apart. Since the court denied divorce and did not provide for legal separation, the fair assumption might be that a reconciliation is indicated. The award of custody to the father would appear to be disruptive of such possible and highly favorable conclusion of the domestic differences here involved; and in my opinion granting exclusive control of children to one of two parents living in the matrimonial home is wholly foreign to our concept of the family unit.
I do not however rest my dissent on either of the foregoing' propositions. I dissent for the reason that the issue of child custody absent divorce and legal separation was never tried. Insofar as the record discloses this mother who certainly knew her divorce might be denied, had not the slightest notice or warning until the evidence was all taken *235and the trial judge’s mind made up, that the action she started could result in a denial of the divorce and the loss of her children. Notwithstanding the expression of views in the court’s opinion the issue of child custody, even in case the divorce should be granted, was deeply submerged in the issues arising over the divorce and was. clearly a secondary issue; and the issue as to custody without the divorce was wholly outside the contemplation of the parties and their counsel. The court’s decision in this case involving a mother’s right to her children, one being but two years old, seems incompatible with the high degree of protection this court set up for this same right in the case of In re Romero, 73 S. D. 564, 46 N.W.2d 108.
After the trial of this action had ended and the trial court had announced its decision, including the award of child custody to the father who up to that time had not asked for custody except if a divorce be granted, the respondent father was permitted to amend his answer to ask for custody absent the divorce. The opinion of the court rests in part on the proposition that at that time appellant’s counsel could have obtained permission to offer new evidence on the new issue thus raised by the amended answer. The precise reason why counsel did not choose that course does not appear in the record. Counsel may have been surprised or even annoyed at this novel procedure and hastily concluded the better course would be to appeal. Counsel may well have reached that conclusion after full consideration of the problem presented; or counsel may well have been of the opinion that a trial then o'f this new issue following closely and quite necessarily confused with the trial of the related issues in the divorce case, would be impractical. But whatever may have prompted appellant’s counsel to submit the mother’s case to the judgment of this court at that point, her substantive right to keep her children should not be affected in any degree by such procedural problem as this record presents. Her right is too precious -and important.
I would affirm as to the divorce and direct the circuit court to vacate that part of the judgment relating to child custody.

=== CASE 2223434 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:01.234215+00 ===

332 Mich. 65 (1952)
50 N.W.2d 851
TAYLOR
v.
S.S. KRESGE COMPANY.
Docket No. 70, Calendar No. 45,214.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided January 7, 1952.
Foster, Cummins, Snyder, Cameron & Foster (Sorling, Catron & Hardin, of counsel), for plaintiff.
Kelley & Seelye, for defendant.
CARR, J.
Plaintiff brought suit in equity seeking the cancellation, or reformation, of a lease on business property in the city of Lansing, and for incidental relief. On motion the case was dismissed in circuit court and plaintiff has appealed, contending that he is entitled to a trial of the matters pleaded by him and a determination on the merits in accordance with facts established by proofs.
The bill of complaint alleged that in 1911 the then owner of the property in question, Elizabeth H. Stryker, leased the property to defendant for a period of 10 years for an annual rental of $1,500. In 1918 a new lease was negotiated between the parties, fixing annual rental at $3,000 and the duration of the lease at 25 years from April 1, 1918. Mrs. Stryker died in 1919, leaving as her heirs at law as to said property her daughters, Louise S. Capps and *68 Elizabeth S. Hart, and 2 minor grandsons, namely, plaintiff and his brother, Robert C. Taylor, Jr. The father of said minors was appointed their guardian by the county court of Cass county, Illinois, but there was no guardianship proceeding of any kind within the State of Michigan.
Desiring to enlarge its building, defendant, in 1925, obtained a 55-year lease from the owners of property abutting the land here in question on the north, and a lease for a term of 50 years from a party claiming to own land adjoining on the south. After some negotiations a new lease covering the land described in the lease between Mrs. Stryker and defendant, executed in 1918, with the exception of a parcel 22 feet square, was drawn. It was signed by Mrs. Capps and by Mrs. Hart, and by the father of plaintiff, purporting to act as his guardian and the guardian of Robert C. Taylor, Jr. It provided for an annual rental of $7,500 for a period of 50 years from March 1, 1926.
On January 17, 1929, plaintiff became of age. Shortly thereafter his father forwarded to him and Robert C. Taylor, Jr., who had previously become of age, the draft of an agreement providing for ratification or adoption by them of the lease. The instrument was duly executed, and presumably was returned to defendant. The bill of complaint averred that the lease executed in 1926 was void as to plaintiff and his brother, and that their purported ratification was a nullity. It also alleged that at the time of such transaction plaintiff and his brother did not have a copy of the original lease, had only partial knowledge of its provisions, and were not familiar with the rental value of properties in Lansing. It asserted that the rental fixed, $7,500 per annum, was materially less than the rental paid by defendant for the use of adjoining property, and that it was so grossly inadequate as to evidence fraud.
*69 On November 16, 1944, Robert C. Taylor, Jr., died, leaving plaintiff as his only heir at law. The bill of complaint set forth that during his investigation of the value of property belonging to his brother he discovered for the first time that the 1926 lease was unfair and inequitable. In the prayer for relief he asked that the lease be cancelled as to the 1/3 interest owned by him in the premises, or, in the alternative, that the lease be modified so as to provide a reasonable rental covering plaintiff's interest from the time of the execution of the lease.
Plaintiff also filed a petition for discovery, referring to the suit for cancellation or reformation and setting forth his claim to the right sought as follows:
"That certain books, papers and documents relating to the merits of such action and of material importance in evaluating the same and the rights of the parties are in the possession and control of the defendant S.S. Kresge Company, discovery of which is required by petitioner in order to enable him to plead and properly declare his cause of action herein; and that the nature of such documents, insofar as petitioner is able to describe them from information available to him is correspondence, memoranda, files, records, data and information pertaining to negotiations and execution of the lease of said property, pertaining to the negotiations and execution of lease upon property adjoining on the north, from Nora Smith, Sue Deane and Clara L. Bradford, dated on or about April 2, 1925, and the lease upon property adjoining on the south from Robert T. Merrifield, dated on or about November 11, 1925."
The petition was supported by plaintiff's affidavit as to the situation indicated by the statement above quoted. It was formally denied by an order of the court filed May 1, 1951.
The suit was instituted October 21, 1949. Under date of November 10th following, defendant moved *70 to dismiss, claiming as the bases therefor that the averments of the bill of complaint were insufficient to show fraud, that there was no fiduciary relation between the parties, that the facts well pleaded did not establish plaintiff's right to the relief sought, that plaintiff was guilty of laches, and that the averments of the bill of complaint did not excuse the delay in asserting the alleged cause of action. By order filed June 6, 1950, the motion was granted on the ground of laches. The trial court in his opinion did not discuss the other matters raised by the motion to dismiss, nor did the order make reference thereto. On June 23, 1950, plaintiff moved to set aside the order dismissing the bill of complaint, referring in said motion to an application for leave to file an amendment to the bill of complaint, and setting forth that the allegations of such proposed amendment affected "the grounds upon which said order was entered." In form, the amendment added to the averments of paragraph 13 of the bill of complaint as originally filed. It referred in some detail to plaintiff's efforts to obtain information, including correspondence from defendant relating to the details of arrangements made with plaintiff's father concerning the lease in question and the 22-foot parcel of which plaintiff claimed to be part owner, and also information bearing on negotiations between defendant and the lessors under the other leases referred to in the bill.
It was further averred in the amendment that, in connection with a dispute between the heirs of Elizabeth H. Stryker and one Merrifield involving the ownership of said 22-foot parcel, defendant undertook to represent said heirs. Based on the claimed undertaking, the amendment asserted in effect the existence of such a relation between plaintiff and the defendant as placed a burden on the latter to disclose to plaintiff all information in its possession with *71 reference to the lease here in question and the other leases, above referred to, covering contiguous property. After considering the amendment proffered, the trial court on January 11, 1951, filed an opinion that the averments of the bill of complaint, as amended, were not sufficient to establish any fiduciary obligation on the part of defendant requiring it to disclose to plaintiff information with reference to the matters specifically referred to by plaintiff in his pleading, and that the facts claimed did not establish a cause of action based on fraud. In accordance with the opinion, an order was entered January 20, 1951, dismissing the case on the basis of the following recital:
"The plaintiff having filed his motion to set aside the order heretofore entered dismissing the bill of complaint therein and his further motion for leave to file an amendment to his bill of complaint, and said amendment having been permitted; and the defendant having renewed its motion to dismiss said cause or in the alternative to strike, and the defendant's said motion to dismiss having been reconsidered and the court having heard the oral arguments and considered the written briefs submitted in behalf of the respective parties, from all of which it appears that plaintiff has failed, by his amended bill of complaint, to state a valid cause of action in equity."
On January 19, 1951, plaintiff filed amendments to different paragraphs of the bill of complaint, apparently seeking to strengthen the averments originally made by emphasizing the claim as to the alleged fiduciary obligation owing by defendant. Whether these proposed amendments were called to the attention of the trial court does not appear. The record does not indicate that a motion for leave to file was made, or that there was any order of the court with reference to them. It will be noted *72 that the order for dismissal, entered January 20, 1951, and quoted above in part, referred to "an amendment." It is a fair inference that the reference was to the amendment mentioned in the opinion of the court on which the order was based. It may well be doubted if the other proposed amendments filed were entitled to consideration by the trial judge. In any event, the matters alleged therein were not of such a character as to materially change the situation.
On appeal plaintiff asserts that the trial court was in error in his construction of the allegations of the bill of complaint. Defendant has taken a cross appeal, apparently on the ground that the final order of dismissal entered was based, in terms, on plaintiff's failure to state a cause of action entitling him to equitable relief, without mentioning the other grounds for dismissal alleged in defendant's motion. Defendant claims, among other matters, that plaintiff was guilty of laches and that he is estopped to have the relief sought. Whether the order of the trial court was based, in part at least, on laches, as the opinion filed would indicate, or wholly on the specific ground mentioned therein, is not of controlling importance. This is a proceeding in equity, and we review it accordingly. Under the appeal and the cross appeal the question of laches and the other issues involved in the case are before us.
On behalf of plaintiff it is insisted that the bill of complaint sufficiently averred a cause of action based on fraud, actual or constructive. The claim rests on the theory that the allegations of fact in his pleading were sufficient to show a duty on the part of defendant to advise plaintiff as to all matters in any way connected with or related to the subject matter of this suit, that the failure to perform such duty constituted fraud, and that the relief sought should be granted on that basis. In the final analysis *73 such duty, if it exists or has existed, must rest on a fiduciary relationship. The averments in the bill of complaint, as amended, relating to the undertaking of the defendant with reference to the 22-foot parcel, above mentioned, were general in terms and failed to indicate specifically what defendant undertook to do in plaintiff's behalf. However, if it be assumed that defendant was bound at the time to inform plaintiff with reference to such transaction, it may not be assumed or inferred that the duty extended to and included all matters touching or concerning the property involved in the case at bar. The dispute with reference to the 22-foot parcel apparently had reference to the matter of ownership, rather than of rental value. It is not made to appear that the provisions of any lease held by defendant were involved in the controversy. Our examination of the bill of complaint, as amended, brings us to the conclusion that the trial court was correct in determining that the allegations therein were insufficient to establish a fiduciary relation and fraud, either actual or constructive.
The claim of plaintiff that the inadequacy of consideration for the lease was such as to indicate fraud is not well founded. Such assertion rests on the alleged disparity between the amount of rental reserved in said lease and that reserved in the leases of contiguous property. There is no showing as to the reasons or necessities that impelled defendant to enter into the latter leases. Neither is there any showing that the rentals reserved therein were in accord with ordinary rental values of similarly located property in the city of Lansing at the time of execution. It must be borne in mind also that the property involved in the present suit had been leased in 1918 for a period of 25 years, at an annual rental of $3,000. In 1926 said lease had a period of approximately 17 years to run, during which defendant *74 was unquestionably entitled to retain possession on the payment of the rental reserved. The lease that plaintiff seeks to void, or have reformed, calls for $7,500 annual payment. There is no showing that any such situation existed with reference to the other property leased by defendant. The mere allegation or claim of fraud is not sufficient to establish a cause of action based thereon. There must be averments of facts from which such an inference may fairly and reasonably be drawn. Defendant is not charged with having made false representations. The claim of fraud rests wholly on the basis of a violation of a duty to disclose, and on alleged inadequacy of consideration. The allegations of the bill of complaint, fairly and reasonably construed, do not justify the claim in either respect.
Assuming the sufficiency of the allegations in plaintiff's pleading, as amended, the question arises as to whether such laches is shown thereby as precludes the granting of relief. Plaintiff claims that when he executed the instrument, in 1929, in terms ratifying or adopting the lease, he made no investigation whatsoever, or sought to obtain information, with reference to the fairness of its provisions. Presumably he received his due proportion of the rentals, and, insofar as the record here discloses, he did not discuss the matter with his father or with his aunts. There is no claim that he could not have obtained the information, that he now asserts he did not have, from sources other than the defendant. In 1945, after his brother's death, he says that for the first time he learned of matters that caused him to conclude that the lease was, as to him, unfair and fraudulent. At that time he contacted the defendant, but apparently without obtaining any information tending to support his present theory.
As before stated, this suit was instituted in October, 1949. Plaintiff seeks to excuse his delay on the *75 ground that defendant fraudulently concealed the facts on which the alleged cause of action is based. This claim, set forth in the amendment to the bill of complaint, rests on the theory of a fiduciary duty owing by defendant to plaintiff, and a breach of that duty. Complaint is made because of the refusal or failure of defendant to turn over to plaintiff the correspondence and other records that he requested. For the reasons before indicated, plaintiff failed to establish the existence of the duty claimed by him. Had this action been brought on the law side of the court, the statute of limitations,[*] if invoked, would have barred recovery. CL 1948, § 609.20 (Stat Ann § 27.612) provides:
"If any person who is liable to any of the actions mentioned in this chapter, shall fraudulently conceal the cause of such action from the knowledge of the person entitled thereto, the action may be commenced at any time within 2 years after the person who is entitled to bring the same shall discover that he had such cause of action, although such action would be otherwise barred by the provisions of this chapter."
This section does not aid plaintiff because he waited over 4 years, after learning of facts that should have put him on notice with reference to the matters of which he now complains, before bringing suit. It does not appear that during said period he sought information from his colessors, his aunts, or from any source other than the defendant. His failure to do so is not explained.
While the statute of limitations is not applicable to equitable actions, nevertheless if it would bar recovery in a proceeding at law, the doctrine of laches accomplishes the same result in an equitable proceeding. See Monger v. Monger, 327 Mich 306, 313, *76 and prior decisions there cited. Of like import is Seguin v. Madison, 328 Mich 600. The inference of laches arising from the lapse of time between the accrual of plaintiff's right of action, if he had such, and the bringing of suit is not overcome or the delay excused on the basis of the facts pleaded in the amended bill.
Plaintiff's petition for discovery, hereinbefore quoted in part, was properly denied. Reference thereto indicates that plaintiff was seeking from defendant the right to examine all correspondence, records and other data, pertaining not only to the lease in question but also to the leases of the property contiguous on both sides. It was asserted as the reason for the petition that the action sought was necessary to enable plaintiff to plead his cause of action. However, his bill of complaint had been filed some time before. There is no satisfactory showing that such records as plaintiff might be entitled to in the event of trial could not be obtained by subpoena duces tecum. Gemsa v. Dorner, 256 Mich 195. The scope of the order sought indicates rather clearly that plaintiff was seeking access to records to which he was not entitled, and that he desired to examine defendant's records for the purpose of determining to what extent, if at all, he would be benefited thereby. The trial judge did not abuse his discretion in denying the petition.
The conclusions reached with reference to the matters above discussed render it unnecessary to consider other questions in the case, including defendant's claim that plaintiff is not entitled to maintain his action because of the failure to make his co-lessors parties to the suit. The order of the trial court dismissing the case was correct other than in the omission of an express statement therein that it was based on laches, as well as on the failure of *77 plaintiff to allege in his bill of complaint a case for the equitable relief sought.
An order will enter in this Court affirming the order from which plaintiff has appealed, with the modification indicated. Defendant may have costs.
NORTH, C.J., and DETHMERS, BUSHNELL, SHARPE, BOYLES, and REID, JJ., concurred. BUTZEL, J., did not sit.
NOTES
[*]  See CL 1948, § 609.13 et seq. (Stat Ann and Stat Ann 1949 Cum Supp § 27.605 et seq.).

=== CASE 2223435 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:01.236302+00 ===

905 N.E.2d 1051 (2009)
Timothy D. WOLSHIRE, Appellant-Respondent,
v.
Sharon M. WOLSHIRE, Appellee-Petitioner.
No. 16A05-0812-CV-722.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
May 12, 2009.
*1052 Steven P. Teverbaugh, Greensburg, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Frank I. Hamilton, Jr., Hamilton & Tebbe Law Office, P.C., Greensburg, IN, Attorney for Appellee.
*1053 OPINION
RILEY, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Appellant-Respondent, Timothy D. Wolshire (Husband), appeals the trial court's decree arising from the dissolution of his marriage to Sharon M. Wolshire (Wife).
We reverse and remand with instructions.
ISSUES
Husband presents four issues for our review, but we need to reach only three, which we restate as:
(1) Whether the trial court erred by adding language to the provision of the parties' Separation Agreement governing the division of the proceeds from the potential sale of the marital residence;
(2) Whether the trial court erred by awarding Wife a portion of Husband's military retirement benefits;[1] and
(3) Whether the trial court erred by awarding Wife a portion of the military housing allowance received by Husband following the parties' separation.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Husband joined the military in 1984. In 1992, Husband "got together" with Wife, who was also in the military at the time.[2] (Transcript p. 4). The couple married in 1995. Husband left full-time military service in 1996 and began serving part-time in the National Guard.
On August 31, 2005, Wife filed a petition for legal separation. The next day, September 1, 2005, Husband, who was not represented by counsel, and Wife, who was, filed a Separation Agreement with the trial court. The opening paragraph provided:
There is currently pending in the above captioned matter a legal separation action between the parties, and this agreement settles all issues arising in or outside the marital relationship to all things, actions, property, whether real or personal, and all interests of the parties, including but not limited to, the disposition of their property, and this agreement constitutes a complete discharge of the parties' legal obligations to each other, and both parties stipulate and agree that this is a fair, just, equitable and reasonable agreement, and that it shall become effective and binding upon the parties, their respective legal representatives, successors and assigns, immediately upon the approval of this agreement by the Court.
(Appellant's App. p. 11). The agreement called for the parties' real estate in Indiana (the marital residence), Ohio, and Tennessee to be divided as follows:
Wife shall receive as her sole and individual property the marital residence located at 4515 S. Co. Rd. 700 W., Greensburg, Indiana, as well as the Tennessee property on Dunaway Ridge Road, noted on Tax Map No. 95 as Parcel 3.10. Husband shall sign Quit-Claim Deeds granting his interest in each property to Wife.
*1054 Wife shall offer Husband the sum of Thirty-Five Thousand Dollars ($35,000.00) if she sells the marital residence for at least Two Hundred Thousand Dollars ($200,000.00) within five (5) years from the date of this agreement. If said residence sells for less than Two Hundred Thousand Dollars ($200,000.00), then Wife shall offer Husband an amount equal to seventeen and one-half percent (17.5%) of the sale price.
Husband may reside in [the] marital residence as a tenant until November 15, 2005, during which time Husband shall pay and be responsible for one-half (1/2) of all household expenses and he shall assist with all outside yard maintenance.
On or before November 15, 2005, Husband shall remove his possessions outlined hereinbelow. Any items left after November 15, 2005 shall become property of Wife unless otherwise previously agreed to between the parties.
Once Husband has vacated the marital residence, he shall have no contact with Wife. All correspondence shall be through Wife's attorney.
Husband shall retain the property in Ohio, which is already in his individual name.
(Appellant's App. pp. 11-12). Another section of the agreement covered the distribution of the parties' personal property, including bank accounts. Finally, the section headed "Other Property" provided:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Separation Agreement, all money, stock and property of every nature, real or personal, tangible or intangible, securities, bank accounts now owned by either Husband or Wife shall become the separate and exclusive property of the party now owning it, divested of any rights of dower, courtesy, descent or encumbrances or any other right or rights of the other party heretofore existing or arising out of the marital relationship of the parties, except as provided herein.
(Appellant's App. p. 14). The trial court approved the parties' Separation Agreement the same day it was filed.
In March of 2006, Husband began serving full-time with the National Guard. As a result, he started receiving a "basic allowance for housing" (BAH) of $1,412.00 per month. (Tr. p. 33). In September of 2007, Husband was advised by a military attorney that he should send his BAH payments to Wife. The attorney wrote, "I informed Mr. Wolshire about the ramifications of complying with Army Regulation 608-99; specifically that, in the absence of a court order or written support agreement, Soldiers are required to provide support at the basic allowance for housing (with dependent) rate. See AR 608-99, chapter 1-7(a)." (Husband's Ex. C). From that point forward, Husband sent the BAH money to Wife.
On September 4, 2007, Wife filed a Petition for Dissolution of Marriage, in which she stated that "the parties have accumulated certain real and/or personal property during the course of this marriage in which the interest of the parties should be determined." (Appellant's App. p. 18). She asked that "the Court determine and adjust the property rights of the parties[.]" (Appellant's App. p. 18).
A final hearing was held on August 14, 2008. At the beginning of the hearing, Wife testified that she was willing to be bound by the terms of the parties' Separation Agreement but asked the trial court to address the BAH payments and Husband's military retirement benefits. Wife testified that she did not find out that she was entitled to the BAH payments until August or September of 2007, so they were *1055 "not even on the radar screen" at the time the parties entered the Separation Agreement. (Tr. p. 11). She asked the trial court to order Husband to reimburse her for the BAH payments he kept between March of 2006 and September of 2007. When asked why Husband's military retirement benefits were not addressed in the Separation Agreement, Wife stated, "It simply did not come up as we were putting together this agreement. It was an oversight." (Tr. p. 20).
Husband then took the stand and testified regarding the BAH payments for March of 2006, when he started receiving the payments, through September of 2007, when he was advised by the military attorney that he should be sending the payments to Wife. He said that, when he started receiving the payments, his understanding of the relevant military regulations was that he was required to send the payments to Wife unless a court order to the contrary was in place, and he believed that the Separation Agreement approved by the trial court was such an order, that is, that it relieved him of his duty to send the BAH payments to Wife. Regarding military retirement benefits, Husband testified that he had been in the military long enoughnearly twenty-four yearsthat he will receive a pension when he chooses to retire. At the conclusion of the hearing, the trial court granted the petition for dissolution but took the issue of property division under advisement.
On September 22, 2008, the trial court issued its Decree of Dissolution of Marriage. The decree began:
And the Court, being duly advised in the agreement of the parties with regard to most issues, and having heard testimony and arguments of counsel and having determined that the only unresolved issues involved the payment of basic allowance for housing (BAH) and the allocation of Husband's military retirement benefits, now finds and adjudges as follows...
(Appellant's App. p. 4). The portion of the decree regarding the parties' real property was the same as the Separation Agreement, except for the addition of the following language:
Upon the sale of the marital residence, Husband shall be responsible for seventeen and one-half percent (17.5%) of the taxes, insurance and the replacement of existing structures such as doors, heating & air conditioning, plumbing, electrical and roof, from September 1, 2005, to the date of sale, which shall be deducted from his portion of the sales price. If the marital residence does not sell within five (5) years of September 1, 2005, then Wife shall keep the real estate free from any financial obligation to Husband.
(Appellant's App. p. 5). The decree also included the following provision regarding the BAH payments:
That with regard to the basic allowance for housing (BAH), the Court finds that Husband shall pay Wife the equivalent of four (4) months of monthly benefits in the amount of One Thousand Four Hundred Twelve Dollars ($1,412.00), for a total of Five Thousand Six Hundred Forty-eight Dollars ($5,648.00)[.]
(Appellant's App. p. 6). Finally, the trial court addressed Husband's military retirement benefits as follows:
At such time as Husband begins to receive military retirement, Wife shall be entitled to a percentage of his retirement, which shall be calculated by dividing twelve (12) by the number of years and months of service. By way of example, if Husband is in the service for thirty and one-half (30.5) years, then Wife's percentage would be twelve (12) *1056 divided by 30.5, which equals approximately thirty-nine percent (39%), and then divide that by two (2), which would be nineteen and one-half percent (19.5%). This percentage will vary depending on how many years and months Husband serves in the military, and both parties agree to cooperate and obtain signatures and/or Court orders complying with military law to effectuate the terms of this order.
(Appellant's App. p. 6).
Husband now appeals.[3] Additional facts will be provided as necessary.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Husband argues that the trial court erred in three ways: (1) adding the language regarding taxes, insurance, and repairs to the provision of the Separation Agreement governing the sale of the marital residence; (2) awarding Wife a portion of his military retirement benefits; and (3) awarding Wife a portion of the BAH payments. Essentially, Husband contends that all property issues were settled by the parties' Separation Agreement, while Wife asserts that the Separation Agreement left the three issues above unresolved.
Dissolution settlement agreements are encouraged under the Indiana Dissolution of Marriage Act. Pond v. Pond, 700 N.E.2d 1130, 1136 (Ind.1998). Parties are expressly authorized to agree in writing to provisions for the disposition of any property owned by either or both of them. Id.; see also I.C. § 31-15-2-17. There is a very strong presumption of enforceability of contracts that represent the freely bargained agreement of the parties. Pond, 700 N.E.2d at 1136. As such, Indiana courts have not hesitated to enforce a divorce settlement agreement that would have been in excess of the divorce court's authority had it been crafted by the divorce court and that was shown to be, over time, grossly inequitable. Id. The interpretation of such an agreement, as with any other contract, presents a question of law and is reviewed de novo. Bailey v. Mann, 895 N.E.2d 1215, 1217 (Ind. 2008).
By its own terms, the Separation Agreement in this case "settles all issues arising in or outside the marital relationship," including the disposition of the parties' property, and "constitutes a complete discharge of the parties' legal obligations to each other[.]" (Appellant's App. p. 11). Moreover, the parties "stipulate[d] and agree[d] that this is a fair, just, equitable and reasonable agreement" that would become effective and binding immediately upon the approval of the trial court. (Appellant's App. p. 11). The trial court approved the agreement the same day it was filed. As for any property not specifically mentioned, the Separation Agreement provided that "all money, stock and property of every nature, real or personal, tangible or intangible, securities, bank accounts now owned by either Husband or Wife shall become the separate and exclusive property of the party now owning it," divested of any "rights of the other party heretofore existing or arising out of the marital relationship of the parties[.]" (Appellant's App. p. 14). With this backdrop in mind, we address each of the three provisions added by the trial court.
I. Proceeds from the Sale of the Marital Residence
The parties' Separation Agreement provided that Wife would receive the marital residence and that she would offer Husband roughly 17.5% of the sale price if *1057 she sells the residence within five years of the date of the agreement. The trial court's decree of dissolution retained this language but added a provision stating that, "[u]pon the sale of the marital residence, Husband shall be responsible for seventeen and one-half percent (17.5%) of the taxes, insurance and the replacement of existing structures such as doors, heating & air conditioning, plumbing, electrical and roof, from September 1, 2005, to the date of sale, which shall be deducted from his portion of the sales price." (Appellant's App. p. 5). We conclude that the trial court erred by adding this language.[4]
"In reviewing a settlement agreement, a court should concern itself only with fraud, duress, and other imperfections of consent, or with manifest inequities, particularly those deriving from great disparities in bargaining power." Pond, 700 N.E.2d at 1136; see also Beaman v. Beaman, 844 N.E.2d 525, 530-31 (Ind.Ct.App. 2006). Here, Wife has not claimed that the provision of the Separation Agreement regarding the proceeds from the sale of the marital residence was the result of fraud or duress or a great disparity in bargaining power. In fact, it was Wife who had the benefit of counsel when entering the agreement, while Husband apparently negotiated on his own. Moreover, during the final hearing, Wife did not even ask the trial court to add the language in question. Our supreme court has said that a trial court should not reject a settlement agreement just because it believes that it can draft a better one. Pond, 700 N.E.2d at 1136. We therefore remand to the trial court with instructions to remove the challenged language from its dissolution decree.
II. Husband's Military Retirement Benefits
We reach the same conclusion with regard to the trial court's division of Husband's future military retirement benefits. Generally, a spouse's military retirement benefits are a marital asset subject to division. See, e.g., Griffin v. Griffin, 872 N.E.2d 653 (Ind.Ct.App.2007). Here, however, the parties entered an agreement that made no mention of Husband's benefits. When asked about this omission during the final hearing, Wife stated, "It simply did not come up as we were putting together this agreement. It was an oversight." (Tr. p. 20). As noted above, a trial court reviewing a settlement agreement "should concern itself only with fraud, duress, and other imperfections of consent, or with manifest inequities, particularly those deriving from great disparities in bargaining power." Pond, 700 N.E.2d at 1136. A mere oversight does not rise to this level. We instruct the trial court, on remand, to remove the provision concerning Husband's military retirement benefits from the decree of dissolution.
III. BAH Payments
Finally, Husband argues that the trial court erred by awarding Wife $5,648.00 based on the BAH payments he received between March of 2006 and September of 2007. Husband would have us hold that this issue is controlled by the "Other Property" provision of the parties' Separation Agreement, which, again, provided:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Separation Agreement, all money, stock and property of every nature, real or personal, tangible or intangible, securities, bank accounts now *1058 owned by either Husband or Wife shall become the separate and exclusive property of the party now owning it, divested of any rights of dower, courtesy, descent or encumbrances or any other right or rights of the other party heretofore existing or arising out of the marital relationship of the parties, except as provided herein.
(Appellant's App. p. 14). Husband urges that, under this provision, "[a]ny other property not specifically mentioned in the settlement agreement becomes sole property of the person whose name the property is in," that the BAH payments "are property, and specifically not mentioned in the settlement agreement," and that they should therefore be considered Husband's sole property, since they "are in his individual name." (Appellant's Br. p. 14). Wife, on the other hand, contends that the BAH payments "needed to be dealt with" by the trial court because "[t]he parties did not have an agreement on [that] issue[.]" (Appellee's Br. p. 9). "In fact," she continues, "the Separation Agreement was totally silent" regarding the BAH payments. (Appellee's Br. p. 9).
The problem with Wife's argument is that it would render the "Other Property" provision of the parties' Separation Agreement completely meaningless. That is, while the "Other Property" provision purports to award any property not specifically mentioned to the party "now owning it," Wife would have us hold that the parties intended for the trial court to control the division of any such property. Nothing in the Separation Agreement supports such a conclusion. Because the BAH payments were not specifically mentioned in the Separation Agreement, and because they were issued to Husband, they were his property, and the trial court erred by making an award to Wife based on the payments. We instruct the trial court to remove the provision regarding BAH payments from its decree of dissolution.
Obviously, at least part of the reason that the BAH payments were not mentioned in the Separation Agreement was that the payments had not yet begun when Husband and Wife signed that agreement. But losing any right she might have had in later-acquired property was one of the risks Wife took by signing the Separation Agreement. The agreement "settles all issues arising in or outside the marital relationship to all things, actions, property, whether real or personal, and all interests of the parties, including but not limited to, the disposition of their property," and it "constitutes a complete discharge of the parties' legal obligations to each other, and both parties stipulate and agree that this is a fair, just, equitable and reasonable agreement[.]" (Appellant's App. p. 11). More specifically, as to property in Husband's name, the "Other Property" provision divested Wife of any rights "heretofore existing or arising out of the marital relationship of the parties[.]" (Appellant's App. p. 14). This is very broad language, but Wife agreed to it, and not because of any disparity in bargaining power. If anything, Wife had the upper hand, since she was represented by counsel and husband was not.
Finally, we recognize that Husband, Wife, and a military attorney all apparently agreed in September of 2007 that Wife was entitled to the BAH payments and that Wife in fact received the payments from that point forward. However, it seems that Wife simply got lucky in this regard. In a letter written to Husband, the military attorney remarked that Army Regulation 608-99 entitled Wife to the payments "in the absence of a court order or written support agreement[.]" (Husband's Ex. C) (emphasis added). Here, Husband and Wife had reached an agreement *1059 that, by its own terms, settled all issues between the parties, and the trial court had approved that agreement. As such, Wife was not entitled to the BAH payments under the military regulation in question.[5]
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the trial court erred by adding new language to the provision of the parties' Separation Agreement governing the proceeds of the potential sale of the marital residence and by awarding Wife a portion of Husband's military retirement benefits and a portion of the BAH payments. We remand this cause to the trial court with instructions to amend its decree of dissolution in accordance with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded with instructions.
KIRSCH, J., and MATHIAS, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Husband also challenges the formula used by the trial court in dividing his military retirement benefits. Because we conclude that the trial court erred by awarding Wife any of those benefits, we need not reach that issue.
[2]  Wife testified during the final hearing that she served in the military for twelve and a half years, but the parties do not specify the exact years in which her service began and ended. Wife did testify that she started receiving VA disability benefits in 1995.
[3]  After Husband filed his notice of appeal, the trial court entered a supplemental Court Order Regarding Retirement. That supplemental order does not affect the issues on appeal.
[4]  As detailed above, the trial court added this language despite its statement that "the only unresolved issues involved the payment of basic allowance for housing (BAH) and the allocation of Husband's military retirement benefits[.]" (Appellant's App. p. 4).
[5]  That is not to say that Husband can now seek the return of the BAH payments he made after September of 2007. He did not ask for such relief during the final hearing, and he has not done so in this appeal. We hold only that the trial court erred by ordering Husband to reimburse Wife for a portion of the BAH payments he received between March of 2006 and September of 2007.

=== CASE 9740409 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:44.971367+00 ===

Messmore, J.
This is an action at law brought by Margaret Heeney, administratrix of the estate of Raymond Heeney, deceased, as plaintiff, against Lloyd Churchill, defendant, to recover damages for the alleged wrongful death of plaintiff’s decedent. The case was tried to a jury resulting in a verdict in favor of the defendant. Plaintiff filed a motion for new trial. From the order overruling the motion, plaintiff appeals.
For convenience we will refer to Raymond Heeney as the deceased, the appellant Margaret Heeney as the plaintiff, and the appellee Lloyd Churchill as the defendant.
The pleadings, insofar as necessary to consider in this appeal, are as follows: The plaintiff’s petition alleged in substance that the defendant drove his automobile in a reckless and negligent manner, at an excessive rate of speed along the road in question, without keeping the proper lookout to enable him to stop his automobile within his view, and that the negligence of the defendant, *850as alleged, was the direct and proximate cause of the death of the deceased.
The defendant’s answer is in effect a general denial. Although it alleges the deceased did not keep a proper lookout and warn the defendant of his presence on the highway, and placed himself in a position where he could not, by the exercise of ordinary care, be seen by the defendant, there is no affirmative allegation therein charging the deceased with contributory negligence.
The record discloses that the defendant lives about 2% miles northwest of Hubbard. On August 21, 1947, in the evening he, his wife, and daughter, went to a ladies club party at Dose’s, approximately 7 miles southwest of Hubbard. The defendant drove his 1936 Ford coupe. They stayed at Dose’s, had a midnight lunch, and left for home. The defendant and his family followed Marion Grove and his family into Hubbard where Grove stopped to let his wife’s folks out of the car. . The defendant went on by Grove and proceeded toward his home. The headlights and taillight on his . car were working. To go to his home the defendant took the road north of Hubbard which is a dirt road and is smooth. This road goes straight north for half a mile out of Hubbard, then turns west, and proceeds about 40 rods when it turns north again. There is a gradual rise in the road west. Where the road turns north there is a rounding corner. After rounding the curve proceeding north, the road is level or flat for a distrance estimated by witnesses as being from the length of a car to 50 or 60 feet from the brow of the hill. The road slopes down to the north. There are trees and shrubs east of the curve where the road turns north, west thereof, and on the east side of the road that slopes to the north.
The defendant, after he proceeded upgrade to turn north, was traveling at a rate of speed of 20 miles an hour. His wife was seated to his right, and to her right was seated their daughter. His car was on the right side of the center of the road. As the defendant pro*851ceeded around the corner the lights of his car would show across the road to the west bank and upward. The defendant testified it would be necessary to round the curve at the top of the hill before the lights would shine down the hill to the north on the right side of the road. The defendant saw no object or man standing or lying down as he made the turn to the north, but in so doing he felt a “bump” such as if running over something. After he hit the bump in the road he drove 20 feet and came to a stop. His wife asked him what it was. He did not know of any object that migiit have come in contact with his car. He drove down to the bottom of the hill and turned around and came back. On his return he saw a man’s body lying in the road. He drove to the west side a distance of about 4 feet from the body and got out of his car. He had a flashlight with him and flashed it on the body. The feet were approximately one foot from the east grade of the road, and the head was to the west. All of the body was east of the center line of the road. The body was lying on its right side facing south. The defendant then drove toward Hubbard and had gone approximately a half mile when he met Grove and stopped him. Grove was on the road north of Hubbard near a bridge at that time. The defendant told Grove he had run over somebody, and asked Grove to go back to Hubbard and call the sheriff, which he did.
The sheriff arrived at the scene of the accident about 1 a. m. The defendant and his wife were there. The defendant’s car was parked to the north on the west side of the road. The sheriff parked well over to the west side of the road, south of and close to the body, and he could see the body in the lights of his car. He had a conversation with the defendant. The defendant said he struck something in the road, and the further he proceeded down the road the more he thought it was peculiar. He went to the bottom of the hill and turned and went back to see what it was.
*852The defendant testified that the body was from 2 to 4 feet north, over the top of the hill 15 or 20 feet past the curve, lying on the north side of the slope. The witness Grove testified that the body was lying 30 feet from the corner of the road going north after you get to the brow of the hill. The sheriff testified the body was lying 50 to 60 feet north of the top of the hill, and the plaintiff’s son placed the body 40 or 50 feet from the curve.
The sheriff testified that as you proceed around the corner north, your lights shine against the road to the west bank and upwards. There are trees and brush at the corner of the road, and it would be difficult to see through the trees at the corner of the road at night.
The witness Bill Hogan had been to the fair at Homer. He met the defendant standing in the road where the body was lying. He stopped his car 10 to 15 feet south of the body, and could see the body by the lights of his car. He did not get out of his car. The defendant said he had hit someone. Hogan flashed a light on the body and identified it as the body of Raymond Heeney. He could not tell what part of the body had been run over. He had seen the body before the defendant flagged him down with a flashlight. He came up the right side of the road as you. go around the corner, and he testified that his lights picked up the parked car of the defendant which was 15 feet north of the body on the right side of the road.
The sheriff testified to finding some tracks along the side of the road south of the body at an approximate distance of 15 to 20 feet. These tracks led in the direction of the body. The sheriff did not notice anything to indicate that the body had been dragged or rolled.
The plaintiff’s son testified that his father was dressed in blue overalls, and wore a light blue work shirt and a cap.
The plaintiff and the deceased lived northwest of Hub*853bard. On August 21, 1947, the deceased and his wife were in Hubbard. They intended to return home together. The plaintiff waited for their daughter, a school girl, who was attending the fair at Homer. Upon her return to Hubbard' the mother and daughter left for home in the family car. The deceased had often walked home or caught a ride, and did not go with them. He was apparently on his way home when the accident occurred.
Raymond Heeney, deceased’s son, had talked to his father the morning of August 21, 1947, just before leaving for Omaha. He returned to Hubbard at about 10 p. m. He saw his father about 10:30, and talked to him again. On Wednesday after his father was killed he talked to the defendant at the defendant’s home. He asked the defendant if he could tell how the accident happened. Defendant said he was “coming along about 15 to 20 miles an hour and he felt something hit the car.” He had hauled grain over that road that day and knew there were no bumps there that he could hit, so when he felt the bump he went to the bottom of the hill, turned around, and went back and found the deceased lying in the road.
■ The defendant made tests to determine how much he could see from his car. Sitting in his car looking over the front end of it he would have to look 16 feet to pick up an object approximately 8 inches off the ground, indicating that there was a distance of 16 feet in front of the car where he could not see the road. Likewise a test was made looking to the right-hand side with reference to an object lying in the road directly in front of the car. There was a distance of 23 feet from the object in the road back toward the car that you could see nothing in the road, that is, an object 8 or 10 inches high.
Before discussing the plaintiff’s assignments of error we note the following upon which the trial court properly instructed the jury: The duties of a pedestrian using a public highway and the operator of a motor ve*854hide using the same are reciprocal. A pedestrian, though he has a legal right to walk on the highway, is also required to use reasonable care for his own safety. The driver of a motor vehicle using the highway in the exercise of his legal rights is required to exercise due care for the safety of others who might reasonably be-expected to be on the highway. Such driver is likewise required to anticipate that pedestrians may be using the highway and to use due care and protect any such who may be using it. See, Johnson v. Anoka-Butte Lumber Co., 141 Neb. 851, 5 N. W. 2d 114; Floyd v. Edwards, 150 Neb. 41, 33 N. W. 2d 555.
The plaintiff contends the trial court erred in failing to adequately instruct the jury as to the duties of the defendant to observe the rules of the road so as to operate his motor vehicle in such manner that he could stop the same within the area lighted by the lights of his automobile and avoid striking the deceased who was lawfully using the highway. In support of this contention the plaintiff relies on the cases of Roth v. Blomquist, 117 Neb. 444, 220 N. W. 572, 58 A. L. R. 1473; Cotten v. Stolley, 124 Neb. 855, 248 N. W. 384; Allen v. Clark, 148 Neb. 627, 28 N. W. 2d 439.
In Roth v. Blomquist, supra, this court held: “As a general rule it is negligence as a matter of law. for a motorist to drive an automobile so fast on a highway at night that he cannot stop in time to avoid a collision with an object within the area lighted by his lamps.” In the opinion, it is said: “When applicable to the facts a violation is of itself negligence precluding a recovery * * The rule with recognized exceptions has been followed since it was first announced. See, Fulcher v. Ike, 142 Neb. 418, 6 N. W. 2d 610, and cases cited therein p. 423; Buresh v. George, 149 Neb. 340, 31 N. W. 2d 106; Pierson v. Jensen, 148 Neb. 849, 29 N. W. 2d 625.
In Fulcher v. Ike, supra, this court said: “It would appear, therefore, that the general rule with exceptions, which provides that it is negligence as a matter of law *855for a motorist to drive an automobile so fast on a highway at night that he cannot stop in time to avoid a collision with an object within the area lighted by the lamps on the automobile, should embrace in the exceptions all situations where reasonable minds may differ on the question of whether or not the operator of the automobile exercised the care, caution and prudence required of a reasonably careful, cautious and prudent person under the circumstances of the particular situation.”
The facts in the instant case disclose that the defendant was driving his car upgrade west at a speed of 20 miles an hour and did not increase his speed when he turned north on the highway to proceed downgrade. In making the turn north there is a flat surface estimated in length as from the length of a car to 50 or 60 feet. Along the north side of the road going west are trees, brush, and bushes, and also at the turn to the north, and on the east side of the highway where the road slopes downward to the north. The deceased was wearing blue overalls, a light blue work shirt, and a cap. The defendant did not see the deceased until after he felt a bump, turned around, came back, and saw the body lying on the highway. The evidence does not disclose whether the defendant was walking along the highway or was lying down at the time the defendant felt a bump as if his car has struck some object. The body was lying over the crest of the hill. There is a variance in the testimony as to just what distance north of the top of the hill the body was lying, as heretofore set out in the evidence.
It is contended by the plaintiff that the defendant drove at an excessive rate of speed and that he was unable to stop within the range of his vision. There is no evidence to sustain this conclusion in the record. The maximum rate of speed of defendant’s car was 20 miles an hour ascending the upgrade,.-and it was not increased. This certainly was not excessive speed, but a reasonable rate of speed under the circumstances. The rule that it is negligence to drive a car so fast that you *856cannot stop it within the distance you can see is based on the reckless speed that such a situation implies. The rule contended for, although correct, has no application to the facts before us. The negligence of the defendant, if any, must be predicated on some other theory.
The question of whether the defendant should have seen the deceased, and the inferences to be drawn from the evidence adduced are matters of evidence which a jury must decide. The only question properly determinable was whether the defendant was negligent in failing to see the deceased in time to avoid the accident. See Johnson v. Anoka-Butte Lumber Co., supra. The trial court instructed the jury with reference to whether or not the defendant, in rounding the turn, made use of his sense of seeing, and was exercising that degree of care that persons of ordinary prudence would ordinarily exercise under the circumstances. The issue was presented to the jury as to whether or not the defendant was keeping a proper lookout and had his automobile under control under the circumstances.
In Floyd v. Edwards, supra, a case wherein a pedestrian dressed in dark clothing was walking along the highway at night and was struck by an automobile approaching from the rear, the plaintiff’s petition alleged facts in accordance with the rule set forth in Roth v. Blomquist, supra. The plaintiff also offered and requested instructions in accordance with the rule, which the trial court refused. This court held that the defendant was not negligent as a matter of law, that the case was brought within the exceptions of the rule, and therefore the court was required to submit the issues on the driver’s alleged negligence, if any, to the jury for its determination.
In the light of the evidence and foregoing cited authorities, we conclude the defendant was not guilty of negligence as a matter of law, and the case was brought within the exceptions to the rule which require submission of the issue of the driver’s alleged negligence to *857the jury. The plaintiff’s contention cannot be sustained.
The plaintiff assigns as error the failure of the court to instruct the jury under the rule that where there are no eyewitnesses and no direct evidence of the accident causing the injury, the facts and circumstances may be proved by circumstantial evidence, and the presumption is raised by the instinct of self-preservation on behalf of the deceased that he was not guilty of contributory negligence, but was in the exercise of due care and caution for his own safety, unless the contrary is shown.
The presumption of due care arising out of the natural instinct of self-preservation is not evidence, but a mere rule of law, and obtains only in the absence of direct or circumstantial evidence justifying reasonable inferences one way or another upon that subject. When such evidence is produced the presumption disappears and is not entitled to be considered. Eggeling v. Chicago, R. I. & P. Ry. Co., 119 Neb. 229, 228 N. W. 361. See, also, Anderson v. Nincehelser, 152 Neb. 857, 43 N. W. 2d 182, on rehearing, 153 Neb. 329, 44 N. W. 2d 518. The trial court did not commit prejudicial error as contended, for by the plaintiff.
We have examined the plaintiff’s other- assignments of error and conclude they are without merit.
For the reasons given in this opinion, the judgment entered on the verdict is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9740410 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:44.975483+00 ===

Chappell, J.,
concurring.
I find no fault with propositions of law appearing in the opinion and agree with the result, but believe that disposition of the last assignment of error could have been predicated upon another ground.
In this case the trial court evidently concluded either that defendant had not affirmatively pleaded contributory negligence of plaintiff’s decedent, or that there was no evidence to ultimately support such issue if properly pleaded. Therefore, no instruction was given by the trial court upon the question of contributory negligence. *858In that situation plaintiff had the benefit of the failure to submit such issue and cannot complain. The only issue submitted was the alleged negligence of defendant and whether or not it proximately caused the accident and resulting death.
It appears logical to say that in such a case there .can be no necessity of giving an instruction that it was presumed that plaintiff’s decedent was not guilty of negligence in order to avoid prejudicial error, because whether or not he was negligent was never an issue submitted to the jury. Thus, the failure to give such presumptive instruction could not be prejudicial error because it had no place in the issues as ultimately submitted.
Wenke, J., joins in this concurring opinion.

=== CASE 9740411 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:45.925904+00 ===

Thompson, J.
The indictment herein charged the defendant with violation of section 124.20 of the Code of 1950. After the jury had been selected and sworn, the county attorney was permitted, over defendant’s objection, to amend by adding the words “either personally or by agent or employee.” The original indictment charged the defendant with the crime of “offering or making beer available to a minor,” in that the defendant “did on October 20,1950, offer or make beer available to Marion Hardesty, a minor of 16 years of age.” The words of the amendment were inserted immediately after the date, so that.this portion of the *1330charge, as amended, read: “* * * did on October 20, 1950, ‘either personally or by agent or employee’ offer or make beer available * * Defendant was found guilty by jury verdict, and judgment was duly entered thereon.
There is little dispute in the facts. Defendant and -his wife had a Class B beer permit, by virtue of which they operated a tavern in the town of Martensdale, in Warren County. Defendant was employed in Des Moines, so that the operation of the tavern fell almost altogether to his wife, with the assistance of one Rhoads. On the evening of October 20, 1950, when the commission of the alleged crime is charged, the evidence is without dispute that defendant was in Des Moines,, and did not return until some hours after the claimed sale of the beer to the minor. Nor is there any evidence whatever that he had any knowledge of the transaction, or that it was. made under his direction or with his consent.
The record is likewise devoid of any showing as to' who made the sale. .Marion Hardesty, sixteen years of age on October 20, 1950, had started from Winterset for Des Moines, with four other boys, all minors, about 5:30 to 6:30 p.m. on the date named. They were traveling in an automobile owned' by one of the boys. . On the way they took up a collection for the purpose of purchasing beer, and stopped before the defendant’s tavern in Martensdale. Here Hardesty, armed with the proceeds of the collection, entered the place and bought eighteen bottles of beer. He did not know from whom he made the purchase. He testified : “I did not look very closely at the man who1 sold me this beer. If I saw him again I would not know him.” The other boys remained in the-car, and did not see the seller.
The material part of section 124.20 is herewith set out:
“It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or make available to any minor or to permit any minor to purchase or consume any beer on the premises of a class ‘B’ or class ‘C’ permit holder, or for any minor to buy or attempt to buy or to secure or attempt to secure beer from any person, and it shall further be unlawful for any person to offer beer, with or without consideration, to any minor, except within a private home and with the knowledge and consent of the parent or guardian of' *1331said minor. A violation of the provisions of this paragraph by any holder of a class ‘B’ or class ‘C’ permit or any of his agents or employees in connection with the operation of a beer business under said class ‘B’ or class ‘O’ permit shall be a mandatory ground for revocation of said permit, in addition to other mandatory grounds provided in this chapter.”
Chapter 124 of the Code, of which the above-quoted section is a part, also contains a general penalty clause, providing punishments for “any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter.” Section 124.37.
I. The major contention of defendant, and the only one which we find it necessary to consider, is that the burden was upon the State to show, not only that a sale was made to the minor through his agent or employee, but that such sale was with the defendant’s knowledge or consent: He raised this question by motion for directed verdict, both at the- close of the State’s evidence and at the close of all the evidence; and by exceptions to the instructions in which the court told the jury that it might find defendant guilty if the sale was made either by him personally or by his agent or employee.
Generally, a criminal intent is essential before it can be said that an offense has ,been committed. Within certain limits, however, the legislature may forbid the doing or require the doing of an act and make its commission or omission criminal without regard to the intent or knowledge of the doer. 22 C. J. S., Criminal Law, sections 29, 30, pages 84, 85, 86.
Whether intent is a necessary, element of a statutory crime is a matter of statutory construction. We said, in State v. Dunn, 202 Iowa 1188, 1189, 211 N.W. 850, 851: “Whether a criminal intent or guilty knowledge is an essential element of a statutory offense is to be determined as a matter of construction from the language of the act, in connection with its manifest purpose and design.”
We have held that such construction leads to the conclusion, in some cases, that intent or knowledge is not required, and that a defendant may be convicted of an offense which he had no thought of committing, and when he had no knowledge that he was violating the law. State v. Dobry, 217 Iowa 858, 250 N.W. *1332702; State v. Dunn, supra. Closely related to these two is State v. Striggles, 202 Iowa 1318, 210 N.W. 137, 49 A. L. R. 1270, in which it was determined that the reliance of the defendant upon a lower court holding that a certain machine was not a gambling device did not protect him from conviction for keeping a gambling house, when the inferior court’s holding was later held to be erroneous.
But we think it should be, and is, the law that the legislative intent to eliminate guilty knowledge should be clearly apparent. It is true that criminal intent is said not to be involved in an accusation of selling intoxicating liquors. State v. Fountain, 183 Iowa 1159, 1163, 168 N.W. 285; 48 C. J. S., Intoxicating Liquors, section 214, page 339. But we must not confuse criminal intent with knowledge. 48 C. J. S., supra, says:
“Usually as the statutory offense is committed by the doing of the prohibited act, a guilty or criminal intent is not a necessary part of the offense * * But immediately following is this: “The only intent necessary is an intent to do the prohibited act.” (Italics supplied.) That is to say, while an intent to break the law is not essential, a knowledge of the act itself is required, at least in the absence of an expressed legislative intent otherwise.
In State v. Striggles, supra, the defendant knew of the presence of the prohibited gambling devices; but he did not know that they were prohibited. He had knowledge of the doing of the act, and so his intent to violate the law was held not essential. So in State v. Fountain, supra; intent was held not material, but there was a clear implication that defendant had knowledge that intoxicating liquors were actually sold on his premises.
In State v. Probasco, 62 Iowa 400, 17 N.W. 607, the statute made it unlawful for the keeper of a billiard saloon, or his employees, to permit minors to remain in the place. In Church v. Higham, 44 Iowa 482, and Dudley v. Sautbine, 49 Iowa 650, 31 Am. Rep. 165, the applicable statute, section 1539 of the Code of 1873, forbid any person, by agent or otherwise, to sell intoxicating liquors to anyone who was in the habit of becoming intoxicated. Convictions in these cases were upheld; but in each of them the legislative intent to make the owner or employer liable for the acts of his agents was clearly expressed.
*1333It is further well-settled law that penal statutes are to be strictly construed; and in case of doubt, such doubt is to be resolved in favor of the accused. State v. Cooper, 221 Iowa 658, 666, 265 N.W. 915; State v. Andrews, 167 Iowa 273, 149 N.W. 245; State v. Wignall, 150 Iowa 650, 128 N.W. 935, 34 L. R. A., N. S., 507; In re Estate of Kuhn, 125 Iowa 449, 101 N.W. 151, 2 Ann. Cas. 657; State v. Lovell, 23 Iowa 304.
But in the end, each case of this kind must turn upon the proper construction to be placed upon the governing statute. If the judgment of the lower court here is to stand affirmed, it must be' because the legislative purpose to do away with the requirement of intent or guilty knowledge, and to permit the accused to be punished for an offense committed by an agent or employee while he was absent from the premises, an offense which he had not sanctioned and of which he had no forewarning, is clear from the provisions of section 124.20. The statute fails to meet such a test.
It will be noted that the first sentence of the quoted' paragraph of the statute makes it unlawful for “any person” to sell, give or make available any beer to a minor. The second sentence makes a violation of this provision by a permit holder “or any of his agents or employees” ground for revocation of the permit. The only criminal punishment, for a violation of the provisions of the first sentence, must be found in the general penalty section of chapter 124, section 124.37. But in defining the crime and its punishment the-legislature did not see fit to include the words “or .any of his agents or employees”, as it did in the latter part of the statute setting up grounds for revocation of license. We must conclude that it did not mean to make the permit holder guilty of a criminal offense, if committed by an agent or employee, unless he had intent or guilty knowledge. If it had such purpose, it could readily have said so in the same manner that it did in providing for revocation of the permit. Its failure so to do is most persuasive.
The same situation was before this court in State v. Bradley, 231 Iowa 1112, 1116, 3 N.W.2d 133, 135. A statute prohibited keeping or using any liquor for beverage purposes of an alcoholic content greater than four per cent upon the premises of any Class B permittee. A general penalty section of the same chapter *1334provided punishment for “any person” violating any of the provisions thereof. The trial court instructed the jury that if they found such liquor was used or kept upon the premises “either with or without the knowledge of the defendant,” upon this feature of the case they would be warranted in finding him guilty. We said:
“Section 1921.132 provides that any person who violates the provisions of section 1921.126 shall be guilty of a crime. * * # It was not sufficient for the State to prove that liquor was kept in the place of business of defendant; it was incumbent on the State to prove that the liquor was kept on the premises with the knowledge of defendant.” (Italics supplied.)
The Bradley case is directly in point, and is a controlling precedent. There, the question was as to the knowledge- of the defendant that intoxicating liquor was kept on his premises; here, it is as to the accused’s knowledge of sale of beer to a minor. The principle involved is identical, except that we think the statute in the case at bar is stronger in its showing that the legislature did not intend to do away with the requirement of knowledge.
It was incumbent upon the State to prove that the sale to the minor was made with the knowledge, or by the direction, sanction or approval of the defendant. The record is barren of any such showing. We are not disposed to extend further the doctrine o-f guilt without intent or knowledge. Defendant’s motion for directed verdict should have been sustained. — Reversed.
Bliss, Wennerstrum, Smith, Mantz, and Hays, JJ., concur.
Oliver, C. J., and Garfield and Mulroney, JJ., dissent.

=== CASE 9740412 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:34:45.931367+00 ===

Oliver, C. J.
(dissenting) — I am unable'to agree the record is “devoid of any showing as to who made- the sale” of beer to the minor. The record shows John Rhoads was employed by defendant as bartender in the tavern and was in charge of it that day.- It may be fairly inferred Rhoads made the sale. There was no evidence to the contrary. The sale was made in the regular *1335course of the business Rhoads was employed by defendant to transact. Defendant as a witness did not testify the sale was without his consent or .contrary to his instructions.
The majority opinion states a criminal intent is essential before it can be said an offense has been committed and whether intent is a necessary element of a statutory crime is a matter of statutory construction. That statement is indefinite and inadequate and does not accord with the general rule which is also the rule in this State. The general rule is intent is not an essential element in statutory crimes of this nature unless the statute so provides. State v. Striggles, 202 Iowa 1318, 1320, 210 N.W. 137, 138, 49 A. L. R. 1270, 1272, states:
“It is settled law that, in prohibitive statutes covering misdemeanors, where no provision is made as to the intention,1 and the word ‘knowingly’ or other apt words are not employéd, tó indicate that knowledge is the essential element of the crime, intention is not an element of the crime. Especially is this so where the act is forbidden by statute in the aid of the police power of the state.”
In the language of State v. Cooper, 221 Iowa 658, 663, 265 N.W. 915, 917:
“The point is that the legislature inserted intent as an essential element of all offenses punishable under section 85 * * *. But this element of intent was not made part of any of the other offenses the legislature at the same time created in other provisions of the act. This leaves these other misdemeanor offenses punishable, regardless of intent. * * * It is also significant that these other offenses, such as illegal possession, bootlegging, nuisance, using liquor in public places, are further distinguishable from violations of section 85, in that such offenses are peculiarly such as may be committed by the general public.”
Hammond v. King, 137 Iowa 548, 552, 114 N.W. 1062, 1063, states: “* * * many police regulations, including those relating to the sale of intoxicating liquor, are so framed that the doing of the prohibited act is punishable as a crime, regardless of the intent with which it was done.”
*1336State v. Fountain, 183 Iowa 1159, 1163, 168 N.W. 285, 286, states:
“Moreover, the matter of intent is not involved in an accusation of selling intoxicating liquors. If the defendant or anyone else for him actually sold intoxicating liquors on the premises, he would be guilty, whether he intended so to do or not.”
Code section 124.1 makes it unlawful to sell.beer without a permit. Subsequent sections in the chapter regulate such permits and sales. The sale of beer is regarded, as a business requiring substantial restriction and control and the act recognizes the necessity of strictly regulating it for the protection of the public welfare and morals. Soursos v. Mason City, 230 Iowa 157, 158, 296 N.W. 807; State v. Talerico, 227 Iowa 1315, 1321, 1323, 290 N.W. 660; Bernstein v. City of Marshalltown, 215 Iowa 1168, 248 N.W. 26, 86 A. L. R. 782.
The majority refers to the paragraph of Code section 124.20 here involved and points out that the first sentence makes it unlawful for “any person” to. offer or make beer available to a minor upon the premises of a permit holder and that the second sentence makes a violation of this provision by a permit holder “or any of his agents or employees” ground for revocation of the permit. The majority reasons the failure to specifically list “agents or employees” in the first sentence indicates a legislative intent not to make the permit holder responsible for their acts.
This reasoning overlooks the language of the first sentence which makes it unlawful for any person to make beer available to a minor on the premises of a permit holder, or for a minor' to secure or attempt to secure beer from any person, or amy person to offer beer to a minor, except in a home, etc. However, the permit holder’s license may not be revoked merely because any person makes beer available to a minor in a tavern. Only such act by the permit holder or his agents or employees affords ground for such revocation. The effect of the language in the second sentence, any holder of a permit “or any of his agen.ts or employees” is not to extend, but rather to limit the class of persons whose conduct might constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. This limitation affords no sound basis for concluding the language of the first sentence should be construed *1337as exempting the permit holder from the responsibility for the conduct and acts of his employees in the regular course of their employment.
In State v. Probasco, 62 Iowa 400, 402, 17 N.W. 607, 608, the statute provided “ ‘it shall be unlawful for any person who keeps a billiard hall, beer saloon or nine or ten-pin alley, or the agent, clerk or servant of any such person, or any person having charge or control of any such hall, saloon, or alley, to permit any minor or minors to remain in such [place] * * * or to take part in * * * billiards.’ ”
It will be noted that statute is in much the same form as the first sentence of the paragraph of the statute here involved which makes it unlawful for any person to make beer available to a minor on the premises of a permit holder. The statute in the Probasco case did not in so many words make the keeper subject to prosecution for the conduct of his employees, it merely included employees in the class subject to prosecution themselves, but the court in affirming the conviction said at page 403:
“Hence, if proper watchfulness is not exercised by either; if the keeper fails to enforce watchfulness on the part of his employes, and thereby a minor is permitted to remain in the saloon, both violate the statute.
“It is obvious that, in the absence of watchfulness and proper effort to discharge the duty imposed by the statute, if a minor remain in the saloon without the knowledge of the beeper or employe, each is liable for the penalty provided by the statute.” (Italics supplied.)
State v. Bradley, 231 Iowa 1112, 1116, 3 N.W.2d 133, 135, is cited by the majority. That case did not involve the act of an employee in the course of his employment for which defendant would be responsible. It turned upon an instruction defendant could be convicted if liquor was kept upon the premises with or without his knowledge. This instruction was held to be erroneous. The record there showed only that liquor was found on the premises. Had it showed defendant’s bartender was dispensing such liquor over the bar in the course of his employment the facts would have been similar to those in the case at bar.
*1338The majority warns “we must not’confuse criminal intent with knowledge.” This warning is not appropriate under the circumstances of this and like cases where the prohibited act is the. act of an agent or employee for which the statute makes the defendant criminally responsible. In such cases the knowledge of the agent would be the knowledge of the defendant. The majority seems to have overlooked the difference in principle pointed out in Dudley v. Sautbine, 49 Iowa 650, 652, 31 Am. Rep. 165, between the criminal responsibility of the owner for illegal sales of liquor by a barkeeper without the owner’s knowledge or consent, and for illegal sales by the owner’s wife in his name: “In the-former case the barkeeper was employed to sell liquor to persons not intoxicated, and he was employed to' observe and determine who among those desiring to purchase were not intoxicated.- In tire case where the wife whose husband was not licensed sold liquor, she did not merely fail in the proper discharge of her duty, but she acted entirely outside of her duty, for she was not employed to sell liquor at all.”
In 139 A. L. R. 306 is an annotation entitled, “Criminal responsibility of one authorized generally to sell intoxicating liquors for particular illegal sale thereof by employee or agent.” At page 309 the author states most of the statutes contadn no express stipulation as to' the criminal liability of am employer for unlawful sales by his employees or agents in the course of their employment, and continues:
“Decisions (of which the following are illustrative) holding that an employer is criminally responsible for unlawful sales of intoxicating liquors by his employee within the scope of his employment are based largely upon the doctrine that in statutory crimes intent is not an-ingredient of the offense unless provision in that regard is incorporated in the statute.” (Citing authorities.)
The majority states the rule to. be: “That is to say, while an intent to break the law is not essential, a knowledge of the act itself is required, at least in the absence of an expressed legislative intent otherwise.” This statement overlooks the language of several decisions of this court already referred to herein, with reference to the criminal liability of the employer for acts *1339of his agents or employees. As a matter of fact the doctrine of criminal responsibility of the employer for illegal sales of liquor by employees in the course of their employment is so- well recognized that in the annotation in 139 A. L. R. 306 et seq. are subdivision headings listing many decisions involving (a) Sales without knowledge or consent of, or in the absence of, employer, (b) Sales contrary to instructions. Neither these various courts nor the annotator “confuse criminal intent with knowledge.” Perhaps it should be again stated that in the case at bar there was no evidence the sale to the minor was without defendant’s consent or contrary to his. instructions.
In State v. Brown, 73 Or. 325, 144 P. 444, the proprietor was, held criminally responsible for the sale by his bartender of liquor to a minor, without the knowledge of the proprietor and contrary to his express orders. In Hershorn v. People, 108 Colo. 43, 54, 113 P.2d 680, 685, 139 A. L. R. 297, the manager of a night club contended he was not criminally liable for illegal sales to a minor during his absence, since there was no knowledge or intent on his part to commit the crime. The court rejected this contention, quoting from 30 Am. Jur. 414, 415, 416, Intoxicating Liquors, sections 301, 302 and 303, citing various decisions and stating the authorities were in conflict but its decision was in harmony with the majority rule. “To hold otherwise would largely nullify section 3(b) supra” which provides it shall be unlawful to sell spirituous liquors to anyone under the age of twenty-one or to an intoxicated person.
State v. Schull, 66 S. D. 102, 106, 107, 108, 279 N.W. 241, 243, 115 A. L. R. 1226, involved the sale of nonintoxicating beer to a person under eighteen by an employee during the licensee’s absence and contrary to his instructions. The statute read: “ ‘It shall be unlawful for any licensee under the provisions of this act to- sell or give any nonintoxicating beer or wine to any person under the age of 18 years.’ ” The decision states it was the duty of the licensee to prevent such sales:
“We can see no distinction between the statute imposing that duty upon the licensee and the statutes which imposed upon proprietors of saloons the duty to beep their saloons closed during certain hours and certain days. By analogy, we believe that the *1340reasoning used in our decisions holding the proprietor of a saloon ■responsible under the intoxicating liquor statutes is decisive of the facts before us. * * *
“The trial court, in the instant case, in effect ruled that it was no defense by the holder of a license that the prohibited acts were committed by an agent, servant, or employee, without authority or contrary to instructions, during the absence from the premises of the holder pf the license. This ruling, we believe, was correct and is in line with the leading authorities.”
I would affirm the judgment of conviction.
Garfield and Mulroney, JJ., join in this dissent.

=== CASE 2223452 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:01.726413+00 ===

50 N.W.2d 346 (1951)
154 Neb. 881
UMBERGER et al.
v.
SANKEY.
No. 33028.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
November 30, 1951.
T. R. P. Stocker, Lincoln, for appellant.
Hammond & Parker, Lincoln, for appellees.
*347 Heard before SIMMONS, C. J., and CARTER, MESSMORE, YEAGER, CHAPPELL, WENKE, and BOSLAUGH, JJ.
CARTER, Justice.
This is an action to recover the reasonable value of labor and materials furnished by the plaintiffs in repairing an airplane belonging to the defendant. The verdict of the jury was for the plaintiffs in the amount of $455.40. Judgment was entered for this amount with interest from June 1, 1947, and costs. The defendant appeals.
Plaintiffs were partners doing business as the Union Air Service at the Union Airport in Lincoln, Nebraska. They were engaged generally in the sale, operation, and servicing of airplanes and in approved licensed flight and pilot instruction. On October 22, 1946, there was a collision between a plane owned by the plantiffs, operated by a student pilot engaged in taking flight training from plaintiffs, and a plane owned and operated by the defendant. Plaintiffs repaired defendant's plane. They testified that the reasonable value of the new parts required and the services rendered was $455.40. The evidence is sufficient to sustain the jury in finding this amount as the reasonable value of the repairs made.
The defendant asserts, however, that he never requested plaintiffs to make the repairs and that it was his understanding they were to be made without cost to him because the accident was the result of negligence on the part of the pilot flying plaintiffs' plane. The defendant testified that Ayabe, one of the partners, told him that plaintiffs were going to fix the planes, that they carried insurance and would check to see if it covered the damage to defendant's plane. Ayabe denies that he ever told defendant that plaintiffs would repair the plane without charge. The other two partners, Umberger and Nelson, also deny that any such statement was made to the defendant.
The plaintiff Umberger testified that defendant had been a customer of the plaintiffs for about two years. He said that on the day after the accident the defendant asked how soon they could get the airplane repaired. Defendant stated he had a prospective buyer for the plane, that he wanted it repaired as soon as possible, and requested that parts be ordered by telephone. Umberger testified that defendant's plane was disassembled, the parts ordered by telephone, and on the arrival of the parts the plane was repaired. Plaintiff Nelson testified to similar conversations with the defendant as to the repair of the plane. Nelson testified also that defendant never claimed the repairs were to be made at plaintiffs' expense until after defendant's plane had been put in flying condition.
The foregoing issues were for the jury to determine. The evidence is clearly sufficient to sustain the finding of the jury that plaintiffs' version of the facts was the correct one.
Defendant contends there was a fatal variance in the pleading and proof, and that the court erred in refusing instructions tendered by the defendant and in giving certain instructions on the court's own motion.
The petition alleges in part that defendant is indebted to plaintiffs in the sum of $455.40 for labor and materials furnished in repairing defendant's airplane, "which repairs were made upon said aircraft by the plaintiffs at the defendant's request on or about October 23, 1946, and upon his oral agreement to pay therefor; that the charge of $455.40 is a reasonable value of the labor and materials furnished; * *." The evidence shows that there was no express oral agreement to pay for the repairs. It is contended by the plaintiffs that the promise to pay for the repairs was implied when defendant requested the repairs to be made. Defendant asserts that the implied agreement to pay for the repairs constitutes a variance from the petition which alleges "his oral agreement to pay therefor."
It is the rule in pleading a cause of action based on quantum meruit for the reasonable value of labor and materials furnished that an allegation of a promise to pay impliedly exists in the pleading. The *348 petition before us is not one based upon contract. It is for the reasonable value of labor and materials furnished for which there must be implied agreement to pay. The fact that the petition alleges an oral agreement to pay when the evidence shows only an implied promise to pay does not change the nature of the action. It is still an action to recover for labor and materials furnished based on quantum meruit, and the use of the words "upon his oral agreement to pay therefor" does not in any manner change the identity of the cause of action. There is not, therefore, a variance in the pleading and proof within the meaning of the rule for which defendant contends. In any event, this court has held that a single cause of action may be set forth in more than one form of action so as to meet any possible state of the proof. In Stout v. Omaha, Lincoln & Beatrice Ry. Co., 97 Neb. 816, 151 N.W. 295, we held that an action on a quantum meruit may be joined with an action on an express contract where the verdict and judgment on either will satisfy the liability on both, where the origin of both is in the same transaction.
In Ball v. Beaumont, 59 Neb. 631, 81 N.W. 858, 859, a case similar in principle to the one before us, the court said: "It may be that to some extent fictitious averments are still permitted; but they are certainly not required. Neither the letter nor the spirit of the law now requires a party to plead what is not true. The facts stated in the county court, and in the original petition in the district court, disclose a duty resting on the defendants to repay the money expended by the plaintiff at their request and for their use. From this duty the law infers a promise, and it was unnecessary to plead it. The rule is, that what the law implies need not be averred. The plaintiff might have rested his case on the legal duty alone; but the statement, in terms of a promise by the defendants to perform their legal obligation, was, at most, harmless." In the case before us the law implies a promise to pay when the materials and labor were requested. It was not necessary to plead the promise to pay which the law implies. The pleading of such a promise was therefore not essential and was, at most, harmless. It added nothing but a fiction to the pleading and can afford no basis for a claim of a fatal variance between the pleading and proof.
We have examined the instructions given and refused by the court. The claimed primary error is dispelled by our holding on the claim of fatal variance in the pleading and proof. No prejudicial error in the giving or refusing of instructions is shown.
The record shows that the trial court entered a judgment for interest at 6 percent per annum beginning six months after the date of the last item. This portion of the judgment appears to have been based on that part of section 45-104, R.S.1943, which provides: "Unsettled accounts between parties shall bear interest after six months from the date of the last item thereof." The defendant contends that interest should be allowed from the date the judgment was rendered.
In this respect we point out that this is an action based on quantum meruit upon an implied promise to pay the reasonable value of the labor and materials furnished. There is no specific standard by which such reasonable value is to be determined. In the present case the records of the plaintiffs showing the costs of the labor and materials used, which are testified to as being their reasonable value, were offered in evidence for this purpose. This does not constitute the action as one based on an unsettled account within the purview of the statute. In fact an action based on quantum meruit is not a suit upon an account at all and section 45-104, R.S.1943, has no application thereto. Pollard v. Carlisle, Mo.App., 218 S.W. 921; Sidway v. Missouri Land & Live Stock Co., Limited, 187 Mo. 649, 86 S.W. 150.
Interest is allowable in the present case from the date the judgment was rendered. The judgment is hereby so modified. It is correct in all other respects and it will be affirmed as modified.
Modified and affirmed.

=== CASE 2223461 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:01.92459+00 ===

260 Wis. 229 (1951)
MADISON METROPOLITAN SEWERAGE DISTRICT and others, Appellants,
vs.
COMMITTEE ON WATER POLLUTION and another, Respondents.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
November 8, 1951.
December 4, 1951.
*237 William Ryan of Madison, for the appellants Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District and H. O. Lord.
Harold E. Hanson, city attorney, for the appellant city of Madison.
For the respondents there was a brief by the Attorney General, Warren H. Resh, assistant attorney general, and Norris E. Maloney, special counsel, and by Richard W. Bardwell, district attorney of Dane county, and Joseph Goodman, assistant district attorney, and oral argument by Mr. Maloney, Mr. Resh, and Mr. Goodman.
MARTIN, J.
This case involves an abundance of scientific and technical detail, and the well-written briefs of counsel have been of great help to the court.
No claim is made that the findings of fact are not supported by the evidence, and we, therefore, set out only so much of the evidence as will give the necessary background. The innumerable complaints received by the Governor's Committee in its investigation of pollution of the Madison lakes can leave no doubt that nuisance conditions exist on Lakes Waubesa and Kegonsa. The record is full of testimony regarding such conditions.
Appellant contends, however, that the findings do not support the order since it is not specifically stated therein that the effluent from appellant's plant creates a nuisance and that there are no findings of fact that would justify a conclusion that the discharge of such effluent creates a nuisance.
Sec. 144.05 (1), Stats., as amended by ch. 435, Laws of 1949, provides:
"When any city or village or owner shall have constructed or shall in the future construct a sewage system complying with section 144.04, the outflow or effluent from such system may be discharged into any stream or drain constructed pursuant to law, but no such outflow of untreated sewage or effluent from a primary or secondary treatment plant *238 from a city or metropolitan sewage district comprised of forty-five thousand persons or more, shall be discharged directly into, or through any stream, or through any drain, into a lake of more than two square miles and less than six square miles in area located within ten miles of the system or plant of such city, or metropolitan sewage district. All necessary construction of plant, system, or drains for full compliance with this subsection in the discharge of untreated sewage or sewage effluent from all existing primary or secondary plants shall be completed by June 1, 1951, and the plans for any new system or plant shall include provisions for compliance with this subsection. The state committee on water pollution shall have the power and authority at any time to order and require any owner of an existing plant to prepare and file with it, within a prescribed time, preliminary or final plans or both, for proposed construction to comply with this subsection. In lieu of the construction in compliance with the foregoing provision for diversion from such lakes, any owner of an existing plant, on or before June 1, 1950, or any owner of a new system or plant prior to construction of such new system or plant, may file with the committee on water pollution such plans for advanced treatment of effluent from primary or secondary treatment as in the judgment of said committee will accomplish substantially the same results in eliminating nuisance conditions on such lake as would be accomplished by diversion of secondary sewage effluent from said lake (without at the same time creating other objectionable or damaging results), and such owner shall be exempt from the foregoing provisions of this subsection for diversion from such lakes upon approval of such plans and installation of advancedtreatment facilities and procedures in compliance therewith, provided that nothing shall impair the authority of said committee to require at any time preliminary or final plans, or both, for diversion construction. . . ."
In enacting ch. 435, Laws of 1949, the legislature said that under circumstances such as exist here with regard to population, size of lakes, and distance from sewage-treatment plants, sewage effluent may not be discharged into a lake; *239 that compliance with such law is to be had by June 1, 1951, unless by June 1, 1950, some plan of treatment be submitted which will accomplish the same results "in eliminating nuisance conditions" as would be accomplished by diversion. Here is a situation where the legislature has found the nuisance conditions to exist. See State ex rel. Abbott v. House of Vision, etc. (1951), 259 Wis. 87, 47 N. W. (2d) 321.
When the appellant, a metropolitan sewage district comprised of more than forty-five thousand persons, discharges its sewage effluent into the waters of Lake Waubesa, 3.181 square miles in area and located within ten miles of the Nine Springs plant, it violates the provisions of sec. 144.05 (1), Stats., in creating or increasing the nuisance conditions which the statute by its terms seeks to prevent or cure. Since the legislature has found that a nuisance exists under these circumstances, a specific finding to that effect by the committee is unnecessary. It is likewise unnecessary that the committee specifically find damage to health, property, or other nuisance conditions.
Even if the legislature itself did not find that nuisance conditions exist under such circumstances, findings number 2 and 6 of the order of June 26, 1950:
"2. That sewage tributary to said treatment plants receives treatment in modern accepted facilities to produce an effluent satisfactory from the standpoint of biochemical oxygen demand and bacterial content but that said effluent contains substantial amounts of inorganic phosphorus and inorganic nitrogen."
"6. That inorganic phosphorus and inorganic nitrogen in the quantities discharged by the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District into the waters of Lake Waubesa contribute substantially to the growth of blue-green algae of the type that creates objectionable conditions in Lakes Waubesa and Kegonsa." *240 substantially express the finding that nuisance conditions exist, or will exist, as the result of appellant's present operations.
It is argued that finding 7:
"That removal or diversion of said sewage effluent from the waters of the above-named lakes will diminish objectionable conditions by reducing the frequency and intensity of algal blooms,"
does not state the extent to which the objectionable conditions will be diminished by removal or diversion of effluent. It is not necessary for the findings to state the exact extent to which they will be reduced, since by finding 6 a substantial contribution to the growth of the algae which creates the objectionable conditions was found to be made by the inorganic phosphorus and inorganic nitrogen in the effluent discharged by appellant's plant.
The argument is based upon testimony by Dr. Sawyer, a member of the Governor's Committee, that a significant decrease in nuisance conditions on Lake Waubesa would not result from the removal of eighty-five or ninety per cent of the phosphorous from the sewage effluent. This statement must be taken in connection with all the testimony offered by Dr. Sawyer. It is to be noted that in summing up the results of the survey made by the Governor's Committee, Dr. Sawyer said:
"I think that that is one of the important points that our survey demonstrated, that when the phosphorus concentration would be reduced to levels below about a hundredth of a part per million, the biological action would be slowed down and arrested so as to prevent the development of nuisance blooms."
Dr. Sawyer further testified that Lake Waubesa and Lake Kegonsa contained excess phosphorus at all times, while in *241 the other fifteen lakes studied in connection with the survey, without exception, "the phosphorus content dipped to about a hundredth of a part per million." It was his opinion that in a lake with plenty of phosphorus "you have there the makings for the biological bloom or an algal bloom of the bluegreen variety which are capable of fixing nitrogen."
The Committee on Water Pollution has the authority and duty to enforce sec. 144.05 (1), Stats. The statute specifically grants that authority. It does not have to find that a nuisance actually exists for under the authority granted it by sec. 144.53 (1) it shall "exercise general supervision over the administration and enforcement of all laws relating to the pollution of the surface waters of the state."
Sub. (5) of said sec. 144.53, Stats., further provides that it shall have authority:
"To issue special orders directing particular owners to secure such operating results toward the control of pollution of the surface waters as the committee may prescribe, within a specified time. . . . If such results are not secured in the specified time, the committee may direct the owner to take certain steps, or to use or adopt designated systems, devices, and methods for handling industrial wastes, refuse, and other wastes within a specified time. Any such orders may be modified by subsequent orders. The committee shall have the same power and authority as has been conferred upon the state board of health by section 144.04 with reference to ordering and approving plans. . . ."
Sec. 144.536, Stats., provides that all orders of the committee shall be enforced by the attorney general; that the circuit court for Dane county shall have jurisdiction to enforce such orders by injunctional and other appropriate relief; and further provides:
"For purposes of such proceeding where the order prohibits in whole or in part any pollution, a violation thereof shall be deemed a public nuisance. . . ."
*242 The decision of the trial court so well covers all the remaining questions that an effort to improve thereon would be futile. We therefore adopt said decision and make the same a part of this opinion:
Petitioner and intervenors take the position that ch. 435, Laws of 1949, violates various provisions of the United States and state constitutions. Respondent denies this and argues further that if perchance this be so, no creature of the legislature can raise a constitutional objection; and that the intervening taxpayer is likewise impotent inasmuch as both the city of Madison and the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District are contesting in good faith the validity of the order of the Committee on Water Pollution. The position of the respondent, in the court's opinion, is sound.
As to the United States constitution. As to alleged violation of the federal constitution little need be said.
"A municipal corporation . . . has no privileges or immunities under the federal constitution which it may invoke in opposition to the will of its creator." Williams v. Mayor (1933), 289 U. S. 36, 40, 53 Sup. Ct. 431, 77 L. Ed. 1015.
The authority of the legislature over a municipal corporation is supreme, subject, however, to such limitations as may be prescribed by the state constitution. Shirk v. Lancaster (1933), 313 Pa. St. 158, 169 Atl. 557; State ex rel. Martin v. Juneau (1941), 238 Wis. 564, 300 N. W. 187.
As to the state constitution. As early as 1872 the Wisconsin supreme court in State ex rel. Voight v. Hoeflinger, 31 Wis. 257, 263, referring to municipalities, stated:
"No principle of law is better settled than that `whatever is given by statute may be taken away by statute,' except vested rights acquired under it, and except also that the statute must not be in the nature of a contract on the part of the legislature. Some of the authorities go even farther, and hold that a law merely divesting antecedent vested rights of property, where there is no contract, is not inconsistent *243 with the constitution." See Bell v. Bayfield County (1931), 206 Wis. 297, 239 N. W. 503.
The petitioner, of course, is a quasi-municipal corporation. See 37 Am. Jur., Municipal Corporations, p. 625, sec. 6.
The case of State ex rel. Zilisch v. Auer (1928), 197 Wis. 284, 293, 221 N. W. 860, 223 N. W. 123, involved the constitutionality of an act of the legislature providing for the detachment of land from certain school districts under given circumstances and providing for its attachment to another district or the creation of a new district. In discussing the status of municipal corporations, so far as legislation is concerned, the court said, by quoting with approval from other cases:
"`Municipal corporations are political subdivisions of the state, created as convenient agencies for exercising such of the governmental powers of the state as may be intrusted to them. . . . The state, therefore, at its pleasure, may . . . expand or contract the territorial area, unite the whole or a part of it with another municipality, repeal the charter and destroy the corporation. All this may be done, conditionally or unconditionally, with or without the consent of the citizens, or even against their protest. In all these respects the state is supreme, and its legislative body, conforming its action to the state constitution, may do as it will, unrestrained by any provision of the constitution of the United States. Although the inhabitants and property owners may, by such changes, suffer inconvenience, and their property may be lessened in value by the burden of increased taxation, or for any other reason, they have no right, by contract or otherwise, in the unaltered or continued existence of the corporation or its powers, and there is nothing in the federal constitution which protects them from these injurious consequences. The power is in the state, and those who legislate for the state are alone responsible for any unjust or oppressive exercise of it.'" See Hunter v. Pittsburgh (1907), 207 U. S. 161, 28 Sup. Ct. 40, 52 L. Ed. 151; School Dist. v. Callahan (1941), 237 Wis. 560, 297 N. W. 407; Williams v. Mayor, supra.
*244 As heretofore stated, the city of Madison and all other municipal units whose sewage is treated by the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District are creatures of the legislature, as is the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District itself. It is a quasi-public or quasi-municipal corporation.
Certain districts are often created with limited powers for the carrying out of some particular public purpose. They are quasi-public corporations or quasi-municipal corporations and are governed by the rules applicable to municipal corporations. 37 Am. Jur., Municipal Corporations, p. 625, sec. 6, and cases cited.
The distinction between the rights of an individual citizen and the rights of a creature of the legislature under the constitution must always be kept in mind. Most of the authorities cited by petitioner, as to rights under the constitution being violated, are cases dealing with the rights of individuals, and not creatures of the legislature, who are permitted by the legislature to perform certain acts for a certain time and under certain conditions. As stated above, these rights having been given by the legislature may be modified or taken away by the legislature, with the exception noted as to vested rights and contractual rights between the legislature and the complaining creature of the legislature. Metropolitan sewerage districts had no right to exist prior to 1927 (see ch. 442, Laws of 1927, now secs. 66.20 to 66.209, Stats.), and hence, without any doubt, are creatures of the legislature. The legislature might in its wisdom destroy such districts and if it can destroy them, it may certainly regulate them.
Likewise, the city of Madison is a municipal corporation, a creature of the legislature and an arm of the state.
In 56 Am. Jur., Waters, p. 813, sec. 388, the rule is stated as follows:
"The state may in the exercise of its police power require that sewage be purified before being cast into a stream, or *245 it may absolutely prohibit the use of streams for such purpose. It has been stated that the right of a municipality to empty its sewage into a stream or a river is merely a legislative license revocable whenever public health and safety require. No constitutional property right is invaded by absolutely prohibiting the casting of any obnoxious matter into any running stream of the state."
". . . the decisions in a great majority of the states regard the incorporated city or town as a sole creature of the state, possessing and exercising state powers only, and hence, unless special organic provision forbids, the power of the legislature over such local organ is unlimited." 1 McQuillin, Municipal Corporations (2d ed.), p. 746, sec. 268.
"In accordance with the settled doctrine that municipal corporations of all kinds, including incorporated cities . . . are regarded as creatures . . . of the state government, the legislature unless restrained by the constitution, in conferring powers and imposing obligations on municipal corporations, may within its discretion designate limitations thereon." 2 McQuillin, Municipal Corporations (3d ed.), p. 12, sec. 4.04. See In re Application of Racine (1928), 196 Wis. 604, 220 N. W. 398, 221 N. W. 109.
". . . a municipal corporation `is merely an agency instituted by the sovereign for the purpose of carrying out in detail the objects of governmentessentially a revocable agencyhaving no vested right to any of its powers or franchisesthe charter or act of erection being in no sense a contract with the stateand therefore fully subject to the control of the legislature, who may enlarge or diminish . . . its functions, may change or modify its internal arrangement, or destroy its very existence with the mere breath of arbitrary discretion . . . for the power which can create and destroy can modify and change.'" 2 McQuillin, Municipal Corporations (3d ed.), pp. 15-18, sec. 4.05.
In the rather late case of State ex rel. Martin v. Juneau, supra, there was a contest involving the contention by the city of Juneau that a joint order of the State Board of Health and Committee on Water Pollution directing the city to *246 take immediate steps for the preparation of plans for a complete sewage-treatment plant and to install the same by a certain date was in excess of the statutory powers of the agencies and not reasonably necessary as a health measure. The court said (p. 571):
"It is clear that the provisions of our constitution only slightly restrict the power of the legislature over municipal corporations and those restrictions apply only to local affairs. Municipalities obtain no vested right under an act of the legislature, the constitution reserving to the legislature the power to repeal or alter any such act."
No contractual rights involved. A municipal corporation being a governmental agency whose powers are derived from and subordinate to the state, a municipal charter or other legislation affecting a municipal corporation is not a contract within the contemplation of a constitutional prohibition against the impairment of the obligations of a contract and the legislature retains the power to amend or repeal such charter and to enlarge or curtail the powers granted thereby. Cape Girardeau County Court v. Hill (1886), 118 U. S. 68, 6 Sup. Ct. 951, 30 L. Ed. 73; 19 R. C. L., Municipal Corporations, p. 731, sec. 37; Williamson v. New Jersey (1889), 130 U. S. 189, 9 Sup. Ct. 453, 32 L. Ed. 915.
"The municipality itself, which is a mere creature of the legislature, is in no position to complain of the action of that body in reassuming powers previously delegated. The obligation of no existing contract is impaired by such an act and no vested rights are thereby disturbed." Central Union Tel. Co. v. Indianapolis Tel. Co. (1920), 189 Ind. 210, 230, 126 N. E. 628.
". . . the city being a municipal corporation and the creature of the state legislature, does not stand in a position to claim the benefit of the constitutional provision in question, since its charter can be amended, changed, or even abolished at the will of the legislature. . . .
*247 ". . . the municipality, being a mere agent of the state, stands in its governmental or public character in no contract relation with its sovereign, at whose pleasure its charter may be amended, changed, or revoked, without the impairment of any constitutional obligation, while with respect to its private or proprietary rights and interests it may be entitled to the constitutional protection." New Orleans v. New Orleans Water Works Co. (1891), 142 U. S. 79, 89, 91, 35 L. Ed. 943, 12 Sup. Ct. 142.
To the same effect are: Worcester v. Worcester Consolidated Street R. Co. (1905), 196 U. S. 539, 25 Sup. Ct. 327, 49 L. Ed. 591; State v. Aberdeen (1904), 34 Wash. 61, 74 Pac. 1022; Sanger v. Bridgeport (1938), 124 Conn. 183, 198 Atl. 746.
No vested rights involved. Municipalities, such as petitioner, derive all their rights and privileges from legislative act. They are, therefore, subject to legislative will and may have such rights or charter abolished by the legislature and are not to be regarded as thereby being deprived of any vested rights. Joslin Mfg. Co. v. Providence (1923), 262 U. S. 668, 43 Sup. Ct. 684, 67 L. Ed. 1167; East Hartford v. Hartford Bridge Co. (1850), 51 U. S. (10 How.) 511, 13 L. Ed. 518; Covington v. Kentucky (1899), 173 U. S. 231, 19 Sup. Ct. 383, 43 L. Ed. 679.
Rights of H. O. Lord, intervening taxpayer. A taxpayer's right of action is the same as that of the city of Madison and the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District and can be asserted only if and when either municipality fails to act. The theory upon which a taxpayer's action is permitted is discussed in Willard v. Comstock (1883), 58 Wis. 565, 17 N. W. 401. It is there held that a taxpayer may appear in behalf of himself and others similarly situated after demand and refusal of the corporate authorities to bring suit in the premises. In Estate of Cole (1899), 102 Wis. 1, 7, 78 N. W. 402, it was held that where the officers of a public *248 corporation refuse to put the necessary judicial machinery in motion upon demand being made therefor and failure to so act, a taxpayer may bring suit on behalf of himself and others similarly situated. The court said:
"The direct injury to be remedied where the taxpayer intervenes and sets the judicial machinery in motion for that purpose, is not personal and direct to himself, but to the corporation. The question is, Are the members of the corporation as a whole aggrieved ? If so, rather than that justice shall fail, the court will take jurisdiction of the subject of controversy at the instance of a taxpayer. The fact that the threatened injury or the wrong done is to the corporation, and that its governing body or officers, who should move in the matter, neglect or refuse to do so, creates a necessity for some other way to remedy the mischief, and in that situation the circumstance of a person being a taxpayer and interested in the protection of its rights is a sufficient test of his competency to challenge the threatened wrong, or wrong actually done, in a court of justice."
See also State ex rel. Knapp v. Pohle (1925), 185 Wis. 610, 202 N. W. 148, where the court, in speaking of a taxpayer's action, said that whatever his rights they certainly do not rise above those of the joint district.
See also New Orleans v. New Orleans Water Works Co., supra, where the court said (p. 93):
"Little need be said with regard to the appeal of Conery and the other taxpayers; they sue in the right of the city, the rights of the city are their rights, and they have no other or greater rights upon this appeal than has the city. Indeed, the city has, in its amended and supplemental answer, joined with them in the assertion of its rights, and they are bound by the disposition of the case against it."
In 52 Am. Jur., Taxpayers' Actions, p. 7, sec. 10, it is said:
"If a taxpayer is permitted to maintain a taxpayer's suit, it is not in his individual right, but as the representative of *249 the district whose interests are alleged to be jeopardized by the inefficiency or maladministration of its officers, and he has no other or higher right than the district or municipality itself could claim if the action were prosecuted in its name, and hence he can maintain the action only in cases where the district or municipality itself could do so. The derivative nature of the action is brought out forcibly in the rationale of the theory by which taxpayers' suits are maintainable as being analogous to stockholders' suits, and by the usual requirement that antecedent demand be made upon the prosecuting official of the public body to enforce the claim of such public body." See also 52 Am. Jur., Taxpayers' Actions, p. 17, sec. 26; Koshkonong Mud Creek D. Dist. v. Bodeman (1928), 197 Wis. 261, 221 N. W. 864.
In the opinion of the court the taxpayer has no rights that are higher than those of either the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District or the city of Madison and has no legally protectible interest which he is in a position to assert in this proceeding. In the case at bar the same counsel represents the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District and the taxpayer, H. O. Lord, and with the city of Madison is vigorously contesting the order of the Committee on Water Pollution.
The legislature created and gave to the petitioner Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District and the city of Madison, intervenor, certain rights and privileges. It has the power to regulate them in the exercise of said rights and privileges, or if necessary take the rights and privileges entirely away, if in its wisdom it sees fit to do so. It is clear that there are no contractual relationships or vested rights involved.
It seems to us, therefore, under the law that none of those asking for a declaration by the court that the statute in question violates various provisions of the federal and state constitutions has any standing in court to assert them.
Constitutional objections. Notwithstanding this fact, let us examine some of the objections raised.
*250 That serious nuisance conditions result in the vicinity of the Madison lakes is undisputed. It is likewise undisputed that the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District, in a very large part, is responsible for these conditions. It is the opinion of the experts that diverting the effluent to moving waters will remedy the situation. This leaves only the question of expense involved. That is a matter for legislative consideration and not the courts.
"A grant of power to a municipality to discharge sewage from a sewer into tidewater does not authorize it to do so in such manner as to create a nuisance." 11 McQuillin, Municipal Corporations (3d ed.), p. 224, sec. 31.25.
It was held in Squaw Island F. T. Co. v. Buffalo (1937), 273 N. Y. 119, 7 N. E. (2d) 10, that the power of a municipal corporation to construct sewers or to use a natural stream as a sewer does not authorize it so to construct the sewer or to use the stream so as to create a nuisance to the damage of a lower riparian owner.
"The great weight of authority, American and English, supports the view that legislative authority to install a sewer system carries no implication of authority to create or maintain a nuisance, and that it matters not whether such nuisance results from negligence or from the plan adopted. If such nuisance be created, the same remedies may be invoked as if the perpetrator were an individual." Winchell v. Waukesha (1901), 110 Wis. 101, 109, 85 N. W. 668.
A city is liable for maintenance of a nuisance even when operating in its governmental capacity. Harper v. Milwaukee (1872), 30 Wis. 365; Mitchell Realty Co. v. West Allis (1924), 184 Wis. 352, 199 N. W. 390; Hasslinger v. Hartland (1940), 234 Wis. 201, 290 N. W. 647.
The objection that the act would deprive the petitioner of property without due process of law contrary to the Fourteenth amendment to the United States constitution is not *251 applicable, as this provision applies only to property held by a municipality in its proprietary capacity. Bell v. Bayfield County (1931), 206 Wis. 297, 239 N. W. 503. Here the property is held by the municipality in performance of a governmental duty. The right to do so is given by statute. The right may be regulated by the legislature and a public nuisance can always be abated.
Classification valid. Whether the distance of the lake from the plant of the system is a proper basis for classification presents a somewhat difficult question. It would seem that to pour the effluent into the lake eleven miles away would be no different than pouring it into one nine miles or any other distance away from the plant. It is not so much the distance of the lake from the plant that causes the damage but apparently the volume of the sewage and size and type of the lake. However this may be, the testimony establishes that carrying the effluent in moving waters for over ten miles will tend to destroy the potency of the nutrient. We are of the opinion that the distance feature does not render the act void for improper classification.
Regarding the population classification, apparently the legislature was of the opinion that sewage from cities of lesser population might be handled by static waters of a given volume and area without creating a nuisance, but that from cities of forty-five thousand or more population it could not. The legislature evidently found and, hence, concluded that in cities of forty-five thousand population or more, nuisance conditions might develop when the sewage effluent was poured into relatively static waters of a certain size such as the Madison lakes, namely, more than two square miles and less than six square miles in area located within ten miles of the plant so giving off the effluent.
"Whether the basis of classification adopted is wise and judicious, and whether it will operate as fairly as some other *252 basis that might be adopted, are questions for the legislature and not for the courts. The extreme limit of judicial inquiry in this direction is whether the basis adopted bears any reasonable relation to the subject to which the legislature has applied it, and whether it is germane to the law. Unless the classification adopted by the legislature is plainly illusory, or may be applied illusively, the judgment of the legislature must prevail." 37 Am. Jur., Municipal Corporations, p. 712, sec. 101.
In State ex rel. Kellogg v. Currens (1901), 111 Wis. 431, 435, 87 N. W. 561, it is said:
"The sufficiency of the reasons for a classification of persons in respect to privileges or restrictions is for the legislature, not for the courts; and only in a case clear beyond a reasonable doubt will the courts declare a statute invalid on the ground that its purpose or the classifications it makes are without reason to support them. [Syllabus.]
"These limitations, however, according to all the authorities, state and federal, are to be read as not extending so far as to deprive the states of their power to so control the conduct of individuals as to protect the welfare of the community, a power commonly described as the `police power.' . . . Hence courts have struggled well-nigh since the commencement of our government to define the line of demarkation between what is permitted and what is forbidden to the legislature by the constitutional restrictions above referred to, and it has been decided with substantial unanimity that upon those subjects wherein the welfare of the community at large is jeopardized by unrestrained freedom of will and action in every individual the legislature may impose restraints, and that such restraining laws are within the constitutional requirement of uniformity and equality between individuals if they affect all individuals who are situated and conditioned alike with reference to the subject under consideration; that, from the nature of things, class legislation, strictly speaking, must exist; that some classes of our citizens may safely enjoy greater privileges, and other classes may be placed under different burdens and restrictions, . . ."
*253 The question of classification is primarily for the legislature, both as to need and basis. In Servonitz v. State (1907), 133 Wis. 231, 239, 113 N. W. 277, the court said:
"In considering the subject we must bear in mind that the policy of classification is a matter wholly within legislative discretion, and that whether there is room for the classification made in any given case is primarily a legislative question and can never become a judicial one except for the purpose of determining, in any given situation, whether legislative action passed the boundaries of reason, reasonable doubts to be resolved in the negative."
Another authority says:
"The circumstances of a particular locality, or the prevailing public sentiment in that section of the state, may require or make acceptable different police regulations from those demanded in another, . . . The legislature may therefore prescribe or authorize different laws of police, . . . in each distinct municipality, provided the state constitution does not forbid. These discriminations are made constantly; and the fact that the laws are of local or special operation only is not supposed to render them obnoxious in principle." 2 Cooley, Constitutional Limitations (8th ed.), p. 804.
It seems to the court that the statute meets constitutional requirements relating to classification. All that seems to be required is that there must be some reasonable basis along general lines for the adoption, all reasonable doubts to be resolved in favor thereof, and when this is found the judicial function ends and the legislative function begins. Mehlos v. Milwaukee (1914), 156 Wis. 591, 146 N. W. 882. The main requirement is that it must apply equally to all within the class. Kiley v. Chicago, M. & St. P. R. Co. (1909), 138 Wis. 215, 119 N. W. 309, 120 N. W. 756.
Statute is presumed valid. It is well established in Wisconsin, as in most states, that any repugnance between a legislative act and the provisions of the constitution must be *254 clear and irreconcilable, and that in matters involving only questions of public policy the determination of the legislature is final and conclusive on the courts. State ex rel. Attorney General v. Cunningham (1892), 81 Wis. 440, 51 N. W. 724; State ex rel. Kellogg v. Currens, supra; Ritholz v. Johnson (1944), 244 Wis. 494, 12 N. W. (2d) 738. In the case of State ex rel. Kellogg v. Currens the court held that only in a case clear beyond a reasonable doubt will the court assert that a law is without reason to support either its purpose or the classification it makes. In State ex rel. Carnation M. P. Co. v. Emery (1922), 178 Wis. 147, 160, 189 N. W. 564, the court said:
"If there is any reasonable basis upon which the legislation may constitutionally rest, the court must assume that the legislature had such fact in mind and passed the act pursuant thereto. The court cannot try the legislature and reverse its decision as to the facts. All facts necessary to sustain the act must be taken as conclusively found by the legislature, if any such facts may be reasonably conceived in the mind of the court." See 11 Am. Jur., Constitutional Law, p. 776, sec. 128.
Unless the court can say that the law appears on its face to be unreasonable and unnecessary it must find that the facts before the legislature were sufficient to justify the requirement. If circumstances could exist to justify the requirements, it must be presumed that such circumstances did exist. Cream City B. P. Co. v. Milwaukee (1914), 158 Wis. 86, 147 N. W. 25; State ex rel. Carnation M. P. Co. v. Emery, supra. In the case at bar it appears without substantial dispute from the expert testimony that facts do exist justifying the regulation in question.
If there is any choice as to construction the court should adopt the construction which will sustain the statute. Petition of Breidenbach (1934), 214 Wis. 54, 252 N. W. 366; Petition of State ex rel. Attorney General (1936), 220 Wis. 25, 264 N. W. 633.
*255 The question of policy and wisdom is not before the court. The wisdom or expediency of particular regulations under the police power is primarily for the legislature rather than the courts. Janesville v. Heiser (1933), 210 Wis. 526, 246 N. W. 701; 16 C. J. S., Constitutional Law, p. 567, sec. 198.
"With the wisdom of the policy adopted, with the adequacy or practicability of the law enacted to forward it, the courts are both incompetent and unauthorized to deal. The course of decision in this court exhibits a firm adherence to these principles. Times without number we have said that the legislature is primarily the judge of the necessity of such an enactment, that every possible presumption is in favor of its validity, and that though the court may hold views inconsistent with the wisdom of the law, it may not be annulled unless palpably in excess of legislative power." Nebbia v. New York (1934), 291 U. S. 502, 537, 78 L. Ed. 940, 54 Sup. Ct. 505.
The statute is not subject to attack because it does not cover the entire field.
It is claimed that other fertilization nutrients come from other sources and that the removal of the contribution from the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District will not eliminate completely the nuisance conditions. This may be true, but it appears without substantial dispute that seventy-five per cent of the inorganic nitrogen content of Lake Waubesa and eighty-seven per cent of the total inorganic phosphorus content of said lake comes from the sewage-plant effluent of petitioner; that in turn Lake Kegonsa receives its greatest contribution of these nutrient elements from Lake Waubesa; that these two lakes are fertilized about seven and twelve times, respectively, as heavily as ordinary farm lands; in other words, that although the effluent from the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District is satisfactory from the standpoint of biochemical demand and bacterial content it it a very heavy fertilizer for the plant life in the lake resulting in excessive algal bloom and the resulting decay thereof with *256 the nuisance conditions to the water and obnoxious odors resulting.
A statute does not violate the equal-protection clause merely because it is not all-embracing. Zucht v. King (1922), 260 U. S. 174, 43 Sup. Ct. 24, 67 L. Ed. 194.
"The state `may direct its law against what it deems the evil as it actually exists without covering the whole field of possible abuses.'" Patsone v. Pennsylvania (1914), 232 U. S. 138, 144, 34 Sup. Ct. 281, 58 L. Ed. 539.
This question was passed upon in Ed. Schuster & Co. v. Steffes (1941), 237 Wis. 41, 55, 295 N. W. 737, where the court said:
"The next question is whether sec. 100.15 (2), Stats., is fatally discriminatory in failing to include within its prohibition all cash discounts. We conclude that this question must receive a negative answer. In the first place, `if the legislature shares the now prevailing belief as to what is public policy and finds that a particular instrument of trade war is being used against that policy in certain cases, it may direct its law against what it deems the evil as it actually exists without covering the whole field of possible abuses, and it may do so none the less that the forbidden act does not differ in kind from those that are allowed.' Central Lumber Co. v. South Dakota, 226 U. S. 157, 160, 33 Sup. Ct. 66, 57 L. Ed. 164, 42 L. R. A. (N. S.) 804."
This rule was approved in Roschen v. Ward (1929), 279 U. S. 337, 339, 49 Sup. Ct. 336, 73 L. Ed. 722:
"A statute is not invalid under the constitution because it might have gone farther than it did, or because it may not succeed in bringing about the result that it tends to produce."
The main factual question in this case is, Do the property owners abutting on these lakes and citizens generally have to stand by and permit the nuisance to increase progressively *257 until their properties have become worthless, the waters of the lake unfit for fish or for domestic use of any kind when according to the testimony it could be very substantially improved by casting this effluent into a moving stream rather than semistatic waters ?
It is established in this case that nuisance conditions develop when the sewage effluent from a community in excess of forty-five thousand population is discharged in relatively static bodies of water such as Lakes Waubesa and Kegonsa,  bodies of water more than two square miles and less than six square miles in area and located within ten miles of petitioner's plant. A careful examination of the record shows that conditions around the lakes when this rank growth of algae is decaying are simply unbearable. There seems to be no argument over this. Hence there was no occasion for the legislature to enact a measure more sweeping and far reaching than was necessary to correct an evil known to arise only under such limitations as to population and lake size. If the legislature had set up a standard upon an entirely unknown set of facts, the law might be open to attack on ground of unreasonableness. However, it was limited in its regulations only to known conditions.
Although others may contribute to these conditions in a lesser degree and no action has been commenced to eliminate their contribution, that fact is no excuse or justification for the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage District to continue to so interfere with the natural growth of the plant life in the lakes as to in part cause the obnoxious conditions and nuisance referred to. If others do not deter in their making contribution to this obnoxious condition, presumably proper action will be taken by the proper authorities with reference thereto.
The court has carefully considered all other constitutional objections urged and does not believe any of them apply.
*258 It is our opinion that there are no constitutional objections to the statute in question and, further, that if there were, neither the petitioner nor intervenors may assert them. The judgment affirming the order of the Committee on Water Pollution is affirmed.
By the Court.Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 2225141 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:38.450761+00 ===

89 Ill. App. 2d 25 (1967)
232 N.E.2d 205
Tau Delta Phi, Tau Eta Chapter, Building Association, an Illinois Not for Profit Corporation, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Sophie Gutierrez, Defendant-Appellant.
Gen. No. 51,756.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District, Second Division.
November 10, 1967.
*26 John H. Galgano and Patrick A. Barton, of Chicago, for appellant.
Morgan, Halligan, Lanoff & Cook, and James A. Forkins, of Chicago (Samuel M. Lanoff, John A. Cook and Edmund Gronkiewicz, of counsel), for appellee.
MR. JUSTICE BURKE delivered the opinion of the court:
This was a complaint for specific performance of an option for the sale of real estate owned by defendant. A summary decree was entered for plaintiff and defendant appeals.
On January 22, 1960, plaintiff Tau Delta Phi, as lessee, and defendant Sophie Gutierrez, as lessor, entered into *27 a lease agreement covering the premises at 6000 North Sheridan Road in Chicago. The realty, improved with a two-story dwelling and a two-car garage, was to be used as a fraternity house for Loyola University students. The term of the lease was to run through January of 1963 at a monthly rental of $350. The lease was drawn in the presence of defendant and her attorney, the president and the secretary of plaintiff, and Mr. James Forkins, attorney for plaintiff.
In addition to the standard form of lease, a rider was attached giving plaintiff an option to purchase the premises for the sum of $51,500 upon due notice to defendant. The agreement provided that upon the exercise of the option the parties were to execute a contract for the sale at the stated price, the terms of which were to be $10,000 in cash and a purchase money mortgage in the amount of $41,500 with interest at 6 percent per year, payable monthly over a fifteen year period. The rider also provided for the payment by defendant of $350 to a real estate broker as commission for obtaining the lease and the payment of an additional commission of $1,500 if the option was exercised.
On January 22, 1963, nine days prior to the expiration of the 1960 agreement, a second lease and option was executed by the parties. It is upon this latter document that the instant suit is predicated. The second lease and option differed from the first in the following respects: the term of the lease was to run through May of 1966, the end of the year's school term; the rent was increased from $350 to $400 per month; the purchase price under the option was reduced to $50,000 and the mortgage amount reduced to $40,000; and the real estate broker's commission was eliminated. The option was to be exercised, if at all, at any time during the duration of the lease before January 1, 1966. Both the first and the second leases described the premises demised as "6000 *28 North Sheridan Road"; the 1960 option reserved the right to the lessee to insert the legal description, whereas the 1963 option made no such reservation.
On December 27, 1965, the members of plaintiff voted to exercise the option and authorized attorney James Forkins, who had represented plaintiff in the negotiations for the two leases and options, to exercise the option on behalf of plaintiff. At the same time, a check was drawn to the order of Mr. Forkins, as attorney for plaintiff, covering the $10,000 cash payment called for upon the exercise of the option. Mr. Forkins then sent a letter to defendant on December 28th stating plaintiff was thereby exercising the option, but defendant failed to respond to the communication. A second letter was sent to defendant on January 10th urging defendant to cooperate, but defendant again failed to respond. This complaint for specific performance was filed on January 27, 1966.
Defendant filed a motion to strike the complaint alleging that the option agreement and lease failed to definitely describe the real estate involved; that the language of the option agreement was so uncertain and ambiguous that a court of equity could not decree its specific performance; that the contract for sale which was contemplated by the option and which the complaint sought to have executed in accordance therewith contained terms which were not ascertainable until some later date; and that the alleged notice of exercise of the option lacked mutuality and was insufficient to bind plaintiff to the execution of the contract for sale. The motion to strike was dismissed and defendant was ordered to file an answer.
Defendant's answer stated that the legal description set forth in the complaint encompassed the common addresses of 6000, 6002 and 6004 North Sheridan Road, not simply 6000 North Sheridan Road as alleged in the *29 complaint; that the plaintiff's attorney drew the lease and option in question contrary to the agreement entered between the parties in that the purchase price should have been $51,500; that the option agreement is ambiguous and uncertain in that the seller is required to give a mortgage to the buyer; that the monthly mortgage payment item in the document was left blank; and that the alleged notice of exercise of the option was insufficient to bind plaintiff inasmuch as it was not signed by plaintiff through its duly authorized officers. The answer further alleged that in June of 1965, the officers of plaintiff advised and informed defendant that plaintiff had no intention of exercising the option; the answer also denied that plaintiff tendered the down payment in accordance with the option requirements.
Plaintiff thereafter filed a motion for summary decree based upon the affidavit of its president, James Moreno, stating facts relating to the exercise of the option on December 28, 1965, and the tender of the $10,000 down payment as contemplated by the option. Also attached to the motion was plaintiff's written authorization to Mr. Forkins to exercise the option to purchase.
Defendant filed a counter-affidavit stating that she was unacquainted with Mr. Moreno and that she never had dealings with him; that on or about January 22, 1963, she negotiated for the 1963 lease with John Hannan, plaintiff's then secretary, and it was specifically agreed that the new lease would be exactly in accordance with the 1960 lease except that the duration of the lease and the monthly rental would be changed; that she relied upon the understanding thus arrived at and signed the 1963 lease without a close examination of the same; and that it was only after the present controversy arose that she learned for the first time that the option price was $50,000 instead of $51,500. The counter-affidavit further alleged that on or about June 1, 1965, she had *30 been informed by plaintiff's then president, Thomas Murray, that plaintiff had no intention of exercising the option and that John Hannan, by telephone, confirmed this fact and advised defendant to make plans for the premises accordingly; that on June 23, 1966, John Hannan confirmed the aforesaid telephone conversation of 1965, but that Hannan said he would not execute an affidavit to that effect. It was further alleged that the purported notice of exercise of the option was not accompanied by a written authorization of plaintiff; that on November 17, 1964, defendant assigned the lease to a savings and loan association as additional security for a mortgage note; that defendant was 73 years old, not conversant with the English language and relied upon plaintiff to draw the 1963 lease in accordance with the oral agreement reached with plaintiff's officer; and that pursuant to plaintiff's statement that the option would not be exercised, defendant incurred considerable expense in having plans prepared in connection with the future use of the premises and sold her home in Central America in order to raise funds necessary to carry out the plans.
Defendant caused depositions to be taken from Thomas Murray and John Hannan. It was stipulated between the parties to this action that the depositions could be used as evidence at the hearing on the motion for a summary decree. John Hannan testified that he was secretary of plaintiff from November of 1959 to May 31, 1965. To the best of his recollection he did not receive a telephone call from defendant in June of 1965 advising him of a conversation between defendant and Thomas Murray concerning plaintiff's unwillingness to exercise the option. Hannan testified that defendant came to his business office on June 3, 1966, and asked him to execute a prepared affidavit concerning the alleged telephone conversation, but that he told defendant that the matters *31 contained in the affidavit were untrue and that he would not sign it. Hannan further testified that on June 9, 1966, he had a discussion with defendant's son at which time he again refused to sign the affidavit. Hannan stated that defendant and her son threatened to expose him before his employer; that they stated they had influential friends, who were politicians and judges, who said defendant had a "very good case" against plaintiff; and that another friend who was the real estate editor of a local newspaper was interested in the case and "wanted to blow the whole thing up in the city newspaper." Concerning the negotiations for the 1963 option and lease, it was further testified by Hannan that it was agreed upon that the duration of the lease and the monthly rentals would be different from the 1960 lease, that the $1,500 broker's commission would be eliminated from the 1963 lease, and that the purchase price under the option was to remain the same as in the 1960 lease, namely, $50,000, the amount due defendant after deduction of the broker's commission.
Thomas Murray testified that he was the newly elected president of plaintiff at the time Hannan resigned as secretary in May of 1965. He stated that he was authorized by plaintiff sometime in June of 1965 to discuss with defendant the rental of the premises and the exercise of the option. It appears the plaintiff found the building somewhat difficult to maintain and too expensive at the time for its budget. Murray stated he discussed the situation with defendant and testified, "I never had a conversation with Mrs. Gutierrez in which I agreed that the option would be released without her also cancelling the lease." The conversation was had in the presence of defendant's son, William, who suggested that "things be left as they are." Murray further testified that in January of 1966 defendant requested him to pre-date a letter as of June of 1965 wherein Murray was to state *32 that plaintiff relinquished its right to exercise the option. Murray refused, stating he would then be liable to legal action by plaintiff. After the June 1965 meeting between defendant and Murray, it appears plaintiff continued to occupy the premises and to pay the rents required under the lease. It further appears that nothing was thereafter done or said with respect to the lease or the option agreement until December 28, 1965, when plaintiff exercised the option.
Also filed by defendant were the affidavits of her son and two grandsons to the effect that John Hannan was presented with a form of affidavit which Hannan stated contained true facts concerning plaintiff's intention not to exercise the option, but that Hannan stated he was unable to sign it because he had been advised by his attorney not to sign anything in connection with the case, and that Hannan stated he recalled his conversation with defendant in June of 1965 which was to the effect that plaintiff was not going to exercise the option.
Defendant maintains on this appeal that an issue of fact existed as to whether or not plaintiff abandoned its right to exercise the option, or whether the parties had mutually rescinded or cancelled the option, and that the trial court was consequently without authority to enter a summary decree; that the description of the property contained in the lease was too indefinite to allow enforcement of the option agreement; and that the notice of exercise of the option was not binding upon defendant inasmuch as it did not bind plaintiff.
Defendant's first contention, that the matters contained in the pleadings, affidavits, and depositions raised an issue of fact and that the trial court therefore erred in entering a summary decree, is without merit.
[1, 2] The purpose of the summary judgment proceeding is to test whether there exists a genuine issue of material fact and to summarily dispose of those cases *33 wherein no such issue exists, thereby avoiding congestion of trial calendars and the expense of unnecessary trials. Ill Rev Stats 1965, Ch 110, Par 57; Allen v. Meyer, 14 Ill. 2d 284, 292, 152 NE2d 576; Giampa v. Sunbeam Corp., 68 Ill. App. 2d 425, 429, 216 NE2d 233. Whether an issue of fact exists is to be determined from the pleadings, depositions, admissions and affidavits, if any, on file in the case. Giampa v. Sunbeam Corp., 68 Ill. App. 2d 425, 216 NE2d 233. It clearly appears from the record that there exists no genuine issue as to any material fact.
[3] Defendant claims there exists either a question whether the parties hereto mutually agreed to rescind the option agreement or a question whether plaintiff abandoned the option. The allegation is made that Thomas Murray informed defendant that plaintiff "had no intention of exercising the option to purchase" without any amplification of the context of the conversation between defendant and Murray. The allegation is also made that defendant made "plans" for the future use of the premises pursuant to the statement made by Murray, but again fails to allege what plans were made. These allegations amount to no more than conclusions of fact, unsupported by any facts admissible in evidence as required by Supreme Court Rule 191. A mere allegation that a triable issue of fact exists does not create such an issue.
[4] The uncontradicted evidence given by Thomas Murray is that he never discussed the release of the option without discussing an immediate cancellation of the lease as well. When the question of the cancellation of the entire agreement arose, defendant's son, in defendant's presence, suggested that "things be left as they are." Although the reason given by Murray for plaintiff's election to discuss with defendant an immediate cancellation of the lease and option in June of 1965 was its financial difficulties, plaintiff nevertheless continued for *34 six months after defendant's refusal to cancel the lease to pay the monthly rental required under the lease which was accepted by defendant without question. Plaintiff furthermore continued to occupy the premises thereafter and it appears that nothing was done or said with regard to the cancellation of the lease or the option agreement until plaintiff elected to exercise the option in December of 1965. The defendant was unwilling to cancel the agreement when plaintiff offered to do so in June of 1965 and the lease and option remained in full effect thereafter and was acted upon by both parties; plaintiff was therefore within its rights under the agreement to exercise its option to purchase in December of 1965.
The cases cited by defendant in support of her position in this regard are inapposite to the factual situation herein. They involve either a mutual rescission or alteration of the agreement, or facts showing an outright repudiation of the contract, which is not true here. See Fisher v. Michigan Square Bldg. Corp., 328 Ill. App. 143, 65 NE2d 473; Printing Machinery Maintenance, Inc. v. Carton Products Co., 15 Ill. App. 2d 543, 147 NE2d 443; Almar Forming Machine Co. v. F. & W. Metal Forming Machinery Co., 308 Ill. App. 151, 31 NE2d 415; Jones v. Dove, 382 Ill. 445, 47 NE2d 447; Bonde v. Weber, 6 Ill. 2d 365, 128 NE2d 883.
Defendant's second contention is that the provisions of the option agreement are too uncertain to permit a court of equity to decree specific performance thereof. We disagree.
[5] The first point raised is that the legal description of the premises ordered to be sold included the street addresses of 6000, 6002 and 6004 North Sheridan Road, whereas the agreement covers only 6000 North Sheridan Road. It appears that the 6000 North Sheridan Road address is the mailing address of the property and was employed by defendant when the 1960 lease was drawn *35 by her attorney. The property is improved with a two-story dwelling containing twelve rooms or more and a two-car garage, and plaintiff has been in continuous possession thereof since 1960. The evidence is clear that the property referred to in the agreement and that referred to in the complaint and the decree are one and the same. See Macy v. Brown, 326 Ill. 556, 563, 158 N.E. 216.
Secondly, defendant claims the terms of payment of the mortgage are not fully set out in the option. However, the option provides for a $40,000 mortgage with interest of 6 percent per year amortized over fifteen years, including taxes. The monthly payments are, therefore, easily ascertainable.
[6] Thirdly, defendant claims the agreement is ambiguous concerning the one who is to give the mortgage. The agreement has an obvious clerical error in calling for the lessor to deliver a mortgage to the lessee. Clearly the intent is that the lessee shall execute and deliver the mortgage. As stated in Welsh v. Jakstas, 401 Ill. 288, 82 NE2d 53, at pages 294 and 295:
"The law enters into and forms a part of every contract, and a contract is sufficiently certain and definite to be enforcible if the court is enabled from the terms and provisions thereof, under proper rules of construction and applicable principles of equity, to ascertain what the parties have agreed to do. We are of the opinion the plain common-sense meaning of the option should prevail." (Emphasis supplied.)
The remaining matters urged by defendant on this point have been considered and are found to be without merit.
Defendant finally maintains that the notice of exercise of the option was sent by plaintiff's attorney, without any evidence of authority on his part to do so, and was consequently not mutually binding upon the parties. Plaintiff's *36 attorney, Mr. Forkins, represented plaintiff with regard to the 1960 and 1963 leases and options, the letter exercising the option was signed by him as "General Counsel ... Attorney for Lessees," and defendant did not at any pertinent time question the authority of Mr. Forkins to act for plaintiff.
Because we think that the court was right in allowing plaintiff's motion the decree is affirmed.
Decree affirmed.
LYONS, P.J. and BRYANT, J., concur.

=== CASE 2223465 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:02.000698+00 ===

332 Mich. 229 (1952)
50 N.W.2d 771
WOLTER
v.
WOLTER.
Docket No. 36, Calendar No. 45,151.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided January 7, 1952.
*230 Leo B. Lange and Walter M. Nelson, for plaintiff.
Silverston & Kabatsky and Charles C. Benjamin, for defendant.
NORTH, C.J.
Each of these parties in the circuit court in chancery sought a divorce from the bonds of matrimony. Initially plaintiff wife by her bill of complaint sought a decree of separate maintenance, but later asked for a divorce on the ground of extreme and repeated cruelty; and defendant husband by his cross bill sought a divorce on like ground. The trial judge, concluding that neither had established a right to relief, decreed dismissal of plaintiff's bill of complaint and of defendant's cross bill. Plaintiff wife has appealed. Defendant husband has not appealed.
Our review of the record brings the conclusion that the wife should have been decreed a divorce on the ground above noted. We will refer herein to only a portion of the items of extreme and repeated cruelty as to which testimony was offered in behalf of the wife. We are mindful of the conflict between her testimony and that of the husband; and also that her testimony was corroborated in only a comparatively few particulars. But such corroboration of plaintiff's testimony contradicted by defendant lends an added degree of credence to her uncorroborated testimony in the particulars in which it was contradicted by the husband.
*231 Each of these parties was of German birth. At the time of the hearing in the trial court they were 48 or 49 years old. They were married in November, 1940, and separated in March, 1948, when plaintiff started this suit. No children were born of the marriage. Plaintiff alleged and produced testimony tending to prove acts of extreme and repeated cruelty, some of which were as follows.
Plaintiff charged that on New Year's Eve, 1942, while the parties were in her brother's home they quarreled about some money matters and that defendant struck her with such force that she fell against the corner of the house and gashed her forehead, which resulted in some bleeding. Defendant denies that there was any quarreling about money matters, but instead that the 2 parties in effect collided while the wife was going down and the husband coming up the stairs leading from the basement to the first floor, incident to which he claims his wife struck him. He denied that he struck his wife, but did testify that she fell to her knees and that as a result of the physical encounter plaintiff's brother, according to defendant's testimony, intervened and "he pushed me out of the door (evidently a grade door)." Plaintiff's brother testified in corroboration of her version of this encounter and, without contradiction, added that defendant apologized for what had happened. The record also discloses an offer to further corroborate plaintiff's version of this affair by the testimony of her brother's wife, but her testimony does not appear to have been taken. It is true that the altercation, just above noted, happened several years before the final separation of these parties, and therefore might not be too persuasive as to plaintiff's right to a divorce. However, the testimony concerning this event quite conclusively indicates that defendant's testimony in this particular was untrue, and therefore the testimony *232 of this incident bears quite materially upon his credibility.
According to plaintiff's testimony, in July, 1945, while she and her husband were riding in his automobile he displayed anger because plaintiff had been too long in making a purchase in a grocery store and that "he bawled me out and struck me right in the face." She thereupon left the car and walked home. As to this particular incident plaintiff's uncorroborated testimony was denied by defendant.
Again from plaintiff's testimony it appears that in September, 1947, because of some rather inconsequential circumstances, defendant became very angry, hit her in the face, knocked her to the floor, and kicked her when she was down; and as a result plaintiff suffered severe bruises and her face was so puffed up that for several days she stayed at home from her work. As to this incident plaintiff's testimony was corroborated by that of Verna Topsher, who was a co-worker with plaintiff. This witness testified that when plaintiff returned to her work she had a black eye and the side of her face was bruised and puffed up. There was farther corroboration by plaintiff's brother, who said that when plaintiff came to his home he observed "injuries on her face. She had a black eye and her face was in terrible shape  all puffed up." Defendant testified that he never struck plaintiff, and concerning the incident above noted gave the following unconvincing answers:
"Q. Now, the occasion that your wife spoke about in '47, when she claimed you kicked her. What happened?
"A. I don't know a thing about that. * * *
"Q. What did you  what happened if anything happened?
*233 "A. Well I don't know what, I don't know what was she, she claims about I beat her up, bruises and disfigured face, so I, I don't know about that."
In addition to the above specifically noted altercations, plaintiff testified defendant struck her on various occasions as to which she could not remember the exact dates; that defendant had an "intolerable temper;" that on various occasions he called her vile names and in effect charged her with being an unacceptable wife.
In the light of the record presented on this appeal, we conclude that plaintiff should have been granted a decree of divorce on the ground of extreme and repeated cruelty; notwithstanding defendant alleged that plaintiff displayed a lack of affection; that during a part of the time the parties lived and cohabited together, although he delivered to her his pay checks, plaintiff continually demanded money of defendant, and that at least once a month plaintiff "attempted to scold, nag and quarrel with the cross-plaintiff in connection with her demands for additional money, or otherwise, all of which made the continuance of the marriage relationship impossible and intolerable." We are also mindful that defendant testified that during practically 2 years next preceding the separation, plaintiff refused to cohabit with defendant. This was denied by plaintiff's testimony, and in consequence it cannot be said defendant's charge in this particular was proven.
Under the circumstances it remains for this Court, on this hearing de novo, to determine what would be an equitable adjudication of the property rights of these parties. Because of the manner in which the trial judge disposed of the case, he had no occasion for considering this phase of the instant case. As bearing upon property rights of the respective parties the record discloses the following. The most valuable single item possessed jointly by these parties *234 is their residence, referred to as the Waltham property, which was left to them by the will of a Mr. Thurm. This property is shown to have been worth at least $9,000 or $10,000, but was subject to a mortgage of $3,380.45. However by subsequent payments made by defendant the unpaid balance of the mortgage at the time of the hearing was $941.14. The above property and all of the stock investments, to which reference is hereinafter made, as well as an amount of cash, were acquired by these parties from Mr. Thurm by virtue of an agreement entered into between him and these parties in 1941. Briefly the agreement was that if the parties to this suit would move into the residence of Mr. Thurm, a widower, furnish him with his board, room, and care in general, he would by will leave to these parties all the property of which he was possessed at the time of his demise. He died about 4 months after the agreement was entered into, and by will made these parties his sole beneficiaries. It is obvious that this agreement would have been quite impossible except for plaintiff's participation therein in the way of caring for the household, looking after Mr. Thurm, et cetera. That she discharged these duties is not questioned; and for that period she discontinued her wage-earning employment outside the household. During 3 or 4 of the 7 years these parties lived together, plaintiff was employed outside of her home duties. Her undisputed testimony discloses a total of gross earnings during the years 1945, 1946 and 1947 of $2,701.79. It is a fair inference that these earnings of plaintiff, as well as the earnings of defendant, were expended for their living and as investments in the property possessed by them at the time of their separation. As to the husband's earnings, the record discloses that he ordinarily earned approximately $70 per week, but on one occasion for a period of 4 months due to a *235 heart condition he was unemployed. At least since the separation defendant has been receiving rental for the second story of the Waltham property of $15 per week. He had previously made some repairs and improvements on this property. We forego reference to many other details that have more or less bearing upon what would constitute an equitable disposition of property rights in this case; but we conclude that such result will, as nearly as possible, be accomplished by a decree which provides:
Plaintiff shall have as her sole property, subject to the unpaid portion of the mortgage thereon, the so-called Waltham property with the fixtures, furniture and furnishings therein, but defendant shall have the right to remove his personal effects therefrom. This property is an income-producing property, and including furniture and furnishings has a net value of $10,000 or $11,000.
The defendant should be decreed to be the sole owner of the 2 lots facing on Lake St. Clair, which are of the approximate value of $3,050; the 20 acres of orchard property located on Van Dyke avenue, Macomb county, of the approximate value of $4,000; United States savings bonds of the maturity value of $250; deposit in a Detroit bank of approximately $50; 100 shares Goebel Brewing Company stock, estimated value $1,075; 50 shares United Shirts stock, estimated value $1,075; also the 100 shares of stock in the McClanahan Oil Company and a like number of shares in the Eulin and Company, which are of questionable value; and the 1940 Plymouth automobile which is of relatively small value.
There is considerable variance in the testimony as to the actual or estimated value of many of the items of property involved in this case; but in our judgment the foregoing results in an approximation of equal division between these parties of the *236 property possessed at the time of the separation. The decree herein may provide that as to each parcel of real estate an appropriate quitclaim deed shall be delivered to the party entitled thereto, and in default thereof either party may cause a certified copy of the decree to be recorded as evidence of title. All items of property are to be conveyed or assigned subject to any unpaid taxes or assessments. The foregoing adjustment of property rights will be in full satisfaction of any and all interest either party may now or hereafter have in property decreed to the opposite party. Alimony (including payment of back alimony) will not be decreed to plaintiff. An attorney fee of $300 shall be paid by defendant within 30 days from the date hereof to plaintiff's counsel; and unless paid before decree is entered, this item may be decreed to be a lien on the Van Dyke avenue property. The decree, in accord with the foregoing, to be entered in this Court, will be without costs except the above attorney's fee; and the case will be remanded to the trial court with jurisdiction to hear and determine any future matters arising therein.
DETHMERS, CARR, BUSHNELL, SHARPE, BOYLES, and REID, JJ., concurred. BUTZEL, J., did not sit.

=== CASE 2223492 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:02.545826+00 ===

127 Mich. App. 73 (1983)
338 N.W.2d 725
McDONALD
v.
OBERLIN
Docket No. 65649.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided July 7, 1983.
Rappleye, Wilkins & Arcaro (by Viola A. Kaminski), for plaintiff.
Kelly, Kelly & Kelly (by William J. Kelly), for defendant.
Before: M.J. KELLY, P.J., and GRIBBS and R.L. TAHVONEN,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Plaintiff filed suit seeking to recover damages for noneconomic losses arising out of an automobile accident. The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of defendant pursuant to GCR 1963, 117.2(3) (no genuine issue as to any material fact and the moving party is entitled to *75 judgment as a matter of law). Plaintiff appeals as of right.
Following adoption of the Michigan automobile no-fault insurance law, a person remains subject to nonintentional tort liability for noneconomic loss caused by his use of a motor vehicle only if the injured person has suffered death, serious impairment of a body function, or permanent serious disfigurement. MCL 500.3135; MSA 24.13135. In the instant case, plaintiff alleged that she suffered serious impairment of a body function. When there is no factual dispute regarding the extent of a plaintiff's injuries, the trial court is to decide as a matter of law whether the plaintiff has suffered a serious impairment of a body function. Cassidy v McGovern, 415 Mich 483, 488; 330 NW2d 22 (1982).
There is no factual dispute regarding the extent of plaintiff's injuries. The doctors who examined plaintiff were not deposed prior to the summary judgment motion. The trial court based its decision on the parties' briefs, plaintiff's deposition, and the remainder of the court file. In accordance with Cassidy, the trial court properly decided as a matter of law whether plaintiff had suffered a serious impairment of a body function. Plaintiff complained in her deposition of some pain and discomfort as a result of her injury. This injury does not appear to have affected plaintiff's mode of living in any significant way. On appeal, plaintiff asserts that she was entirely disabled from work for three months due to "severe dorsal strain". The report containing that diagnosis, however, is not included in the lower court file and, therefore, it cannot be used by plaintiff to bolster her claim on appeal. See Trail Clinic, PC v Bloch, 114 Mich App 700, 708-709; 319 NW2d 638 (1982); People v *76 Gibbs, 120 Mich App 485, 491; 328 NW2d 65 (1982).
Plaintiff contends further on appeal that when she returned to work three months after the accident, she was released for only "light duty" by her physician. This was not established at the lower court proceeding. Indeed, plaintiff's deposition testimony is contrary to that position. Although she did not specifically recall whether she had worked sporadically during the three-month period, she acknowledged that she may have gone to work for a couple of days. Additionally, plaintiff was not confined to bed and was able to function normally and engage in her normal activities. Plaintiff was not incapacitated by her discomfort, nor did it interfere with her normal lifestyle. Reviewing the record, we find that the trial court properly concluded as a matter of law that plaintiff failed to meet the minimum threshold requirement.
Plaintiff's second argument is based upon a factual misconception. Plaintiff argues that the trial court improperly granted summary judgment under GCR 1963, 117.2(1) (failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted). Defendant's motion and the lower court opinion and order, however, were based upon GCR 1963, 117.2(3) (no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law). GCR 1963, 117.2(3) is designed to test whether factual support exists for the plaintiff's claim. The party opposing the motion must present some proof to establish the existence of a genuine issue of material facts. Bob v Holmes, 78 Mich App 205, 212; 259 NW2d 427 (1977). There was no dispute as to the injuries sustained in the present case. The issue was whether those injuries met the requisite legal threshold. Plaintiff did suffer some *77 discomfort due to the accident; however, the degree of the injury was insufficient to meet the minimum threshold requirement. Summary judgment was properly entered in defendant's favor.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 9740413 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:00.94451+00 ===

N. J. Kaufman, J.
On January 20, 1978, Eugene Robinson drove his pickup truck to Tom Marks’s Garage, a repair garage owned by Tom Marks. Robinson went there to pick up a hydraulic jack. As Robinson and Marks were loading the jack into the truck, Robinson slipped on some grease on the garage floor. He fell and suffered a back injury.
Eugene and Edith Robinson sued Tom Marks for negligence. Mr. Marks’s insurer, Ohio Casualty Insurance Group, brought this action for declaratory relief to establish that Mr. Marks is also an insured under Mr. Robinson’s automobile policy with Riverside Insurance Company, a member of the Transamerica Group.1 Under Ohio Casualty’s theory, if Mr. Marks were an insured under the Transamerica policy, then Ohio Casualty would not be solely liable for Mr. Robinson’s injuries. The Monroe County Circuit Court granted summary judgment for Ohio Casualty on January 6, 1982. Transamerica appeals.
In this case we are faced with the confusing task of determining whether the noninjured party (Mr. Marks) to the accident would be covered by the injured party’s insurance policy (Mr. Robinson’s policy with Transamerica). Transamerica raises four issues in this regard, which we now consider.
*141I
Transamerica first argues that Marks was not "using” the truck and therefore is not a defined insured under the Transamerica policy. In Section I of the policy Transamerica agrees to pay for injuries "arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of the insured automobile, including the loading and unloading thereof’. It is nowhere required in the policy that the "user” also be the driver, and case law does not impose such a construction. See, e.g., BASF Wyandotte Corp v Transport Ins Co, 523 F Supp 515 (ED Mich, 1981). The clear wording of the Transamerica policy designates Mr. Marks as an "insured” while he is loading or unloading the insured vehicle. We therefore find no error in the trial court’s conclusion that Mr. Marks was "using” the vehicle when Mr. Robinson was injured.
II
Transamerica next argues that Mr. Marks was specifically excluded from coverage because he is a "person operating a repair shop”. Section III of the policy provides that:
"The insurance with respect to any person or organization other than the Named Insured or spouse does not apply:
"(1) to any person or organization or to any agent or employee thereof, operating an automobile sales agency, repair shop, service station, storage garage or public parking place, with respect to any occurrence arising out of the operation thereof * * *.”
Ohio Casualty argues that Mr. Marks did not operate "an automobile sales agency [or] repair shop” under the policy because he repaired trucks *142and trailers, not automobiles. Assuming for the sake of argument that only "automobile” repair shops are excluded from coverage, we believe Mr. Marks’s business fits within the exclusionary language of Transamerica’s policy.2 We conclude this because of the policy’s definition of "automobile” in Section IV:
"Except where specifically stated to the contrary, the word 'automobile’ wherever used shall include its equipment and other equipment permanently attached thereto and shall mean the described automobile, a land motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or house-trailer, not operated on rails or crawler-treads, but, except with respect to Section (2) Coverage C Medical Payments, none of the foregoing shall include a motorcycle unless specifically described in the Policy, and except while actually upon public roads, does not mean a farm type tractor or equipment * *
A truck is a "land motor vehicle”, MCL 475.1; MSA 22.531, and is nowhere excluded by the policy from the "automobile” definition. In fact, the insured "automobile” in this case is a truck. The trial court found, though, that Mr. Marks was not excluded under Section III. This finding is clearly erroneous and merits reversal.
Ill
Transamerica raises as its third issue the argument that Mr. Marks was not a named insured *143under the "use of other automobiles” section of the Transamerica policy. We are unable to consider this issue because it was not addressed by the trial court.
IV
In its final issue, Transamerica argues that, if Tom Marks is an insured under the Transamerica policy, Ohio Casualty would still be obligated to pay as the primary insurer of the Marks premises under Ohio Casualty’s policy. That policy states:
"The insurance afforded by this policy is primary insurance, except when stated to apply in excess of or contingent upon the absence of other insurance. When this insurance is primary and the insured has other insurance which is stated to be applicable to the loss on an excess or contingent basis, the amount of the company’s liability under this policy shall not be reduced by the existence of such other insurance.
"When both this insurance and other insurance apply to the loss on the same basis, whether primary, excess or contingent, the company shall not be liable under this policy for a greater proportion of the loss than that stated in the applicable contribution provision below * # * »
Transamerica argues that the Ohio Casualty policy establishes primary liability by Ohio Casualty to the policy limit of $100,000. Ohio Casualty argues that the Transamerica policy applies "on the same basis”, and therefore Transamerica has pro-rata liability. As discussed in the second issue, the Transamerica policy excludes Mr. Marks as the operator of a repair shop. The Transamerica policy therefore does not apply "on the same basis” as the Ohio Casualty policy, and Transamerica has no pro-rata liability.
*144V
As mentioned earlier, this case involves a determination of whether the noninjured party to the accident would be covered by the injured party’s insurance policy. Throughout these proceedings the parties seem to have assumed that the Robin-sons have a cause of action against the garage owner’s insurer, Ohio Casualty.3 It has become apparent in our treatment of the issues, though, that Mr. Robinson’s injury arose out of the use of his vehicle as that term is used in the no-fault act. MCL 50).3105(1); MSA 24.13105(1). See MCL 500.3106(c); MSA 24.13106(c); Nickerson v Citizens Mutual Ins Co, 393 Mich 324, 331; 224 NW2d 896 (1975). It would be contrary to the strong public policy behind the no-fault act if Transamerica were completely absolved of liability for injuries arising out of the use of an automobile it insures.
The trial court and Ohio Casualty in its brief cite 16 Couch, Insurance, 2d, § 62:1 as supporting pro rata liability among insurers. The two Michigan cases cited in Couch, however, do not support pro rata liability. In Werner v Travelers Indemnity Co, 55 Mich App 390; 222 NW2d 254 (1974), the plaintiffs decedent was killed in an accident involving an uninsured motorist. The plaintiffs decedent and the owner-driver of the car she was riding in were insured by different companies. Despite a "pro rata” clause in the driver’s policy, the Court held that his policy was the primary policy for the passenger’s representative to look to for recovery. The passenger’s policy was secondary *145and would pay only for the excess over the primary policy’s limit. In Hartman v Ins Co of North America, 106 Mich App 731; 308 NW2d 625 (1981), lv den 414 Mich 890 (1982), a no-fault case, the Court established a "priority” of claims for injuries to a bicyclist in a bicycle-automobile accident. The bicyclist’s no-fault carrier, if any, would be primarily liable, followed by the insurer of a "relative domiciled in the same household” and, finally, the insurer holding the policy on the automobile involved in the accident. See also Underhill v Safeco Ins Co, 407 Mich 175, 182; 284 NW2d 463 (1979) (motorcyclist). Neither case stands for pro rata liability — in fact, in stark contrast, they stand for a system of priorities involving primary and secondary liability.
The difficulty which now arises involves the conflict between Mr. Robinson’s no-fault policy on his automobile and Mr. Marks’s garage policy. The no-fault act was intended to abolish, in part, tort determinations of fault. Shavers v Attorney General, 402 Mich 554, 579; 267 NW2d 72 (1978). By way of analogy only, two panels of this Court have held that the no-fault act’s abolition of tort liability is strong enough to overcome the public policy behind the garage keeper’s liability act’s rebuttable presumption of negligence when a vehicle is returned damaged. Buckeye Union Ins Co v Johnson, 108 Mich App 46; 310 NW2d 268 (1981), lv den 414 Mich 873 (1982); Liberty Mutual Ins Co v Ins Co of North America, 117 Mich App 197; 323 NW2d 650 (1982). See MCL 256.541; MSA 9.1721.4 *146On remand the trial court should give appropriate consideration to this issue and determine whether Mr. Robinson’s primary source of recovery is his own no-fault carrier.
Based on the second issue, we reverse summary judgment and remand for further proceedings.
Cynar, P.J., concurred.
For simplicity, we will consider Riverside Insurance Company and the Transamerica Insurance Group as the same party and refer to them collectively as "Transamerica”. Thus, references to Mr. Robinson’s "Transamerica” policy mean the policy written by Riverside as a Transamerica member. Transamerica is the defendant-appellant in this action. Ohio Casualty is the plaintiff-appellee. Eugene and Edith Robinson are defendants, and Mr. Marks is not a party to this action.
We are not sure that "automobile” modifies all establishments listed ("sales agency, repair shop, service station, storage garage, or public parking place”). Instead, it may modify only "sales agency”. We believe this may he so because service stations and public parking places are not necessarily limited to "automobiles” in the restrictive sense of sedans and to the exclusion of trucks, especially light trucks like vans and pickups. In any event, we need not decide this issue for the reasons demonstrated in the text.
It must be remembered that Mr. Robinson’s underlying action is collateral to this appeal. This serves not only to secrete the full factual setting, but also to limit the res judicata effect of these pronouncements. This section of our opinion is offered to assist the trial court on remand so that it might be better able to render a just verdict.
A third panel in Liberty Mutual Ins Co v Allied Truck Equipment Co, 103 Mich App 33; 302 NW2d 588 (1981), held that the Legislature is presumed to have known of the garage keeper’s liability act when it enacted the no-fault act. The exceptions to no-fault liability found in MCL 500.3135; MSA 24.13135 did not involve bailments for hire, this third panel reasoned, and therefore the no-fault act would not bar a negligence action under the garage keeper’s liability act. This *146holding, however, does not preclude the courts from limiting Mr. Robinson to his no-fault coverage as the primary source because this case does not involve the bailment of an automobile. While the Liberty Mutual v Allied case thus does not affect our discussion, the Buckeye Union and Liberty Mutual v Ins Co of North America cases do affect our discussion because they demonstrate the strong public policy behind primary coverage of no-fault insurance.

=== CASE 9740556 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:37:12.968114+00 ===

OPINION
CRONE, Judge.
Case Summary
In this belated appeal, Warren Guter-muth challenges his twenty-four-year aggregate sentence for three counts of class C felony child molesting. We affirm.
Issues
We restate the two issues Gutermuth presents as follows:
I. Whether he may challenge his sentence pursuant to Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296, 124 S.Ct. 2531, 159 L.Ed.2d 403 (2004); and
II. Whether the trial court properly sentenced him.
Facts and Procedural History
Between June and October 1995, Earl and Dorinda Riley and their three children lived with the eighty-one-year-old Guter-muth in his Jeffersonville home. One day, when Earl and Dorinda were out of the home, Gutermuth put his finger “inside the private[s]” of their seven-year-old twin daughters. Appellant’s App. at 14-15 (probable cause affidavit). Gutermuth told the girls not to tell anyone and that they would get in trouble or he would get mad if they did. Id. at 15. On September 19 or 20, 1995, Gutermuth touched the penis of the Rileys’ eight-year-old son over his clothing and told him not to tell anyone. Id.
The police conducted an investigation, and Gutermuth took a polygraph examination on March 5, 1996. Following the examination, which indicated deceptive responses, Gutermuth admitted to molesting all three children. Id. at 18. He stated that he did so because he suspected that someone else was molesting them, and he believed that if he touched them inappropriately, then they would tell him who else was touching them. Id. On March 15, 1996, the State charged Gutermuth with two counts of class B felony child molesting and three counts of class C felony child molesting. On June 17, 1996, the State amended the charging information to add twenty-one counts of class A misdemeanor child exploitation.
The matter was set for jury trial on January 7, 1997. On that date, before a jury was selected, Gutermuth agreed to plead guilty to three counts of class C felony child molesting, in exchange for the State’s dismissal of the remaining charges, with sentencing left to the trial court’s discretion (also known as an “open plea”). The court informed Gutermuth of the rights he would forfeit by pleading guilty, *720including “the right to appeal [his] conviction to the Indiana Supreme Court or the Indiana Court of Appeals, as the case might be.” Tr. at 8. The court determined that Gutermuth’s plea was voluntary and advised him of the possible sentencing range. In establishing a factual basis for the plea, the State incorporated by reference, without objection, the probable cause affidavit and two exhibits related to the polygraph examination. The court accepted Gutermuth’s plea, entered judgment on the convictions, and set the matter for sentencing.
On February 18,1997, Gutermuth filed a motion to strike the presentence investigation report and to exclude reference to prior arrests or uncharged acts. At the sentencing hearing on February 21, 1997, the trial court ruled on the motion1 and sentenced Gutermuth as follows:
The Court has reviewed all of the factors in this particular case, and I would emphasize that Indiana Code Section 35-38-l-7.1(a) says the Court shall man-datorily review certain factors, the risk that the Defendant will commit another crime. And this Court is of the belief based upon what I’ve heard and my review of this particular case that there is that particular risk. Number two, the nature and circumstances of the crime committed. I simply state for the record, I have considered the nature and circumstances of the crime committed as mandated. Number three, I have considered that Mr. Gutermuth has no prior criminal record. I have considered his character and I have considered his condition. Number four is not applicable to this particular case. That’s the age of the children. That’s a part of the [child molesting] statute itself. So that’s not applicable. Number five isn’t applicable. Number six, I have considered the oral statements reduced in paragraph form in the Pre-Sentence Investigation Report of the victim’s parents in this particular case. I go through the aggravating circumstances in this particular case and I’m going to recognize the following as aggravating circumstances. Firstly, given the nature of these particular offenses, I do believe that the person, Mr. Gutermuth, is in need of correctional rehabilitative treatment that can best be provided by commitment to a penal facility. Number four, I do believe that an imposition of a reduced sentence or a suspended sentence or a suspension of a sentence and imposing probation would depreciate the seriousness of this particular offense. I recognize Mr. Gutermuth’s age, and I’ll address that later on. But at the same *721time this Court or any Court should send any message to any community, and especially this community, that we are going [sic] to tolerate or consider leniency in situations where there is admission and evidence of child molestation. Number five, again, in terms of aggravators, I’m not going to consider that. That is the age of the victims. And number six is inapplicable, the mental or physical infirmity of the victims. But what is applicable is the emotional condition of the children and I’ll get to that also. Number seven doesn’t apply. Number eight and number nine, I’m not going to announce those. They don’t apply in this particular case. Then I’m going to look at, in terms of this statute, the Court may consider the following factors as mitigating factors. And as I go through these mitigating factors, one, the crime neither caused nor threatened serious harm to person. It did, in the Court’s opinion, impose serious harm to persons, those being the children. That’s not, that threat mitigating factor is not applicable. Number two, the crime" was a result of circumstances unlikely to recur. And considering the nature, and I’m not, incidently [sic], I’m stating for the record that I’m not going to consider those photographs or the testimony of Mr. Riley as to what happened twenty-five years ago. That’s too remote in time. I’m going, that’s a given. That is too remote in time. I’m not going to consider that fact. But I am going to consider the fact that I’ve got three separate victims in this particular case. And under the circumstances I believe there is a likelihood or the crime could recur given the fact, given the evidence as presented and given the attitude of the Defendant. I’m going to get to that as another aggravating circumstance. The victim certainly didn’t facilitate this particular offense, being children. So that doesn’t apply. There’s no substantial grounds tending to excuse or justify the crime. So that doesn’t apply. Mr. Gutermuth is not acting under strong provocation. Number six, the person has no history of delinquency or criminal activity. That’s somewhat applicable. Number seven, he’s likely to respond affirmatively to probation or short-term imprisonment. That doesn’t apply. Number eight, the character attitudes of Mr. Gutermuth indicate the person is unlikely to commit another crime. The reverse is true in this particular case. And number nine, restitution doesn’t apply. Number ten, imprisonment of the person will result in undue hardship to the person. Of all those mitigating factors, perhaps two apply in this particular case. No prior criminal history as such. And that perhaps because of his age, but the age is only one particular factor. The other aggravating factors are the position of trust with the children. There was a definite position of trust with the children in here. And, if anything, we must develop positive attitudes in our children and positive trust in our children. And this is certainly one way of destroying that trust and destroying those positive attitudes in those children. And we know the history of these kinds of situations. Lord knows what these children are going to become as adults in view of what happened in this particular case. We certainly know with history what happens in other cases with other children who have been subject to abuse over the years under these kind of circumstances. I’m particularly finding as an aggravating circumstance a lack of remorse here. The attitude that Mr. Gutermuth had and the comments that he made to the Court’s Probation Officer, which are represented in the Court’s probation report, as well as *722what I’ll find on that polygraph examination, as the officer of the Court [i.e., the prosecutor] related to me, his attitudes towards children and the idea of molestation. Again, there are three different children in this particular factor. So given all of that I can’t help but determine that the aggravating circumstances in this particular case outweigh the mitigating circumstances. And it is with regret that I impose a sentence on an individual as old as Mr. Gutermuth is. But I’m not going to let age interfere with offenses of these particular natures. Because it’s not the age of the person that commits the offense that has any bearing on the devastating effect of the children. The age of the person can be anywhere from fifteen to a hundred and fifteen as far as the Courts are concerned. If there’s child molesting involved, then those children are going to suffer. And that’s the situation in this particular case. Having found all of that, and the Defendant having entered a plea of guilty to Count II, Child Molesting as a Class C Felony, and the Court having previously entered judgment of conviction for that particular offense, and having considered all of these particular factors and these factors are going to go to the aggravation of the sentences that I’m going to impose. And they’re going to the consecu-tivity of the sentences that I’m going to impose. The Court for Count II will impose a presumptive term of four years and will add four additional years for aggravating circumstances, for a total of eight years. As to Count IV, the Defendant having been found guilty, having pled guilty to that offense and the Court having entered Judgment of Conviction for that offense, the Court will impose a sentence of four presumptive years plus four additional years, for eight total years. That second sentence is to be served consecutively to the sentence imposed under Count II. And the defendant having pled guilty to Child Molesting, as a Class C Felony under Count V, and the Court having entered Judgment of Conviction of that offense previously in this particular case, the Court will impose a four year sentence, presumptive sentence plus four additional years sentence. That sentence, that sentence, of that eight years, four years will be suspended with two years on home incarceration as a condition of probation upon being released on probation, on being released upon service of sentence with the remainder to be placed on strict terms of probation. But that sentence is also to be served consecutively in this particular case.
Id. at 129-36. The trial court did not inform Gutermuth of his right to appeal his sentence. Cf. Collins v. State, 817 N.E.2d 230, 231 (Ind.2004) (“[A] person who pleads guilty is entitled to contest on direct appeal the merits of a trial court’s sentencing decision where the trial court has exercised sentencing discretion, i.e., where the sentence is not fixed by the plea agreement.”).
On July 20, 2000, Gutermuth filed pro se a petition for post-conviction relief pursuant to Indiana Post^Conviction Rule 1, alleging that he had received ineffective assistance of counsel, that his guilty plea was not knowing, intelligent, and voluntary, and that there was no factual basis for the plea. Appellant’s App. at 182-89. On December 5, 2002, Gutermuth filed by counsel an amended petition for post-conviction relief pursuant to Post-Conviction Rule 1, alleging that the trial court had improperly considered various aggravating and mitigating circumstances at sentencing and that his sentence was manifestly unreasonable pursuant to Indiana Appellate Rule 7(B). Id. at 197-200. On April 22, 2003, *723the post-conviction court denied Guter-muth’s amended petition.
Gutermuth appealed. Another panel of this Court addressed the merits of Guter-muth’s sentencing claims and affirmed the denial of his petition for post-conviction relief, rejecting the State’s argument that he had waived any challenge to his sentence because he “could have raised the issue in a direct appeal, but did not file one.” Gutermuth v. State, 800 N.E.2d 592, 596 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. granted (2004). Our supreme court granted the State’s petition for transfer, thereby vacating this Court’s opinion, and addressed the issue of “whether an individual who pleads guilty to an offense in an ‘open plea’ is entitled to challenge the sentence imposed by means of a petition for post-conviction relief.” Gutermuth v. State, 817 N.E.2d 233, 234 (Ind.2004) (quoting Collins, 817 N.E.2d at 231). Based on its decision in Collins, the court held that “the post-conviction court should have dismissed the petition for post-conviction relief for lack of jurisdiction without prejudice to any right Gutermuth may have to file a belated notice of appeal in accordance with the requirements of [Posb-Conviction Rule] 2.” Id. at 234-35.2 On November 17, 2004, the post-conviction court vacated its order and dismissed Gutermuth’s petition.
On March 29, 2005, Gutermuth filed by counsel a petition for permission to file a belated notice of appeal pursuant to Posb-Conviction Rule 2(1). On June 6, 2005, after a hearing, the trial court granted Gutermuth’s petition. On July 6, 2005, Gutermuth filed a notice of appeal. On November 3, 2005, Gutermuth filed his appellant’s brief, in which he argues that the trial court sentenced him in violation of Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296, 124 S.Ct. 2531, 159 L.Ed.2d 403 (2004), that the trial court abused its statutory sentencing discretion by considering improper aggravating circumstances and failing to give adequate weight to mitigating circumstances, and that his sentence is therefore inappropriate in light of the offenses and his character pursuant to Indiana Appellate Rule 7(B). We now turn our attention to Gutermuth’s arguments.
Discussion and Decision
I. Does Blakely Apply to Gutermuth’s Appeal?
On June 24, 2004, the United States Supreme Court decided Blakely, in which it applied the Sixth Amendment rule expressed in Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 120 S.Ct. 2348, 147 L.Ed.2d 435 (2000): “ ‘Other than the fact of a prior conviction, any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt.’” Blakely, 542 U.S. at 301, 124 S.Ct. 2531 (quoting Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 490, 120 S.Ct. 2348). The Blakely majority explained that
the “statutory maximum” for Apprendi purposes is the maximum sentence a judge may impose solely on the basis of the facts reflected in the jury verdict or *724admitted by the defendant. In other words, the relevant ‘statutory maximum’ is not the maximum sentence a judge may impose after finding additional facts, but the maximum he may impose without any additional findings.
Id. at 303, 124 S.Ct. 2531 (citations omitted).
In Smylie v. State, 823 N.E.2d 679 (Ind.2005), cert, denied, the Indiana Supreme Court determined that “Indiana’s sentencing system runs afoul of the Sixth Amendment not because it mandates a ‘fixed term’ [i.e., presumptive] sentence for each felony, but because it mandates both a fixed term and permits judicial discretion in finding aggravating or mitigating circumstances to deviate from the fixed term.” Id. at 685. The court also stated, however, that “[t]here is no constitutional problem with consecutive sentencing so long as the trial court does not exceed the combined statutory máximums.” Id. at 686. The court then addressed the State’s assertion that Smylie had forfeited his right to challenge his sentence under Blakely by failing to object on Sixth Amendment grounds at sentencing:
It is firmly established that, “a new rule for the conduct of criminal prosecutions is to be applied retroactively to all cases, state or federal, pending on direct review or not yet final, with no exception for cases in which the new rule constitutes a ‘clear break’ with the past.” Griffith v. Kentucky, 479 U.S. 314, 328, 107 S.Ct. 708, 93 L.Ed.2d 649 (1987). A rule is new for the purposes of retroac-tivity “if the result was not dictated by precedent existing at the time the defendant’s conviction became final.” Teague v. Lane, 489 U.S. 288, 301, 109 S.Ct. 1060, 103 L.Ed.2d 334 (1989). Blakely was decided while Smylie’s case was still pending on direct appeal, and thus, the initial question is whether the result in Blakely was dictated by existing precedent.
The State apparently concedes that Blakely constitutes a new rule for the purposes of retroactivity. Correctly so. While Blakely certainly states that it is merely an application of “the rule we expressed in Apprendi v. New Jersey,’ 542 U.S. at [301], 124 S.Ct. 2531 it is clear that Blakely went beyond Appren-di by defining the term “statutory maximum.” As the Seventh Circuit recently said, it “alters courts’ understanding of ‘statutory maximum’ ” and therefore runs contrary to the decisions of “every federal court of appeals [that had previously] held that Apprendi did not apply to guideline calculations made within the statutory maximum.” Simpson v. United States, 376 F.3d 679, 681 (7th Cir.2004) (collecting cases). Because Blakely radically reshaped our understanding of a critical element of criminal procedure, and ran contrary to established precedent, we conclude that it represents a new rule of criminal procedure.
[[Image here]]
Of course, as the State points out, the application of Blakely to any case pending on direct review remains subject to the standard rules governing appellate procedure such as waiver and forfeiture.
To receive the benefit of a new rule of law, a claimant must preserve the issue for appeal. In Pirnat v. State, 607 N.E.2d 973 (Ind.1993), for example, we considered the retroactive applicability of our decision about the admissibility of “depraved sexual instinct” evidence to cases pending on appeal at the time Lannan v. State, 600 N.E.2d 1334 (Ind.1992) was decided. We declared that “Pirnat and others whose cases properly preserved the issue and whose cases were pending on direct appeal at the time Lannan was decided receive the *725benefit of review under the new rule.” Pirnat, 607 N.E.2d at 974 (emphasis added). Pirnat had previously challenged the admission of the “depraved sexual instinct” evidence at trial and on appeal. Pirnat v. State, 596 N.E.2d 259 (Ind.Ct.App.1992).
We reached the same conclusion in Coleman v. State, 558 N.E.2d 1059 (Ind.1990), when we considered the retroactive applicability of the constitutional rule announced in Booth v. Maryland, 482 U.S. 496, 107 S.Ct. 2529, 96 L.Ed.2d 440 (1987) and South Carolina v. Gathers, 490 U.S. 805, 109 S.Ct. 2207, 104 L.Ed.2d 876 (1989) to cases pending on direct appeal at the time those rules were announced. Although we concluded that Booth and Gathers applied retroactively to cases pending on direct appeal, we made clear that we considered the rule to “apply to the direct appeal of a trial occurring before those cases were decided so long as the appellant has preserved [the issue for appeal] by objecting at trial.” Coleman, 558 N.E.2d at 1061 (emphasis added). We have utilized this same approach in other cases. See, e.g., Ried v. State, 615 N.E.2d 893 (Ind.1993); Daniels v. State, 561 N.E.2d 487 (Ind.1990).
On this principle of appellate law, Indiana jurisprudence is rather ordinary. In United States v. Cotton, 535 U.S. 625, 122 S.Ct. 1781, 152 L.Ed.2d 860 (2002), for example, the Supreme Court applied the plain error test to a case pending on appeal when the new rule in Apprendi was announced. In so doing, the Court noted that Cotton’s claim was “forfeited” because of his failure to object to alleged error at trial. Id. at 629, 122 S.Ct. 1781. Similarly, in Johnson v. United States, 520 U.S. 461, 117 S.Ct. 1544, 137 L.Ed.2d 718 (1997), the Court considered the retroactive application of the rule announced in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 115 S.Ct. 2310, 132 L.Ed.2d 444 (1995), to a case pending on appeal at the time of that decision. In considering Johnson’s claim, the Court noted that “[bjecause petitioner is still on direct review, Griffith requires that we apply Gaudin retroactively.” Johnson, 520 U.S. at 467, 117 S.Ct. 1544. The Court, however, still applied plain error review because of Johnson’s failure to object at trial and preserve the error for appeal. Id. Unsurprisingly, a number of federal circuit cases reflect the same practice.
Given this backdrop of precedent we believe that our approach regulating the retroactive application of a new rule to cases pending on direct appeal through the application of the rules governing appellate procedure is entirely consistent with the dictates of Griffith. As such, we agree with the State that it is entirely possible for defendants to have waived or forfeited their ability to appeal their sentence on Blakely grounds.
Id. at 687-88 (initial emphasis and brackets added) (footnotes and parallel citations omitted).
The court then examined the issue of preserving a Blakely challenge and summarized its analysis as follows:
First, as a new rule of constitutional procedure, we will apply Blakely retroactively to all cases on direct review at the time Blakely was announced. Second, a defendant need not have objected at trial in order to raise a Blakely claim on appeal inasmuch as not raising a Blakely claim before its issuance would fall within the range of effective lawyer-ing. Third, those defendants who did not appeal their sentence at all will have forfeited any Blakely claim.
Id. at 690-91.
In this case, Gutermuth asserts, and the State does not specifically deny, that *726Blakely applies retroactively to his appeal. As stated previously, Gutermuth filed his belated notice of appeal pursuant to Post-Conviction Rule 2(1), which provides,
Where an eligible defendant convicted after a trial or plea of guilty fails to file a timely notice of appeal, a petition for permission to file a belated notice of appeal for appeal of the conviction may be filed with the trial court, where:
(a) the failure to file a timely notice of appeal was not due to the fault of the defendant; and
(b) the defendant has been diligent in requesting permission to file a belated notice of appeal under this rule.
The trial court shall consider the above factors in ruling on the petition. Any hearing on the granting of a petition for permission to file a belated notice of appeal shall be conducted according to Section 5, Rule P.C. 1.
If the trial court finds grounds, it shall permit the defendant to file the belated notice of appeal, which notice of appeal shall be treated for all purposes as if filed within the prescribed period.
If the trial court finds no grounds for permitting the filing of a belated notice of appeal, the defendant may appeal such denial by filing a notice of appeal within thirty (30) days of said denial.
(Emphases added.)3
In support of his argument regarding Blakely’s applicability, Gutermuth states,
The Indiana sentencing scheme that ran afoul of Blakely was used when Guter-muth was sentenced and although belated this appeal is now on direct review. The delay was not attributable in any manner to Gutermuth as he had been advised that he did not have a right to appeal. Furthermore, Gutermuth had previously made diligent efforts to challenge his sentence through the aforementioned post-conviction relief proceedings.
Appellant’s Br. at 9. We agree with Guter-muth that Blakely applies retroactively to his case, but not because it is currently on direct review. As mentioned earlier, our supreme court stated that it would “apply Blakely retroactively to all cases on direct review at the time Blakely was announced.” Smylie, 823 N.E.2d at 690-91 (emphasis added). Blakely had been on the books for over a year by the time Gutermuth filed his notice of appeal.
Instead, we conclude that Blakely applies retroactively because Gutermuth’s case was not yet final when Blakely was decided. In Griffith, the U.S. Supreme Court explained that “final” means “a case in which a judgment of conviction has been rendered, the availability of appeal exhausted, and the time for a petition of certiorari elapsed or a petition for certiora-ri finally denied.” 479 U.S. at 321 n. 6, 107 S.Ct. 708. In Gutermuth’s case, the availability of appeal via Posb-Conviction Rule 2(1) had not yet been exhausted when Blakely was announced, and therefore Blakely must be given retroactive effect. See Sullivan v. State, 836 N.E.2d 1031, 1035 (Ind.Ct.App.2005) (“Because Sullivan was given permission to file this belated appeal, he may rely on Blakely even though he was sentenced more than five years before it was decided because his case was ‘not yet final’ when Blakely was decided.”); see also Fosha v. State, 747 N.E.2d 549, 552 (Ind.2001) (applying new double jeopardy rule where defendant filed belated praecipe several months before rule was announced in Richardson v. State, 717 N.E.2d 32 (1999); “[0]ur rule *727that precludes retroactive application of new criminal rules to collateral proceedings does not apply to direct appeals brought pursuant to Posi^Conviction Rule 2.”).4
We acknowledge that at least two different panels of this Court have reached a different conclusion. In Robbins v. State, 839 N.E.2d 1196 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), trans. not sought, the defendant pleaded guilty to two counts of class B felony child molesting and was sentenced to consecutive maximum twenty-year terms in 1999. Robbins filed an amended petition for post-conviction relief in 2001, which he withdrew in 2005 after our supreme court decided Collins. Robbins filed a belated notice of appeal in March 2005 and challenged his sentence under Blakely. In addressing the Blakely claim, the Robbins court discussed the ramifications of Smylie and noted that the defendant’s “direct appeal was not pending at the time that Blakely was decided.” Id. at 1199. The court then stated,
As to whether Robbins’s case was “final” when Blakely was decided, we note that a timely notice of appeal is filed within thirty days after the entry of a final judgment. Ind. Appellate Rule 9(A)(1). While Robbins still had the option of pursuing a belated appeal at the time that the Blakely rule was announced, it is our conclusion that because his right to pursue a timely appeal had lapsed over four years prior to Blakely, his case was final for the purpose of retroactivity. Accordingly, we conclude that Robbins is not entitled to raise a Blakely challenge because Blakely does not apply retroactively to Robbins’s case.
Id.
In Hull v. State, 839 N.E.2d 1250 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), trans. not sought, the defendant was resentenced for two counts of murder fifty days before Blakely was decided. Ten months after Blakely, Hull belatedly appealed his sentence on several grounds. On cross-appeal, the State argued that the trial court abused its discretion in granting Hull’s motion to file a belated notice of appeal. The court disagreed, noting that
Hull alleged in his motion that the trial court did not advise him of his appellate rights at the resentencing hearing and that he was diligent in pursuing his right to appeal the new sentence. The State does not dispute that Hull was not advised of his appellate rights at resen-tencing .... [W]e are unaware of any additional information that Hull could have provided in support of his motion.
Id. at 1254.
With respect to Hull’s Blakely claim, however, the court stated,
Hull did not file a timely notice of appeal and thus, Hull’s direct appeal was not pending at the time Blakely was decided. It was nearly ten months after Blakely that Hull filed his motion to file a belated notice of appeal. In short, although it was later revived, Hull’s case was not on direct review when Blakely was decided. See Robbins v. State, [839 N.E.2d at 1199,] (holding that Blakely did not apply to a case that was final but not on direct review when Blakely was *728decided and in which the trial court later allowed a belated appeal). Accordingly, Hull’s claims under Blakely must fail.
Hull, 839 N.E.2d at 1256.
We must respectfully disagree with our colleagues’ interpretation of finality as it relates to the retroactive application of Blakely. The U.S. Supreme Court’s definition of finality in Griffith requires only that the availability of appeal be exhausted; it does not require that the appeal be timely filed. See 479 U.S. at 321 n. 6, 107 S.Ct. 708. Although not based directly on Griffith, we have found one Indiana case that illustrates this critical point.
In Horrall v. State, 673 N.E.2d 526 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), police seized 217 marijuana plants from the defendant’s property in 1993. Horrall was assessed a controlled substance excise tax (“CSET”) of $12,000. He was subsequently convicted of possession of marijuana and received a thirty-month sentence. “Horrall timely filed a praecipe, but his appeal did not proceed because the appellate counsel who had been appointed failed to file the record of proceedings with this court.” Id. at 527. In December 1995, our supreme court held that “[pjrosecution for possession of marijuana after the assessment of CSET is barred by principles of double jeopardy.” Id. (citing Bryant v. State, 660 N.E.2d 290, 300 (Ind.1995), cert. denied (1996)). After Horrall was released from prison in 1996, he pursued a belated appeal of his conviction based on our supreme court’s holding in Bryant.
We addressed Horrall’s claim as follows:
Prosecution for possession of marijuana after the assessment of CSET is barred by principles of double jeopardy. Bryant, 660 N.E.2d at 300. Generally, a newly declared constitutional rule regarding the conduct of criminal prosecutions is applied to all cases pending on direct review. Davis v. State, 598 N.E.2d 1041, 1051 (Ind.1992).[5] However, a new constitutional rule of criminal procedure is generally not applicable to those cases on collateral review, that is, those which have become final before the new rule was announced. Daniels v. State, 561 N.E.2d 487, 488-89 (Ind.1990).[6]
*729The State argues that Horrall may not benefit from a “retroactive” application of Bryant in this belated appeal. The State argues that the procedure for bringing a belated appeal under [Post-Conviction Rule] 2 “essentially allows collateral attacks on a conviction, although under the guise of a direct appeal.” We disagree.
As discussed by Professor Stroud:
Post-Conviction • Remedy Rule 2 ... is not a post-conviction relief procedure in the truest sense. [Post-Conviction Rule] 2, unlike [PosU-Con-viction Rule] 1, does not create a procedure for collaterally challenging a conviction or sentence.
[Post-Conviction Rule] 2 does, however, provide a means by which a procedurally derailed appeal can be set back on the track towards review on the merits. The function, then, of [Post-Conviction Rule] 2 is to facilitate the direct appellate review of convictions.
Stroud, Kenneth M., 4A Indiana Practice (2nd Ed.1990) § 18.1 p. 253 (Emphasis added). Moreover, our supreme court has held that the Equal Protection Clause of the United States Constitution prevents a state from imposing a more rigorous standard on an appellant seeking a belated appeal under [Post-Conviction Rule] 2 than on those seeking a timely appeal. Gallagher v. State, 274 Ind. 235, 410 N.E.2d 1290, 1292 (1980).[7]
The present appeal, although belated, is a direct appeal. Therefore, Horrall is entitled to an application of Bryant, 660 N.E.2d 290, and we must vacate his criminal conviction under principles of double jeopardy. See id. at 300.
Id. (alterations added) (citation to brief omitted).
*730Likewise here, Gutermuth’s belated appeal is a direct appeal, and absent any indication that he is responsible for the tardiness of his appeal, he is entitled to the retroactive application of Blakely. See id8 At this point, it bears mentioning that those familiar with Indiana’s criminal justice system are aware that there are likely hundreds, if not thousands, of criminal defendants in a situation similar to Guter-muth’s: namely, those who pled guilty and were sentenced prior to both Collins and Blakely and were not advised of their right to challenge their sentence in a direct appeal. Pursuant to Smylie and Griffith, many of those defendants are now entitled to retroactive application of Blakely, and many of them have pursued (or will pursue) a belated appeal and challenge their enhanced sentences “on the basis of a rule that was not the law when they were convicted [and] could not have been anticipated when they were sentenced[.]” Powell v. State, 574 N.E.2d 331, 334 (Ind.Ct.App.1991), trans. denied (1992).9 To put it mildly, the retroactive application of Blakely is likely to “have a highly detrimental effect on the administration of justice.”10 Id. Unless and until the U.S. Supreme Court revises or clarifies its rules on retroactivity, however, we are bound to consider the merits of belated Blakely appeals where appropriate.
We now address the merits of Guter-muth’s Blakely claim, as well as other sentencing considerations where appropriate. The trial court enhanced the four-year statutory presumptive sentence on each of the three counts of class C felony child molesting based on the following aggravating circumstances: (1) Gutermuth is in need of correctional rehabilitative treatment best provided by commitment to a penal facility; (2) imposition of a reduced or suspended sentence would depreciate the seriousness of the crimes; (3) Guter-muth molested three separate victims; (4) Gutermuth was likely to reoffend; (5) Gu-termuth was in a position of trust with his victims; and (6) Gutermuth lacked remorse for his crimes. See Tr. at 129-36. In Trusley v. State, 829 N.E.2d 923 (Ind.2005), our supreme court explained that
[u]nder Blakely, a trial court in a determinate sentencing system such as *731Indiana’s may enhance a sentence based only on those facts that are established in one of several ways: 1) as a fact of prior conviction; 2) by a jury beyond a reasonable doubt; 3) when admitted by a defendant; and 4) in the course of a guilty plea where the defendant has waived Apprendi rights and stipulated to certain facts or consented to judicial factfinding.
Id. at 925.
Gutermuth states, “As could be expected since the sentencing was in 1997, an appropriate waiver was not procured.” Appellant’s Br. at 10. This statement highlights one of the absurdities inherent in the retroactive application of Blakely, as well as the magnitude of the sea change that Blakely wrought in criminal procedure. That said, Gutermuth does not assert that the probable cause affidavit and the two exhibits related to his polygraph examination, which the State used without objection to establish a factual basis for his crimes, run afoul of Blakely for sentencing purposes. Neither does Gutermuth challenge the presentence investigation report on Blakely grounds.
Gutermuth acknowledges that in pleading guilty to the facts alleged in the charging information, he admitted to molesting three separate victims. He challenges the propriety of the remaining ag-gravators, which we address in turn. As for the trial court’s finding that he is in need of correctional rehabilitative treatment best provided by commitment to a penal facility, Gutermuth argues that “[s]uch a generalized statement would certainly [offend] Blakely since the origin of the facts upon which this aggravator is based are unknown. Blakely concerns aside, this aggravator is properly used to enhance a sentence only when the court explains with specific facts why treatment is needed beyond that provided by the presumptive sentence.” Appellant’s Br. at 13.11 We find Gutermuth’s non -Blakely argument dispositive and conclude that this aggravating circumstance is improper given the lack of such an explanation in this case. See Hope v. State, 834 N.E.2d 713, 719 (Ind.Ct.App.2005) (“This factor may be used to enhance a sentence above the presumptive only if the trial court provides a specific or individualized reason as to why the defendant requires correctional treatment in excess of the presumptive term.”); see also Sheron v. State, 682 N.E.2d 552, 553 (Ind.Ct.App.1997) (“As a matter of jurisprudence, courts will not decide constitutional issues when a case can be decided on other grounds.”).
With respect to the trial court’s finding that the imposition of a reduced or suspended sentence would depreciate the seriousness of the crimes, Gutermuth acknowledges that “[b]ecause this aggravator cannot justify a sentence above the ‘statutory maximum,’ i.e., the presumptive sentence, its use does not implicate Blakely concerns.” McGinity v. State, 824 N.E.2d 784, 787 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), trans. denied. Nevertheless, Gutermuth argues — and the State concedes — that this aggravator is improper because there is no indication that the trial court was considering imposing anything less than the presumptive sentence. See Bacher v. State, 686 N.E.2d 791, 801 (Ind.1997) (“This aggravating factor is used to support a refusal to reduce the presumptive sentence. There is nothing in the record indicating that the trial court was considering a re*732duced sentence. Therefore, the use of this aggravating circumstance was improper.”).
As for the trial court’s determination that he was likely to reoffend, Gutermuth cites Altes v. State, 822 N.E.2d 1116 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), trans. denied, in which we stated that “a trial court’s assessment of a defendant’s future criminal behavior can properly be based upon the defendant’s adult or juvenile criminal history.” Id. at 1125. We noted, however, that Altes was appealing his first conviction, and therefore “the trial court’s speculation regarding his possible lack of future law abiding behavior cannot be derived from his past criminal conduct and thus, is an aggravator which should have been found by the jury.” Id. Gutermuth points out that he has no prior convictions and asserts that this aggravator is therefore improper.
The State argues that Altes is inapplicable because Gutermuth admitted to molesting three victims. The State also argues that other facts admitted by Gu-termuth support this aggravator. In Morgan v. State, 829 N.E.2d 12 (Ind.2005), our supreme court explained,
We do not see how the Sixth Amendment is implicated or endangered by permitting judges to use aggravators to enhance sentences so long as the underlying facts supporting the aggravator are found by a jury or admitted by a defendant.
Put another way, Sixth Amendment rights are not implicated when the language of an aggravator is meant to describe the factual circumstances, not to serve as a fact itself. This is certainly the case with an aggravator such as “failed to rehabilitate” or “failed to deter” where the language used itself is not a fact. Such observations merely describe the moral or penal weight of actual facts. The “fact” of being undeterred is not established by a statement to that effect, but rather by the underlying fact of prior convictions....
The aggravators in such instances are not found by the separate inquiry of a judge, but rather by reference to facts already admitted by the defendant or found by a jury. Thus the use of such underlying facts to support an aggravator does not require the independent judicial fact-finding at issue in Blakely. Rather, it reflects the efforts of a judge to describe in a concise manner what the underlying facts mean, and why they demonstrate that a particular defendant deserves an enhanced sentence.
Because the use of underlying facts to support an enhanced sentence does not violate the Sixth Amendment requirements of Blakely by allowing impermissible independent judicial fact finding, we hold that sentences enhanced by ag-gravators whose language is not specifically found by a jury or admitted by the defendant, are not necessarily impermissible so long as the aggravator in question was 1) supported by facts otherwise admitted or found by a jury and 2) meant as a concise description of what the underlying facts demonstrate and therefore relies upon a legal determination otherwise reserved as a power of the judge.
Id. at 17-18.
Here, the probable cause affidavit indicates that Gutermuth molested three children and warned them not to tell anyone. Appellant’s App. at 14-15. Gutermuth later confessed and stated that he had molested the children to gain their trust and discover who else might have been molesting them. Id. at 18. When he was interviewed for the presentence investigation report, however, Gutermuth told the probation officer that “[t]he whole thing is a *733bunch of lies.” Appellant’s App. at 133.12 In light of Gutermuth’s molestation of multiple victims, his perverse rationale for doing so, his attempt to conceal his crimes by admonishing the victims to remain silent, and his subsequent denial of responsibility, we believe that the trial court properly concluded, based on Gutermuth’s admissions, that he was likely to reoffend if not incarcerated for a significant period of time. This conclusion does not violate the Sixth Amendment requirements of Blakely,13 See Morgan, 829 N.E.2d at 17-18.
We also believe that the trial court did not violate Blakely in concluding that Gutermuth was in a position of trust with his victims. According to the probable cause affidavit, the victims had been living in Gutermuth’s home for several months when they were molested, and two of the three victims referred to him as “Grandpa.” Appellant’s App. at 14-15. These admitted facts are sufficient to support a conclusion that Gutermuth was in a position of trust with the victims.
Finally, we address the trial court’s determination that Gutermuth lacked remorse for his crimes. The trial court stated,
I’m particularly finding as an aggravating circumstance a lack of remorse here. The attitude that Mr. Gutermuth had and the comments that he made to the Court’s Probation Officer, which are represented in the Court’s probation report, as well as what I’ll find on that polygraph examination, as the officer of the Court [i.e., the prosecutor] related to me, his attitudes towards children and the idea of molestation.
Tr. at 133-34. When interviewed for the report, Gutermuth told the probation officer,
The whole thing is a bunch of lies. I told my attorney that I want to go to trial. I did not know what I signed. I didn’t have the faintest idea. I told [my attorney] that. I realize that I pled guilty to it the way it stands but I didn’t do it and why should I plead guilty to something I didn’t do. I want to go to trial if that’s what it takes. I am not going to plead guilty to all three of those kids. I can’t hear very good and don’t get all the words and just went on with what I thought it was. After I read the thing it said I molested all three of them and two of them weren’t even there, and I did not molest the other one anyway. I shouldn’t have to plead to something I didn’t do.
Appellant’s App. at 133-34. Gutermuth claims that the statement merely “reflect[s] a general disagreement between [him] and counsel. The statement does not equate to a finding of a lack of remorse as much as it reflects dissatisfaction with the pleas entered and counsel’s apparent advice to avoid trial.” Appellant’s Br. at 11 (citation to appendix omitted). Notwithstanding Gutermuth’s self-serving interpretation of his statement, we believe that the trial court could properly conclude that his comments demonstrate a lack of remorse for the crimes to which he had previously confessed and pled guilty. Having found a proper factual basis for the *734trial court’s conclusion, we need not address Gutermuth’s arguments regarding the polygraph examination.14
In sum, we conclude that four of the six aggravating circumstances found by the trial court do not violate Blakely and that two of the aggravators are improper on other grounds. Having found no Sixth Amendment violation, we need not address Gutermuth’s constitutional harmless error argument and instead consider the propriety of his sentence under our traditional standard of review.
II. Propriety of Sentence
Gutermuth argues that the trial court improperly identified and weighed aggra-vators and mitigators and that his twenty-four-year aggregate sentence is therefore inappropriate pursuant to Appellate Rule 7(B). In Hope, 834 N.E.2d 713, we stated,
In the past, whether a trial court abused its discretion in issuing a sentencing statement identifying and weighing ag-gravators and mitigators usually has been a separate analysis from whether the resulting sentence was inappropriate (or manifestly unreasonable) under Indiana Appellate Rule 7(B).[15] See Noojin v. State, 730 N.E.2d 672, 678 (Ind.2000). Now, when faced with a non-Blakely challenge to an enhanced sentence, it appears the first step is to determine whether the trial court issued a sentencing statement that (1) identified all significant mitigating and aggravating circumstances; (2) stated the specific reason why each circumstance is determined to be mitigating or aggravating; and (3) articulated the court’s evaluation and balancing of the circumstances. See Cotto v. State, 829 N.E.2d 620, 523-24 (Ind.2005). If we find an irregularity in a trial court’s sentencing decision, “we have the option to remand to the trial court for a clarification or new sentencing determination, to affirm the sentence if the error is harmless, or to reweigh the proper aggravating and mitigating circumstances independently at the appellate level.” Id. at 525. Even if there is no irregularity and the trial court followed the proper procedures in imposing sentence, we still may exercise our authority under Appellate Rule 7(B) to revise a sentence that we conclude is inappropriate in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the offender. See Ruiz v. State, 818 N.E.2d 927, 928 (Ind.2004).
Id. at 717-18.
Gutermuth raises no additional substantive arguments regarding the propriety of the four valid aggravating circumstances found by the trial court and instead challenges only their respective *735weight, which we address below.16 To the extent Gutermuth contends that the trial court erred in failing to assign a specific weight to each aggravator and mitigator, we note that the court was not required to do so. Leffingwell v. State, 810 N.E.2d 369, 371 (Ind.Ct.App.2004).
With respect to mitigators, we observe that
[t]he finding of mitigating circumstances is not mandatory and rests within the trial court’s discretion. The trial court has the discretion to determine the existence of and the weight given to a mitigating circumstance. The trial court is not required to accord the same weight to a mitigating circumstance as would the defendant. Additionally, the trial court need not consider a mitigating circumstance that is highly disputable in nature, weight, or significance. When the trial court fails to find a significant mitigating circumstance that is clearly supported by the record, however, there is a reasonable belief that it was improperly overlooked.
Moyer v. State, 796 N.E.2d 309, 313 (Ind.Ct.App.2003) (citations omitted).
Gutermuth first contends that the trial court abused its discretion in failing to consider his advanced age as a significant mitigating factor. We disagree. “Age is neither a statutory nor a per se mitigating factor.” Sensback v. State, 720 N.E.2d 1160, 1164 (Ind.1999). There is no evidence that the eighty-three-year-old Gutermuth was suffering from any significant age-related infirmities other than hearing impairment when he was sentenced in 1997. Cf. Dockery v. State, 504 N.E.2d 291, 297 (Ind.Ct.App.1987) (stating that trial court’s failure to note seventy-six-year-old defendant’s age, poor health, lack of criminal record, and productive work history “impede[d] meaningful appellate review of the sentence imposed”). Given the nature of the crimes committed, we cannot say that the trial court abused its discretion in discounting Gutermuth’s age as a significant mitigating factor.
Gutermuth also contends that the trial court abused its discretion in not considering his guilty plea as a mitigating circumstance. Again, we disagree. The significance of a guilty plea as a mitigating factor will vary from case to case. Francis v. State, 817 N.E.2d 235, 238 n. 3 (Ind.2004). Gutermuth pled guilty on the day of trial, with a jury panel waiting in the wings, and he benefited substantially from the dismissal of two class B felony and twenty-one class A misdemeanor charges. Gutermuth’s last-minute plea appears to have been largely pragmatic, and thus it was entitled to minimal mitigating weight. See Wells v. State, 836 N.E.2d 475, 479 (Ind.Ct.App.2005) (“[A] guilty plea does not rise to the level of significant mitigation where the defendant has received a substantial benefit from the plea or where the evidence against him is such that the decision to plead guilty is merely a pragmatic one.”), trans. denied (2006).
Having determined that two of the trial court’s six aggravators are improper, *736and having found no impropriety in the court’s consideration of mitigators, we elect to reweigh the aggravators and miti-gators independently pursuant to Appellate Rule 7(B).17 See Hope, 834 N.E.2d at 718. Gutermuth molested three children with whom he was in a position of trust; we conclude that these aggravating circumstances are entitled to substantial weight. The trial court placed particular emphasis on Gutermuth’s lack of remorse for his crimes, and we, too, find this deserving of significant aggravating weight. The likelihood of Gutermuth reoffending is intrinsically more speculative and in this case merits less aggravating weight. The record indicates that the trial court did not place much significance on the two improper aggravators mentioned above. Guter-muth’s lack of criminal history is entitled to some mitigating weight, but we cannot say that it outweighs the four proper ag-gravators found by the trial court.
Appellate Rule 7(B) provides that this Court “may revise a sentence authorized by statute if, after due consideration of the trial court’s decision, the Court finds that the sentence is inappropriate in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the offender.” Our supreme court has explained that “[t]his formulation places central focus on the role of the trial judge, while reserving for the appellate court the chance to review the matter in a climate more distant from local clamor.” Serino v. State, 798 N.E.2d 852, 856-57 (Ind.2003). The court has also stated that when a perpetrator commits the same offense against multiple victims, “enhanced and consecutive sentences seem necessary to vindicate the fact that there were separate harms and separate acts against more than one person.” Id. at 857. In light of the foregoing considerations, as well as the nature of the three molestations and Gu-termuth’s character, we conclude that his twenty-four-year aggregate sentence is appropriate.18
Affirmed.
FRIEDLANDER, J., dissents with opinion.
MAY, J., concurs with opinion.
. The trial court stated:
As to the Motion to Strike the Pre-Sentence Investigation Report, I won't strike the Report. I will strike portions of the Report if they are in violation of the statutes or the case law. I will not consider those portions of the Pre-Sentence Investigation Report if, in fact, that is true. And that is what I'm going to do. So insofar as the Report might say there were prior uncharged acts, and the Report doesn't have a factual basis for that, then I'm not going to consider that aspect of the Pre-Sentence Investigation Report. But there are other portions of the Report that have merit for me to consider. And that includes the Defendant's comments in the Pre-Sentence Investigation Report. And this includes the comments of the victim's families in the Pre-Sentence Investigation Report. The conclusion of the Probation Officer is merely the Probation Officer's recommendation. That's all it is. And the history, if you looked at the history of criminal cases in this Court you’d find occasions when I rejected the Probation Officer's recommendation, on occasions when I accepted the recommendation of the Probation Officer or where I accepted in part and rejected in part those kinds of recommendations. That's what I'm called upon to do and that's what I’ll do.
Tr. at 38-39.
. In Collins, our supreme court explained,
The fact that the trial court at a guilty plea hearing does not advise the defendant in an open plea situation that the defendant has the right to appeal the sentence to be imposed does not warrant an exception to the rule that sentencing claims must be raised on direct appeal. This is because Indiana Post-Conviction Rule 2 will generally be available to an individual in this situation. Post-Conviction Rule 2 permits an individual convicted after a trial or guilty plea who fails to file a timely notice of appeal to petition for permission to file a belated notice of appeal where the failure to file a timely notice of appeal is not the fault of the individual; and the individual is diligent in requesting permission to file a belated notice of appeal.
817 N.E.2d at 233 (footnote omitted).
. The State does not argue that the trial court abused its discretion in granting Gutermuth's petition for permission to file a belated notice of appeal.
. The Fosha court rejected the State's contention that "the defendant’s convictions and sentence became final when the defendant did not perfect a timely direct appeal by February 3, 1994, thirty days after the defendant’s motion to correct errors was deemed denied pursuant to Indiana Trial Rule 53.3(A).’’). 747 N.E.2d at 552 n. 5. The court noted that "[w]here a trial court grants a defendant’s motion to file a belated praecipe, it 'shall be treated for all purposes as if filed within the prescribed period.’ Ind. Post-Conviction Rule 2(1).” Id. at 552 (footnote omitted).
. See Davis, 598 N.E.2d at 1051 ("The defendant also contends that the prosecutor’s final argument was improper because it touched on the value of the victim’s life to family and loved ones, contrary to Booth v. Maryland (1987), 482 U.S. 496, 107 S.Ct. 2529, 96 L.Ed.2d 440. However, Booth and its rationale were expressly overruled and rejected in Payne v. Tennessee (1991), 501 U.S. 808, 111 S.Ct. 2597, 115 L.Ed.2d 720. As a newly declared constitutional rule regarding the conduct of criminal prosecutions, Payne should be retroactively applied to all cases pending on direct review. Griffith v. Kentucky (1987), 479 U.S. 314, 107 S.Ct. 708, 93 L.Ed.2d 649; cf. Daniels v. State (1990), Ind., 561 N.E.2d 487 (retroactivity in cases pending on collateral review).”) (some citations omitted).
. See Daniels, 561 N.E.2d at 488-89 ("However, a direct appeal terminates and a conviction becomes final when the availability of appeal, including a petition for certiorari, is exhausted or expires. Griffith v. Kentucky (1987), 479 U.S. 314, 107 S.Ct. 708, 93 L.Ed.2d 649. Daniels’ conviction became final with the failure to seek Supreme Court review of our decision on direct appeal. The present cause, resulting from Daniels' separate appeal following the denial of his petition for post-conviction relief, is a collateral review proceeding initiated after his case became final with the conclusion of his direct appeal. Upon analysis of the issue of retroac-tivity, the Supreme Court recently held that a new constitutional rule of criminal procedure is generally not applicable to those cases on collateral review, that is, those which have become final before the new rule was announced. Teague v. Lane (1989), 489 U.S. 288, 109 S.Ct. 1060, 103 L.Ed.2d 334.”) (some citations omitted).
. In Gallagher, the defendant was convicted of second-degree murder in 1968, and there was "no record that [he] was advised about his right to appeal or the procedures necessary to perfect an appeal or to secure legal counsel for that purpose." 274 Ind. at 237, 410 N.E.2d at 1291. Gallagher did not learn of his appellate rights until 1976, and in December 1977 he petitioned our supreme court for a belated appeal. Having received no ruling on the petition, in November 1978 Gallagher filed a petition for post-conviction relief, which was denied in June 1979. Gallagher appealed that denial, and our supreme court consolidated that cause with the undecided belated appeal. Our supreme court found that Gallagher was diligent in perfecting his belated appeal and then considered the merits of his petition for post-conviction relief, in which he sought a new trial or discharge based on the unavailability of a trial transcript for purposes of appeal. The court stated,
It has been established that a new trial is an appropriate remedy where there is no usable transcript available for appeal. The basis for this is that absent evidence of an intelligent waiver of the right to appeal or an appraisal by counsel that the appeal would be wholly frivolous, the state is constitutionally required to protect petitioner's right to appeal. Furthermore, once sufficient excuse for any delay is advanced, the Equal Protection Clause of the United States Constitution prevents a state from imposing a more rigorous standard on petitioners seeking a belated appeal than on those seeking a timely appeal.. The underlying merits of an appeal have no bearing on the question of restoring fundamental appellate rights where they have been wrongfully denied.
Indiana statutory law has made an appeal from a state conviction in a criminal case a matter of right. Therefore, the scheme of appellate review must conform to constitutional requirements of equal protection and due process. The record in the instant case does not show a voluntary, knowing, and intelligent waiver by petitioner of his right to appeal, but does show evidence of the desire to appeal and lack of advisement about the procedures necessary to perfect the appeal. Id. at 239, 410 N.E.2d at 1292-93 (citations omitted). Our supreme court found that Gallagher “was denied his statutory and constitutional right to adequate appellate review” and reversed and remanded for a new trial. Id. at 240, 410 N.E.2d at 1293.
. Cf. Kling v. State, 837 N.E.2d 502, 508-09 (Ind.2005) ("We also decline Kling's invitation to decide, in a one-size-fits-all manner, whether any person who elects to continue litigating a P-C.R. 1 petition — with potential claims presentable only in a direct appeal waiting in the wings — will later be able to demonstrate diligence as part of a possible PC.R. 2 proceeding. The factual determination of diligence is one for the trial court or appropriate appellate court to make in the context of a particular case when P-C.R. 2 relief is sought. However, as a general matter, electing to proceed first on a P-C.R. 1 claim does not preclude a finding of diligence in a later P-C.R. 2 claim. Nor does the time spent by the State Public Defender investigating a claim count against the defendant when courts consider the issue of diligence under P-C.R. 2. Finally, with respect to P-C.R. 2 petitions filed by persons sentenced in 'open pleas,' we think it appropriate for courts to keep in mind that Collins resolved a conflict in earlier Court of Appeals' opinions regarding whether such a defendant could include a sentencing challenge in a P-C.R. 1 petition, see 817 N.E.2d at 231, and some delay may be attributable to the prior uncertainty in the law rather than the defendant's lack of diligence.”).
. Powell addressed retroactivity in a post-conviction context.
. In her dissenting opinion in Bla!<ely, Justice O'Connor lamented that the majority had "ignore[d] the havoc that it [was] about to wreak on trial courts across the country.” 542 U.S. at 324, 124 S.Ct. 2531 (O’Connor, J„ dissenting). The same might be said for the country's appellate courts, which are now sorting through a myriad of complex questions left unanswered in the wake of the Blakely majority's headlong pursuit of "doctrinaire formalism.” Id. at 321, 124 S.Ct. 2531 (O’Connor, J., dissenting).
. To support this assertion, Gutermuth cites this Court’s opinion in Farrell v. State, 612 N.E.2d 124 (Ind.Ct.App.1993), which was vacated upon our supreme court's grant of transfer. See Farrell v. State, 622 N.E.2d 488 (Ind.1993).
. We note that Gutermuth did not testify, let alone protest his innocence, at the sentencing hearing.
. In its brief, the State mentions the testimony of the victims' father, Earl Riley, that "Gu-termuth molested him when he was eleven years old and took nude photographs of him as a child approximately twenty-five years ago:” Appellee's Br. at 10. At sentencing, the trial court specifically stated that it was "not going to consider those photographs or the testimony of Mr. Riley as to what happened twenty-five years ago. That's too remote intime.” Tr. at 132.
. We note that the videotape of the polygraph examination does not appear in the record before us. Consequently, we are unable to verify either party’s arguments regarding the contents of the videotape.
. When Gutermuth was sentenced in 1997, Appellate Rule 17(B) read as follows: "The reviewing court will not revise a sentence authorized by statute except where such sentence is manifestly unreasonable in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the offender.” Effective January 1, 2001, the rule was redesignated as Appellate Rule 7(B). Effective January 1, 2003, Appellate Rule 7(B) was amended to read, "The Court may revise a sentence authorized by statute if, after due consideration of the trial court’s decision, the Court finds that the sentence is inappropriate in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the offender.” We review Guter-muth's sentence under the current standard. See Polk v. State, 783 N.E.2d 1253, 1260 (Ind.Ct.App.2003) ("Because the rule is directed to the reviewing court, the amendment is applicable to review after January 1, 2003, even though the sentence was imposed prior to that date.”), trans. denied.
. We do agree with Gutermuth that the trial court acted improperly in sending a "message” to the community that it was not "going to tolerate or consider leniency in situations where there is admission and evidence of child molestation.” Tr. at 131. Our supreme court has stated, "We do not believe ... that a trial judge should be allowed to use the sentencing process as a method of sending a personal philosophical or political message. A trial judge’s desire to send a message is not a proper reason to aggravate a sentence.” Beno v. State, 581 N.E.2d 922, 924 (Ind.1991). Because the trial court did not specifically cite this "message” as a basis for imposing enhanced and consecutive sentences, however, we do not address it further.
. The State argues that by pleading guilty, Gutermuth "waived his right to challenge the appropriateness of his sentence.” Appellee's Br. at 16 (citing, inter alia, Bennett v. State, 813 N.E.2d 335, 338 (Ind.Ct.App.2004)). To the extent that Bennett and other cases hold that a defendant who submits to an open plea may not challenge the appropriateness of his sentence, we decline to follow those cases as contrary to supreme court precedent. See Payne v. State, 838 N.E.2d 503, 507-08 (Ind.Ct.App.2005) (citing Tumulty v. State, 666 N.E.2d 394 (Ind.1996)), trans. denied (2006).
. As for Gutermuth's argument that the maximum sentence is inappropriate because he is not one of the worst offenders, this Court has stated that “we must concentrate less on comparing the facts of this case to others, whether real or hypothetical, and more on the nature, extent, and depravity of the offense for which the defendant was sentenced, and what it reveals about the defendant's character.” Means v. State, 807 N.E.2d 776, 789 (Ind.Ct.App.2004), trans. denied. Here, Gutermuth molested three young children living in his home who considered him a grandfather figure. Under these circumstances, the extraordinary depravity of Gutermuth’s conduct and character is self-evident.

=== CASE 2225148 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:38.641608+00 ===

782 N.W.2d 147 (2010)
IOWA SUPREME COURT ATTORNEY DISCIPLINARY BOARD, Complainant,
v.
Ross G. HAUSER, Respondent.
No. 09-1445.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
May 14, 2010.
*149 Charles L. Harrington and David J. Grace, Des Moines, for complainant.
Ross G. Hauser, Cedar Rapids, pro se.
WIGGINS, Justice.
This matter comes before us on the report of a division of the Grievance Commission of the Supreme Court of Iowa. See Iowa Ct. R. 35.10. The Iowa Supreme Court Attorney Disciplinary Board brought a complaint against the respondent, Ross G. Hauser, alleging multiple violations of our ethical rules based on his neglect of a client matter. After a hearing, the grievance commission recommends we suspend Hauser's license to practice law in Iowa indefinitely with no possibility of reinstatement for nine months. Upon our de novo review, we concur the respondent violated our ethical rules and suspend his license to practice law indefinitely with no possibility of reinstatement for six months.
I. Scope of Review.
This court reviews lawyer disciplinary proceedings de novo. Iowa Supreme Ct. Att'y Disciplinary Bd. v. Dull, 713 N.W.2d 199, 201 (Iowa 2006). The board's burden to prove disciplinary violations is by a convincing preponderance of the evidence. Iowa Supreme Ct. Att'y Disciplinary Bd. v. Marks, 759 N.W.2d 328, 330 (Iowa 2009). A convincing preponderance of the evidence is "`less than proof beyond a reasonable doubt, but more than the preponderance standard required in the usual civil case.'" Iowa Supreme Ct. Att'y Disciplinary Bd. v. D'Angelo, 710 N.W.2d 226, 230 (Iowa 2006) (quoting Iowa Supreme Ct. Bd. of Prof'l Ethics & Conduct v. Lett, 674 N.W.2d 139, 142 (Iowa 2004)). Weight is afforded the commission's findings, but we are not bound by them. Marks, 759 N.W.2d at 330.
II. Background Facts and Prior Proceedings.
Hauser has been practicing law in the state of Iowa for the past twenty-three *150 years. During this period of time, the respondent has received a series of private admonitions, public reprimands, and suspensions. Beginning in 1988, we have privately admonished him twice for neglect of legal matters and failure to respond to the board's inquiries. We have publicly reprimanded him three times for neglect of client matters, failure to respond to the board's inquiries, and failure to return a retainer. Finally, we have suspended his license five times between October 2005 and June 2009 for failing to comply with the rules of the Commission on Continuing Legal Education, failing to comply with the rules of the Client Security Commission, and failing to respond to the board's inquires.
This current disciplinary action involves Hauser's handling of a dissolution action. In 2005 the respondent was retained by Ricky Clemens to represent Clemens in his dissolution-of-marriage case. At the start of the representation, Clemens gave the respondent a $1000 retainer.
Initially, Hauser appeared to be providing appropriate representation to his client. He filed an answer to Clemens' now ex-wife's dissolution petition and participated in obtaining an agreement on temporary matters and a pretrial statement. On February 26, 2006, he attended a mediation session with his client and the opposing party. Thereafter, however, Hauser did not file any further pleadings or motions on Clemens' behalf. On July 5, 2006, the respondent and his client failed to appear at the scheduled trial on the dissolution petition, and the court entered a default decree. Hauser had not notified Clemens of the trial date, and Clemens was not aware the trial had occurred until he received a copy of the dissolution decree in the mail.
After receiving the decree, Clemens placed numerous telephone calls to Hauser, which Hauser failed to return. Clemens then employed another attorney who motioned the district court to get the default judgment set aside. On August 31, 2006, the district court entered an order denying the motion. Clemens did not appeal. He subsequently filed a complaint against Hauser with the board.
On April 8, 2008, the board sent Hauser a letter, seeking information on Clemens' complaint. Hauser never responded. On May 14, 2009, the board filed a one-count complaint against Hauser, alleging the respondent violated numerous ethical rules in his representation of Clemens. Specifically, the board alleged Hauser committed ethical violations by ceasing to work on his client's case without taking the proper steps to withdraw; failing to adequately communicate with his client; failing to notify his client of the trial date; failing to attend the trial, resulting in a default judgment against his client; failing to furnish his client with a timely and complete accounting regarding earned fees; and failing to respond to a request for information from the board. These acts, the board alleged, established violations of Iowa Rules of Professional Conduct 32:1.1, requiring a lawyer to provide competent representation to a client; 32:1.3, requiring a lawyer to act with reasonable diligence and promptness in representation; 32:1.4, requiring a lawyer to keep his client reasonably informed and to promptly comply with reasonable requests for information; 32:1.15, requiring a lawyer to render a full accounting of client property in his possession; 32:1.16(d), requiring a lawyer, upon withdrawal from representation, to take appropriate steps to protect his client's interests and to return any unearned fees; 32:8.1(b), requiring a lawyer to respond to lawful demands for information from the board; and 32:8.4(a) and (d), holding it is misconduct for a lawyer to violate an ethical *151 rule and to engage in conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice. The board also asserted Hauser violated Iowa Court Rule 45.7, which requires a lawyer to notify his client of the withdrawal of advance fees from the client's trust account.
Hauser failed to respond to the board's complaint, and therefore, the commission deemed the allegations admitted. Hauser subsequently, however, responded to a motion to compel discovery. Based upon the information contained in Hauser's responses, the board moved to amend its complaint to include an additional allegation of trust account violations due to the respondent's failure to keep trust account records with respect to the advance fee he received from Clemens. See Iowa R. Prof'l Conduct 32:1.15(c) ("A lawyer shall deposit into a client trust account legal fees and expenses that have been paid in advance, to be withdrawn by the lawyer only as fees are earned or expenses incurred."); Iowa Ct. R. 45.2(2) ("A lawyer shall maintain complete records of all funds ... of a client coming into the lawyer's possession and regularly account to the client for them."). In an order granting the board's request to amend, the commission noted its prior order holding the initial allegations admitted, but the subsequent allegation was not deemed admitted, and Hauser would be permitted to present evidence on this allegation.
A hearing was held on September 1, 2009, before a division of the commission. Because the majority of the allegations were deemed admitted, the board presented the testimony of Ricky Clemens for the limited purpose of considering the appropriate sanction. The focus, therefore, was on what harm, if any, Clemens sustained from Hauser's representation.
Clemens testified the divorce decree ordered him to pay $560.55 per month in child support.[1] This, he contended, was based upon the child support guidelines worksheet submitted by his ex-wife, which listed Clemens' annual income at $42,785. Clemens, however, claimed his annual income was $25,600 in 2006 and $29,100 in 2005. No child support worksheet had been submitted to the district court by Clemens or by Hauser on Clemens' behalf, and Clemens did not present any evidence in the form of income tax returns. Clemens also asserted his ex-wife's child support worksheet erroneously understated the monthly premium he paid for health insurance. Based upon these alleged errors, Clemens believed his child support was set too high.
As previously noted, Clemens' attempt to get the default decree set aside was unsuccessful. In December 2006 Clemens developed serious medical problems and was unable to work for approximately four months. At that time, he hired a third attorney who was successful in getting his child support obligation modified as of July 2007. Clemens believed Hauser's failure to properly represent him resulted in his receiving an excessive child support obligation, which in turn required him to hire different counsel, necessitating additional attorney fees. In addition, Clemens testified he never received an accounting of the $1000 he paid to Hauser or any refund of any unearned fees from Hauser.
Hauser testified on his own behalf. He acknowledged his neglect of the Clemens dissolution matter. In his defense to the allegation of trust account violations, Hauser submitted three check stubs as evidence *152 of his depositing Clemens' $1000 advance fee payment into his client trust account and of his subsequent withdrawals of $400, $300, and $100 in payments to himself for legal services rendered. The last withdrawal was dated October 21, 2005. The records do not show, however, how Hauser earned the fees withdrawn. Upon questioning, he admitted he could not locate any trust account ledger that may have been kept in this case, but stated it was his practice to keep such a ledger.
Hauser also testified to his lengthy history of alcohol abuse. He acknowledged his alcohol use could have played a factor in prior disciplinary actions brought against him as well as this one. In the time leading up to Clemens' trial, early 2006, Hauser asserted he was not in control of his drinking. During this time, he underwent a short period of self-committal followed by extensive participation in the Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) program. Although he was able to maintain sobriety for over eighteen months, Hauser admitted he resumed drinking in January 2008. Hauser testified he has been sober since May 29, 2009, and is committed to sobriety. He has been attending AA meetings on a regular basis. He acknowledged clients would suffer if he resumed drinking and agreed the public needs to be protected from this. His failure to respond to the board's inquiries, he contended, was due to the fact that he wanted to address his alcohol abuse first before dealing with the ethics complaint. Hauser called no other witnesses, but he did try to admit three letters of support, which the commission rejected due to his failure to timely present his character evidence by sworn affidavit as required by Iowa Court Rule 36.14.
The commission concluded the respondent committed the ethical violations alleged by the board. It also concluded the respondent was currently unfit to practice law as evidenced by his ineffective representation of himself before the commission. In addition to failing to produce complete records regarding his trust account, the commission noted Hauser failed to follow the rules to allow the admission of letters of support into evidence. Finally, in considering an appropriate sanction, the commission found mitigating as well as aggravating circumstances. It found the respondent's presently sober and candid acknowledgement of the harm caused his client to be a mitigating factor, while his numerous prior disciplinary actions and the financial harm caused to his client were aggravating factors. Based upon these findings, the commission recommended Hauser's license to practice law be suspended indefinitely with no possibility of reinstatement for nine months. It also recommended three conditions be placed upon any application for reinstatement: (1) reimbursement of Clemens' $1000 advance fee, (2) Hauser must be evaluated by a licensed health care professional who verifies his fitness to practice law, and (3) Hauser must furnish evidence that he will associate with an experienced attorney who can monitor his practice of law to ensure Hauser is not allowing alcoholism to affect his practice.
III. Misconduct and Ethical Violations.
We agree with the commission the board established by a convincing preponderance of the evidence Hauser neglected his client's dissolution case, failed to keep his client informed, failed to properly safeguard and appropriately withdraw his client's funds, failed to appropriately withdraw from representation, failed to properly maintain trust account records, failed to provide an accurate accounting to his client and to return unearned fees to his client, and failed to respond to the board's inquires. We also agree, with one exception, *153 these actions establish violations of the previously enumerated ethical rules. See Iowa Rs. of Prof'l Conduct 32:1.3; 32:1.4; 32:1.15(c); 32:1.16(d); 32:8.1(b); 32:8.4(a), (d); Iowa Ct. Rs. 45.2(2), .7. We disagree, however, that there was clear and convincing evidence Hauser's conduct evidenced incompetence. See Iowa R. Prof'l Conduct 32:1.1 (requiring a lawyer to provide competent representation to a client).
To establish incompetence, the board is required to show the attorney (1) "did not possess the necessary legal knowledge and skill to complete the tasks" or (2) "had not made a competent analysis of the factual and legal elements of the problem[ ]." Iowa Supreme Ct. Att'y Disciplinary Bd. v. Hoglan, 781 N.W.2d 279, 285 (Iowa 2010). In this case, Clemens does not assert Hauser's representation, up until the time of the mediation, had been neglectful or in any other way inadequate. Thereafter, the evidence supports the conclusion that, due to his struggles with alcohol, Hauser abandoned his client and his client's case. While this is certainly evidence of serious neglect and numerous rules violations, it is not evidence of incompetence as defined under our rules. Therefore, we conclude the board failed to prove by a convincing preponderance of the evidence attorney incompetence.
IV. Sanction.
"There is no standard sanction for a particular type of misconduct, and though prior cases can be instructive, we ultimately determine an appropriate sanction based on the particular circumstances of each case." Iowa Supreme Ct. Att'y Disciplinary Bd. v. Carpenter, 781 N.W.2d 263, 270 (Iowa 2010). In determining the appropriate sanction, we look to several factors, including "the nature of the violations, the need for deterrence, protection of the public, maintenance of the reputation of the Bar as a whole, and the violator's fitness to continue to practice law." Iowa Supreme Ct. Bd. of Prof'l Ethics & Conduct v. Ramey, 639 N.W.2d 243, 245 (Iowa 2002). We also consider mitigating and aggravating circumstances. Iowa Supreme Ct. Att'y Disciplinary Bd. v. Earley, 774 N.W.2d 301, 308 (Iowa 2009).
The primary underlying ethical violation in this case is severe neglect, which eventually resulted in a total abandonment of the client. Sanctions for neglect have "typically ranged from a public reprimand to a six-month suspension." Hoglan, 781 N.W.2d at 286. "`Often, the distinction between the punishment imposed depends upon the existence of multiple instances of neglect, past disciplinary problems, and other companion violations.'" Marks, 759 N.W.2d at 332 (quoting Iowa Supreme Ct. Att'y Disciplinary Bd. v. Lesyshen, 712 N.W.2d 101, 106 (Iowa 2006)).
In this case, Hauser's neglect and abandonment of his client is compounded by the fact that Hauser made no attempt to notify Clemens of his decision to abandon representation so that Clemens could engage new counsel and avoid having a default decree entered against him. See Iowa Supreme Ct. Att'y Disciplinary Bd. v. Ireland, 748 N.W.2d 498, 502 (Iowa 2008) (noting abandonment prior to performing the contracted legal services resulted in failure to meet the lawful objectives of the client). These actions were clearly harmful to his client. His failure to timely return his client's paperwork or refund any unearned portion of the advance fee was also harmful to his client. Id.
Hauser's trust account violations are also a serious matter. See Iowa Supreme Ct. Att'y Disciplinary Bd. v. Wagner, 768 N.W.2d 279, 287-88 (Iowa 2009). In the *154 past, the sanction for failure to properly deposit, to properly account for, and to appropriately return unearned advance fees has ranged from a public reprimand, see Iowa Supreme Ct. Bd. of Prof'l Ethics & Conduct v. Herrera, 560 N.W.2d 592, 594-95 (Iowa 1997), to a suspension, see Iowa Supreme Ct. Att'y Disciplinary Bd. v. Earley, 729 N.W.2d 437, 444 (Iowa 2007) (Earley I), to a revocation, see D'Angelo, 710 N.W.2d at 236-37. In cases warranting a more severe sanction, additional infractions or other aggravating circumstances were present. See Earley I, 729 N.W.2d at 443-44 (neglect resulting in harm to clients, failure to return client's property, trust account violations, and prior reprimand warranted four-month suspension); D'Angelo, 710 N.W.2d at 236-37 (multiple and serious violations, including deliberate conversion of client funds demands revocation of lawyer's license); Iowa Supreme Ct. Bd. of Prof'l Ethics & Conduct v. Frerichs, 671 N.W.2d 470, 477-78 (Iowa 2003) (illegal fee contract, trust account violations, neglect of client matter, failure to cooperate with board, and prior admonition warranted four-month suspension). In this case, Hauser's abandonment of his client, his prior extensive history of ethical infractions, and his failure to timely and appropriately respond to the board's inquiries, combined with his trust account violations, warrants the imposition of a more serious sanction. See Wagner, 768 N.W.2d at 287.
In fashioning an appropriate sanction, we also consider any mitigating circumstances. We have repeatedly held that, "[w]hile ... illnesses do not excuse [attorney] misconduct, they can be mitigating factors and can influence our approach to discipline." Carpenter, 781 N.W.2d at 271; accord Hoglan, 781 N.W.2d at 287; Iowa Supreme Ct. Att'y Disciplinary Bd. v. Curtis, 749 N.W.2d 694, 703 (Iowa 2008). Hauser candidly admits that he is an alcoholic and further acknowledges that his clients will suffer if he resumes drinking. At the time of the hearing, the respondent testified to his current sobriety and his involvement with AA, but offered no significant testimony about any prior treatment or any evidence that he is currently seeking professional assistance with his alcoholism. The only evidence of professional treatment is contained in Hauser's response to interrogatories, in which Hauser stated he was diagnosed in August 2009 as being alcohol dependent. To the extent Hauser acknowledges his alcoholism and has taken steps to address it through attendance at AA meetings, we consider these acts in fashioning an appropriate sanction. However, we are mindful that our primary goal is not to punish the attorney, but "`to protect the public ... from lawyers rendered unfit from any cause.'" Dull, 713 N.W.2d at 207 (quoting Comm. on Prof'l Ethics & Conduct v. Paulos, 410 N.W.2d 260, 261 (Iowa 1987)).
V. Disposition.
We have carefully considered Hauser's current violations, his prior history of ethical infractions, and his current fitness to practice law and conclude the respondent's license to practice law should be suspended indefinitely with no possibility of reinstatement for six months. Prior to any application for reinstatement, the respondent must provide this court with an evaluation by a licensed health care professional verifying his fitness to practice law. In addition, as a condition of reinstatement, Hauser must confirm that he has accounted to Clemens for the advance fees paid to him and that he has refunded any unearned fees. See Iowa Supreme Ct. Bd. of Prof'l Ethics & Conduct v. Kennedy, 684 N.W.2d 256, 261 (Iowa 2004). If he is unable to provide adequate trust account *155 documentation, we hold the full retainer must be returned.
We decline, however, to impose a commission recommendation that the respondent, prior to application for reinstatement, furnish this court with evidence that "he will associate with an experienced lawyer who can monitor his practice of law to ensure [the respondent] is not allowing his alcoholism to affect his practice and is attending to his cases." As we have stated in prior cases, "`neither the court nor the bar has effective machinery in place for such supervision.'" Hoglan, 781 N.W.2d at 287 (quoting Iowa Supreme Ct. Att'y Disciplinary Bd. v. Kirlin, 741 N.W.2d 813, 819 (Iowa 2007)). Requiring the respondent to provide medical documentation of his fitness to practice law more appropriately addresses this issue.
This suspension applies to all facets of the practice of law. See Iowa Ct. R. 35.12. Upon any application for reinstatement, Hauser must establish that he has not practiced law during the suspension period and that he has in all ways complied with the requirements of Iowa Court Rule 35.13 and has provided the required notification of clients as outlined in Iowa Court Rule 35.22. Prior to any application for reinstatement, Hauser must provide the board with an evaluation by a licensed health care professional verifying his fitness to practice law. In addition, he must also submit documentation that he has refunded any unearned fees. Costs are taxed to Hauser pursuant to Iowa Court Rule 35.26.
LICENSE SUSPENDED.
All justices concur except TERNUS, C.J., and BAKER, J., who take no part.
NOTES
[1]  This amount was forty dollars more per month than the temporary support set by the court. There is no indication in the record that Clemens or Hauser objected to the temporary support award.

=== CASE 2225149 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:38.667627+00 ===

142 Ind. App. 74 (1968)
232 N.E.2d 622
GENERAL ELECTRIC COMPANY
v.
LOUIS GENE FUELLING D/B/A L. & L. FUELLING CO. ET AL.
No. 20,724.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
Filed January 12, 1968.
Rehearing denied February 7, 1968.
Transfer denied April 4, 1968.
*75 Bamberger, Foreman, Oswald and Hahn, of Evansville, for appellant.
Charles T. Rachels, of Mt. Vernon, for appellee.
COOPER, J.
This appeal comes to us from the Posey Circuit Court wherein the Appellee Fuelling brought an action to establish and foreclose a mechanics lien for materials supplied for use in the construction of a plant on property owned by the Appellant, General Electric Company.
It appears from the record now before us, that after the proper issues were made and closed, the cause was submitted to the court for trial. After the conclusion of all the evidence the trial court entered requested special findings of fact and conclusions of law, which were adverse to the Appellant. Thereafter Appellant filed a motion for new trial in which it averred that the decision was not sustained by sufficient evidence and was contrary to law. The trial court overruled the motion for new trial and this ruling is the assigned error on appeal to this Court.
It appears from the evidence in the record that the Appellee Fuelling was paid $34,743.90 by W.D. Rommell, a subcontractor, and $500.00 by United Engineers and Construction, Inc., the general contractor, on a total account of $35,984.64, leaving a balance of $1,510.85, the amount of Appellee Fuelling's claimed lien.
Both the Appellant and the Appellee agree that the basic issue which was before the trial court and which is now before us, is whether the no-lien contract entered into between General Electric Company, Appellant, and United Engineers and Construction, Inc., was executed pursuant to and in conformity with Section 43-701 Burns' Indiana Statutes, Annotated (1952 Repl.).
*76 The part of the statute concerning no-lien contracts reads as follows:
"No provision or stipulation in the contract of the owner and principal contractor that no lien shall attach to the real estate, building, structure or any other improvement of the owner, shall be valid against subcontractors, mechanics, journeymen, laborers or persons performing labor upon or furnishing materials or machinery for such property or improvement of the owner, unless the contract containing such provision or stipulation shall be in writing, and shall be acknowledged as provided in case of deeds and filed and recorded in the recorder's office of the county in which such real estate, building, structure, or other improvement is situated not more than five (5) days after the date of the execution of such contract, and unless the owner, before the commencement of the work under said contract, shall post or cause to be posted a notice not smaller in size than three (3) feet by three (3) feet in a place upon said premises conspicuous at all times to all subcontractors, mechanics, journeymen, laborers or persons performing any work upon said premises or furnishing any material or machinery for such property or improvement and shall maintain or cause such notice to be so maintained upon said premises at all times during the progress of the work under said contract. Said notice shall be substantially in the following works: `This work to be done under a no-lien contract between the owner and the principal contractor. (name) ________, (3) inches in height. The recorder shall record such contract at length in the order of time of its reception in books provided by him for that purpose, and the recorder shall index the same in the name of the contractor and in the name of the owner, in books kept for that purpose, and said recorder shall receive therefor a fee such as is provided for the recording of deeds and mortgages in his office ..."
The language of the statute is clear. In order to have a valid no-lien agreement that is binding upon sub-contractors, mechanics, journeymen, laborers or persons performing labor upon or furnishing materials or machinery, the statutory requirements must be complied with, including the following:
*77 "... unless the owner before the commencement of the work under said contract shall post or cause to be posted a notice not smaller in size than three (3) feet by three (3) feet in a place upon said premises conspicuous at all times to all subcontractors, mechanics, journeymen, laborers or persons performing any work upon said premises or furnishing any material or machinery for such property or improvement, and shall maintain or cause such notice to be so maintained upon said premises at all times during the progress of the work under said contract." (our emphasis) Midland Building Industries, Inc., v. Oldenkamp, et al. (1951), 122 Ind. App. 347, 355; 103 N.E.2d 471; Burns' Indiana Statutes, Anno. Sec. 43-701, (1952 Repl..)
We are of the opinion that the contract referred to by the statute is the original contract, which in this case was the contract between the owner, General Electric Corporation and the United Engineers and Construction, Inc. Therefore, before General Electric as the owner could have availed itself of the no-lien provisions of Burns' 43-701, supra, it was necessary for it, among other things, to have posted the required notice on the premises before the commencement of any work under the contract.
In reviewing the trial court's special findings of fact, we find the court's finding number 6 reads as follows:
"6. After the commencement of the work under said contract dated November 10, 1959, the defendants General Electric Company and United Engineers and Construction, Inc., posted or caused to be posted notice of the no-lien contract heretofore described at said work site, said notice not being smaller in size than three feet by three feet and posted at the main entrance to the project so that it was conspicuous and observable at all times to all sub-contractors, mechanics, journeymen, laborers or persons performing any work upon said premises or furnishing any material or machinery for said project" (our emphasis).
Therefore, it appears that the trial court by its finding number 6 found that the required sign was not posted as required by the pertinent statute until after the commencement of the work under the no-lien contract.
*78 We have reviewed the evidence in the record, bearing in mind that it is for the trial court as the trier of facts to reconcile, reject, or accept and weigh the evidence and determine the credibility of the witnesses. Wiltrout Indiana Practice, Sec. 2786, and authorities cited therein. This applies to photographs as well as to oral evidence. Pennsylvania R.R. Co. et al. v. Mink (1966), 138 Ind. App. 311, 212 N.E.2d 784.
Likewise, on appeal, it is well settled that this Court will consider only evidence which tends to support the finding together with reasonable natural and logical inferences which may be drawn therefrom. Southport Board of Zoning Appeals, et al. v. Southside Ready Mix Concrete, Inc., et al. (1961), 242 Ind. 133, 137, 176 N.E.2d 112.
We are of the opinion that under the evidence in this cause we cannot say as a matter of law, that the trial court's findings were not sustained by sufficient evidence and that the judgment based on such findings and conclusions of law is contrary to law.
Judgment affirmed.
Carson, C.J., Faulconer, J., and Prime, J., concur.
NOTE.  Reported in 232 N.E.2d 622.

=== CASE 9740414 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:00.949135+00 ===

Mackenzie, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I agree with the majority that Marks, as a person operating a repair shop, was excluded from coverage under Robinson’s policy with Transamerica. I respectfully dissent from the majority’s directions for remand.
The majority has ordered that, on remand, the circuit court shall determine whether Robinson’s primary source of recovery is his own no-fault automobile insurance carrier. I have four objections to this result.
(1) No such issue was raised by the parties.
(2) In a separate action, Robinson is suing Marks for negligence. In this action, the Ohio Casualty Insurance Company, Marks’s garage keeper’s premises liability insurance carrier, sought a declaratory judgment that Marks was an "insured” under Robinson’s no-fault automobile insurance policy and that Transamerica, the no-fault carrier, had a duty to defend Marks and aiford him coverage in the action between Robinson and Marks. The issue raised by the majority is outside the *147scope of this action and belongs in the action between Robinson and Marks.
(3) Robinson’s no-fault automobile insurance carrier is not his primary source of recovery if Robinson’s action against Marks falls within one of the exceptions to the abolition of tort liability stated in MCL 500.3135(2); MSA 24.13135(2).
(4) In Citizens Ins Co of America v Tuttle, 411 Mich 536; 309 NW2d 174 (1981), the Court held that the no-fault act did not abolish the tort liability of a defendant whose wrongful act did not involve his ownership, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle, even though the action may have also arisen out of the plaintiffs ownership, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle. Here, Robinson has represented to both this Court and the circuit court that his complaint against Marks alleges that the accident was caused by Robinson’s slipping on grease on the floor of Marks’s garage. If this is, in fact, the causal mechanism on which Robinson relies in his action against Marks, then Robinson’s action against Marks falls within the rule stated in Tuttle, and Marks’s loading of Robinson’s motor vehicle at the time of the accident is merely a fortuitous coincidence of no relevance. Robinson’s no-fault automobile insurance carrier is not his primary source of recovery if Tuttle allows him to recover damages in a negligence action against Marks.
Because this case was before the circuit court on cross motions for summary judgment, I would reverse and remand the case for entry of an order of summary judgment for Transamerica.

=== CASE 2223496 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:02.673573+00 ===

25 Ill.2d 331 (1962)
185 N.E.2d 191
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Defendant in Error,
v.
ALLEN J. CLARK, Plaintiff in Error.
No. 36556.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed September 28, 1962.
PAUL L. BRADY, of Chicago, appointed by the court, for plaintiff in error.
WILLIAM G. CLARK, Attorney General, of Springfield, and DANIEL P. WARD, State's Attorney, of Chicago, (FRED G. LEACH and E. MICHAEL O'BRIEN, Assistant Attorneys General, and JOHN T. GALLAGHER and WILLIAM L. CARLIN, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel,) for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE HOUSE delivered the opinion of the court:
At a bench trial in the criminal court of Cook County, Allen J. Clark was convicted of the unlawful sale of narcotics and sentenced to confinement in the penitentiary for a term of 10 years to 10 years and 1 day. Defendant asserts *332 that the conviction should be set aside because the evidence shows that he was guilty of unlawful possession but not the unlawful sale of narcotics and because he was entrapped by the police.
The undisputed evidence reveals that officer Thomas Kearns and Jack Bailey, an informer, went to defendant's apartment and told him they wanted to purchase narcotics. The defendant agreed to sell them some and accepted $20. Officer Kearns and the informer waited at the apartment while defendant went to secure the narcotics. Defendant purchased 5 packages of heroin and returned. There is a dispute as to what happened when defendant returned to the apartment. Officer Kearns and Bailey testified that defendant gave the packages to Kearns, that Kearns went into the kitchenette and performed a field test on the contents of one package and that defendant was then arrested. Defendant testified that when he entered the apartment officer Kearns drew his pistol, arrested him and took the five packages from his pockets.
Defendant argues here, as he did in the trial court, that he is not guilty of unlawfully selling narcotics because he did not deliver or hand the narcotics to officer Kearns or Bailey. The trial judge chose, however, to believe the testimony that defendant voluntarily handed the packages to Kearns before he was arrested. We will not set aside a conviction which depends upon the credibility of the witnesses and weight to be accorded their testimony unless it is necessary to prevent apparent injustice. (People v. Saisi, 24 Ill.2d 274.) This record shows that the trial court was justified in finding defendant guilty of unlawfully selling narcotics.
There is no evidence in the record to support defendant's assertion that he was entrapped by the police. All the testimony, including that of the defendant, shows that officer Kearns and Bailey merely told defendant they wanted to purchase narcotics and defendant agreed to sell *333 some to them. Defendant was not induced by the police to perpetrate a crime which he would not otherwise have committed. See People v. Outten, 13 Ill.2d 21.
The judgment of the criminal court of Cook County is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9740415 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:06.397305+00 ===

PAULSON, Surrogate Justice.*
This is an appeal from a summary judgment denying specific performance of an alleged contract to convey land. We affirm.
On March 1, 1976, Alex Generous [Generous], granted to the plaintiffs, Jay and Doug Wessels [Wessels], a one-year option to purchase certain real property. The option was renewable each year thereafter by the tender by Wessels of $100 to Generous on or before March 1 of each succeeding year. The option was renewed every year thereafter until Generous’s death in July of 1980. The defendant, Yvonne Whetstone [Whetstone], was appointed personal representative of the Alex Generous estate. In that capacity, Whetstone learned of the existence of a document denominated “Option to Buy Land” which was filed for record in the office of the register of deeds of Pembi-na County. She then caused to be filed in that office an affidavit “to give notice the estate of Alexander Generous does not recognize any obligation to be bound or to comply with the terms of [the] Option”. This affidavit was filed for record on November 21, 1980.
On December 5, 1980, Attorney Paul T. Crary wrote a letter to counsel for the personal representative on behalf of Doug Wessels, wherein Wessels offered to purchase the property subject to the option, in addition to another parcel of land, for a total sum of $225,000. Crary subsequently received a reply from Whetstone in a letter dated December 31,1980, which stated that “the land in the Generous Estate is not for sale”. On February 18,1981, Doug Wessels wrote a letter to Whetstone which, in relevant part, states as follows:
“Pursuant to that certain Option dated March 1, 1976, a photo-copy of which is enclosed, I do hereby choose to exercise the said Option and to purchase the land described therein.
“I also make an offer to buy the South Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 15, Township 163, Range 56 — 80 acres of wooded land, which although not contained in the Option is adjacent to the land that is contained in the Option.
“I make to you at this time an offer of $235,000 total for both parcels which, based upon a professional appraisal which was conducted recently, I believe it does represent a fair market value of the land....”
On February 28, 1981, the option expired. Wessels later received from Whetstone’s attorney a refusal of his proposal in a letter dated March 9, 1981. The stated reason for the refusal was that “the amount stated is inadequate ... [and] because ... [Whetstone] does not recognize [that] you hold any option rights to any of the land held in the Generous Estate”. Wessels then brought suit'for specific performance.
Whetstone subsequently brought a motion for summary judgment, alleging improper exercise of the option. Following a hearing on the motion, the district court issued a memorandum opinion in which it concluded that no genuine issue of material fact existed and that the option was never *832properly exercised by the Wesselses. From that judgment Doug Wessels appealed.1
The relevant portion of the March 1, 1976, option at issue states as follows:
“3. Parties of the Second part [Wessels] may exercise this option at any time within the option period by entering into a Contract for Deed with party of the first part, his heirs, executors or assigns — said contract to specify a down payment of not less than five per cent (5%) of the total purchase price, and, a contract period of up to twenty-Five years subject to the desire of parties of second part.
“4. Should both parties agree, the option may be exercised by the tendering of the total purchase price by parties of the second part at the time of purchase.
“5. Upon exercise of the option the purchase price shall be the fair market value at the time the option is exercised.”
The parties amended the option on March 21, 1977. The amendment states, in relevant part, as follows:
“AMENDMENT
“For the purpose of determing [sic] value in the event that parties of the second part desire to exercise this option, three non interested appraisers shall be selected to appraise the land and to tender to the interested parties a fair market value thereof. The appraisers shall be selected by Paul T. Crary, attorney at law, or, in his absence, another attorney agreed upon by the parties. Parties of second part may then exercise this option by tendering to party of first part the purchase price as determined by the appraisers, either by way of a contract for deed or by full purchase price as per the terms of this option.... ”
The issue presented on appeal is whether or not the Wesselses performed all acts possible or necessary to exercise the right of acceptance granted to the Wesselses by Alex Generous under the March 1, 1976, agreement.
I.
An option agreement is a contract by which the owner of property gives another the right to buy the property at a fixed price within a specified time on agreed terms. Mason v. Haakenson, 303 N.W.2d 557, 558 (N.D.1981); Holien v. Trydahl, 134 N.W.2d 851 (N.D.1965). By such an agreement the owner does not sell the property, nor does he at that time contract to sell. He does, however, sell to the other party the right, at his election or option, to demand the conveyance in the manner specified. Gleeson v. Frahm, 211 Neb. 677, 678, 320 N.W.2d 95, 96 (1982); Commuter Developments & Investments, Inc. v. Gramlich, 203 Neb. 569, 573, 279 N.W.2d 394, 396 (1979). To obtain an enforceable right to the property, the optionee must exercise the option within the time and upon the terms and conditions provided in the option agreement. Mason, supra 303 N.W.2d at 558; Haugland v. Hoyt, 267 N.W.2d 803 (N.D.1978). The offer contained in the option must be accepted unequivocally and in accordance with the terms of the option. Northwestern Bell Telephone Company v. Cowger, 303 N.W.2d 791, 794 (N.D.1981); Haugland, supra 267 N.W.2d at 806; Greenberg v. Stewart, 236 N.W.2d 862 (N.D.1975).
Under the provisions of the March 21, 1977, amendment to the option, the Wesselses could exercise the option by tendering to Generous or his estate the fair market value of the land subject to the option. This tender was to be in the form of a contract for deed, or, if both parties agreed, the total purchase price. The fair market value was to be determined by three appraisers to be appointed by an attorney. Three appraisers were, in fact, appointed by the attorney and they did view the land. Their appraisals ranged from a *833low of $600 per tillable acre to a high of $1,000 per tillable acre. The appraisers acted independently and at no time did they arrive at a jointly determined appraisal. The district court viewed this failure and the failure of the Wesselses to produce either a contract for deed and 5% downpayment or the full purchase price as a failure of the Wesselses to exercise the option. While we believe that reasonable persons might differ as to the necessity that the appraisers arrive at a mutually agreed price, we do, nevertheless, agree that the actions of Doug Wessels were not sufficient to exercise the option and create a binding contract for the sale of real estate.
In 1 Williston on Contracts, 3d Ed., § 61D, page 205, it is said that “options, like other offers, call for acceptance by a promise or an act, depending on whether the main contract is to be bilateral or unilateral”. The option at issue calls for acceptance by “tender” of a contract for deed. The letter of December 5, 1980, was not a tender. It was merely an offer to purchase land. Doug Wessels admits as much. They contend, however, that the letter of February 18, 1981, was a proper exercise of the option. We disagree. The letter merely states that Doug Wessels “choose[s] to exercise” the option. It is not a tender of a contract for deed. The letter offers no price for the land subject to the option; no interest rate; no term of years; in short, it is merely a notice of intent to exercise. No contract for the sale of land was formed by mere notice when the option clearly called for acceptance by “tender”.
Doug Wessels further argues, however, that Whetstone’s repudiation of the option waived the necessity of his tender. He points to Whetstone’s affidavit filed for record in the office of the register of deeds. It is true that our law does not require a party to a contract to perform vain and futile acts when there has been a refusal in advance to comply with the terms of the agreement. Fargo Public Library v. City of Fargo Urban Renewal Agency, 185 N.W.2d 500 (N.D.1971). The “contract” with which Whetstone refused to comply, however, was the option. As we noted earlier, an option to purchase is not an execu-tory contract for the sale of property. The duty which Whetstone repudiated could not come into existence until the option was properly exercised by the Wesselses. In effect, what Doug Wessels asserts is that Whetstone’s repudiation of the option gave rise to a fully executory contract, regardless of proper acceptance on his part. The contention has no basis in either law or logic. Whetstone incurred no obligation until the offer contained in the option was properly accepted by the Wesselses. They failed to do so and, consequently, Whetstone cannot be ordered to specifically perform a contractual duty which does not exist.
The judgment of the district court is affirmed.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., and PEDERSON, J., concur.
Justice WM. L. PAULSON served as a Surrogate Justice for this case pursuant to Section 27-17-03, N.D.C.C.
. Jay Wessels died prior to this appeal. The option, however, provides that it may be exercised by either or both of the Wesselses. This appeal is therefore being prosecuted by Doug Wessels only.

=== CASE 9740416 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:06.402185+00 ===

SAND, Justice,
concurring specially.
I concur in the result and with a major portion of the opinion. I agree that Wes-sels technically did not comply with the option. The noncompliance, however, is more the result of the option itself in not specifying how the detailed requirements of when and how certain essential matters should be performed.
As an example, the option failed to specify the procedure to be used in determining the “fair market value.” The option provides for the selection of three disinterested persons, but nothing is said with reference to who will have the responsibility of asking the attorney to appoint the appraisers, also were the appraisers to meet and act jointly or were the appraisers to reach one price, or, if a disagreement existed among the appraisers, was the average to be used in determining the price; or was some other method to be employed for this purpose. The option is not clear on this.
In short, Wessels could not satisfy the option agreement because the option agreement was inadequate in some essential matters. How could Wessels tender a contract for deed or make a down payment or offer *834full payment without knowing the “fair market value”? Under this setup, no matter what offer Wessels would make it could be rejected and each subsequent offer could be rejected, ad infinitum.
I, therefore, agree that the option agreement was not complied with, but I also conclude it could not be complied with. The option agreement was materially defective to the extent that it was legally defective and inadequate. As a result Wessels should be entitled to have the option payments returned with interest.

=== CASE 9740417 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:06.405284+00 ===

VANDE WALLE, Justice,
dissenting.
Wessels perhaps did not strictly comply with the terms of the option in his attempted exercise thereof, or perhaps the reason for that noncompliance was, as Justice Sand has indicated in his concurring opinion, the terms of the option itself. However, I believe Whetstone’s attempted repudiation of the option agreement and her obvious resistance to recognizing its validity in any manner is primarily responsible for the events that subsequently transpired. Ordinarily we attempt to construe a contract in a manner which will make it valid, legal, effective, and enforceable. Whetstone attempted to do the opposite and I believe her actions constitute an anticipatory breach which made Wessels’s strict compliance with the terms thereof unnecessary. Wes-sels’s mistake was in attempting to satisfy Whetstone when, in fact, she refused to recognize Wessels’s rights under the option agreement. I do not believe he should be punished nor Whetstone rewarded for that mistake.

=== CASE 9740418 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:09.200913+00 ===

Mr. Justice Klingbiel delivered the opinion of the court: After a trial in the circuit court of Cook County/ an amendatory zoning ordinance of the village of Wheeling was declared void. The court also ordered a writ of mandamus to issue commanding the village and its appropriate officer to • grant to petitioner, Suburban Ready-Mix Corporation, a permit for construction of a concrete ready-mix plant on its premises. The village appeals directly to this court, a constitutional issue being involved. The tract of land upon which the appellee company desires to construct a ready-mix plant is situated in a district zoned for industrial uses. Adjacent to it are the premises of Meyer Coal and Material Company, upon which a large ready-mix concrete plant is in operation. • The Meyer company applied for and received the permit for its plant in 1954. The following year the amendment in question was adopted whereby a concrete mixing plant, among other uses, was prohibited in an industrial district. As a result no such use, other than the Meyer operation, is permissible anywhere in the village. On November 18, 1959, the appellee applied for a permit. When the application was denied by the building commissioner, appellee unsuccessfully sought relief from the village board of trustees. It then filed its petition for writ of mandamus. At the suggestion of the trial judge it applied to the zoning board of appeals for a review of the building commissioner’s decision, but the board thereafter affirmed the denial of a permit. In the meantime appellee amended its complaint in the circuit court by adding a second count seeking declaratory relief. The trial court adjudged, inter alia, that “the Ordinance of the VILLAGE OF WHEELING passed and approved July 11, 1955, amending Article 9 T Industrial District Regulations, Section 2, Use Regulations of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Wheeling by adding certain non-uses including concrete mixing plants and/or concrete mixing equipment is, and it hereby is declared to be void and unconstitutional.” To reverse the judgment the village contends, first, that the company failed to exhaust its administrative remedy because it did not apply for a variation and did not seek review of the zoning board decision under the Administrative Review Act. However, the rule requiring initial resort to administrative remedies has no application where, as here, it is claimed not merely that the particular application is unconstitutional but that the ordinance is unconstitutional in its terms. Bank of Lyons v. County of Cook, 13 Ill. 2d 493; Bright v. City of Evanston, 10 Ill.2d 178, 184-185. To sustain the judgment appellee argues that the ordinance is not general in its operation but is unreasonable and tends to create a monopoly. We agree. Although in form it is an ordinary zoning restriction, in its operation and effect it excludes from the village all ready-mix concrete plants except that of the Meyer company. It attempts tó do indirectly what cannot be done directly. The law is well established that a prohibitory ordinance must be general and uniform in its operation, and that if it tends to create a monopoly it cannot be sustained. Chicago Title & Trust Co. v. Village of Lombard, 19 Ill.2d 98. In City of Chicago v. Rumpff, 45 Ill. 90, the city had been given the power to regulate and direct the location of slaughter houses and certain other establishments. Purporting to act pursuant thereto the city adopted an ordinance giving one company the exclusive right to have all the slaughtering in the city (except that done at the regular packing houses for packing purposes) done on its premises. In striking down the ordinance we said: “That the common council had the right, under the large powers conferred by the charter, to so regulate the business of slaughtering animals as to prohibit its exercise, except in a particular portion of the city, leaving all persons free to erect slaughtaring houses, and to exercise the calling at the place designated, cannot be controverted. But an ordinance confining such a business to a small lot, or even a particular block of ground, is unreasonable, and tends to create a monopoly. * * * We regard it neither as a regulation nor a license of the business, to confine it to one building, or to give it to one individual. Such action is oppressive, and creates a monopoly that never could have been contemplated by the general assembly. It impairs the rights of all other persons, and cuts them off from a share in not only a legal but a necessary business.” In Tugman v. City of Chicago, 78 Ill. 405, an ordinance was condemned which declared that within a certain described territory “no distillery, slaughter house, rendering establishment or soap factory shall be erected or put into operation in any building not now used for such purpose.” We pointed out that under the facts in the case its direct tendency was to create a monopoly: “The fact that certain persons were engaged in the business within the district designated in the ordinance at the time of its adoption, gave them no right to monopolize the business, nor would such fact authorize the board of health to provide that such persons might continue the avocation, while others should be deprived of a like privilege who should engage in the business at a later period. “If the board of health had any power to adopt an ordinance on the subject, the ordinance, to be valid, should not discriminate in favor of any citizen. If it prohibited one from carrying on the business, that prohibition should extend to all, regardless of the time the business may have been commenced. “A regulation of this character, to be binding upon the citizen, must not only be general, but it should be uniform in its operation.” In People ex rel. Keller v. Village of Oak Park, 266 Ill. 365, an ordinance prohibiting public garages in certain residential districts was upheld because it did not discriminate in favor of existing garages but “as clearly applies to public garages then in operation as to those to be subsequently opened.” Even if it did not operate to create a monopoly, in view of the existing plant, the ordinance in the case at bar exceeds the limits of the powers delegated by statute. In its effect it does not merely classify for the purpose of location but excludes or prohibits from all districts. Such a prohibition is beyond the authority prescribed by the statute. Under the applicable provisions the village is authorized to divide the municipality into districts and to prohibit uses “incompatible with the character of such districts.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1961, chap. 24, par. 11 — 13—1.) There is no intimation that the ready-mix concrete business is not a lawful one, and as this court observed in People ex rel. Trust Company of Chicago v. Village of Skokie, 408 Ill. 397, “nowhere does the legislature grant to municipalities the power to wholly restrict a lawful business from their boundaries.” (See, also, People ex rel. Busching v. Ericsson, 263 Ill. 368, 374.) Moreover, there is nothing about a ready-mix concrete plant that is “incompatible with” an industrial district, so as to justify a municipality in prohibiting it therefrom. Since the amendatory ordinance in this case purports to exclude a number of other uses, none of which is involved here, the judgment of the circuit court was too broad in declaring it void in its entirety. The judgment is modified so as to declare the amendatory ordinance invalid insofar as it prohibits concrete mixing plants and/or concrete mixing equipment. As so modified the judgment is affirmed. Judgment modified and affirmed.

=== CASE 9740874 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:43:48.265664+00 ===

SMITH, J. This is an appeal by the defendant insurance company from an order of the circuit court refusing to stay an arbitration proceedings then pending under an arbitration agreement contained in a policy issued by the defendant to the plaintiff and ordering that the arbitration proceedings proceed. The insurance policy in question provided that the insurer would pay to the insured or his legal representatives such damages as owed from the owner or operator of an uninsured vehicle because of bodily injury arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of such uninsured vehicle. It further provided that “for the purposes of this coverage, determination as to whether the Insured or such representative is legally entitled to recover such damages, and if so the amount thereof shall be made by agreement between the Insured or such representative and the Company or, if they fail to agree and the Insured or the Company so demands, by arbitration.” It further provided that if any person making claim hereunder and the company do not agree that such person is legally entitled to recover damages from the owner of such a vehicle or do not agree as to the amount of payment which may be owing under this section, then “upon written demand of such person or upon written demand of the Company, the matter or matters upon which such persons and the Company do not agree shall be settled by arbitration in accordance with the rules of the American Arbitration Association.” The plaintiff-insured demanded arbitration. The defendant refused to submit the matter to arbitration and insists that whether or not there is coverage under the policy is a question for the court and not for arbitration. Otherwise stated, the defendant-company’s position is that the arbitrator is without jurisdiction or authority to determine whether or not there is coverage under the policy. Indeed the motion of the defendant to stay the arbitration proceedings asked the court to stay that proceedings until such time as the plaintiff should institute a declaratory judgment suit to determine whether or not there was any such coverage and to order that the institution of such proceedings by the plaintiff be a condition precedent to the termination of any issue by way of arbitration. This position is grounded upon the very simple proposition that if there is no coverage, there is nothing to arbitrate.  Other jurisdictions have held that the determination as to whether or not the claimant is an insured, or whether the other vehicle was actually uninsured or whether there was a hit-and-run driver involved are coverage questions not encompassed by an arbitration clause in an insurance policy. Vanguard Ins. Co. v. Polchlopek, 18 NY2d 376, 275 NYS2d 515, 222 NE2d 383; Western Casualty & Surety Co. v. Strange, 3 Mich App 733, 143 NW2d 572; Hartford Accident & Indemnity Co. v. Travelers Ins. Co., 25 Conn Supp 414, 206 A2d 847; Damsel v. State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co. (Fla App), 186 So2d 825. The New York Court of Appeals by a 4-3 decision held likewise in Rosenbaum v. American Surety Co. of New York, 11 NY2d 310, 229 NYS2d 375, 183 NE2d 667, and it would appear that the language considered in that case is substantially word for word with the arbitration provisions of the policy we now examine. While these cases are persuasive, they are not controlling. The policy in question provides that if the claimant and the company do not agree that the claimant is legally entitled to recover damages or they do not agree as to the amount of payment which may be owing, then “the matter or matters upon which such person and the Company do not agree shall be settled by arbitration  So far as the interpretation or construction of arbitration agreements are concerned, they are subject to basically the same rules which apply to all other contracts. The statutory law is deemed a part of the contract, the same as though expressly incorporated therein. Schiro v. W. E. Gould & Co., 18 Ill2d 538, 165 NE2d 286. Our statute, chapter 10, Ill Rev Stats 1965, provides in 102 § 2 (a) that if the opposing party denies the existence of an agreement to arbitrate, the court should proceed summarily to a determination of that issue so raised and shall order arbitration if it finds for the moving party, otherwise, the application for arbitration shall be denied. Paragraph (b) likewise provides that the court may stay an arbitration proceeding commenced or threatened on a showing that there is no agreement to arbitrate and states “That issue, when in substantial and bona fide dispute, shall be forthwith and summarily tried and the stay ordered if found for the moving party. If found for the opposing party, the court shall order the parties to proceed to arbitration.” Paragraph (e) of the same statute provides “An order for arbitration shall not be refused on the ground that the claim in issue lacks merit or bona fides or because any fault or grounds for the claim sought to be arbitrated have not been shown.” It seems clear to us, therefore, that the intervention of the court is limited to the single issue as to whether or not there is an arbitration agreement. We have already observed that the policy provisions stated that upon written demand “the matter or matters upon which such person and the Company do not agree shall be settled by arbitration.” The policy does not read “such matter or matters” and thus limits the matters to be submitted to arbitration to matters contained in the preceding paragraph. That the policy could have limited the issues to the liability of the hit-and-run driver to the claimant is conceded. It didn’t. We agree with the minority in Rosenbaum that the language is unequivocal. It is for the arbitrator to determine from the facts whether or not there is coverage under this policy. The view just stated is supported by School Dist. No. 46 v. Del Bianco, 68 Ill App2d 145, 215 NE2d 25. In that case, the Appellate Court said, “The foregoing provisions of the Act militate against the contention that a party to an arbitration agreement may choose between the judicial or arbitration forum. The sole issue under the Act on the preliminary hearings to compel or stay arbitration, is whether there is an agreement to arbitrate. If so, the court should order arbitration; if not, arbitration should be refused. Upon this simple formula, the preliminary hearings on such issue should be determined.” The same court states at page 154, “However, if the dispute is over the scope of the issues intended to be submitted to arbitration and they are not clearly defined in the arbitration clause or agreement, as in the case at bar, then a construction by the court of the clause or contract in the light of section 2 would end in destroying the agreement of the parties that a specific term or the terms and meaning of the arbitration clause should be determined by the arbitrators.” The court likewise said at page 155, “Where there is an agreement to arbitrate and its scope is reasonably in doubt, the issue of arbitrability should be initially determined by the arbitrators, subject to the protective reservations of section 12 of the Act — under which the court may vacate an award under the varying conditions therein specified.” If, therefore, arbitration fails to dispose of the entire controversy, the parties may then litigate the issue of the scope of arbitrability under section 12 of the Act which provides, among other things, that the court shall vacate an award where “(3) The arbitrators exceeded their powers; .. . .” The entire contract covering protection against bodily injury by an uninsured vehicle is contained in section II of the policy. The paragraph of this section entitled “Coverage” provides “determination as to whether the insured or such representative is legally entitled to recover such damages, and if so the amount thereof” shall be by agreement or in default thereof by arbitration. The two items refer specifically to damages by an uninsured motorist and are clearly arbitrable. This same section II defines “Insured,” “Vehicle,” “Uninsured Vehicle,” and “Hit-and-Run Vehicle.” A paragraph entitled “Arbitration” is significantly different from the language in the “Coverage” paragraph. It provides that if the parties “do not agree as to the amount of payment which may be owing under this Section” (emphasis supplied) then arbitration may be had. Does this mean owing by the uninsured motorist or does it mean owing by the defendant-company under the terms of section II? If it means the latter — which we think it does — then the issue of whether or not the claimant is an insured, whether the other vehicle was actually uninsured, or whether there was a hit-and-run driver involved are questions which must be resolved in favor of the plaintiff before there is any obligation on the company to make any “payment which may be owing under this Section,” and the amount, if any, “owing under this Section” is subject to arbitration. To interpret the words last quoted to mean “the amount of payment which may be owing [by the uninsured motorist or the hit-and-run driver] under this Section” is to add words which are simply not there. These are already arbitrable under the coverage paragraph. It seems transparently clear to us that the arbitration paragraph deals not with the liability of the uninsured motorist, but deals with the liability of the company to pay under the contract, and that the “coverage” issues presented on this record are properly subject to arbitration in determining whether or not there is anything owing by the company under section II.  The basic intention of our Arbitration Act is to discourage litigation and foster the voluntary resolution of disputes in a forum created, controlled and administered by the agreement to arbitrate and by the statute. This benign policy, in our judgment, is best promoted and aided by a construction that a court is in the first instance limited to a determination as to whether or not an arbitration agreement exists, and that questions of the scope of coverage should in the first instance be determined by the arbitrator in the arbitration proceedings, where that scope is not unequivocally limited and confined by the contract. It could have been, but it wasn’t unequivocally so limited and confined in this contract. We, therefore, conclude that the judgment of the trial court in the instant case is correct and that it should be and it is hereby affirmed. Affirmed. CRAVEN, P. J., concurs. TRAPP, J., dissents:

=== CASE 9740875 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:43:48.270471+00 ===

TRAPP, J., dissenting: In the adopted opinion the contract is construed to require that defendant arbitrate the issue as to whether the person for whom claim is made was an insured person under the definition contained therein. There appear to be inherent contradictions in the opinion which states both, (1) that the single issue before the trial court is whether or not there is an arbitration agreement, and, (2) that while the contract could have limited the issues to the liability of the hit-and-run driver, it failed so to do. Both of the two paragraphs in the contract in which there is reference to arbitration clearly define and limit the issues to be arbitrated in the following language: (a) A paragraph which the opinion quotes as providing “coverage” in which defendant agrees: “To pay all sums which the Insured or his legal representatives shall be legally entitled to recover as damages from the owner or operator of an Uninsured Vehicle because of bodily injury, including death resulting therefrom, hereinafter called ‘bodily injury,’ sustained by the Insured, caused by accident and arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of such Uninsured Vehicle; provided, for the purposes of this coverage, determination as to whether the Insured or such representative is legally entitled to recover such damages, and if so the amount thereof shall be made by agreement between the Insured or such representative and the Company or, if they fail to agree and the Insured or the Company so demands, by arbitration.” (Emphasis supplied.) In this clause, the adjective “such” is employed to modify “damages,” thus achieving the specificity required by the opinion as to other “matters.” (b) A paragraph providing “Arbitration” is in the following language: “If any person making claim hereunder and the Company do not agree that such person is legally entitled to recover damages from the owner or operator of an Uninsured Vehicle because of bodily injury to the Insured, or do not agree as to< the amount of payment which may be owing under this Section, then, upon written demand of such person or upon written demand of the Company, the matter or matters upon which such person and the Company do not agree shall be settled by arbitration . . . .” (Emphasis supplied.) Grammatically, in the phrase, “the matter or matters,” the word “the” is used as a function word to indicate that the following noun refers to something previously mentioned or clearly understood from the context. It likewise achieves a high quantum of specificity. As stated in the opinion, Section II does define “Insured,” “Vehicle,” “Uninsured Vehicle” and similar terms. These matters are in separate paragraphs and no reference to arbitration is made concerning any of them. It is apparent that the language of the policy in the paragraph stating when payment is to be made to the insured, and in the paragraph specifically and solely prescribing arbitration, limits the arbitration procedure to the determination of specific factual issues, i. e., (1) whether claimant is “legally entitled to recover damages from the owner or operator of an Uninsured Vehicle . . . ,” and, (2) if he is so entitled, the amount to be recovered. In the statutory provision, chapter 73, § 755 (a) (Ill Rev Stats 1965), relating to “uninsured” or “hit-and-run motor vehicle coverage,” there is no language referring to arbitration of disputes in this form of insurance. The Uniform Arbitration Act, section 1. (C 10, § 101 Ill Rev Stats 1965) authorizes an agreement to submit any existing controversy to arbitration, and further provides that there may be: “. . . a provision in a written contract to submit to arbitration any controversy thereafter arising “ The term “any” is, of course, distinguishable from the term “all,” as the former means one or more chosen from an undetermined number. The use of arbitration, therefore, is a matter of contract between the parties and it seems axiomatic that parties may contractually designate specific matters without assuming an obligation to arbitrate all matters of a dispute. The Uniform Arbitration Act, § 2(a) provides that if a party claims an agreement to arbitrate, but the other party denies the existence of an agreement, the court shall determine summarily the issues so raised, and, in § 2(b), on a party’s application, the court may stay arbitration proceedings commenced or threatened upon a showing that there is no agreement to arbitrate. If such issue is properly in dispute, the court shall summarily dispose of it. Defendant’s motion in the trial court for the stay of arbitration proceedings presents an issue not specified as a matter for arbitration, and it is precisely an issue for summary disposition by the trial court under § 2(b) of the Uniform Arbitration Act. The conclusion set out in the opinion that provision for “any” arbitration requires arbitration of “all” controversies under the contract predictably will reduce the use of arbitration procedures, through contract or agreement, to those instances where arbitrable issues can be strictly “all or none.” This determination, in fact, makes § 2 (a) and § 2 (b) of the Uniform Arbitration Act without meaning or application, except in the unlikely event that a party demands arbitration as to a contract which contains no reference whatsoever to arbitration. The opinion has noted authorities consistent with the view expressed in this dissent.

=== CASE 9740876 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:43:48.839865+00 ===

EBERSPACHER, J. This is an appeal from a judgment for the defendants in an action for personal injuries. The occurrence in question involved a collision wherein the plaintiff, Janice Vancil, was riding as a guest passenger in the automobile of the defendant, Charles Mitroka. The automobile driven by the defendant Mitroka, collided with an automobile driven by the defendant, Ed Fletcher, at the intersection of West Main and Oakland Street in Carbondale, Illinois, on May 19, 1963. The plaintiff was riding in the back seat of defendant Mitroka’s automobile on the right side. The plaintiff’s husband was also seated in the back seat and the defendant Mitroka’s wife was seated in the front passenger seat. Two small children of the parties were also riding in the automobile, one in front and one in the rear. The defendant Mitroka was driving his automobile east on West Main Street. He approached the intersection of West Main at approximately 4:30 p. m. It was a “nice day” and the road was dry. Upon approaching the intersection, the traffic signal indicated red and Mitroka stopped at the signal in the left lane next to the center. There were two eastbound lanes and two westbound lanes on this portion of West Main Street. While stopped at the intersection waiting for the light to change, a car on the opposite side of the intersection in the inside lane indicated an intention to turn left to the south. When the light turned green, the defendant Mitroka commenced a turn to the left. Mitroka testified that before making his turn he saw no traffic in the outside, or north, lane of the westbound traffic, however there were six to eight cars lined up in the inside lane on the opposite side of the intersection. After Mitroka got partly into the intersection and while starting to make his left turn, the plaintiff as well as the plaintiff’s husband, testified that they observed the automobile driven by the defendant Fletcher approaching from the east in the outside westbound lane. The plaintiff testified that she observed the Fletcher car 75 feet east of the intersection and was of the opinion that it was traveling 40 miles per hour. The plaintiff’s husband also stated he first saw the Fletcher automobile about 75 feet east of the intersection. Neither the plaintiff nor her husband made any comment to their driver Mitroka but continued to watch the Fletcher car upon its collision course. Neither of the defendants, Mitroka or Fletcher, decreased the speed of his vehicle prior to impact. The front end of the Fletcher vehicle struck the right rear quarter panel of the Mitroka vehicle. As a result of the collision, the plaintiff received multiple contusions and abrasions and lumbosacral sprain. The plaintiff’s complaint, as amended, alleged willful and wanton misconduct against Mitroka in driving his automobile and negligence against Fletcher in driving his automobile. The cause also includes a counterclaim by Mitroka against Fletcher for property damage to his automobile. Mitroka’s counterclaim alleged negligence of Fletcher in driving his automobile. The jury rendered a general verdict in favor of both defendants and for defendant Fletcher on the counterclaim of Mitroka. In answer to three special interrogatories the jury also indicated : (a) that the defendant Fletcher was guilty of negligence, (b) that the counterplaintiff Mitroka was guilty of contributory negligence, and (c) that the defendant Mitroka was not guilty of willful and wanton misconduct. This appeal is taken by the plaintiff on the judgment rendered on the verdicts. No appeal is taken on the counterclaim. In support of the plaintiff’s effort to reverse the judgment, the plaintiff alleges that the trial court erred in denying plaintiff’s post-trial motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict against both defendants and that the trial court erred in denying plaintiff’s post-trial motion for a new trial against both defendants. In support of the latter motion, the plaintiff alleges, that the jury’s answer to the Special Interrogatories and their verdict was against the manifest weight of the evidence, the defendant Mitroka’s use of improper impeachments, and that the trial court erred in denying directed verdicts against both defendants. Turning first to the specific allegation of errors, the plaintiff alleges six specific incidents of improper impeachment by the defendant Mitroka. The first alleged error concerns the testimony of the witness Robert Vancil, the husband of the plaintiff. The witness, Robert Vancil, was called to the witness stand by the defendant Mitroka during the presentation of the defendant Mitroka’s case. The defendant Mitroka initially sought to call Robert Vancil for the purpose of cross-examination but after an exchange between counsel without any ruling by the court, counsel for Mitroka stated he would call Robert Vancil as his own witness. It might be noted at this point that Robert Vancil was originally a party plaintiff to the cause but had been dismissed prior to trial. The witness had also previously testified as a witness in the plaintiff’s case. The first question asked of the witness Robert Vancil was whether he had discussed with his wife’s employer the reason for her ceasing her employment to which the witness replied in the negative. The witness was then asked if his wife ever told him where the Fletcher automobile came from immediately before the collision. The witness replied that they had discussed it but no definite answer was reached. The witness was then reminded of a deposition taken earlier in the case and then asked if he had been asked the same question during the deposition and he replied that she had told him she thought it came from the other lane of traffic but was not sure. The witness replied that he may have made that answer. No further questions were asked of the witness and objections by the plaintiff that the defendant was impeaching his own witness was overruled.  We do not consider that these questions amounted to impeachment, and even though Mitroka could not impeach a witness called by him, he had a right to appeal to the witness’s conscience and refresh his memory, and such procedure was not prejudicial. The next alleged erroneous impeachment also concerns the witness Robert Vancil during cross-examination by counsel for the defendant, Mitroka, while testifying in the plaintiff’s case. Here again the witness was asked whether his wife, the plaintiff, ever made any statement to him as to where the Fletcher car was when she first saw it to which the witness answered, “No sir.” The witness was then handed a document marked “Defendant Mitroka’s Exhibit No. 3,” which was never offered for admission into evidence, and asked if the document refreshed his recollection. After examining it the witness stated he couldn’t read the writing of the document but that the signature appearing thereon looked like his own. The witness was then asked again whether his wife ever made the statement to him that the Fletcher vehicle pulled from the inside lane of traffic into the outside lane and just kept coming. The witness answered that she might have. The latter was asked and answered without objection.  The plaintiff urges that the foundation for impeachment was laid but no impeachment evidence was ever offered. Such evidence consists of evidence that the witness made a statement on a previous occasion which is inconsistent with his testimony at the trial. Such evidence is permissible to cast doubt on the credibility of the witness. Before such evidence may be introduced, a foundation must be laid consisting of calling the witness’s attention to the time, place and persons present when such statement was made or in the case of a written instrument by identifying the signature, Podenkirk v. State Farm Mut. Auto Ins. Co., 325 Ill App 421, 60 NE2d 269 (1945).  In the present case, the witness was not asked if he had made a particular statement at a particular time in the past but was handed a document and asked if the document refreshed his recollection. The witness was then asked the same question without objection by the plaintiff. Such procedure is not impeachment by proof of prior inconsistent statement and whatever other objection the plaintiff may have had, she failed to make.  In the remaining incidents of alleged erroneous impeachment, the plaintiff alleges that the defendant laid the foundation for impeachment but failed to follow up with proof of the prior inconsistent statement. We have examined the record in each of the incidents and find that the witness did not deny making the previous statement but was equivocal in his answer to the effect that he may have made the previous statement. No proper foundation was laid for the introduction of the prior statement, and as a result it would not have been admissible if offered. In view of the equivocal answers, it was the defendant’s option to offer impeaching testimony if they so desired. People v. Bush, 29 Ill2d 367, p 372, 194 NE2d 308, and People v. Preston, 341 Ill 407, 173 NE 383.  The plaintiff’s allegation that the jury’s answers to the special interrogatories and their verdict was against the manifest weight of the evidence may be dealt with summarily. The jury found both of the defendants guilty of negligence, the defendant Mitroka not guilty of willful and wanton misconduct and presumably that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence. There is evidence to support the jury’s findings. It is clear from the record in this case that there was evidence of negligent conduct on the part of both defendants. The jury was presented with a question of fact as to whether the defendant Mitroka’s conduct amounted to willful and wanton. The question of the plaintiff’s contributory •negligence will be dealt with in a remaining portion of this opinion. To be against the “manifest weight of the evidence” requires that the opposite conclusion be clearly evident. Hulke v. International Mfg. Co., 14 Ill App2d 5, 142 NE2d 717 (1957). The opposite conclusion is not clearly evident in this case.  Turning next to the plaintiff’s allegation that the court erred in denying the plaintiff’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict as to the defendant Mitroka; the most recent statement of the applicable rule is found in Pedrick v. Peoria and E. R. Co., 37 Ill2d 494, 229 NE2d 504, in which the court stated that judgments n. o. v. ought to be entered only in those cases in which all the evidence, when viewed in its aspect most favorable to the opponent, so overwhelmingly favors movant that no contrary verdict based on the evidence could ever stand. The jury in answer to a special interrogatory found that the defendant Mitroka was not guilty of willful and wanton misconduct as necessitated by the Illinois automobile guest statute. There is no need to completely digest the record in order to determine that the jury had sufficient probative facts upon which to base their verdict. The evidence is undisputed that the defendant Mitroka stopped in response to the traffic signal and slowly made his left turn. There is also evidence that the Fletcher automobile was at least partially concealed by the inside lane of traffic. There is no allegation that the jury was incorrectly instructed. Such a finding of fact was in the province of the jury and the trial court correctly denied the motion.  The plaintiff’s last assignment of error is that the court erred in denying her post-trial motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict as to the defendant Fletcher. Besides the general verdict the jury found by special interrogatory that Fletcher was guilty of negligence. It is the plaintiff’s theory that since she was a passenger in the Mitroka automobile she could not be guilty of contributory negligence. Before the plaintiff could recover, it was necessary for her to prove that she was in the exercise of ordinary care for her own safety. She was not relieved of that duty because she was riding as a guest passenger in an automobile. Grifenhan v. Chicago Rys. Co., 299 Ill 590, 132 NE 790 (1921); Piper v. Lamb, 27 Ill App2d 99, 169 NE2d 164 (1960); Nowak v. Witt, 14 Ill App2d 482, 144 NE2d 813 (1957).  The fact remains that plaintiff saw the approaching Fletcher car, when Mitroka did not, and did not warn her driver. There is a conflict in the evidence as to the speed at which the Fletcher car was approaching, and as to whether it was preceded by a truck in the outside lane of traffic. There is undisputed evidence that plaintiff’s driver, Mitroka, did not see it approaching; whether plaintiff knew her driver did not see the approaching car is not shown by the evidence. Plaintiff was only required to exercise such care as the situation may have required, and under no duty as a back seat passenger to supervise the operation of the car in which she was riding. The trial court, who heard and saw the witnesses, obviously concluded that whether under such circumstances plaintiff had a duty to warn and whether her failure to warn contributed to the collision, was a question of fact for the jury. From the evidence the jury could find, and apparently did conclude, that her failure contributed to the collision. Again applying the rule of Pedrick, supra, the court properly refused a judgment n. o. v. on behalf of plaintiff. For the foregoing reasons the judgment of the trial court is affirmed. Affirmed. GOLDENHERSH, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9740877 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:43:48.844507+00 ===

MORAN, J., dissenting: The majority holding clearly conflicts with the holding of our Supreme Court in Smith v. Bishop, 32 Ill2d 380, 205 NE2d 461, wherein it was determined that “unless the passenger sees an obvious danger which the driver might not see, there would be no duty to warn him.” Id. at 384. The unimpeached testimony of the plaintiff was that although she saw the Fletcher car at a distance of seventy-five feet, she was not expecting a collision. However, the majority says that she must warn the driver of her car about the imminence of a collision that she does not think is going to occur, i. e., when the plaintiff sees something which to her is not an obvious danger, she must nevertheless treat it as an obvious danger and warn of it. The logic of this reasoning escapes me. The reasonableness of plaintiff’s belief that no collision was imminent is substantiated by the fact that the Mitroka car was almost out of the intersection when the collision occurred and that the Fletcher car struck the Mitroka car at its extreme right rear, thus indicating that if another fraction of a second had transpired, the collision would not have occurred. “One riding in a motor vehicle driven by another has the right to assume that the driver will exercise proper care and caution, until he has notice to the contrary. He is entitled to repose confidence in the driver’s operation of the vehicle and to assume that he is alert to other traffic until it becomes apparent to one in the exercise of due care that the driver is inattentive. Acceptance of the driver’s manner of operating the vehicle is not ordinarily contributory negligence unless the driver’s fault or incompetence is so obvious as to demand effort on the guest’s part to abate the danger.” 8 Am Jur, § 527, page 84. See also Blashfield, Cyclopedia of Automobile Law and Practice, Vol 4, pages 553-554. The majority, in effect, recognize this principle by saying that the plaintiff was “under no duty as a back seat driver to supervise the operation of the car in which she was riding.” However, the result they reach is exactly opposite to the principle they espouse. Assuming that a duty for her to warn her driver did arise as a result of her observation of the Fletcher automobile, this would still not defeat her recovery, for her failure to warn could not have been a contributing cause to the accident. “It is well settled that even where a plaintiff may be guilty of negligence he will not, for this reason alone, be prevented from recovering in an action for injuries unless it is also shown that such negligence contributed to the accident.” Hagen v. Bailus, 283 Ill App 249 at 251. It is apparent that plaintiff’s failure to warn her driver, if it can be termed a failure, could not have been a contributing cause of the accident for there was not sufficient time in which to voice a warning which could have directed her driver as to the appropriate action to take to avoid the impending collision. She testified that she saw the Fletcher car at a distance of seventy-five feet traveling at a speed of forty miles per hour. This would have given her little more than a second to voice a warning which would have prevented the accident. It is beyond the range of possibility that plaintiff could have taken any action in this short time which would have averted the accident. Hence, it cannot be said that her negligence, if indeed there was any negligence on her part, could have been the proximate cause of the accident which resulted in her injuries. Then, too, even if we assume that the Fletcher car was in obvious danger when plaintiff saw it, I would still see no duty to warn for Mitroka was well into the intersection, making a left turn, when plaintiff saw the Fletcher car. It was then too late to protest, for the danger was already there. It is one thing to warn a driver of a danger unknown to him, and quite another to give direction when danger is already imminent. One may prevent an accident; the other may tend to create an additional hazard. For the foregoing reasons, I would reverse the judgment of the trial court and order a new trial on damages alone between the plaintiff and the defendant, Fletcher.

=== CASE 9740878 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:43:49.739396+00 ===

Faulconer, J.
— After the death of her husband appellantQuinlan put her money in a joint savings account with her son, appellee’s decedent. Upon her son’s death appellant went to the bank and learned for the first time that all of the money in the joint savings account had been withdrawn by her son prior to his death. Although an estate was opened in California with the widow of the son as executrix an estate was opened in Lake County, Indiana, since the son had title to real estate there. Margaret Glissman, decedent’s sister and daughter of appellant, was made executrix of the estate in Indiana. After the sale of the real estate by appellee as executrix, about two years after the estate was opened, appellant filed in the Lake Superior Court what she designated, “Petition for Order and Authority to Pay Claim.” In addition to the above facts she alleged that “immediately upon appointihent of Margaret Glissman, as Executrix ■ herein by this *3[¶] onorable Court, your petitioner made a claim and demand upon said Executrix for .the payment of. said moneys' due her, as aforesaid and that said Executrix then- acknowledged said indebtedness of Lyle Culbert Ropp, as due and owing and agreed to pay same, or as much thereof as the assets of the estate would permit or would enable her to, as soon as the real estate of the decedent herein or his interest therein, is sold and the proceeds of sale are received by the Executrix herein, without the necessity of filing of formal claim therefor, which was considered by the Executrix unnecessary, under the circumstances.”
For the purpose of this opinion we deem it .unnecessary to set forth a lengthy rendition of the evidence. -Suffice to state that it shows that the appellee, as executrix, did, during the six months statutory period for filing claims, tell appellant that the debt was owed her, that it was just and would be paid when the estate received the proceeds from the sale of the real estate. There was also evidence from which the trial court could have found that, in reliance upon this information, the appellant did not file a formal claim prior to the petition referred to above. There is no dispute regarding the fact that no written claim was filed nor was the claim paid during the six months’ period after the appointment of the executrix and publication of notice thereof to creditors as provided by statute for such filing or payment. There is also no dispute that the petition which is the subject of this suit was filed many months after the statutory period had expired.
The court denied appellee’s motion to strike and overruled appellee’s demurrer. Although the record discloses no further pleadings the cause was tried by the court without a jury, and the trial court found against appellant on her petition and entered judgment that appellant “take nothing by her petition against the estate of Lyle Culbert Ropp, ■. . .”
Appellant’s motion for new trial was overruled, and such action is assigned as error on this appeal. The only proper *4specification of the motion for new trial is that the decision of the trial court is contrary to law.
The section of our Probate Code, Acts 1953, ch. 112, § 1401, p. 295, § 7-801 (a), Burns’ 1953 Replacement, pertinent to the issues in this appeal, provides as follows:
“All claims against a decedent’s estate, other than expense of administration and claims of the United States, and of the state and any subdivision thereof, whether due or to become due, absolute or contingent, liquidated or unliquidated, founded on contract or otherwise, shall be forever barred against the estate, the personal representative, the heirs, devisees and legatees of the decedent, unless filed with the court in which such estate is being administered within six (6) months, after the date of the first published notice to creditors.”
We are not here concerned with the 1961 amendment to the above Act, nor does it affect the provision quoted above.
In 1 Grimes, Henry’s Probate Law and Practice, ch. 14, § 3, p. 440 (6th Ed. 1954), we find the following statement:
“The Indiana statute follows the great weight of authority making the nonclaim statute an absolute bar. It would appear that the Indiana theory is that all claims against an individual are buried with him except those that are filed within the time provided by the nonclaim statutes.”
Concerning that part of Acts 1953, ch. 112, § 1402, § 7-802, Bums’ 1953 Replacement, pertinent to this opinion, Professor Grimes, at page 394, 1 Henry’s Probate Law and Practice, ch. 13, § 1 (6th Ed. 1954), states:
“The statute now forbids the bringing of an action in the ordinary form against an executor or administrator, either personally or in his representative capacity, on a claim due from his decedent, and all claims against a decedent’s estate not filed as required by this statute, unless the claim falls within the exceptions, are barred. There is now no other method of conferring upon a court jurisdiction of such claims, except they be filed and placed by the clerk upon the appearance docket, and if not allowed they must be transferred to the issue docket for trial.”
*5Claims against an estate can only be enforced in the manner provided by statute. Beasley’s Estate v. Rauch, Rec. (1937), 104 Ind. App. 312, 318, 11 N. E. 2d 60; Barnum v. Rallihan (1916), 63 Ind. App. 349, 363, 112 N. E. 561; Doddridge, Ex., v. Doddridge (1900), 24 Ind. App. 60, 62, 56 N. E. 112.
There are decisions of our Supreme and Appellate Courts which state or indicate that “just claims may be paid by an executor or administrator although not filed and allowed. . . .” Baker v. Happ (1944), 114 Ind. App. 591, 598, 54 N. E. 2d 123; Swift, Administrator v. Harley et al. (1898), 20 Ind. App. 614, 620, 49 N. E. 1069; Wysong, Executor, etc. v. Nealis et al. (1895), 13 Ind. App. 165, 174, 41 N. E. 388; Chase et al. v. Beeson, Administrator, et al. (1883), 92 Ind. 61, 64.
From a careful reading of these decisions we find that they were all decided under prior statutes and, in addition, can be distinguished on facts involved. In addition to the distinguishing features we are of the opinion that the law on this issue is now settled in Indiana and that a claim not filed or paid within the time and in the manner provided by the statute is barred. This was settled by the decision of this court in Donnella, Admrx. v. Crady (1963), 135 Ind. App. 60, 185 N. E. 2d 623 (Transfer denied, 191 N. E. 2d 499). In the Donnella case Judge Cooper stated, at pages 63, 64 of 135 Ind. App., page 625 of 185 N. E. 2d, as follows:
“The rule of waiver or estoppel has no application to a nonclaim statute. As pointed out above, the time element in a nonclaim statute is a part of the right of action itself and is not a defense. Such statutes are not extended by the disability, fraud or misconduct of the parties. The time to act cannot be waived by the parties or lengthened by the court. Unless the claim is filed or the action thereon brought within the time prescribed by said statute, any right of action then existing becomes unenforceable and the claim or action is forever barred.”
*6In the Donnella case the appellee contended that a fraud was perpetrated upon the attorneys for appellee by the attorney for the personal representative in that the .claim had been forwarded to the attorney for the personal representative of decedent within the statutory period upon the representation that the attorney for the personal representative would immediately file said claim. In holding that even if true such promise could not bind the estate and the breach of such promise could not extend the time for filing the claim, this court further stated at pages 64-65 of 135 Ind. App., page 625 of 185 N. E. 2d, as follows :
“As heretofore pointed out, the applicable statute is a non-claim statute and not a statute of limitation and cannot under any circumstances be extended beyond the time specified in the statute.” See also: Roberts v. Spencer, Executor (1887), 112 Ind. 85, 90, 13 N. E. 129.
There is some contention by appellant that this claim was “allowed” by the actions and statements of the executrix to appellant and, therefore, can be paid pursuant to Acts 1953, ch. 112, § 1419, § 7-819 (c), Burns’ 1953 Repl. In our opinion this section permits the personal representative to pay, upon the expiration of six months after the date of the first published notice to creditors, only those claims which have theretofore been allowed in accordance with the provisions of this code.
Acts 1953, ch. 112, § 1410, § 7-810, Burns’ 1953 Repl., provides the method by which the personal representatives shall allow, or disallow, claims. No provision is made for oral allowance or disallowance. We are not here concerned with the paying of claims within the six months’ period where none was filed. It is our opinion that the methods for filing and paying claims, as well as allowing and disallowing claims, provided by our Probate Code are exclusive and must be followed.
*7“Since the statute requires that the clerk keep a record showing the filing of all claims against estates and of the allowance or disallowance of the same, and requires that the action of the executor or administrator in allowing or disallowing all claims be in writing, we hold that the allowance of a claim must be proven by the record, and that when the record does not show an allowance that the intention of the administrator to allow the claim cannot be proven by oral testimony.” Price v. Engle (1922), 77 Ind. App. 439, 447, 133 N. E. 755,
No question has been presented to us concerning appellant’s legal right to the money alleged to be due her or the manner she has chosen to recover it. Although appellee filed a motion to strike appellant’s petition as improper the overruling of such motion is not an issue in this appeal.
We are of the opinion that the judgment of the trial court should be affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
Carson, C. J. and Cooper, J., concur.
Prime, J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 9740879 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:43:49.744066+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion
Prime, J.
— The majority opinion states that it is unnecessary to set forth a rendition of the evidence. In my opinion it is absolutely necessary to set forth the evidence in order to arrive at an equitable result.
Lyle Culbert Ropp died January 30, 1962, a resident of the state of California. He was survived by his widow and also his mother, Blanche Eliza Quinlan, and a sister, Margaret Glissman.
On September 4, 1962, an ancillary probate proceeding was commenced in Lake County, Indiana. Margaret Glissman qualified as executrix. The first publication of notice of administration was made on September 20, 1962.
On May 1, 1964, the appellant herein, Blanche Eliza Quinlan, filed a petition for an order and Authority to Pay a Claim. *8The appellant is the mother of the deceased and of the executrix.
At the time of the filing of the petition, the estate was still open and assets were in the hands of the executrix. The assets consisted of money realized from the sale of a half interest in certain real estate previously owned by the deceased as a tenant in common with his wife. This was the only asset in the estate and the sale was made after petition and proper order of the court. The sale was made and approved by the court December 3, 1963.
The appellant’s claim, as set out in her petition, was for $8,398.00 which had been deposited in the Calumet National Bank of Hammond, Indiana in an account held by appellant and her son as joint tenants with rights of survivorship.
The son, during his lifetime, checked out all the money from that account without the knowledge of his mother. His acts were discovered after his demise.
The mother, the appellant herein, filed her petition to have the estate pay her the money which was allegedly appropriated by the son in a fraudulent manner.
The court heard and considered the matter and made the following findings and judgment.
“Although the executrix agreed with petitioner that petitioner’s claim was just and ought to be paid, the executrix failed to pay said claim within the provisions of the law made and provided for the allowance and payment of claims and therefore the petitioner has failed to substantiate the allegations of her petition accordingly by a fair preponderance of the evidence and further the law is with the executrix and further the petitioner has a claim pending in the proceedings now being had in the State of California concerning an estate of decedent, Lyle Culbert Ropp. It is therefore ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED by the Court that petitioner, Blanche E. Quinlan, take nothing by her petition against the estate of Lyle Culbert Ropp, herein, with costs taxed against the said estate.”
The appellant filed a motion for a new trial setting out several grounds. All but one, that the decision was .contrary *9to law, were argumentative. Our consideration is limited to that alleged error.
The court held that the claim of the appellant was barred by reason of Burns’ Sec. 7-801, Acts 1953, Ch. 112, § 1401, P. 295.
“All claims against a decedent’s estate, other than expenses of administration and claims of the United States, and of the state and any subdivision thereof, whether due or to become due, absolute or contingent, liquidated or unliquidated, founded on contract or otherwise, shall be forever barred against the estate, the personal representative, the heirs, devisees and legatees of the decedent, unless filed with the court in which such estate is being administered within six [6] months after the date of the first published notice to creditors.”
The appellant contends that her claim was allowed by the executrix within the six months period and thus was not barred by the statute. The appellant did not file a formal claim with the clerk. Our task here is to determine if the claim was allowed or whether or not the court was correct in finding that it was not filed and therefore barred.
The appellant, Blanche Eliza Quinlan was a widow, seventy-six years of age. She opened an account in the bank with her son, Lyle Ropp. After his death she discovered there was no money in the bank and that it had been drawn out and the account closed. There was an understanding between Mrs. Quinlan and her daughter that her claim would be paid. She did not file a claim because she was told by the executrix that she would be paid as soon as the house was sold. The matter was discussed after Mrs. Glissman was appointed executrix. After the sale of the house she told her daughter that she did not get the money. Appellant did not understand what is meant by filing a claim, nor did she come to court to file a claim. Her daughter assured her that claim would be paid. The executrix told appellant she would give her the money as soon as she got the proceeds from the sale.
*10Margaret Glissman, the executrix, testified as follows:
“After the death of my brother, my mother and I went to the bank ix> change the account over to her name and mine or the survivor. We learned that the account was closed. I had an understanding with my mother concerning payment of the money that was withdrawn. I told her I would give her as much as I could get after other bills were paid because she had it coming. I knew it was a just debt and claim so she didn’t file any claim. I didn’t have any understanding about filing a formal .claim against the estate. I told her that I would put her bid in later. I found out that is what you call a claim. I didn’t know the law words. I received the proceeds of the sale of the house, about $5500.00, two weeks ago, but I did not pay her because Mr. Hand said I couldn’t pay her. I told my mother that and that is why she filed the petition. I told her the house was sold and said: “Well, the house is sold, you can get your money.”
We believe that the uncontraverted testimony and evidence shows beyond doubt that the claim in question was allowed within the six months period although it was not paid because there were no assets in the estate until after the sale of real estate. This situation is then brought within the procedure set out in Burns’ Annotated Statutes — Sec. 7-819 (c).
“Upon the expiration of six (6) months after the date of the first published notice to-.creditors and the final adjudication of all claims filed against the estate, the personal representative shall proceed to' pay the claims which have theretofore been allowed against the estate in accordance with the provisions of this code, but which he has. not theretofore paid.”
An executrix may allow a claim against the estate of his testator, if found to be a just debt, though the claim not be made out in an itemized form, and not filed with the clerk of the court. Lancaster, et al. v. Gould, et al. (1874), 46 Ind. 397.
We are cognizant of the changes wrought in the common law by successive recodifications of probate law in Indiana. However, the ruling precedent enunciated in the Lancaster *11case has not, in our opinion, been superseded or overruled by any provision extant in the current version of the Probate Code.
A claim' is sufficient if it shows legal liability on the part of the estate, and indicates to its representative what he is called upon to meet with reasonable certainty. Hull v. Burress (1950), 120 Ind. App. 507, 93 N. E. 2d 213; Logan v. Hite, Admr. (1938), 214 Ind. 233, 13 N. E. 2d 702.
All that is necessary by way of a complaint is a statement containing sufficient substance to apprise the administrator or executrix of the nature of the demand. Ayres v. Smith (1948), 227 Ind. 82, 84 N. E. 2d 185.
While it is true that appellant did not file a formal claim, there is sufficient evidence to establish the issuable facts constituting the cause of action set out in her petition. Stanley’s Estate v. Pence (1902), 160 Ind. 636, 66 N. E. 51; Masters v. Jones, 158 Ind. 647; Caldwell v. Ulsh (1916), 184 Ind. 725, 112 N. E. 518.
The non-claim statute has been circumvented in other cases. A valid contract entered into by the decedent creates a valid debt against the estate, even if no claim is filed, when the executor or administrator acknowledges the justness of the debt. Baker v. Happ (1943), 114 Ind. App. 591, 54 N. E. 2d 123. It was repugnant to Judge Royse’s idea of justice to permit that executor to deny liability for lack of a claim; it is just as repugnant to ours.
It is our opinion that the appellant’s claim was properly allowed by the executrix, and that its adjudication is not barred by operation of the non-claim statute. This finding is not in conflict with the resolution of Donella, Admx. v. Crady (1963), 135 Ind. App. 60, 185 N. E. 2d 623. In that case, the claim was originally filed after the six month period had elapsed. The instant holding is that a claim allowed before the expiration of six months may meet the statutory filing requirements. A claim may be technically filed even though *12the only action taken upon it is a verbal allowance and recogr nition of its justness. To deny this claim would be to strip away all vestiges of fairness.
Here we have an elderly perón, who is practically blind being told by her own daughter, the executrix, that the claim was allowed and would be paid. To say that she could not rely on this statement and had to perform the mechanical function of “filing” in the office of the clerk is to deviate from settled principles of law.
To serve the cause of justice this case should be reversed.
Note. — Reported in 232 N. E. 2d 384.

=== CASE 9740419 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:09.204933+00 ===

Mr. Justice Schaefer, concurring: I am not prepared to rule, as the majority opinion may be read to imply, that every municipality in the State, regardless of its size, its established character, or the accessibility of available areas outside its borders, must make place within its boundaries for every conceivable industrial use of land not unlawful per se, and for an unlimited number of users in every permitted class. The contrary views that have been expressed seem persuasive to me. See Duffcon Concrete Products, Inc., v. Borough of Cresskill, 1 N.J. 509, 64 A.2d 347 (1949); Valley View Village v. Proffet, 221 F.2d 412 (6th Cir. 1955); Town of Hobart v. Collier, 3 Wis.2d 182, 191, 87 N.W.2d 868, 873 (1958) (dissenting opinion). Since a landowner adjoining the plaintiff has been allowed to carrjr on the ready-mix concrete business and was given permission to expand his installations after the effective date of the amendment prohibiting the use, I concur in accepting the trial court’s finding that the ordinance, in the circumstances of this application, is arbitrary and void.

=== CASE 2223522 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:03.199135+00 ===

25 Ill.2d 553 (1962)
185 N.E.2d 682
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Defendant in Error,
v.
L.T. McKEE, Plaintiff in Error.
No. 37052.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed September 28, 1962.
*554 FRANK M. COVEY, JR., of Chicago, for plaintiff in error.
WILLIAM G. CLARK, Attorney General, of Springfield, and DANIEL P. WARD, State's Attorney, of Chicago, (FRED G. LEACH and E. MICHAEL O'BRIEN, Assistant Attorneys General, and JOHN T. GALLAGHER and M. ROBERT OSTROW, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel,) for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. CHIEF JUSTICE SOLFISBURG delivered the opinion of the court:
In 1946 the defendant, L.T. McKee, was tried by jury in the criminal court of Cook County and found guilty of the crime of murder for which he was sentenced to the penitentiary for a term of life imprisonment. After the adoption by this court of Rule 65-1, the defendant filed a petition seeking a free transcript of the proceedings at his trial and the trial court entered an order directing the official shorthand reporter to furnish the defendant with a transcript. One of the official reporters advised the defendant that it was impossible to prepare a stenographic transcript because the court reporter at the original trial, E.M. Allen, had died in 1949 and no one was able to transcribe his notes. The defendant then filed a motion again requesting the preparation of a stenographic transcript, or, in the alternative, the preparation of a satisfactory narrative transcript or a bystander's bill of exceptions. The motion requested that the judgment of conviction be vacated and a new trial granted in the event that neither a stenographic transcript or a satisfactory bystander's bill of exceptions could be provided. The court entered an order again directing the official reporter to transcribe the notes taken by Allen and providing that if it was impossible to furnish such a stenographic transcript that the State's *555 Attorney should take the initiative in preparing an adequate bystander's bill of exceptions. The alternative motion for a new trial was taken under advisement. Some months later the defendant filed a supplemental motion for a new trial in which he stated that he had been advised that the official reporter was unable to transcribe Allen's notes and that the State's Attorney was unable to prepare a satisfactory bystander's bill of exceptions. In this supplemental motion the defendant requested that a new trial be granted on the ground that the State was unable to provide a stenographic transcript or a satisfactory bystander's bill of exceptions. In the alternative, the defendant requested that the court certify a narrative transcript prepared by the defendant or to correct that transcript and certify it as corrected, and requested that if the court failed to certify or to correct and certify the defendant's narrative transcript that a new trial be granted. In support of this motion defendant filed a lengthy affidavit purporting to set out in narrative form the defendant's arrest, the events leading up to his trial and the evidence at the trial. Defendant's counsel filed an affidavit in support of this motion in which he set forth his unsuccessful efforts to secure witnesses to assist him in constructing a bystander's bill of exceptions. The State filed affidavits by Richard B. Austin and Joseph A. Pope, who were assistant State's Attorneys at the time of the defendant's conviction and were judges of the criminal court of Cook County at the time their affidavits were submitted, and also filed an affidavit of Howard Savage, the attorney who had represented the defendant at the time of his conviction. These persons all stated that they had made no record of the testimony at the defendant's trial and had no recollection of the exact nature of the testimony. The judge who had presided at the defendant's trial was deceased at the time defendant's motion for a new trial was presented. The supplemental motion for a new trial was heard by Judge Austin, who was at that time *556 Chief Justice of the criminal court of Cook County, and he entered an order denying the defendant's supplemental motion for a new trial and denying his request for certification of the narrative transcript submitted by the defendant. The trial judge did not rule on that portion of the defendant's motion asking for a correction and a certification as corrected of the defendant's narrative transcript in view of the fact that no evidence had been submitted to justify any correction of that transcript. A writ of error has been issued by this court to review the judgment of the trial court denying the defendant's supplemental motion for a new trial.
On this writ of error the defendant relies upon the decisions of the United States Supreme Court in Griffin v. Illinois, 351 U.S. 12, 100 L.ed. 891, and Eskridge v. Washington State Board of Prison Terms and Paroles, 357 U.S. 214, 2 L.ed.2d 1269, which hold that a State cannot constitutionally deny a defendant the right to effective appellate review because he is financially unable to purchase a stenographic transcript of the proceedings at his trial. Practically identical contentions were made in the recent case of People v. Norvell, (May Term 1962,) 25 Ill.2d 169. In that case the defendant was convicted in 1941. A portion of the testimony at his trial had been reported by E.M. Allen. Immediately after the defendant's conviction he attempted to obtain a stenographic transcript but was unable to obtain one because he was unable to pay for it. After the adoption of Rule 65-1, an order was entered granting Norvell a free transcript but a complete stenographic transcript could not be furnished because Allen's notes could not be transcribed. It was established there, as in the present case, that a satisfactory bystander's bill of exceptions could not be obtained. Norvell moved for a new trial, claiming that he was deprived of his constitutional right to effective appellate review by reason of the fact that the State was unable to provide him with a complete *557 stenographic transcript or other suitable means for such review. The motion for a new trial was denied and we issued a writ of error. After a full consideration of the effect of the decisions of the United States Supreme Court, we held that the defendant was not entitled to a new trial. Insofar as the defendant's motion for a new trial is based upon the inability of the State to furnish a stenographic transcript or a satisfactory bystander's bill of exceptions, the Norvell case is controlling, and it would serve no useful purpose to repeat in this opinion the reasons underlying our ruling in Norvell.
The Norvell case does not completely dispose of the contentions advanced by the defendant here. The defendant contends that he was entitled to have the trial judge certify his purported narrative transcript or to correct and then certify that transcript and it is asserted that the failure of the trial judge to do so entitles the defendant to a new trial. The defendant's counsel concedes that the narrative submitted by the defendant may be biased and inaccurate, but it is contended that since the original trial judge is deceased, the other witnesses are unavailable and the prosecutors and the defendant's attorney are unable to recall the testimony, that the defendant's narrative is the only summary of the evidence at his trial and that therefore it must be accepted. We cannot agree with this contention. Before a trial judge certifies any transcript, whether it be a bill of exceptions or a bystander's bill, he must be satisfied that it is an accurate transcript or summary of the evidence at the trial and he is not required to certify an inaccurate summary, even though it may be the only one available. A transcript of the proceedings at the coroner's inquest was referred to upon oral argument and in order to exhaust the possibility of preparing a satisfactory record, we granted leave to file it. While the testimony of the witnesses at the coroner's inquest is not necessarily the same as the testimony of these witnesses at the trial and therefore is of no direct *558 help in determining whether the petitioner's summary of the evidence at the trial is accurate, it is of interest to compare the actual testimony of the witnesses at the inquest with the petitioner's summary of their testimony then. In his narrative transcript, the defendant stated that a woman had testified at the inquest that she and her son were coming home and saw a tall white man shoot the deceased. According to the defendant, this woman testified at the inquest that the defendant was not the man she had seen. The transcript of the testimony at the inquest shows that when this witness first testified the defendant had not been apprehended. She testified then that she was in the kitchen of her home when she heard a disturbance outside. She ran to the front door and saw a man and woman struggling on the sidewalk. She could not tell whether the man was black or white. The inquest was adjourned and was resumed after the defendant had been apprehended. At the second session she was not asked to identify the defendant.
In his purported narrative of the testimony at the inquest the defendant said that another witness had testified that he had been visiting in the neighborhood and that he had seen a man fleeing the vicinity of the crime. The defendant's version of the testimony was that the coroner asked this man whether he could identify the defendant; that the man replied that the defendant did not look like the man he had seen; that the witness stated that the man he had seen was white or a mulatto; that a policeman then asked the witness if he would not say the defendant was the man he had seen; and that the witness then replied that the defendant was the man. The actual testimony at the coroner's inquest by this witness at the first session was that he got a good look at the man fleeing from the scene of the crime and that this man looked like a Mexican or a mulatto and had very dark skin. At the second session of the inquest he testified that he had picked the defendant out of a line-up of six other men and that he was positive *559 that the defendant was the man he had seen fleeing the scene of the crime. The wide variance between the defendant's narrative transcript and the actual evidence at the coroner's inquest gives some indication of the unreliability of his narrative of the evidence at the trial and we are of the opinion that the trial judge properly refused to certify the defendant's narrative. The trial judge also properly refused to correct the narrative since there was no basis upon which such a correction could be made.
For the reasons expressed herein, we are of the opinion that the order of the trial court denying the defendant's motion for a new trial and the other motions was correct and the judgment of the criminal court of Cook County is therefore affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 2223530 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:03.378981+00 ===

338 N.W.2d 601 (1983)
215 Neb. 299
CHURCH OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, a Nebraska corporation, Appellee,
v.
BEVCO, INC., a Nebraska corporation, Defendant and Third-Party Plaintiff, and
Fidelity and Deposit Company of Maryland, a corporation, Appellants and Cross-Appellees,
Universal Terrazzo & Tile Co., Third-Party Defendant and Cross-Appellant.
No. 82-534.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
September 23, 1983.
*603 Robert J. Becker and Jean A. Mahon-Pettit of Swarr, May, Smith, Andersen & Jensen, Omaha, for Fidelity & Deposit Co. of Md.
Carpenter, Fitzgerald & Coe, P.C., Omaha, for Church.
John F. Thomas of McGrath, North, O'Malley & Kratz, P.C., Omaha, for Universal.
KRIVOSHA, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, McCOWN, WHITE, HASTINGS, CAPORALE, and SHANAHAN, JJ.
SHANAHAN, Justice.
The Church of the Holy Spirit (Church) sued its contractor, Bevco, Inc. (Bevco), and Bevco's bonding company, Fidelity and Deposit Company of Maryland (Fidelity), for damages from breach of a construction contract and performance bond, i.e., faulty painting of the Church's parish center. Bevco filed a third-party action against its subcontractor, Universal Terrazzo & Tile Co. (Universal), which had painted the building's exterior. Bevco counterclaimed against the Church for payment of services rendered under the contract. Universal counterclaimed against Bevco for payment of services rendered under the subcontract. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand with directions.
In 1976 the Church entered a written contract with Bevco for construction of a parish center. Bevco subcontracted the exterior painting to Universal for $6,276. This written contract between Bevco and Universal contained: "X. To be bound to the Contractor by the terms of the general conditions of the specifications and addenda, and to conform to and comply with the drawings and specifications and addenda, and to assume toward the Contractor all the obligations and responsibilities that the Contractor assumes in and by the aforesaid documents toward the Owner, in so far as they are applicable to this particular sub-contract"; "XIV. To guarantee his work against all defects of materials or workmanship, as called for in the plans, specifications and addenda, or if no guarantee is called for, then for a period of one year from the date of completion of the work covered by this agreement"; and "Payment to the Subcontractor shall be made propmtly [sic] after the Contractor is paid by the owner."
John Tilly, architect for the Church, inspected the work of the contractors. Between November 11 and December 16, 1977, Universal applied the initial exterior coating of Desco Tonecrete. According to manufacturer's specifications, Desco Tonecrete should be applied and allowed to cure at a minimum temperature of 40° Fahrenheit and the backing of such application should have a maximum of 16-percent moisture content. Universal painted on some days when the temperature was less than 40 ° Fahrenheit and on other days when it rained or snowed. On December 13 Tilly discovered that Universal was applying the incorrect color of paint and ordered the painting stopped. It was too late in the year to repaint, and the building's expansion control joints remained open during the winter.
The Church selected another color of paint in May 1978. Universal finished applying the new paint in August, and later in August Tilly rejected Universal's work because there were "color variations" and "bleached-out" areas. To prevent the paint's cracking around expansion control joints, Tilly ordered removal of caulking from those joints in October. In November the Church selected transparent sealer, which Universal later applied in May 1979. Because Universal's application of the sealer was not uniform, Tilly rejected that work. In the fall of 1979 Universal said it would not correct the exterior sealer-coating. Between the fall of 1979 and January 1980 the exterior paint peeled and deteriorated. Such condition has never been corrected.
*604 In January 1981 the Church sued Bevco and alleged Bevco's breach of contract consisted of "improper exterior wall coating and caulking resulting in lack of uniformity in color, thickness and texture, discoloration, cracking, peeling ...." Bevco responded by filing an answer admitting the construction contract but generally denying any breach of contract. With its answer Bevco filed a counterclaim against the Church, seeking $16,750 in payment for services rendered under the contract. Bevco then filed a third-party action against Universal, alleging the provisions of paragraphs X and XIV of the subcontract, and further alleging that Universal was liable for any faulty painting. In the third-party action Universal filed an answer containing only a general denial, and also filed a counterclaim against Bevco for payment under the subcontract in the amount of $6,276. Neither Bevco nor Universal raised any affirmative defense regarding the Church's claim for faulty painting.
Tilly, the architect, testified that he did not know the cause of the paint's peeling. The Church also called an expert witness, painter Leroy Gustafson, who testified that the cost of correcting the condition of the painting was $29,117. Gustafson further testified that moisture entering the uncaulked expansion joints could have caused the poor condition of the painting. At the conclusion of the Church's case Bevco and Universal separately moved to dismiss the Church's claim for faulty workmanship. These motions were overruled.
Bevco called a witness who testified that Universal initially applied the paint when temperatures were below and moisture levels were above the manufacturer's specifications. According to Bevco's witness, Universal's failure to comply with the manufacturer's specifications caused the paint to peel. On account of such condition the Church did not accept the painting and did not pay Bevco. At the conclusion of Bevco's case Universal moved for a directed verdict on Bevco's third-party complaint because Bevco had not paid for the subcontracted painting. The trial court overruled the motion.
During Universal's case in chief, witnesses described the manner of application and the subsequent condition of the paint on the parish center. Universal introduced the manufacturer's written instructions for application of the paint used. At the close of all the evidence Universal again asked dismissal of Bevco's third-party complaint. The trial court overruled Universal's motion regarding Bevco. Then both Bevco and Universal renewed their motions to dismiss the Church's action. The trial court overruled these motions.
The trial court instructed the jury: "Before third-party plaintiff Bevco, Inc. can recover on its Third-Party Petition against third-party defendant Universal Terrazzo and Tile Co., it must first be determined by the jury that the plaintiff is entitled to recover against Bevco, Inc.," and that Bevco must prove the "amount of damages sustained by Bevco" as a result of any breach of the subcontract by Universal. The court further instructed: "If you find for Bevco on its Third-Party Petition against Universal, it will be your duty to award such damages as will fairly and reasonably, but not excessively, compensate Bevco for damages which it has sustained. The measure of damages is the amount of recovery that is awarded to plaintiff in its Petition against the defendant Bevco for the failure to properly apply the wall covering, if in fact you find such amount is owing." Bevco had requested and the court refused an instruction which included: "[I]f you find that the damages suffered by the Church were caused by the work performed by Universal ... then you must find Universal liable to Bevco for such damage."
During the course of deliberations, the jury asked additional instruction regarding the third-party action, namely, if the jury found in favor of the Church against Bevco, would such finding "have a bearing on how we are to go" in disposing of Bevco's third-party complaint against Universal? The trial court responded: "This is a question which must be determined by you in light of all the instructions," and no further instruction *605 was given to the jury. The jury returned a verdict in favor of Bevco on its third-party complaint and assessed damages at "$0." The trial court told the jury that the verdict for Bevco on the third-party complaint was "no verdict at all" and "that if [the jury] finds for Bevco, Inc. on its Third-Party Petition [sic], it must assess Bevco's damages." After further deliberations the jury returned a verdict for Bevco against Universal in the amount of $500. The jury also returned verdicts in favor of the Church against Bevco in the amount of $29,117, for Bevco against the Church in the amount of $16,750, and for Universal against Bevco in the amount of $6,276.
Post-trial motions were filed. On account of the performance bond, the Church requested an attorney fee of $12,091.25 pursuant to Neb.Rev.Stat. § 44-359 (Reissue 1978). The court allowed an attorney fee of $7,500 as a part of the costs to be paid by Fidelity. Bevco asked the trial court to increase Bevco's judgment against Universal from $500 to $29,117 or grant a new trial on the issue of damages in the third-party action. The trial court set aside the verdict of $500, as requested by Bevco, and granted a new trial in the third-party action on the question of damages. Bevco also requested prejudgment interest on the amount awarded on its counterclaim against the Church, but this request was denied. The Church's judgment against Fidelity was reduced to $12,367, that is, the difference between the damages awarded the Church and the amount awarded Bevco on its counterclaim against the Church.
Bevco assigns as errors of the trial court (1) the refusal to increase Bevco's verdict against Universal from $500 to $29,117 and (2) the disallowance of prejudgment interest on Bevco's counterclaim.
Fidelity claims error in the amount of the attorney fee allowed by the trial court.
Universal contends the trial court erred by (1) failing to sustain (a) Universal's motion to dismiss at the end of the Church's case and (b) Universal's additional motion for dismissal at the conclusion of all the evidence; (2) failing to sustain the motion for a directed verdict against Bevco because Bevco had not paid Universal for work under the subcontract; and (3) granting a new trial to Bevco on the issue of damages sought in the third-party action.
Confusion existed at trial regarding disposition of the third-party action. Therefore, it is necessary to review the nature and function of a third-party action pursuant to Neb.Rev.Stat. § 25-331 (Reissue 1979).
Section 25-331 is patterned on Rule 14 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. See, Statement on Legislative Bill 763, Committee on Judiciary, 77th Leg. (Feb. 27, 1967); Minutes, Committee on Judiciary L.B. 763, 77th Leg. (Feb. 27, 1967). "The general purpose of Rule 14 is to avoid two actions which should be tried together to save the time and cost of a reduplication of evidence, to obtain consistent results from identical or similar evidence, and to do away with the serious handicap to a defendant of a time difference between a judgment against him, and a judgment in his favor against the third-party defendant." 3 J. Moore, Moore's Federal Practice ¶ 14.04 at 14-26 (2d ed. 1983). Also, "A third-party claim may be asserted ... only when third party's liability is in some way dependent on the outcome of the main claim or when the third party is secondarily liable to defendant." 6 C. Wright & A. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil § 1446 at 246 (1971).
Availability and proper use of third-party practice was described in United States v. Joe Grasso & Son, Inc., 380 F.2d 749, 751-52 (5th Cir.1967), as "only in cases where the third party's liability was in some way derivative of the outcome of the main claim. In most such cases it has been held that for impleader to be available the third party defendant must be `liable secondarily to the original defendant in the event that the latter is held liable to the plaintiff.' ... Stating the same principle in different words, other authorities declare that the third party must necessarily be liable over to the defendant for all or part of the plaintiff's recovery ... or that the defendant *606 must attempt to pass on to the third party all or part of the liability asserted against the defendant .... Whichever expression is preferred, it is clear that impleader under Rule 14 requires that the liability of the third party be dependent upon the outcome of the main claim." (Citations omitted.) See Index Fund, Inc. v. Hagopian, 417 F.Supp. 738 (S.D.N.Y.1976).
The policy underlying third-party practice is to avoid circuity of actions and multiplicity of suits, as well as to expedite the resolution of secondary actions arising out of or as a consequence of the same facts involved in the action originally instituted. See Colton v. Swain, 527 F.2d 296 (7th Cir.1975). The basic function of third-party practice is the original defendant's seeking to transfer to the third-party defendant the liability asserted by the original plaintiff. See Tower Mtg. Corp. v. Reynolds, 81 F.R.D. 560 (W.D.Okl.1978). Third-party practice should reduce litigation by "having one lawsuit do the work of two." Falls Industries, Inc. v. Consolidated Chem. Indus., Inc., 258 F.2d 277, 283 (5th Cir.1958).
In this case the Church claimed faulty painting. In the subcontract Universal indemnified Bevco, viz, Universal assumed "toward [Bevco] all the obligations and responsibilities that the Contractor assumes... toward the [Church]." Because Bevco could be liable, and according to the jury was liable, to the Church, an attempt to transfer such liability to Universal was permissible under § 25-331.
A third-party defendant can be bound by the adjudication of the main claim. See, 3 J. Moore, supra at ¶ 14.13; Council Brothers, Inc. v. Ray Burner Company, 473 F.2d 400 (5th Cir.1973). Where the third-party plaintiff's claim against the third-party defendant is an outgrowth of the same facts which will determine the main or original claim of the initial plaintiff, the rights of all three parties are focused on a common, factual setting. In the interest of economyto the parties, court, counsel, and witnesses, as well as the pocketbook in view of the increasing costs of litigationa final disposition of all claims from such common source should be resolved as far as practicable in one action. See Powell, Inc. v. Abney, 83 F.R.D. 482 (S.D.Tex.1979).
As stated in Caputo v. U.S. Lines Company, 311 F.2d 413, 416 (2nd Cir.1963), an objective of third-party practice is "to make the evidence adduced by the plaintiff against the defendant available as a basis for the claim of the third-party plaintiff against the third-party defendant. Inconsistent determinations based upon the same evidence at the same trial are logically impossible. The court must follow the verdict of the jury." See, also, Knell v. Feltman, 174 F.2d 662 (D.C.Cir.1949).
Neither Bevco nor Universal raised any affirmative defense regarding any aspect of the entire proceedings. Apart from Bevco's counterclaim against the Church, the only question for the jury regarding the main claim was whether improper application of the paint caused the peeling condition. The jury found that damages were caused by Universal's faulty painting. Although the jury awarded damages to the Church, the trial court's instruction regarding the third-party action confused the jury. The jury awarded Bevco an amount different from the damages awarded to the Church, so that there were inconsistent verdicts. To conclude the question of responsibility for payment of damages caused by the faulty painting, the trial court should have instructed in substance: If there was a verdict for the Church, the jury also must return a verdict in favor of Bevco against Universal in the same amount awarded in the Church-Bevco verdict. Bevco's post-trial motion would have corrected the inconsistent verdicts. The District Court erred in overruling Bevco's motion in that regard.
Bevco contends that it is entitled to prejudgment interest on the amount awarded on its counterclaim against the Church. Prejudgment interest on a contract claim is allowed under Neb.Rev.Stat. § 45-104 (Reissue 1978), where the amount is liquidated. A claim is liquidated if the evidence furnishes data which, if believed, *607 makes it possible to compute the amount with exactness, without reliance upon opinion or discretion. Classen v. Becton, Dickinson & Co., 214 Neb. 543, 334 N.W.2d 644 (1983). Where a reasonable controversy exists as to the plaintiff's right to recover or as to the amount of the recovery, the claim is generally considered to be unliquidated and prejudgment interest is not allowed. Classen v. Becton, Dickinson & Co., supra; Holt County Co-op Ass'n v. Corkle's, Inc., 214 Neb. 762, 336 N.W.2d 312 (1983). The poor quality of the painting raised the question whether Bevco could recover any amount from the Church. In view of the faulty paintinga breach of contractBevco requested and received an instruction on substantial performance in order to prevail on its counterclaim against the Church. Any possibility of recovery by Bevco depended on the jury's answer to the question, Had Bevco substantially performed its contract with the Church? A reasonable controversy existed regarding the nature and degree of performance by Bevco, and, therefore, the claim was not liquidated. The trial court was correct in denying prejudgment interest on Bevco's counterclaim.
Addressing Fidelity's assignment of error regarding the attorney fee awarded by the trial court, Fidelity believes the attorney fee of $7,500 is excessive, because Fidelity should not have to bear an award of an attorney fee attributable in part to the Church's defense against Bevco's counterclaim. On several occasions we have indicated the factors considered by a court in determining a reasonable attorney fee. See, Stephens v. Allied Mut. Ins. Co., 182 Neb. 562, 156 N.W.2d 133 (1968); Schmer v. Hawkeye-Security Ins. Co., 194 Neb. 94, 230 N.W.2d 216 (1975); Herrera v. American Standard Ins. Co., 203 Neb. 477, 279 N.W.2d 140 (1979). A bonding company's exposure to liability, anticipated or actual, is not among the factors considered by a court in determining the amount of an attorney fee to be awarded in an action on a bond. The possibility that an attorney fee will be substantial in comparison with potential liability "is simply one of the factors the parties have to consider in determining whether to litigate a claim or attempt to settle it." See Graff v. Farmers Mut. Home Ins. Co., 211 Neb. 13, 21, 317 N.W.2d 741, 745 (1982). The trial court did not abuse discretion regarding the attorney fee awarded as a part of the costs taxed to Fidelity.
Universal complains that the trial court should have dismissed the third-party complaint of Bevco, because Bevco had not paid Universal the subcontracted compensation of $6,276. The agreement between Bevco and Universal expressly provided that Universal was entitled to be paid after Bevco was paid by the Church. In turn, the Church was obligated to pay Bevco upon acceptance of the work. Further, Universal did not raise any affirmative defense, such as Bevco's nonperformance of the subcontract. An affirmative defense must be pleaded in a contract action, and a general denial is not sufficient to raise any affirmative defense. Morearty v. City of McCook, 119 Neb. 202, 228 N.W. 367 (1929); Peters v. Wilks, 151 Neb. 861, 39 N.W.2d 793 (1949). The clear implication of the pleadings is that Bevco performed the subcontract as far as possible but that Universal's faulty workmanship prevented performance of the subcontract. As stated in Rickertsen v. Carskadon, 172 Neb. 46, 50, 108 N.W.2d 392, 396 (1961): "If there is a substantial performance, the action may be maintained but without prejudice to any showing of damages on the part of defendant for the failure to receive full and complete performance." Proper performance of the subcontract would have produced payment for the painting. It is untenable that Universal be permitted to use its faulty workmanship to defeat enforcement of the subcontract in which Universal expressly agreed to "guarantee ... against all defects of ... workmanship." One cannot profit from or escape liability for his own wrongdoing. See Keystone Bus Lines v. ARA Services, 214 Neb. 813, 336 N.W.2d 555 (1983). We affirm the trial court's action in denying the motion to dismiss Bevco's third-party complaint against Universal.
*608 Finally, Universal contends the trial court should have sustained Universal's motions for a directed verdict on the Church's claim. After Universal's motion for a directed verdict was overruled at the end of the Church's case, a witness described Universal's application of the paint. Such evidence was adduced by Universal's cross-examination of Bevco's witness and as a part of Universal's case in chief. Universal took the risk of aiding the Church's case by presentation of evidence, either in cross-examination of Bevco's witness or in presenting its own case in an attempt to defeat a recovery by the Church. The evidence produced by Universal helped establish the cause of the peeling paint, namely, noncompliance with the manufacturer's specifications for application of the paint. There can be no complaint by Universal that it supplied information to buttress or even prove the Church's cause of action. See Kentucky Aerospray v. Mays, 251 S.W.2d 460 (Ky.1952). "A defendant who moves for a directed verdict at the close of the plaintiff's evidence and, upon the overruling of such motion, proceeds with trial and introduces evidence waives any error in the ruling on the motion for directed verdict." Baker v. Blue Ridge Ins. Co., 215 Neb. 111, 114, 337 N.W.2d 411, 414 (1983). See, also, Bradstreet v. Grand Island Banking Co., 89 Neb. 590, 131 N.W. 956 (1911); Schaffer v. Strauss Brothers, 164 Neb. 773, 83 N.W.2d 543 (1957). Therefore, there is no question to be reviewed by this court regarding Universal's motion for a directed verdict at the end of the Church's case.
Universal also contends that at the close of all the evidence the trial court should have sustained Universal's second motion for a directed verdict on the question of faulty painting. A motion for a directed verdict at the conclusion of all the evidence is judged in the light of the total evidence at the time such motion is made, that is, the evidence as it stands at the close of the trial, and such motion is not determined only on the evidence existing at the time of the initial motion at the close of an adversary's case. See, 89 C.J.S. Trial § 668 (1955); Abston v. Medora Grain, Inc., 206 Kan. 727, 482 P.2d 692 (1971); Smith v. Sharp, 85 Idaho 17, 375 P.2d 184 (1962). When Universal moved for a directed verdict at the conclusion of all the evidence, the existing evidence created a question of fact about which reasonable minds might differ. The evidence supported the jury's finding that there was faulty workmanship of Universal in applying the paint. There is no error in the trial court's overruling Universal's motions for a directed verdict on the Church's claim of faulty painting.
Finally, Universal alleges error in granting a new trial to Bevco in the third-party action. In view of the disposition which we direct concerning the third-party action, we need not dispose of Universal's assignment of error in this regard.
We affirm the following judgments of the District Court: The judgment in favor of the Church against Bevco in the amount of $29,117; the judgment in favor of Bevco on its counterclaim against the Church in the amount of $16,750; the judgment in favor of the Church against Fidelity in the amount of $12,367; the judgment in favor of Universal against Bevco in the amount of $6,276; and the judgment awarding the Church an attorney fee of $7,500 as costs taxed to Fidelity as a part of the judgment on the performance bond covering Bevco.
We reverse the judgment of the trial court's granting a new trial to Bevco regarding the third-party action against Universal. It would be futile to remand for a new trial on Bevco's third-party complaint against Universal, since Universal is already bound by the judgment in the action of the Church against Bevco. Under the circumstances in this case the District Court would be required to direct the jury to return a verdict for Bevco against Universal in the amount of $29,117. Therefore, in addition to reversing the judgment of a new trial granted to Bevco, we remand this matter to the District Court and direct the District Court to enter judgment in favor of Bevco against Universal in the amount of $29,117 as a result of Bevco's third-party action against Universal.
*609 Concerning costs of the appeal in these proceedings, an attorney fee in the amount of $750 is awarded to the Church and assessed against Fidelity. With the exception of the attorney fee charged to Fidelity in this appeal, the costs of the appeal are taxed to Universal.
AFFIRMED IN PART, AND IN PART REVERSED AND REMANDED WITH DIRECTIONS.
WHITE and HASTINGS, JJ., concur in the result.
McCOWN, J., not participating.

=== CASE 9740420 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:13.800489+00 ===

Caporale, J.
Following trial by jury, the defendant, Jerry L. Evans, was adjudged guilty of burglary and senenced to the Nebraska Penal and Correctional Complex for a period of not less than 18 nor more than 30 months. He was given credit for the 3 months and 16 days he spent in jail awaiting disposition of the case. We affirm.
The issues, as defined by defendant’s assignments of error, are whether (1) Nebraska’s identifying physical characteristics act is constitutional, (2) the evidence is sufficient to sustain the conviction, (3) the trial court erred in refusing to charge the jury in the language of certain of defendant’s tendered instructions, and (4) the sentence imposed is excessive.
The trial testimony was that at approximately 8 *435a.m. on July 2, 1982, Paul Osborn entered his Hay Springs, Nebraska, grocery store and discovered that it had been burglarized since its closing the previous day. Over $700 in food stamps and cash was missing, along with merchandise. A window located some 10 feet off the ground above a rear door had been broken such as to admit a small person. In the opinion of a state highway patrolman, two persons were responsible for the break-in, one being needed to lift the other to the window. Bloodstains were found on the broken glass. Fingerprints and palm prints, less than 24 hours old, were found on various articles throughout the store, including a tag or wrapper used in the display of a pair of gloves. Defendant had not been seen in the grocery store during regular working hours prior to July 2, 1982.
At 6 a.m. on the morning of July 2, 1982, Robert McCarter, as he was out walking, saw defendant and a small, young boy speaking with each other. He overheard defendant say to the boy, “It is over there.’’ The boy then walked to a steel shed. At this time McCarter knew nothing of the burglary. After he heard of the burglary he informed his mother, another Hay Springs merchant, about the incident. She informed Osborn. Osborn, after hearing of the conversation, searched the sheds located in the area which had been indicated by McCarter. On July 10, 1982, in the shed which had been the subject of the conversation between defendant and the boy, Osborn found merchandise which he believed to have been stolen from his store. While making a purchase at Mrs. McCarter’s store on July 2, 1982, defendant displayed a thick stack of currency.
Defendant testified that his print was on the glove wrapper as a result of his having looked at a pair of gloves while shopping in Osborn’s store. He denied any recollection of a conversation with a boy. Defendant was unemployed at the time of the burglary, needed gloves for prospective employment, and his *436testimony as to how much, if any, money he had at the relevant time is in conflict.
On July 30, 1982, an affidavit prepared by a Nebraska state patrolman was submitted to the District Court, seeking an order pursuant to the identifying physical characteristics act, Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 29-3301 et seq. (Reissue 1979), to compel defendant to submit to fingerprinting and palm printing.
Section 29-3302 of that act empowers certain judicial officers to issue orders authorizing identification procedures for the purpose of obtaining identifying physical characteristics. Section 29-3303 thereof provides: “The order may issue upon a showing by affidavit of a peace officer that (1) there is probable cause to believe that an offense has been committed; (2) that procurement of evidence of identifying physical characteristics through nontestimonial identification procedures from an identified or particularly described individual may contribute to the identification of the individual who committed such offense; and (3) that the identified or described individual has refused, or there is reason to believe he will refuse, to voluntarily provide the desired evidence of identifying physical characteristics. The contents of the affidavit may be supplemented or augmented by the affidavits of other persons or by sworn testimony given to the issuing judge or magistrate.”
The affidavit recited the fact of the burglary; the finding of prints believed, because of their location, to have been left by the person or persons committing the burglary; that defendant was overheard saying to an unknown person, “the stuff is over there,” referring to a shed; and that merchandise taken from the grocery during the burglary was found in the shed. The affidavit also recited that on July 6, 1982, defendant was asked to voluntarily give a sample of his fingerprints and palm prints and that defendant refused. An order requiring the defendant to so submit was entered on August 2, 1982. *437On August 3, 1982, pursuant to the order, a palm print was taken from the defendant which matched the one on the glove wrapper found on the floor of the store during the burglary investigation.
As to the first issue, defendant argues that his motion to suppress the palm print exemplar, taken from him pursuant to the order issued under the identifying physical characteristics act, was erroneously denied. Defendant argues more specifically that § 29-3303 is constitutionally infirm in that it authorized him to be unreasonably seized by police authorities in violation of the fourth amendment of the U.S. Constitution and article I, § 7, of the Nebraska Constitution. He urges that our opinion in State v. Swayze, 197 Neb. 149, 247 N.W.2d 440 (1976), is wrong and should therefore be reconsidered and overruled. We disagree.
In Swayze a recently born child was found abandoned in a restroom at a state wayside area. A large amount of blood was found on bedding in the room where the child was believed to have been born. Police had four suspects and received orders pursuant to §§ 29-3301 et seq. to obtain blood samples from each. Swayze’s blood sample matched that found at the scene, and she was convicted of assault with intent to commit murder. On appeal she questioned the constitutionality of the statute on fourth and fifth amendment grounds. This court upheld the statute, finding specifically that Schmerber v. California, 384 U.S. 757, 86 S. Ct. 1826, 16 L. Ed. 2d 908 (1966), was controlling. In Schmerber a man who had been arrested for drunk driving was compelled to give a blood sample over his objection. The U.S. Supreme Court found that his arrest was supported by probable cause and that since the exigency of the circumstances required present action to obtain evidence of Schmerber’s blood alcohol level, it was a proper search incident to arrest.
It appears that the progenitor of statutes such as our identifying physical characteristics act is cer*438tain dictum found in Davis v. Mississippi, 394 U.S. 721, 89 S. Ct. 1394, 22 L. Ed. 2d 676 (1969). In Davis, police conducted a mass roundup of young men in order to fingerprint them for the purpose of seeking the individual who had raped a woman. The Court reversed Davis’ conviction, holding that the fingerprint exemplar taken during the roundup was the result of an unreasonable seizure and should have been suppressed. The Court did not decide what quantum of suspicion would justify a seizure for fingerprinting, but stated: “Detentions for the sole purpose of obtaining fingerprints are no less subject to the constraints of the Fourth Amendment. It is arguable, however, that, because of the unique nature of the fingerprinting process, such detentions might, under narrowly defined circumstances, be found to comply with the Fourth Amendment even though there is no probable cause in the traditional sense.’’ 394 U.S. at 727.
Responding to this language, several states adopted statutes allowing judicial officers to issue orders empowering police authorities to seize persons in order to obtain nontestimonial identification evidence. See, Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 13-3905 (1978); 7B Colo. Rev. Stat. Rule 41.1 (1973); Idaho Code § 19-625 (1979); Iowa Code Ann. §§ 810.2 et seq. (West 1979 & Supp. 1983); N.C. Gen. Stat. §§ 15A-271 et seq. (Repl. 1978); Utah Code Ann. § 77-8-1 (Repl. 1982). See, also, Model Code of Pre-Arraignment Procedure app. VIII at 669 et seq. (1975). In most instances the orders issue upon an affidavit of a police officer showing that there is probable cause to believe that an offense has been committed; that there are reasonable grounds, not amounting to probable cause to arrest, to suspect that the person named or described in the affidavit committed the offense; and that the results of specific nontestimonial identification procedures will be of material aid in determining whether the person named in the affidavit committed the offense. In the only re*439ported case we have found involving a direct constitutional attack on this type of statute, the statute was upheld. People v. Madson, 638 P.2d 18 (Colo. 1981).
Defendant argues that unlike the above-cited statutes the one at hand requires no nexus between the crime and the individual seized. In this respect he is mistaken. We must bear in mind that where a statute is susceptible of two constructions, under one of which the statute is valid, while under the other it is unconstitutional or of doubtful validity, that construction which gives it validity should be adopted. Nebraska P.P. Dist. v. City of York, 212 Neb. 747, 326 N.W.2d 22 (1982).
A similar process of interpretation was employed by the Arizona Supreme Court under their § 13-3905, which provides that an order to compel the submission of an individual to nontestimonial identification procedures can issue on the showing by affidavit of a peace officer that “1. Reasonable cause for belief that a specifically described criminal offense punishable by at least one year in the state prison has been committed. 2. Procurement of the evidence of identifying physical characteristics from an identified or particularly described individual may contribute to the identification of the individual who committed such offense. 3. Such evidence cannot otherwise be obtained by the investigating officer from either the law enforcement agency employing the affiant or the criminal identification division of the Arizona department of public safety.” Arizona interpreted that language to require a showing that reasonable grounds exist to connect the person detained with the crime being investigated. State v. Grijalva, 111 Ariz. 476, 533 P.2d 533 (1975), cert. denied 423 U.S. 873, 96 S. Ct. 141, 46 L. Ed. 2d 104; Long v. Garrett, 22 Ariz. App. 397, 527 P.2d 1240 (1974).
Unlike the Arizona Supreme Court, though, we are not willing to follow the suggestion of the Davis *440dictum that seizures for the purpose of compelling nontestimonial identification evidence under § 29-3303 are permissible, under either the fourth amendment to the U.S. Constitution or article I, § 7, of the Nebraska Constitution, on a showing of less than probable cause to believe the person to be seized and compelled to submit to identification procedures committed the crime under investigation. We are led to this conclusion by a reading of the U.S. Supreme Court cases decided after Davis v. Mississippi, 394 U.S. 721, 89 S. Ct. 1394, 22 L. Ed. 2d 676 (1969), which effectively dispel any speculation created by the above-quoted dictum.
In Dunaway v. New York, 442 U.S. 200, 99 S. Ct. 2248, 60 L. Ed. 2d 824 (1979), a suspect was not told that he was under arrest but was picked up by police officers and held for questioning. Dunaway was convicted after information supplied during his interrogation incriminated him. Dunaway’s motion to suppress evidence obtained by the seizure was denied by the state courts. The U.S. Supreme Court reversed, rejecting the State’s contention that Dunaway’s seizure was permissible because it was based upon reasonable suspicion and did not amount to an arrest. The Court stated: “The application of the Fourth Amendment’s requirement of probable cause does not depend on whether an intrusion of this magnitude is termed an ‘arrest’ under state law. The mere facts that petitioner was not told he was under arrest, was not ‘booked,’ and would not have had an arrest record if the interrogation had proved fruitless, while not insignificant for all purposes, [citation omitted], obviously do not make petitioner’s seizure even roughly analogous to the narrowly defined intrusions involved in Terry and its progeny. Indeed, any ‘exception’ that could cover a seizure as intrusive as that in this case would threaten to swallow the general rule that Fourth Amendment seizures are ‘reasonable’ only if based on probable cause.” 442 U.S. at 212-13.
*441In Florida v. Royer,_U.S._, 103 S. Ct. 1319, 75 L. Ed. 2d 229 (1983), the Court reversed a conviction of a man convicted of transporting narcotics. The defendant had initially been apprehended as he walked through an airport after it was determined by police that he fit the profile of a drug courier. He was held in a small room at the airport until his luggage could be brought to him. The suitcases were then opened, revealing a quantity of marijuana. At trial Royer’s motion to suppress was denied, but that denial was reversed by the Florida District Court of Appeal. In the U.S. Supreme Court it was argued that the reasonable suspicion standard for police investigatory stops enunciated in Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 88 S. Ct. 1868, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889 (1968), should apply to Royer’s airport seizure by police officers. The Court disagreed, and concluded “that at the time Royer produced the key to his suitcase, the detention to which he was then subjected was a more serious intrusion on his personal liberty than is allowable on mere suspicion of criminal activity.” 103 S. Ct. at 1326.
We find these cases persuasive in reaching the conclusion that the compulsion of a person by police officers to accompany them to a police station or hospital, or wherever, and the forced submission to nontestimonial identification procedures, is a seizure of such a magnitude that more than mere suspicion is required. We read the identifying physical characteristics act to require a showing of probable cause to believe the person to be so seized has engaged in an articulable criminal offense prior to the judicial officer issuing an order pursuant to § 29-3303. As so interpreted, the act is constitutional. It would be anomalous and indeed bizarre to require such probable cause prior to the seizure of papers, books, and other objects, but not for the seizure of persons. See, also, Matter of Abe A., 56 N.Y.2d 288, 437 N.E.2d 265, 452 N.Y.S.2d 6 (1982), for a case reaching the same conclusion.
*442The next inquiry is whether the order requiring Evans to submit to fingerprinting was based upon a showing of probable cause that a crime was committed and that the defendant was the person committing it. We are guided in this inquiry by the recent case of Illinois v. Gates, _ U.S. _, 103 S. Ct. 2317, 76 L. Ed. 2d 527 (1983). Gates teaches that findings of probable cause necessary for fourth amendment seizures pursuant to a warrant are to be interpreted in a commonsense manner with an eye to the totality of the circumstances. The same can be said for findings under § 29-3303.
The affidavit supporting the order in this case establishes the fact that a burglary occurred and that shortly after that burglary the defendant was seen and heard conversing with a small boy, and that the words “the stuff is over there” were uttered by the defendant in reference to a shed. The fruits of the burglary were later found in the same shed. The defendant was in Hay Springs, Nebraska, during the time the burglary occurred. We find that the affidavit was sufficient to establish probable cause to believe that the defendant was involved in the burglary.
As to the sufficiency of the evidence, the defendant argues principally that since the facts and circumstances are reasonably susceptible of two interpretations, they must be resolved in favor of the accused and therefore the evidence is insufficient to convict him.
In making that argument he relies principally upon State v. Earlywine, 191 Neb. 533, 215 N.W.2d 895 (1974). In so arguing he overlooks the clear import of the later case of State v. Buchanan, 210 Neb. 20, 312 N.W.2d 684 (1981), which acknowledges that while some decisions of this court may be found which create confusion as to the State’s burden in such a case, the better reasoned decisions of other courts, and the reasoning adopted in Buchanan, are that one accused of a crime may be convicted on the *443basis of circumstantial evidence if, taken as a whole, the evidence establishes guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. See, also, State v. Rowe, 214 Neb. 685, 335 N.W.2d 309 (1983); State v. Evans, 214 Neb. 432, 334 N.W.2d 5 (1983).
It is also the rule that after a jury has considered all the evidence and returned a verdict of guilty, that verdict may not, as a matter of law, be set aside on appeal for insufficiency of evidence, if the evidence sustains some rational theory of guilt. State v. Mackey, 200 Neb. 549, 264 N.W.2d 430 (1978); State v. Harig, 192 Neb. 49, 218 N.W.2d 884 (1974).
Here, the evidence, including that entry was obtained through a broken window which would allow the admission of a small person, the finding of defendant’s palm print on a glove wrapper within the store, and the discovery of the stolen items as a result of a conversation between the defendant and the unknown child, together with the other circumstances, certainly sustains a rational theory of guilt. Not unlike in State v. Pena, 208 Neb. 250, 302 N.W.2d 735 (1981), the jury was not required to accept defendant’s explanation as to how his print found its way onto the glove wrapper.
As recently observed in State v. Rowe, supra, it is not for this court to accept one version of the case over another; that was for the jury. In determining the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain a conviction, it is not the province of this court to resolve conflicts in the evidence, pass on the credibility of witnesses, determine the plausibility of explanations, or weigh the evidence. Such matters are for the trier of fact, and the verdict must be sustained if, taking the view most favorable to the State, there is sufficient evidence to support it.
Defendant’s claim that the evidence is insufficient to support his conviction is without merit.
Next, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in refusing to charge the jury in the language of his tendered instruction Nos. 1 through 4. How*444ever, his argument deals only with tendered instruction Nos. 1 and 4. Since consideration of assignments of error is limited to those discussed in the brief, we do not address tendered instruction Nos. 2 and 3. See, Neb. Ct. R. 9D(l)d (Rev. 1982); Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-1919 (Reissue 1979); Flakus v. Schug, 213 Neb. 491, 329 N.W.2d 859 (1983).
Defendant’s tendered instruction No. 1 undertook to inform the jury that he had a right to testify on his own behalf; that the jury had no right to disregard his testimony merely because he was the defendant, nor was it to receive the testimony as true; but that it was required to consider whether the testimony was true. The defendant does not undertake to explain how the failure to so instruct the jury prejudiced his defense. The fact that he did testify would seem to convey to the jury the notion that he had a right to do so. As stated in State v. Bartholomew, 212 Neb. 270, 322 N.W.2d 432 (1982), error cannot be predicated based on instructions given to the jury in the absence of prejudice to the rights of the defendant. That is equally the case with respect to the failure to give tendered instructions. Moreover, there was no error; the court’s standard credibility instruction properly advised the jury of the factors it was to consider in assessing the credibility of any witness.
Defendant’s tendered instruction No. 4 simply misstated the law as to how the jury was to consider circumstantial evidence. The court’s instructions properly informed the jury as to the law in that regard, which is as set forth in the preceding discussion concerning the sufficiency of the evidence.
Lastly, defendant argues that the trial court erred in not placing him on probation. The presentence investigation of the defendant is not a favorable one. He has a criminal history dating back to 1976, when he was 15 years old. It has long been the rule that an order denying probation and a sentence imposed within statutorily prescribed limits will not be dis*445turbed on appeal unless there has been an abuse of discretion on the part of the sentencing judge. State v. Patterson, 213 Neb. 686, 331 N.W.2d 500 (1983). The defendant was found guilty and convicted of violating Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-507 (Reissue 1979). This is a Class III felony punishable by up to 20 years’ imprisonment, a $25,000 fine, or both. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-105 (Reissue 1979). Under the circumstances it cannot be said that there was an abuse of discretion which worked to the prejudice of the defendant.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9740421 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:13.804759+00 ===

Krivosha, C.J.,
dissenting.
I regret that I must dissent in this case. While I concur completely with that portion of the majority opinion which provides that Neb. Rev. Stat. § 29-3303 (Reissue 1979) requires a showing of probable cause that a crime has been committed and that the person compelled to produce the nontestimonial evidence has committed that crime before an order requiring one to give fingerprints may issue, I cannot agree that the evidence in this case, even when considered as a whole, was sufficient to submit the case to the jury. The circumstantial evidence presented to the jury is to the effect that a glove wrapper contained a palm print of the accused; that he was overheard saying to a young boy, “It is over there”; and that he displayed a thick stack of currency while making a purchase on July 2, 1982. The palm print was on a wrapper that had been around a pair of gloves offered for sale and which the defendant had a right to touch. The fact that no one could remember that he was in the store was not sufficient, in my view, to create any inference of his having placed his palm print on the wrapper during the course of a robbery. Moreover, his pointing in a general direction and saying “It is over there” are not sufficient to connect him with the fact that certain goods from the store are later found in a shed a week after the burglary. No goods, including the gloves, were ever found in the possession of the defendant or on any *446property owned or controlled by the defendant. While it is true that one accused of a crime may be convicted on the basis of circumstantial evidence if, taken as a whole, the evidence establishes guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, and the State is not required to disprove every hypothesis but that of guilt, see State v. Buchanan, 210 Neb. 20, 312 N.W.2d 684 (1981), it is likewise true that to sustain a conviction for a crime the corpus delicti must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Workman, 213 Neb. 479, 329 N.W.2d 571 (1983). In order to convict one of burglary in violation of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-507 (Reissue 1979), the State must produce evidence to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused willfully, maliciously, and forcibly broke and entered any real estate or any improvements thereon with intent to commit any felony or with intent to steal property of any value. The State was able to establish the elements of the crime only by requiring the jury to make substantial leaps of faith from one bit of circumstantial evidence to another. In my view, it was asking more than the jury should have been asked to do, and, like our decision in State v. Workman, supra, the action should have been dismissed.
White, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9740422 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:18.785894+00 ===

AMDAHL, Chief Justice.
The trial court denied a motion for summary judgment brought by defendant John Kennedy and issued an order, pursuant to a stipulation for appeal, that the issues presented by defendant’s motion for summary judgment are important and doubtful and should be reviewed by this court. The issues raised are whether the Minnesota social host rule applies to the case at bar and whether the defendant negligently allowed or failed to prevent Peggy Kennedy from providing the facilities for a party at which minors would be present and consuming alcohol. We reverse and remand with an instruction to enter summary judgment for defendant.
Defendant John Kennedy and his wife had a practice of taking an annual 6-8 week trip to Arizona. In 1980, they left their minor daughter Peggy, 16 years old in January of 1980, in the care of Marianne Kennedy, an older daughter who was 21 years old in January of 1980. Although prohibited, over the years all three of the Kennedy daughters have hosted parties during their parents’ annual absence.
On the evening of Friday, January 25, 1980, while their parents were in Arizona, Marianne gave Peggy permission to have eight to ten friends at the house. Although Marianne knew that minors would be present at the party, she did not inquire whether liquor would be consumed. All of the liquor consumed at the party was brought by the guests; no liquor was provided by Peggy or Marianne.
Several people not invited by Peggy were present at the party, including 17-year-old Patrick Welin. During the 5 hours preced*255ing his arrival at the party at 11 p.m., Welin had consumed four to six strong beers and four glasses of wine. He may have had one or two beers, which he brought, while at the Kennedy residence.
At approximately 12:30 a.m. on January 26,1980, Welin left the party to pick up his brother. He was returning to the party at about 1 a.m. when he lost control of his car as the result of a sudden application of the brakes to avoid passing the Kennedy residence. His car slid into a ditch across from the Kennedy driveway. Shortly after Welin left the car to get help from those present at the party, David Walker, who was operating a snowmobile, collided with the stranded automobile. Walker was instantly killed as a result of the injuries suffered from the collision. Approximately 40 minutes after the collision, the decedent had a blood alcohol level of .26 gm/dl, and Welin’s blood alcohol level 2½ hours after the accident was .11 gm/dl.
It is unnecessary for this court to decide whether the Minnesota case law that insulates a social host from liability for damages and injuries inflicted by an intoxicated guest is applicable when the guest is a minor, as urged by plaintiff-respondent. See generally Annot., 97 A.L.R.3d 528 (1980).
An essential element for social host liability is that the guest is “given or furnished” alcoholic beverages by the person from whom recovery is sought. See, e.g., Linn v. Rand, 140 N.J.Super. 212, 217, 356 A.2d 15, 18 (1976); Wiener v. Gamma Phi Chapter of Alpha Tau Omega Fraternity, 258 Or. 632, 643, 485 P.2d 18, 23 (1971). Since it is undisputed that Welin was not “given or furnished” liquor by any member of the Kennedy family, social host liability is inappropriate in the present case, regardless of the fact that Welin was a minor.
Plaintiff also contends that because intoxicated minors pose a serious threat to society, defendant negligently allowed or failed to prevent Peggy from hosting a party at which minors would be consuming alcohol. Plaintiff alleges a special relationship existed between Peggy and defendant that imposed a duty upon defendant to control Peggy’s conduct. See Restatement (Second) of Torts §§ 315-19 (1980).1 Plaintiff’s argument fails because in the cases in which this court has imposed liability for negligent failure to control the conduct of a third person, the injury was caused by the third person. See, e.g., Republic Vanguard Insurance Co. v. Buehl, 295 Minn. 327, 332, 204 N.W.2d 426, 429 (1973). In the present case, it was the conduct of a party with whom defendant did not have a special relationship that caused the injury.2
Reversed and remanded.
. Section 315, Restatement (Second) of Torts, provides:
There is no duty so to control the conduct of a third person as to prevent him from causing physical harm to another unless (a) a special relation exists between the actor and the third person which imposes a duty upon the actor to control the third person’s conduct * * *.
Comment c to section 315 notes that the “special relationships” are stated in sections 316-319. The relationships are that of parent-child, master-servant, owner-licensee and person in charge of another with dangerous propensities.
. In the same order the trial court denied John Kennedy’s motion for summary judgment, it granted plaintiffs motion to amend the complaint to include Marianne Kennedy as a defendant. Plaintiff claims that Marianne Kennedy negligently failed to prevent the party and negligently allowed Patrick Welin to drive while intoxicated. The issue of Marianne’s negligence was not a part of the summary judgment motion and, therefore, is not before this court.
We will briefly note two considerations that concern the issue of Marianne’s negligence. First, there is no special relationship between Marianne and Welin that would impose a duty upon Marianne to control Welin’s conduct. Second, contrary to plaintiffs allegation, a propensity to provide a location for parties, at which alcohol may be consumed by minors, does not constitute a dangerous propensity as contemplated by section 319 of the Restatement. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 319, comment a (1965).

=== CASE 9740423 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:18.790238+00 ===

SCOTT, Justice
(concurring specially).
While I am in agreement with the result arrived at by the majority opinion, I must *256respectfully disagree with its reasoning. The majority seems to imply that if Patrick Welin had been given or furnished alcoholic beverages by the Kennedys or if a “special relationship” had existed the defendant may have been found liable for plaintiff’s injuries. Under either theory the ultimate negligent act must be based upon allowing Patrick Welin to drink alcoholic beverages in the Kennedy home. The Civil Damages Act provides the exclusive remedy for injuries resulting from the illegal sale or barter of intoxicating liquors and preempts the field of remedies. A social host cannot be liable under the Civil Damages Act. As we stated in Cole v. City of Spring Lake Park, 314 N.W.2d 836, 840 (Minn.1982), “the specific removal of the word ‘giving’ is legislative activity which we interpret here as intent to preempt a Civil Damages Act or common-law remedy against social hosts.” Thus, the majority’s statement that liquor was not given or furnished is correct, but is misleading. This case should be decided upon the exemption of social hosts from liability under the Civil Damages Act.

=== CASE 2223552 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:03.759161+00 ===

338 N.W.2d 153 (1983)
In the Matter of WATERLOO COMMUNITY SCHOOL DISTRICT, Appellant,
and concerning William J. Gowans, Appellee.
No. 2-69090.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
September 21, 1983.
*154 Steven A. Weidner of Swisher & Cohrt, Waterloo, for appellant.
Gary J. Boveia, Waverly, for appellee.
Considered en banc.
HARRIS, Justice.
Because of budget limitations and declining enrollment a school district found it necessary to eliminate the positions of three of its twenty-three elementary school principals. The position of William J. Gowans, a non-probationary administrator with twelve year's service to the district, was one of the three terminated. Gowans appealed the termination to district court, pursuant to Iowa Code section 279.24 (1981), where the termination was reversed. The board appealed from that reversal, arguing it was not required to explain why Gowans' position was one of the three selected for termination. The board believes it is enough to show the need to reduce staff by three positions. It maintains that it cannot thereafter be made to answer why any of the specific positions were chosen for elimination. The district court rejected the board's position and so do we. We affirm the district court.
The Waterloo community school district has seen its share of financial problems. Student enrollment has declined considerably since 1967 and yet teachers need periodic pay increases. In December, 1980 the district's administrator informed the board of directors that staff reductions were necessary in order to fund a proposed eight percent pay increase for teachers. The administrator recommended that three full-time elementary principalships be eliminated. There was no collective bargaining agreement covering principals, and no past practice or board policy existed for terminating their positions. Previously the positions had been eliminated only through attrition.
The school board went into executive session to hear the administrator's recommendation on which of the twenty-three principalships were to be terminated. The school superintendent recommended the three to be terminated, including Gowans'. The board, upon returning from executive session, voted to consider termination of the three positions recommended.
The board thereafter served notice of its decision on Gowans and provided him with four reasons for its action: (1) the district continues to have a declining student enrollment; (2) the district continues to have budget limitations; (3) the district has eliminated the position of three full-time elementary principals; and (4) "the relative performance and evaluation of the administrators and the needs of the district have been considered."
Gowans requested that a hearing officer be selected, pursuant to Iowa Code section 279.24, to review the board's action. At the hearing the school board introduced evidence to establish reasons (1), (2), and (3). It chose to offer no proof in support of reason (4). The hearing officer, and later the school board, found that the school district had established reasons (1), (2), and (3) and further found that these reasons *155 amounted to "just cause" for terminating Gowans' position.
On review the district court reversed the board of education, ruling that, although the district had shown sufficient cause to eliminate three positions, it had not shown just cause for selecting Gowans' position. It remanded the case for a hearing on that question. The district then took the position that it was not required to make any showing why Gowans' position was selected for termination. It appealed the order of remand to us.
We explained our standard of review under section 279.24 in Briggs v. Board of Directors, Etc., 282 N.W.2d 740, 743 (Iowa 1979).
I. There is no issue on the propriety of the school district's decision to terminate three unspecified principal positions. The district court took this as established and we do too. The issue centers on the school district's contention that it cannot be required to explain why it selected the three specific positions. The district thinks it should be excused from explaining its specific staff reduction terminations because they were not fault oriented. Instead, the district claims, they were solely the product of neutral factors, such as shrinking enrollment and budget constraints. The school district believes it was Gowans' burden to show that the selections were arbitrary or capricious.
Gowans thinks the district's conceded lack of criteria, standards, or policy for making specific selections for staff reductions renders the decision to termiante his position arbitrary and capricious on its face. He maintains that, in the absence of some objective criteria or policy, the school district would be free to terminate the position of any administrator, regardless of qualifications, simply by proving that staff reduction is necessary.
The issue is not squarely joined because the parties see the question differently. The board, when faced with necessary staff reductions, is understandably anxious to be spared the usual burden of showing "just cause" to justify its decision on what positions to terminate. Gowans is anxious to learn the basis for the board's decision in order to become satisfied that it was not based on some frivolous or improper ground. We agree with the district court's holding that the proper rule accommodates the concerns of both the board and Gowans.
In selecting positions for staff reductions a board need not justify its decision under the formal procedure, or grounds, that would ordinarily be required to discharge an administrator for "just cause" under Iowa Code section 279.24. See Briggs, 282 N.W.2d at 742-43 (Iowa 1979). On the other hand the board can be called upon to articulate some objective basis for its selections, such as ability, seniority, experience, or anything else that denotes its decision was not arbitrary.
II. Staff reduction has become a fact of life for many school districts. A number of cases have recognized this and state that "just cause" must include legitimate reasons relating to the district's personnel and budgetary requirements. See, e.g., Smith v. Board of Education of Mediapolis School District, 334 N.W.2d 150, 152 (Iowa 1983); Briggs, 282 N.W.2d at 742. Four cases provide examples where staff reduction was the sole reason a teacher was terminated. Because Gowans' position was terminated solely for financial reasons (it was not a "fault" termination), these four cases are important. All four involved teachers facing a staff reduction policy, based on objective criteria, directing the district's termination decision. In three of the four cases the school district followed its policy or criteria in selecting the positions for termination. All three decisions were affirmed on appeal. Smith, 334 N.W.2d 150; Von Krog v. Board of Education of Beaman-Conrad-Liscomb, 298 N.W.2d 339 (Iowa Ct. App.1980); Hagarty v. Dysart-Geneseo Community School District, 282 N.W.2d 92 (Iowa 1979). In the other case, however, the district did not comply with the staff reduction policy and its termination decision was reversed. Ar-We-Va Community School District v. Long, 292 N.W.2d 402 (Iowa 1980). As mentioned, there is no *156 showing here of a board policy or objective criteria for terminating administrators such as Gowans.
The board is an elective body free to exercise its own discretion in deciding which of the three positions to terminate. So long as the termination decision is based on some set policy or criteria it cannot be challenged in court, unless the policy or criteria are illegal or irrational. For example, the termination decision manifestly could not violate a fundamental right of the persons holding the positions considered for termination; selection could not be based on their race, religious preference, sex, or political persuasion. In Briggs, 282 N.W.2d at 743, we also excluded "some petty vendetta" as a justifiable basis of the decision.
The difficulty with the board's position is that it leaves unanswered the crucial question of whether its decision rested within the broad area of its discretion or within the narrow area of what might be prohibited. Without inquiring into that question the possibility would exist that the selection was made on the basis of some petty vendetta or in violation of some fundamental right. The trial court was right in so holding.
III. Gowans has cross-appealed from that part of the district court's order which remanded the case for further hearing. He contends he should have been ordered reinstated.
Reinstatement is the proper disposition when a board's termination decision has been reversed. See Munger v. Jessup Community School District, 325 N.W.2d 377, 381 (Iowa 1982) (findings of board in teacher termination case not supported by a preponderance of evidence; judgment of district court reversed and teacher reinstated); Ar-We-Va Community School District, 292 N.W.2d at 405 (contracts of teachers not validly terminated; judgment of trial court affirmed and teachers reinstated).
We conclude that Gowans' position in the cross-appeal is well taken and that he should have been ordered reinstated. The judgment of the trial court is affirmed in part, reversed in part and remanded for entry of a judgment in accordance with this decision.
AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART AND REMANDED.

=== CASE 2223554 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:03.791918+00 ===

338 N.W.2d 782 (1983)
215 Neb. 410
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Michael NIX, Appellant.
Nos. 83-371, 83-372.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
September 30, 1983.
*783 Peter K. Blakeslee, Lincoln, for appellant.
Paul L. Douglas, Atty. Gen., and Mel Kammerlohr, Asst. Atty. Gen., Lincoln, for appellee.
KRIVOSHA, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, WHITE, HASTINGS, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, and GRANT, JJ.
CAPORALE, Justice.
The only assignment of error for us to consider in this appeal is whether the sentence imposed upon the defendant, Michael Nix, was excessive. We find the sentence excessive, modify it, and affirm as modified.
On February 4, 1983, Nix entered a plea of no contest to three property-related offenses. Those offenses were two felony counts of theft by receiving stolen property and one misdemeanor count of theft by receiving stolen property. Nix was sentenced to consecutive terms of not less than 1 nor more than 2 years on each of the felony convictions, and to a term of 1 year on the misdemeanor conviction, to be served concurrently with the two other sentences.
All of the convictions stem from a "sting" operation conducted by Lincoln police and the Nebraska State Patrol. The law enforcement officers had set themselves up in a secondhand store in Lincoln and let the word be circulated throughout the community that they were interested in buying property of all types. Word reached Nix and his partner in crime, James Knaff. Knaff and Nix on numerous occasions, prior to their eventual arrest, sold stolen property to the undercover officers. Knaff pled no contest to two counts of theft by receiving stolen property and was placed on probation for 2 years.
The rule of this court is that sentences within statutory limits will not be disturbed on appeal absent an abuse of discretion on the part of the sentencing judge. State v. Beach, 215 Neb. 213, 337 N.W.2d 772 (1983). Nix concedes that the sentence he was given is within statutory limits, but argues that an abuse of discretion took place when he was not placed on probation as was his partner.
In State v. Shonkwiler, 187 Neb. 747, 751, 194 N.W.2d 172, 174 (1972), we stated: "At least as early as 1905, this court expressed its view that where two or more defendants are convicted for the same offense and different penalties are inflicted, and it appears from the evidence that the defendant receiving the least punishment is at least equally guilty, it may be necessary for this court to examine the evidence to determine whether there were justifiable reasons for the distinctions and whether the higher sentence should be reduced." See, also, State v. Kruse, 215 Neb. 408, 338 N.W.2d 781 (1983); State v. Komor, 213 Neb. 376, 329 N.W.2d 120 (1983); State v. Javins, 199 Neb. 38, 255 N.W.2d 872 (1977); State v. Burkhardt, 194 Neb. 265, 231 N.W.2d 354 (1975).
Here, it is clear from the factual recitation in the District Court upon Nix's no contest pleas that Knaff and Nix were equally involved in these crimes. The fact that Knaff was allowed to plead to two charges and Nix to three is of no importance. Both were originally charged by information with at least twice as many crimes as they eventually pled to.
A review of the reports of the presentence investigation indicates that both of these men have lengthy juvenile and adult records but no prior felony convictions. The only significant difference in their past records indicates that Nix is somewhat less docile in his confrontations with police officers and has been convicted twice for assaults on police officers. Knaff has been convicted once for hindering arrest. Both still live with a parent, and Nix contributes to the support of his mother from wages he earns from employment he has held since November of 1982. Knaff, at the time of being placed on probation, was unemployed.
Under the circumstances of this case we conclude that the disparity of sentences accorded *784 these two men for the involvement in identical offenses is impermissible and embodies an abuse of discretion.
Accordingly, the sentence imposed by the Nebraska Third Judicial District Court, Lancaster County, upon the defendant is modified to one of probation for a period of 2 years under the same conditions as those imposed upon the coperpetrator Knaff.
AFFIRMED AS MODIFIED.

=== CASE 2223555 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:41:03.820534+00 ===

25 Ill.2d 342 (1962)
185 N.E.2d 201
ANNE S. EVERETT, Appellee,
v.
JAMES E. EVERETT, Appellant.
No. 36961.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed September 28, 1962.
*343 GORMAN AND DRUGAS, of Chicago, (ROBERT J. GORMAN, of counsel,) for appellant.
IRWIN, DENEKE & PENNER, of Chicago, (HAROLD E. PENNER, of counsel,) for appellee.
Affirmed in part and reversed in part.
Mr. JUSTICE HOUSE delivered the opinion of the court:
Anne S. Everett filed a complaint in the superior court of Cook County seeking a divorce from her husband, James E. Everett, on the ground of extreme and repeated cruelty. Defendant's answer denied the cruelty and he counterclaimed for divorce on the ground of desertion. Plaintiff denied this charge of desertion and filed a supplemental complaint alleging that he had deserted her. The decree entered by the trial court granted plaintiff's prayer for divorce on the ground of desertion; awarded the care, custody and control of the parties' three minor children to her, gave her the household furniture and furnishings, and ordered defendant to pay $30 per week to plaintiff for alimony and $25 per week for the support of each of the minor children, convey an undivided one-half interest in the residence to plaintiff, transfer one half of the 500 shares of stock he owns in his employer's company to plaintiff, and pay $1,750 to plaintiff's attorneys as their fee in this case. Defendant appeals directly to this court because a freehold is involved.
The defendant contends that the trial court erred in finding that he had deserted plaintiff and should have found that she had deserted him. It is undisputed that the parties had *344 lived separate and apart for more than one year when this action was commenced. While the testimony as to the cause of the separation was conflicting, there is evidence in the record, which, if believed, warranted the trial court in finding that the parties lived separate and apart because of defendant's extreme and repeated cruelty. Since the chancellor observed the witnesses and heard them testify, his finding in this respect will not now be disturbed. Tuyls v. Tuyls, 21 Ill.2d 192; Curran v. Curran, 19 Ill.2d 164.
Defendant also argues that the allowance of $30 a week for alimony and $25 a week for support of each of the children is excessive. The plaintiff testified to the cost of groceries, fuel, lights, water, garbage disposal, insurance, telephone, clothing, laundering, automobile expenses, medical and drug expenses and school incidentals. She stated that the cost of living expenses for her and the children is about $800 per month. While the record is not clear, this figure of $800 per month or about $185 per week apparently includes the amount that will be needed for rent. In any event, these costs of living figures were not contradicted or questioned by defendant. He points out, however, that after paying the allowance of $103 a week he must live on $73.60 a week, and argues that this demonstrates the excessiveness of the allowance.
In general, the amount of alimony and child support to be allowed in a case such as this must be determined by accommodating insofar as possible the needs of the parties and children with the available means of the parties, due regard being given to their stations in life. The available income of the parties is as follows: the $178.60 a week defendant receives after deductions for taxes and medical insurance, $8 to $54 a week which plaintiff earns for tutoring, and $12 a week social security payment she receives. While the allowance decreed by the trial court takes a substantial portion of defendant's income, it fails by some $15 to $62 per week, depending on plaintiff's earnings from *345 tutoring, of meeting the amount required to support her and the children. There is nothing in the record to indicate what amount would be necessary in order to maintain defendant according to his present station in life. From a careful review of the evidence, we are of the opinion that the trial court was within its discretion in fixing the amount of alimony and child support that it did.
Defendant contends that the court erred in ordering him to convey an undivided one-half interest in his home to plaintiff and to transfer one half of the stock he owns in his employer's company to her. It is undisputed that the parties purchased a home in Glenview in 1950 and plaintiff contributed $3500 of her own funds toward the down payment. Title to this property was held by the parties as joint tenants. In March, 1952, defendant purchased a lot in Northfield in his own name for the construction of a new home. On February 26, 1953, plaintiff advanced $4850 to defendant to apply on construction costs of the new residence, which funds he was to repay. On July 27, 1954, the Glenview home was sold and, after crediting the purchasers with the mortgage payments assumed and the payment of closing costs, plaintiff and defendant received $3135.95, which was also applied to construction costs on the new home. They executed a mortgage on the Northfield property to secure a loan for about $23,500. It was stipulated that the home cost $55,759.60.
Plaintiff testified that during 1950, 1951 and 1952 she spent over $1500 for family expenses and mortgage payments on the Glenview home. Defendant testified that during this period he was giving his wife $400 per month to be used for household expenses and mortgage payments. After they moved into the Northfield residence, defendant made all the installment payments on the new home. Plaintiff testified that from 1954 through 1957 she used about four or five thousand dollars of her own funds for family expenses and defendant testified that during this period he *346 gave his wife between $285 and $508 a month for family expenses.
Plaintiff also testified that the family lawyer had told her that the Northfield home should be in her husband's name in order to take advantage of a marital trust will. The attorney, who was called on plaintiff's behalf, did not corroborate her testimony and stated that the will he proposed is designed to operate whether or not the property is held in joint tenancy.
Plaintiff contends that her contribution toward the purchase of the Glenview home, her signing of the mortgage on the Northfield house, her contribution of $4850 for construction costs of the new home, her expenditure of $4000 or $5000 for family expenses, her living in the house since 1954 and the birth of the children give her special equities which justified the court acting under section 17 of the Divorce Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap, 40, par. 18,) to order defendant to convey an undivided one-half interest in the Northfield home to her and to transfer one half of his stock to her. Section 17 provides: "Whenever a divorce is granted, if it shall appear to the court that either party holds the title to property equitably belonging to the other, the court may compel conveyance thereof to be made to the party entitled to the same, upon such terms as it shall deem equitable." To justify a conveyance or transfer under section 17, however, special circumstances and equities must be alleged and established by the evidence, (Stevens v. Stevens, 14 Ill.2d 99; Podgornik v. Podgornik, 392 Ill. 124; Skoronski v. Skoronski, 395 Ill. 301,) which is unnecessary when the court orders a conveyance or transfer of property in lieu of alimony under section 18. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1959, chap. 40, par. 19; Persico v. Persico, 409 Ill. 608.) The plaintiff's complaint failed to allege any special circumstances or equities with respect to the 500 shares of stock in defendant's name, nor did she pray for a transfer of any of the shares to her. Furthermore, there is no evidence that *347 any of her savings, earnings or services were contributed in acquiring the shares of stock. The court therefore erred in ordering defendant to transfer one half of the shares of stock to plaintiff.
It is also well established that the rights or interests that one spouse has in the property of the other by virtue of the marriage relation alone will not justify a conveyance under section 17 (Anderson v. Anderson, 380 Ill. 435; Bissett v. Bissett, 375 Ill. 551; Termaat v. Termaat, 357 Ill. 472,) but it must be alleged and proved by the spouse seeking a part or all of the property in the name of the other that he or she has furnished valuable consideration such as money or services other than those normally performed in the marriage relation which has directly or indirectly been used to acquire or enhance the value of the property. (Tuyls v. Tuyls 21 Ill.2d 192; Cross v. Cross, 5 Ill.2d 456; Nowogurski v. Nowogurski, 404 Ill. 276.) Thus, the signing of the mortgage, plaintiff's residence in the Northfield home and the birth of the children do not give her an equity in the property.
It is clear nevertheless that plaintiff did make valuable contributions toward the construction of the residence. Defendant admits that plaintiff contributed $3500 toward the down payment on the Glenview home. Whether plaintiff made mortgage payments on this home from her funds or from the $400 per month defendant gave her for family expenses is immaterial because the net proceeds of $3135.95 from the sale of that home was all that was applied on the construction costs of the new home. Although title to the Glenview home was in joint tenancy, we believe that under the circumstances of this case plaintiff's contribution should be traced into the Northfield home without regard to the joint tenancy. She also advanced $4850 to apply on construction costs, which amount defendant was to repay. Plaintiff therefore has an equitable interest in the Northfield home in the amount of $7985.95.
*348 Although plaintiff testified that she had used four to five thousand dollars of her own funds for household expenses between 1954 and 1957, it appears that during this same period, defendant was giving her between $285 and $508 a month and making the mortgage payments of $203 per month. While plaintiff's total contribution for this period is large, it is a small fraction of the contribution to household expense made by defendant. In Spalding v. Spalding, 361 Ill. 387, this court, after reviewing cases from this State and others, held that payments voluntarily made by a wife for family expenses during the time the husband and wife are living together do not create an indebtedness from the husband to the wife, in the absence of an agreement to that effect. If the wife had been providing for a substantial portion of the family expenses while the husband was using his funds to acquire property in his name, there would be some justification for considering her contributions as indirectly being used to acquire the property. Under the facts of this case, however, we do not believe that plaintiff's contributions for household expenses give her an equity in the residence, especially since the divorce decree provides that she is to receive all the household furniture and furnishings.
We hold that the plaintiff has an equitable interest of $7985.95 in the Northfield home, that she is entitled to a lien on the property for that amount, (see Killebrew v. Killebrew, 398 Ill. 432,) and that she has no interest in the stock. That part of the decree directing defendant to transfer one half of his stock to plaintiff is reversed; that part directing him to convey an undivided one-half interest in the Northfield home is reversed and remanded with directions to enter a decree in accordance with the views herein expressed; and in all other respects the decree of the superior court of Cook County is affirmed.
Affirmed in part and reversed in part and remanded, with directions.

=== CASE 9740427 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:23.215025+00 ===

DUNN, Justice
(On Reassignment).
This is an appeal from an order denying appellant Ronald R. Ell’s claim to $559.00 in small bills seized from a dresser in his apartment by Sioux Falls police in 1974 pursuant to a valid search warrant. We reverse and remand.
On April 19, 1974, two men robbed Get-ten’s Food Store in Sioux Falls, South Dakota. The robbers forced the assistant manager to give them approximately $900.00 in small bills. The robbers then fled in a red Ford automobile.
On April 23, 1974, police noticed a red Ford fitting the description of the Getten’s robbery vehicle parked in front of appellant’s apartment. The automobile had license plates registered to appellant. Police, pursuant to a search warrant, searched appellant’s apartment and seized $559.00 in small bills from appellant’s dresser. On April 29, 1974, appellant was charged with first degree robbery in the Getten’s holdup. Appellant received court-appointed counsel after advising the court that he had $15.00, was in jail and had no other money anywhere.
While free on bail, appellant took part in an armed robbery in Omaha, Nebraska. A Nebraska court sentenced appellant to life in prison for murder in connection with the robbery. Based upon this sentence, the Minnehaha County states attorney moved to dismiss charges against appellant in the Getten robbery. The motion was granted by the circuit court.
In 1981, the manager of Getten’s petitioned the circuit court for the $559.00 seized during the search of appellant’s apartment. Despite appellant’s claim that he was the sole owner of the money, the circuit court awarded exclusive title to the $559.00 to the manager of Getten’s Food Store.
At issue in this appeal is whether money legally seized by police from the apartment of an individual subsequently charged with first degree robbery should be returned to him following the dismissal of the robbery charge against him.
The circuit court in this case acted pursuant to SDCL 23A-37, which provides for the return of seized property held by a court. We have held that SDCL 23A-37 gives the circuit courts authority to determine the rightful owner of seized property and to return the property to that person. State v. Cody, 322 N.W.2d 11 (S.D.1982). The general rule of the federal courts is in accord with Cody: “Seized property, other than contraband, should be returned to the rightful owner once criminal proceedings have terminated.” Sovereign News Co. v. United States, 690 F.2d 569 (Sixth Cir.1982); United States v. Wright, 610 F.2d 930 (D.C.Cir.1979); United States v. LaFatch, 565 F.2d 81 (Sixth Cir.1977). See Fed.R.Crim.P. 41(e).
Unfortunately, the determination of the rightful owner of the property in question becomes more difficult when there are third party claimants, such as the manager of Getten’s. Previous federal and state decisions do, however, give us guidelines to follow in determining the rightful owner. First, the seizure of property from someone is prima facie evidence of that person’s entitlement, particularly when the property is money. Unless there are serious reasons to doubt a person’s rights to property seized from him, he need not come forward with additional evidence of ownership. United States v. Wright, supra, at 939. Second, in cases of allegedly stolen property, the burden is on the state to show some nexus between the property and the criminal ac*847tivity. Such a nexus is present where the property is shown to be a fruit of the crime. If there is no such evidence, the property must be returned to defendant. State v. Sweatt, 427 A.2d 940 (Me.1981).
In the present case, appellant was never convicted of robbing Getten’s, and the state has not shown a nexus between the seized property and the criminal activity. There is simply no evidence in the record to show that the $559.00 seized by the police was the fruit of the Getten’s robbery.
The fact that appellant stated at his arraignment that he had no money other than $15.00 at the jail is not necessarily inconsistent with his claim to the seized money. Appellant merely attested at arraignment that he lacked the money to retain counsel at the time he requested the court to appoint counsel. United States v. Wright, supra, at 941. The $559.00 was in the custody of the court and could not be used by appellant. Therefore, under the two-part guideline stated above, the $559.00 would be the property of appellant.
Under SDCL 23A-40-11, a lien is created upon all of the property, both real and personal, of any person for whom legal counsel or a public defender has been provided. Upon satisfaction of this lien, the balance of the $559.00, if any, should be awarded to appellant.
The order of the circuit court is reversed and the case remanded for an amended order in accordance with this decision.
MORGAN, J., concurs.
FOSHEIM, C.J., concurs specially.
WOLLMAN and HENDERSON, JJ., dissent.

=== CASE 9740429 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:23.222315+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(dissenting).
Proceedings were instituted by appellant under the provisions of SDCL ch. 23A-37 for the return of $559.00 in currency seized from his rented room under a lawful search warrant. These proceedings are all ancillary to the case in chief, a first-degree robbery charge, which was ultimately dismissed. A Sioux Falls grocery store filed written claim to the seized currency, whereupon appellant filed an “Answer and Motion to Deliver Defendant’s Property.” The trial court awarded exclusive title to the currency unto the grocery store proprietor and ordered the Clerk of Minnehaha County to deliver it to him.
A procedural history is in order. The armed robbery took place on April 19,1974; a search warrant to search two rooms of an apartment house issued on April 26, 1974, one of said rooms rented to appellant under an alias; the search warrant was executed on the same day, April 26,1974; a return of the search warrant was sworn to before the then Municipal Judge, Honorable R. Patterson; an inventory of property seized pursuant to the search was filed with the Municipal Court on April 29,1974; on May 2,1974, appellant made sworn application for a court-appointed attorney reflecting that he was an unemployed construction worker and had no wages, accounts receivable, money on person, money in banks, bonds, stocks, pensions, furniture, radios, jewelry, real property, but did have a one-half interest in a 1962 Ford of $50.00; in said application he swore that his annual income was $5,000.00 for the past two years; on May 2, 1974, the Municipal Judge appointed appellant defense counsel; on May 4,1974, appellant was released from jail upon posting a $3,500.00 corporate surety bond; a preliminary hearing, after three sessions, was ulti-, *848mately concluded on May 20, 1974, and appellant was bound over for trial on first-degree robbery charges. Appellant remained free on bond. While on bond, he was convicted in the State of Nebraska of first-degree murder and three counts of shooting with intent to kill, wound, or maim. The Nebraska convictions stem from appellant’s participation in a February 21, 1975, armed robbery of a Hinky Dinky store in Omaha, Nebraska. See State v. Ell, 196 Neb. 800, 246 N.W.2d 594 (1976). Appellant is now imprisoned in the Nebraska State Penitentiary at Lincoln and appears pro se in this appeal. Based upon appellant’s life sentence to prison in Nebraska and a sentence of 16% years to 50 years on three counts of shooting with intent to kill, wound, or maim, the state’s attorney moved to dismiss the robbery charge in South Dakota. The trial court granted the motion on October 26, 1977. The grocery store proprietor waited for four years and two months after the first-degree robbery charge was dismissed to assert ownership of currency. On February 1, 1982, the trial court awarded title of the currency to the store owner.
At issue, is the trial court’s determination of the rightful owner of the money under the facts of this case and the procedure set forth in SDCL ch. 23A-37. This is our second expression on this type of proceeding. Our first holding is found in State v. Cody, 322 N.W.2d 11 (S.D.1982), and we look to that case for guidance and precedent. All pertinent South Dakota statutes governing the disposition of seized property in a criminal prosecution are specifically set forth in Cody. Suffice it to say, we held in Cody that our trial courts have the authority to determine the rightful owner of seized property and to return the property to that person. The general rule of the federal courts is in accord with Cody: “[S]eized property, other than contraband, should be returned to the rightful owner after the criminal proceedings have terminated.” Sovereign News Co. v. United States, 690 F.2d 569, 577 (6th Cir.1982); United States v. Wright, 610 F.2d 930 (D.C.Cir.1979); United States v. LaFatch, 565 F.2d 81 (6th Cir.1977). See Fed.R.Crim.P., Rule 41(e) 18 U.S.C.A.
We deem it necessary to review the facts to determine whether or not the trial court was clearly erroneous in its determination that the grocery store proprietor was the rightful owner of the currency. At or about 9:45 p.m. on April 19, 1974, two men, one of whom was armed, robbed Getten’s Food Store. The store had just been closed and the cash register drawers were placed in a safe. The assistant manager was forced by the robbers to empty the store’s safe of all cash it contained into three paper grocery sacks. Approximately $900.00 was taken in ones, fives, tens, and twenties. At the preliminary hearing, the assistant manager was able to identify the denominations of the stolen cash. The two robbers made their escape in a red Ford automobile, shooting at their pursuers as they fled. On April 20, 1974, at 3:00 a.m., a Sioux Falls policeman was investigating an armed robbery that occurred earlier that night. He noted a 1962 Ford parked on Duluth Avenue in Sioux Falls. This car was painted in a two-tone style with white, over blue or turquoise, bearing South Dakota license plates Bl-1847. This car was registered to appellant and his wife. Looking into this car from the outside, the alert officer saw two grocery bags in the back seat and a spent .45 calibre cartridge on the front seat. In an unrelated incident, on April 21, 1974, another Sioux Falls officer had occasion to stop the same automobile and noted that appellant was an occupant therein. A witness who pursued the escape car described it as being maroon or red. Sioux Falls Detective Flowers noticed an automobile fitting the description of the getaway vehicle parked in front of appellant’s apartment house on April 23, 1974. There were no license plates. On the same day, detective Flowers returned once again and noted that the automobile now had South Dakota license plates but the plates matched the other 1962 Ford plates, namely Bl-1847. The manager of the apartment building identified appellant as an occupant of one of the rooms and testified at the prelimi*849nary hearing that he saw appellant drive a red Ford of the same year as the blue Ford.
A search warrant was secured and its propriety is not in question. Investigating officers learned that appellant’s room was rented to an individual who gave his name as Jerry Ellis. However, this individual was identified as appellant. The inventory from appellant’s room revealed the remaining grocery store sack and it was described as a “brown paper sack bearing RG 27N, No. 86 sack double strength.” The return of search warrant reveals .38 calibre and .45 calibre ammunition, which was similar to the .38 calibre slug removed from a wall of an apartment near the shoot-out and the .45 calibre ammunition found on the street at the getaway scene. The return also reveals one pair of dark sunglasses. The assistant manager twice testified that one of the robbers was wearing sunglasses. Also depicted on the return was “one extension to convert a hand held .45 calibre weapon to a shoulder weapon,” an apparatus to gain more deadly accuracy commonly used by thugs and seasoned criminals. The inventory disclosed 101 one dollar bills in the top dresser drawer; 233 one dollar bills in the center dresser drawer; and 11 ten dollar bills, 14 five dollar bills, and 45 one dollar bills in the bottom dresser drawer.
Although a conviction of first-degree robbery was not obtained against appellant, the evidence strongly points towards his felonious participation in the armed robbery of Getten’s Food Store and that the cash seized from his room was the fruit of the robbery. This Court should not sanction the delivery of the fruits of a crime to a hardened criminal, to the deprivation of an innocent victim.* One who steals or converts property to his own use does not thereby acquire title. Stewart v. People, 193 Colo. 399, 566 P.2d 1069 (1977). Therefore, the majority opinion’s lien analysis under SDCL 23A-40-11, is incorrect because appellant owns no currency upon which a lien could attach.
Quite recently in United States Fire Ins. Co. v. Dace, 305 N.W.2d 50 (S.D.1981), a civil action, this Court held that proof of arson may be established by circumstantial evidence. Here, circumstantial evidence and direct evidence strongly link appellant to the armed robbery. Circumstantial evidence is equal to direct evidence and a crime in South Dakota may be proven by circumstantial evidence. State v. Herrald, 269 N.W.2d 776 (S.D.1978); State v. Shank, 88 S.D. 645, 226 N.W.2d 384 (1975). It is incredible that an unemployed construction worker would loosely keep currency in three dresser drawers and maintain that he is the rightful owner thereof when sunglasses and a nearby third grocery sack circumstantially tie him to the crime in question, not to mention ammunition similar to that used in the robbery and the potent evidence that he was the registered owner of the getaway vehicle. We cannot hold the trial court was clearly erroneous in its findings as specifically set forth in an order entered the 29th day of January, 1982, finding that the proprietor of the robbed grocery store was awarded exclusive title to the currency and denying appellant’s claim of title. In re Nelson, 330 N.W.2d 151 (S.D.1983); In re Hobelsberger, 85 S.D. 282, 181 N.W.2d 455 (1970).
Wright, 610 F.2d at 935, has established the general rule in the United States that seized property, other than contraband, should be returned to its rightful owners once criminal proceedings have been terminated. Appellant places great support to his claim for the currency based upon that leading case. However, the Wright Court stated:
The seizure of property from someone is prima facie evidence of that person’s entitlement, particularly when the seized property is money — negotiable instruments difficult to identify and trace.... Unless there are serious reasons (presented by the government or adverse claimants) to doubt a person’s right to the *850property seized from him, he need not come forward with additional evidence of ownership, (emphasis in original) (footnotes omitted)
Wright, 610 F.2d at 939. The Wright Court distinguished between money seized from a person’s body and money seized from a room used by a person; the right to possession of the latter is “less certain.” Wright, 610 F.2d at 940. Reviewing this record, there are serious reasons to doubt appellant’s right to the currency and which we have factually substantiated above. Appellant has relied on a prima facie showing of entitlement but this presumption was strongly overcome by the facts of this case and the grocery store proprietor’s claim of ownership to the seized funds.
I am authorized to state that Justice WOLLMAN joins in this dissent.
The plight of victims of crimes has become of nationwide and statewide importance. So much, in fact, that our state legislature passed SDCL ch. 23A-28, for restitution to victims of crime, and SDCL ch. 23A-28A, for restitution of profits from crime.

=== CASE 9740430 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:35:23.474144+00 ===

Achor, J.*
— Appellant was charged by indictment with first degree murder by poisoning. A jury returned a verdict of guilty of murder in the first degree and appellant accordingly was sentenced to the Indiana State Prison for his natural life.
The sole error assigned in the motion for new trial and here relied upon as cause for appeal is that the evidence is not sufficient to sustain the verdict.
Accordingly we examine the evidence, first, to determine whether it is sufficient to prove that the decedent died as the result of arsenic poisoning, and, second, whether it is sufficient to prove that such poison was administered by the appellant with premeditated malice to kill and murder the decedent, Lois Byrd, his wife.
One: The evidence with respect to the cause of decedent’s death most favorable to the state is as follows:
Every doctor and every lay witness who saw Lois Byrd for any extended length of time prior to her death described her symptoms as sore throat, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, elevated temperature, numbness in the extremeties, abdominal distress, and delirium. According to Dr. Robert Forney, State Toxicologist, *454these are the classical symptoms of arsenical poisoning. He testified that arsenic is a common homicidal poison because of its physical properties which make it easy to administer without arousing suspicion in the victim, and because the symptoms produced approximate those of other diseases and illnesses, which make it difficult for a doctor to diagnósé. Dr. Forney further testified that arsenic is . a metallic poison, and there was sufficient arsenic in the organs and tissue of Lois Byrd to have caused death. Dr. Steussey testified that from his post-mortem examination there was no evidence that Lois Byrd died of disease or natural causes.
There is evidence that the deceased received a penicillin injection sufficient to cause death in event of a reaction. However, there is evidence that such a reaction would have occurred either almost immediately or, if it were a delayed reaction, it would have been evident in the form of hives. The evidence does not indicate that such a reaction occurred.
Thus, there is substantial evidence of probative -value from which the jury could draw a logical inference that Lois Byrd did, in fact, die as the result of arsenic poisoning.
Two: Murder by arsenic poisoning is, by its very nature, a stealthy and despicable crime. Therefore, evidence of the crime, is normally circumstantial rather than direct. Nonetheless, the evidence, although circumstantial, must be sufficient to sustain the verdict.
There is evidence that the decedent first developed the more pronounced symptoms of arsenic poisoning when she was ill at her home and the appellant was cooking for her and waiting on her. Thereafter, during *455her extended illness, decedent would seem to get better until the appellant would serve her, then she would vomit and become worse. After she had moved to the home of her parents, she drank a large amount of frozen orange juice, which she seemed to nourish. On one occasion, the appellant walked nine or ten blocks through deep snow, from his house to the home of his wife’s parents carrying prepared orange juice in a glass jar. Within a few minutes after the deceased drank some of the orange juice, she vomited and became worse and, when she said she didn’t want it, the appellant took it away with him.
On another occasion the appellant went out and got a malted milk for the deceased. After she drank a small portion of it she vomited and couldn’t drink the rest of it. However, appellant had it put in the refrigerator for her. The next day appellant telephoned from his barbershop several times and asked whether she had drunk it. She did finish drinking the malt and became so ill she was taken to the hospital. She died ten days later. A chemical analysis of the Dixie cup which had contained the malt disclosed that it contained one thousand times the amount of arsenic normally found in such cups.- Findings regarding a straw taken from her bedroom were similar. It can be reasonably assumed that she consumed arsenic poison in this beverage, which was given to the deceased by the appellant. This inference is further strengthened by the fact that a search of appellant’s home produced one clean bottle which had formerly, contained arsenic poison, and several dust-dovered bottles, all of which were dragged from, behind the furnace in the -basement. Thus, there was substantial evidence of probative, value from which *456an inference could reasonably be drawn that the appellant did in fact administer arsenic poisoning to his wife, and thereby caused her death.
The appellant took the witness stand in his own defense. He denied his guilt and professed his profound love and devotion for his wife. In the light of this testimony, and because the evidence of guilt was circumstantial, and because there is a noticeable lack of evidence of any motive for the killing, appellant asserts that under these circumstances he was not proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, and therefore that the lower court committed error in overruling appellant’s motion for a new trial.
However, few rules of appellate procedure are more firmly established than this, that it is not within the province of this court, as a court of review, to weigh the evidence, whether it be direct or circumstantial. We may not say that the jury was obliged to believe or disbelieve the testimony of the appellant which was adverse to the verdict. If the verdict is supported by evidence of probative value, it is not for this court to determine whether it establishes the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt, nor is it for this court to determine whether, in proving such guilt, the evidence excludes every hypothesis to the contrary. This is the responsibility of the jury and the trial court. This court may only determine whether there was substantial evidence of probative value from which the jury could have inferred that the appellant was guilty of the offense charged. Christen v. State (1950), 228 Ind. 30, 89 N. E. 2d 445 [and cases cited]. It is by this judicial process that the constitutional prerogative is made *457effective, and that an accused be tried by an impartial jury, in event he elects to be so tried.1
Furthermore, appellant, in support of his argument that the verdict is not sustained by sufficient evidence, contends (1) that the evidence as to the cause of Lois Byrd’s death is in doubt because of the conflicting diagnosis of the doctors who treated her prior to the time of her death; (2) that a single injection of penicillin which was administered to decedent was capable of causing her death; (3) that if she died of arsenic poisoning, many other persons had equal opportunity of administering poison to her, and (4) that there is no proof of any motive by reason of which appellant might have murdered his wife.
The first two points have heretofore been discussed. With respect to the third point, even though there was an opportunity for other persons to have *458poisoned the decedent, there is no evidence from which even an inference of such a fact might be drawn.. However, even if there had been two inferences as to who caused the death, one of which implicated the appellant and one of which did not, it still would not be within the province of this court to reverse the finding and verdict of the jury for that reason.
As stated by this court in the case of Lee v. State (1901), 156 Ind. 541, 546, 60 N. E. 299, and quoted in the case of Christen v. State, supra [228 Ind. at p. 39]:
Where the circumstantial evidence in a case is of such a character that two conflicting inferences may be reasonably drawn therefrom, one favorable to or tending to prove the guilt of the accused, and the other favorable to his innocence, then, under such circumstances, it is not within the province of this court to determine which inference ought to have controlled the jury. The question, in such a case manifestly becomes one of fact for the decision of the jury, subject to review by the trial court, and is not, as previously said, open to review on appeal. American Varnish Co. v. Reed, 154 Ind. 88; McCaughey v. State, ante, 41.’ ”
Concerning the absence of evidence' of motive in the case, this court has stated the rule as follows:
“With motives, in any speculative or psychological sense, neither the law, nor the tribunal which administers the law, has any proper concern. The outward acts of men are all that they profess, or are called upon to regulate or to punish. ... And that motives may be inferred from conduct, as well as conduct from motives, is a familiar principle in the law of presumptive evidence.
So that the jury were legally justified in in-, ferring a motive from the comihission, of the. crime itself, if motive had been essential to make *459out the crime, but it was not. . ; .” Hinshaw v. State (1877), 147 Ind. 334, 364, 47 N. E. 157, 172.
Also, it has been held that motive may be inferred from the commission of the criminal act. Evans v. State (1927), 199 Ind. 55, 64, 155 N. E. 203, 206; Morgan v. State (1921), 190 Ind. 411, 417, 130 N. E. 528, 530.
There is a marked parallel between the evidence in this case and that which was presented to this court in the case of Epps v. The State (1885), 102 Ind. 539, 556, 1 N. E. 491, 501. In that case this court stated:
“It is claimed, finally, that the verdict was not sustained by sufficient evidence, and that for that reason, if for no other, the judgment ought to be reversed.
It is true, that everything which served to connect the appellant with the death of John Epps rested upon circumstantial evidence, and that the circumstances were not absolutely conclusive against the appellant, yet upon the whole evidence we see no palpable reason for doubting her guilt. The evidence tended to establish beyond all question that the deceased died from arsenical poisoning, produced by the administration of small or divided doses of arsenic; that the deceased was taken sick, with symptoms indicating the presence of arsenic in his stomach, the day after the appellant purchased arsenic as herein, above stated; that the appellant cooked the deceased’s breakfast and served it to him the morning he was taken sick; that she administered food and medicine to him during his sickness, having opportunities in that respect which no one else enjoyed; that she at first denied having purchased any arsenic the day before her husband was taken sick, and when confronted with the fact that she had done so, she was unable to . give any account of what became of the arsenic. There were other circumstances unfavorable to the appellant which it is impracticable to *460set out at length. The judgment can not, therefore, be reversed upon the evidence.”
In our judicial system it is the right of every man to be tried by a jury of his peers. A defendant having elected to be so tried is bound by the decision of the jury, if convicted, unless there was no evidence of probative value from which the jury might reasonably have drawn an inference of guilt. Christen v. State, supra; Myles v. State (1955), 234 Ind. 129, 124 N. E. 2d 205; Music v. State (1959) , 240 Ind. 54, 161 N. E. 2d 615.
Judgment is, therefore, affirmed.
Arterburn, C. J., and Landis, J., concur.
Jackson, J., dissents, with opinion.
Bobbitt, J., concurs in the dissenting opinion.
NOTE: This appeal was reassigned on June 28, 1962 to the writer.
. Since counsel for appellant [and the dissenting opinion by Jackson, J.] rely heavily upon appellant’s testimony in the case, we note the following weaknesses in that testimony. In the course of the appellant’s own testimony it was developed that although an opportunity had been given him to take a lie detector test he had declined to do so, on advice of counsel, until the time of his appearance on the witness stand when he offered to take such a test provided it would be taken “right here” in open court, which could not be permitted.
The appellant explained the purchase of the bottles containing arsenic on the ground that it had been purchased to eradicate roaches. However, the labels on the bottles described the contents only as “ANT KILLER for the control of sweet-eating ants.” The labels made no reference to roaches. Appellant [who had once worked in a drug store] denied knowing that the bottles contained arsenic, although their labels clearly indicated that the only active ingredient was arsenic. Also, bearing upon this issue, is the fact that the empty bottles were secreted behind the furnace.
Furthermore, there was some hesitation, and even contradiction, in appellant’s testimony with regard to the incidents during which the appellant brought the orange juice and malted milk for the decedent’s consumption. These facts and the demeanor of the appellant upon the witness stand were all matters which the jury was entitled to consider and weigh in determining the credibility of appellant’s testimony and the fact of his guilt.