=== CASE 9739477 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:15:53.702084+00 ===

NAJAM, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the majority’s holding that the lease in question is illegal under the Adams County Zoning and Land Use Ordinance Regulation of Intensive Livestock Operations (“Ordinance”). The discussion of what constitutes a perpetual lease is an unnecessary digression. The only question before us is whether the lease here is a long-term lease under the Ordinance.
Our standard of review on such issues requires deference to the Adams County Plan Commission’s interpretation of “long term.” Specifically, we have stated:
*1010Generally, we review questions of law decided by an agency de novo. However, an agency’s construction of its own ordinance is entitled to deference. The ordinary rules of statutory construction apply in interpreting the language of a zoning ordinance. Under those rules, the express language of the ordinance controls our interpretation and our goal is to determine, give effect to, and implement the intent of the enacting body. When an ordinance is subject to different interpretations, the interpretation chosen by the administrative agency charged with the duty of enforcing the ordinance is entitled to great weight, unless that interpretation is inconsistent with the ordinance itself. If a court is faced with two reasonable interpretations of an ordinance, one of which is supplied by an administrative agency charged with enforcing the ordinance, the court should defer to the agency. Once a court determines that an administrative agency’s interpretation is reasonable, it should end its analysis....
Hoosier Outdoor Adver. Corp. v. RBL Mgmt., Inc., 844 N.E.2d 157, 163 (Ind.Ct.App.2006) (citations omitted), trains, denied. The trial court properly applied that standard of review and agreed with the Plan Commission’s determination. We cannot say either that the Plan Commission erred as a matter of law or that the trial court erred in its exercise of judicial review.
Again, the Ordinance does not require a perpetual lease, only a long-term lease. The purpose of the Ordinance is to ensure that livestock operations will have enough time to spread the waste generated by those operations. Hence, by “long term,” the Ordinance requires only a term sufficiently long to satisfy that waste-disposal requirement. While I agree with Judge Barnes that five years would be a reasonable amount of time to satisfy that requirement, I cannot say that one year is unreasonable.
This is not to say that under any and all circumstances a one-year lease is a “long term” lease. Here, however, the lease “shall not be cancelled, altered or amended without the consent” of the Plan Commission, and a violation of the terms of the lease will subject Hilty’s permit to revocation. Appellant’s App. at 69. Indeed, “the purpose of this Lease is to provide [Hilty] with sufficient application lands as defined in section 14(h) of [the Ordinance]. The parties recognize that this is a condition precedent to the granting of a permit to [Hilty].” Id. That is, the permit and the acreage operate in tandem. Because the lease is tied directly to Hilty’s permit, the lease serves its intended purpose. Thus, I defer to the Plan Commission determination that the one-year base term is long enough to meet the Ordinance’s requirement. See Hoosier Outdoor, 844 N.E.2d at 163.
Hilty’s lease satisfies Ordinance 2-16-3(C)(3), requiring an applicant for an intensive livestock permit to establish a “long term” lease when that applicant does not own at least one-half of the acreage on which waste will be spread. As such, Hilty’s application also satisfies Ordinance 2-16-2(B)(3), which establishes acreage per livestock requirements. Accordingly, I would affirm the trial court.
BARNES, Judge, concurring in result with separate opinion.
I concur in result but write separately because I believe the only issue is whether Hilty’s automatically renewable one-year lease is a long-term lease. I acknowledge that we must give some deference to the Plan Commission’s interpretation of “long-term.” See Hoosier Outdoor Adver. Corp. v. RBL Mgmt., Inc., 844 N.E.2d 157, 163 *1011(Ind.Ct.App.2006), trans. denied. I simply cannot agree that it is reasonable to call a one-year lease a long-term lease. Common sense tells me one year is not long-term. See Merriam Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 687 (10th ed.1994) (defining long term as “occurring over or involving a relatively long period of time” and “of, relating to, or constituting a financial operation or obligation based on a considerable term and esp. one of more than 10 years.”).
It seems to me that the public policy underlying the Ordinance is primarily to assure that a hog CAFO has a place to dispose of the manure that is produced by the swine. Adams County, in enacting the Ordinance, had a legitimate interest in attempting to assuage the olfactory senses of those who may be affected by a CAFO operation. The Ordinance calls for a “long-term” lease in order to ensure, I assume, a place to spread the manure for a defined, lengthy, and fixed period of time. The lease at issue here does not do that in my opinion. Despite the necessity of 180-days notice and the approval of the Adams County Administrator of Zoning prior to the cancellation of the lease and the automatic renewal provisions in the lease, this lease could theoretically be terminated after twelve months. These provisions do not provide the necessary assurance to the community that Hilty will have a place to dispose of the waste for the long-term.
It is true that the operation’s permit is subject to cancellation if and when there is no place available to spread the manure. I would suggest, however, that 1000 hogs will not magically disappear from a location overnight, their manure will continue to accumulate, and even one day without an outlet for that porcine waste would be too much — especially for downwind neighbors. I believe the lease is not long-term, I would reverse the trial court, and I would insist on a lease of at least five years in order to comply with the Ordinance.

=== CASE 9739478 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:15:54.649567+00 ===

JUSTICE KARMEIER delivered the judgment of the court, with opinion. Chief Justice Thomas and Justices Freeman, Fitzgerald, Garman, and Burke concurred in the judgment and opinion. Justice Kilbride concurred in part and dissented in part, with opinion. OPINION Defendant, Andrew Urdíales, was indicted in the circuit court of Livingston County for the first degree murder of Cassandra Corum. See 720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(a) (West 2004). The State subsequently filed notice of intent to seek the death penalty. Defendant tendered a plea of guilty but mentally ill; however, the State disputed the existence of mental illness. The parties subsequently agreed to an evidentiary hearing in which the trial court simultaneously received evidence concerning the factual basis for the plea and conducted a bench trial on the issue of guilt/innocence. The trial court ultimately rejected defendant’s plea of guilty but mentally ill and his bench trial defense of insanity. The court found defendant guilty of first degree murder. Defendant waived a jury for the eligibility stage of capital sentencing, and the circuit court subsequently found defendant eligible for the death penalty based upon prior murder convictions. See 720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(b)(3) (West 2004). Defendant elected jury consideration for the aggravation/mitigation phase of sentencing. After considering evidence in aggravation and mitigation, the jury concluded that death was the appropriate sentence. See 720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(g) (West 2004). The circuit court thereafter sentenced defendant to death. Because defendant was sentenced to death, his appeal was brought directly to this court. Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, §4(b); 134 Ill. 2d R. 603. On appeal, defendant contends that (1) the trial court erred in ordering defendant restrained during trial, and instructing the jury that “security measures” had been implemented; (2) the trial court’s repeated on-the-record criticisms of recent appellate court opinions deprived defendant of due process and fundamental fairness; (3) the trial court denied defendant due process and fundamental fairness when the court disparaged the motives and conduct of attorneys from the Office of the State Appellate Defender; (4) the trial court abused its discretion in rejecting defendant’s plea of guilty but mentally ill; (5) the trial court’s verdict of guilty, instead of guilty but mentally ill, was against the manifest weight of the evidence; (6) the trial court’s statement to the sentencing jury, that the court had rejected defendant’s insanity defense at trial, and the prosecutor’s reference thereto in closing argument, “improperly demeaned the defendant’s mitigating evidence of mental illness, and punished defendant for exercising his constitutional right to present a defense”; (7) the trial court erred in denying defendant’s request to submit experts’ reports to the jury; (8) the trial court erred in improperly assisting the prosecutor in cross-examining a witness and thus establishing a foundation for a prosecution exhibit; (9) the prosecutor’s closing argument denied defendant due process; (10) the sentencing jury should have been specifically instructed that a background of extreme emotional or physical abuse is a mitigating factor; and (11) the Illinois death penalty statute violates principles announced in Apprendi in that it does not require application of the reasonable doubt standard at the second stage of capital sentencing proceedings. We set forth, hereafter, a summary of the evidence pertinent to a discussion of the issues raised by defendant. BACKGROUND On July 14, 1996, police found the nude body of an unidentified woman floating in the Vermilion River in Livingston County. The woman’s wrists had been handcuffed, her ankles were bound with duct tape, and her mouth was covered with duct tape. An autopsy revealed that the victim had died of a single gunshot wound to the head and seven stab wounds to the head and chest. The body was later identified as that of Cassandra Corum. Corum had been reported missing from Hammond, Indiana. Corum’s murder was subsequently linked to the murders of two young women in Cook County. The bodies of Laura Uylaki and Lynn Huber had been found in Wolf Lake, a body of water in Cook County, near the Indiana border. Each of those victims had also been shot in the head and stabbed multiple times. Ballistics tests indicated that all three victims were killed by bullets fired from the same gun. On April 1, 1997, a police officer in Hammond, Indiana, responded to a call involving defendant and a prostitute. The prostitute told the officer that defendant had wanted to take her to Wolf Lake, handcuff and duct tape her, and have sex with her. In November of 1996, the same officer had arrested defendant for unlawful possession of a firearm, and at that time had found rolls of duct tape in defendant’s truck. The Hammond police officer forwarded the information he had obtained to Chicago detectives, who subsequently obtained the gun seized from defendant as a result of his November 1996 arrest. Testing revealed that defendant’s gun had fired the bullets that killed Cassandra Corum, Laura Uylaki, and Lynn Huber. On April 22, 1997, Chicago police officers approached defendant, who voluntarily agreed to talk with them. At the police station, detectives showed defendant photographs of Corum, Uylaki, and Huber, but defendant claimed he did not recognize them. During the questioning, defendant indicated he had bought his handgun approximately four or five years earlier from a gun shop in Calumet City, and it had been under his exclusive control until it was confiscated in Hammond, Indiana. When officers told defendant the three women had been killed by bullets fired from his gun, defendant paused for a minute, took off his security guard badge, started taking off his shoelaces, and said, “Well, I guess I’m not going to work today.” Defendant then provided the police with detailed confessions to all three Illinois murders. Without prompting from the police, defendant also mentioned “some matters” that California authorities “might be interested in.” Defendant subsequently confessed to the murders of Bobbin Brandley, Julie McGhee, Mary Ann Wells, Tammy Erwin, and Denise Maney, as well as the kidnapping, rape, and attempted murder of J.A., all of which were committed in California between 1986 and 1995. The details of those offenses were provided in testimony and evidence presented at the aggravation/ mitigation phase of sentencing, and will be recounted in our discussion of that portion of defendant’s trial. On March 10, 1998, a Livingston County grand jury returned a four-count indictment charging defendant with first degree murder for the killing of Cassandra Co-rum. In March of 2001, the State filed notice of its intent to seek the death penalty, alleging three possible eligibility factors: that the defendant had been convicted of murdering two or more individuals (720 ILCS 5/9— 1(b)(3) (West 2000)), that he had killed Cassandra Corum during the course of an aggravated kidnapping (720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(b)(6) (West 2000)), and that the murder was committed in a cold, calculated, premeditated manner pursuant to a preconceived plan (720 ILCS 5/9 — l(b)(ll) (West 2000)). Defendant was convicted of the Cook County murders, and was sentenced to death on September 3, 2002. In that case, a jury rejected claims that defendant was legally insane or mentally ill as defined in section 6 — 2(d) of the Criminal Code of 1961. See 720 ILCS 5/6 — 2(d) (West 2002). On January 10, 2003, then-governor George Ryan commuted defendant’s death sentence to one of natural life in prison without the possibility of parole. On November 3, 2003, defendant’s appointed counsel in this case, Steven Skelton and James Elmore, requested that the trial judge accept the appearance of attorney Stephen Richards as additional counsel for defendant. Richards was a deputy defender with one of the State Appellate Defender’s Death Penalty Trial Assistance offices (hereafter DPTA). The trial judge allowed Richards to enter his appearance with the understanding that Skelton and Elmore would be “lead counsel” and that the court would look to them for management of the case. Richards subsequently tendered a written entry of appearance during a hearing conducted on December 1, 2003. On that document, John Hanlon and Allan Sincox, staff attorneys of DPTA, were also listed as entering their appearance. The trial judge did not immediately notice the unauthorized addition of Hanlon and Sincox, a matter that came to the court’s attention when the judge observed what he perceived as disruptive behavior in the courtroom: “THE COURT: Who is the gentleman behind Mr. Richards, because I am getting tired of the expressions on his face and his gyrations. *** And now he is quite red-faced and he seems very angry. Sir, who are you? MR. SINCOX: My name is Allan Sincox. My appearance is now on file. Mr. Richards filed an appearance with my name listed on it today. I have been assisting with this case. THE COURT: You are not an attorney in this case, sir. You are not now an attorney in this case. Oh, I see the appearance has — well, I gave permission, Mr. Richards, for you to assist Mr. Elmore and Mr. Skelton at this relatively late date. I have not given permission for John Hanlon, Allan Sincox to do so. I have not heard from Mr. Elmore and Mr. Skelton that they want their assistance. So the way the record stands now, and I do thank you for calling that to my attention[,] Mr. Richards has been requested for assistance in this case by Mr. Skelton and Mr. Elmore. I have not heard from them as to John Hanlon or Allan Sincox. I am concerned about you, you are Mr. Sincox? MR. SINCOX: Yes, I am, Judge. THE COURT: I am concerned about your professional demeanor here in court today. On four or five occasions you have gripped your head and shaken your head. And it is quite — it is at least distracting to me ***. MR. SINCOX: Well, that is my fault. And I do apologize. THE COURT: Your apology is accepted. I didn’t know you were an attorney. Quite frankly, I am shocked.” Attorney Sincox then noted that he had been involved in the trial of defendant’s cases in Cook County, and he explained: “[T]here are things I find myself wanting to tell the lawyers.” The court responded, “I understand the emotional factor, but you are an attorney, and you should know better.” The court then clarified the status of defendant’s representation, noting that “Mr. Richards is in the case; Mr. Hanlon and Mr. Sincox are not.” The record indicates that the names of Hanlon and Sincox were, at some point, stricken from the entry of appearance. At a subsequent hearing on December 23, 2003, Richards was allowed to argue various pretrial motions for the defense, without comment or objection from the trial judge. The trial court reserved ruling on two of those motions, and denied the remainder. Later, on February 6, 2004, during a pretrial hearing attended only by the prosecutors and attorneys Skelton and Elmore, Skelton broached the possibility that he might ask the court to allow attorney Sincox to “enter his appearance for the limited purpose of deposing Dr. [Park] Dietz in California.” The trial judge asked counsel, “Is this all going to get accomplished in time not to impact on the trial date?” Counsel for defendant nodded affirmatively. The court then expressed “concern” about Sincox’s involvement in the case, noting that he had acted “very unlawyer-like the only time that he was here” and that he had conducted himself “in a very unprofessional manner.” At that point, the prosecutor questioned why Sincox had to be involved and why Skelton and Elmore could not conduct the deposition. Without further comment on the prosecutor’s statement, the trial judge commended attorneys Skelton and Elmore for the job they had done to that point, and then stated his belief that attorneys Sincox and Richards had “an agenda far greater than” the defendant’s case. He indicated he wanted to ensure that Elmore and Skelton remained in control of the case and exercised their “independent judgment.” Continuing, the trial court stated: “I can see a deposition out there going into several areas, well, now they are objecting, and now I am supposed to rule on objections taking place out in California. I don’t trust Mr. Sincox. *** His conduct in this courtroom was most unprofessional. It is clear to me that he has an agenda far greater than Mr. Urdíales and he is motivated by that. And I am concerned that his conduct will be governed by that. *** And if he goes far afield out there, we have got a mess on our hands in terms of, well, now the deposition wasn’t completed. Now we are going to certify some questions and get those back to this court. And we are moving great amounts of cases away from this calendar of mine in Livingston County. I got a heavy calendar and we are making lots of room and going through all kinds of exercises here to get this case tried in April. And I want to get it tried in April.” The trial judge observed: “It is premature to rule on this motion. It’s not yet filed. If you do file it, you need to make plans. I have no problem hearing this motion by conference call ***.” The court then moved on, questioning the prosecutors as to whether the reports of certain experts would be timely filed and were “on track.” The record indicates that a motion was later filed requesting that Sincox be allowed to enter a limited appear anee to take the deposition of Dr. Dietz. On March 4, 2004, in one of many pretrial conferences, the court addressed that motion: “THE COURT: There was a motion here with respect to Mr. Sincox. I am finding that motion rendered moot because Mr. Elmore is going to go [to California] and Mr. Sincox is not now a member of the defense team. I indicated some reluctance to increase the defense team at this point and bring in somebody new. And that issue simply goes away if Mr. Elmore is going to go to California if necessary. MR. ELMORE: Yes, I think both Mr. Skelton and myself anticipate making a trip out there.” Defense counsel did not object to the court’s statement that the motion was moot and did not take any action to obtain a ruling on the motion. Also prior to trial, the court addressed the matter of courtroom security. On April 19, 2004, just prior to jury selection, the court noted for the record: “[T]he defendant is seated there at table where his hands are free. He is in street clothes. There is an eyebolt in the floor. And there he has shackles on his legs. And that shackle is attached to the eyebolt in the floor. The jury, I believe it is correct, will not be able to see that shackling. They will be unaware of it unless Mr. Urdíales makes some noise or some motion that would call their attention to it. And I want to at least see if there is any objection on the record.” Defense counsel stated that the judge’s remarks were “factual and correct,” that the defendant wanted the record to reflect that he was secured in that fashion, and the defense had “no objection to it now.” The trial court then discussed two recent appellate court cases pertaining to courtroom security and restraint of defendants, noting that he “respectfully disagree[d] with both [of] those decisions,” but he had to “take them into account.” The trial judge also acknowledged this court’s decision in People v. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d 261 (1977). The judge suggested that appellate court justices might not appreciate how “trial circumstances have changed,” in part because some of them have “never been trial judges” and have “never practiced criminal law.” The trial judge offered his observation that “[tjimes have simply changed,” and that he had seen “a great deal of violence occurring in [the] courtroom,” noting the presence of two prisons within the county. The court made clear that defendant had behaved appropriately up to that point. However, the judge observed that defendant had been recently convicted of two murders and, though his death sentence had been commuted, he was still serving two life sentences. The court stated that was one factor in its decision to restrain defendant. The court also noted that defendant was in good health and had no difficultly getting around; thus, suggesting that defendant could pose a physical threat. Moreover, the court observed that the Livingston County courthouse was built in 1875 and there were “all kind of security problems” with the building and the courtroom. The judge pointed out that the courtroom was small and seating was close. He stated that two guards would be seated in the row behind the defendant. In that respect, the court observed: “The jurors, I think, will understand that. And importantly for a reviewing court, I have learned over the years that the jurors aren’t stupid. And they will be told the defendant is in custody and that certain security measures have been taken, such as the guards being here. They would expect that. And I believe they can handle that and still give both sides a fair trial.” With that, the trial court asked: “Is there anything else on that issue that either the State or the defense wishes to bring up?” For the defense, attorney Skelton responded, “No, sir.” The court then recessed prior to the commencement of jury voir dire. During that recess, out of the presence of the trial judge and potential jurors, a disturbance occurred in the courtroom. Subsequently, without potential jurors present, the trial judge swore in one of the correctional officers guarding defendant in order to ascertain what had happened. The officer, Craig Valleroy, testified that defendant had turned to talk to a lady seated behind him. The officers initially thought the woman was a lawyer, but when she indicated otherwise, they told defendant he could not speak with her. Defendant then became angry. Stating, “I don’t give a damn,” he slapped a cup of water on the table in front of him, sending it flying, and he “threw *** stuff around.” He was told to settle down, and was then physically subdued and handcuffed. After ascertaining what had happened, the trial judge asked defendant, “Will you promise to behave yourself if I do not shackle you.” Defendant did not respond to the court directly. Rather, defendant had attorney Skelton note for the record that defendant had not been shackled during proceedings in Cook County and there had been no outbursts or problems. Counsel stated: “And he is concerned about his perception of the respect he is being shown here by both the court and security personnel in the courtroom.” Counsel acknowledged that he had attended defendant’s trial in Cook County and that the “logistics of that courtroom and the parameters of that courtroom are somewhat different.” In response to the concerns expressed by defendant, the trial judge observed that “the world changed” for defendant with his murder convictions in Cook County, suggesting, had defendant been found not guilty there, the court “would have been doing something different here.” The court also pointed out, “[Y]ou are on trial here for your life.” As a result of the incident, the court ordered defendant’s left hand shackled under the table as well. Though the court allowed defendant’s right hand to remain free, the court ordered that defendant be given no pencils or pens. Two days later, in chambers, the trial judge, with defense counsel and counsel for the prosecution present, revisited the issue of courtroom security and addressed the circumstances of defendant’s prior courtroom outburst. The court noted that jurors were not present when defendant “went ballistic,” “went berserk, throwing water all over.” The court observed that “two very large guards were necessary to restrain him notwithstanding that he was already shackled by his feet to an eyebolt on the floor.” The judge then asked attorney Elmore whether he had overstated the incident with the use of the terms “ballistic” and “berserk.” Elmore responded that the judge had not overstated the severity of the incident, and added that “there were actually three guards” involved. Elmore indicated that the guards had to take defendant to the floor to subdue him and that defendant had knocked over the table where he was seated. At that juncture, the trial judge criticized various justices of the appellate court for positions they had taken on the issue of shackling, stating that one of them had, in an appellate court opinion, “really roughed me up because I shackled some inmates.” The judge expressed concern “that people with that frame of mind will speculate that I contributed to the event on Monday because I had Mr. Urdíales shackled.” The court observed: “First of all, the response of defendant to go berserk was an overreaction on his part. If he didn’t like that, he should have communicated to counsel. He should have said something in court. We did not have a word of protest coming from him prior to that. He simply went off.” The court characterized defendant as a “high risk individual.” The trial judge observed that there had been a change in defendant’s demeanor after he was convicted of the murders in Cook County and sentenced to death. The court stated: “Mr. Urdíales I have concluded fears that judgment day is coming closer.” The judge noted “a dramatic change” at the prior pretrial hearing, when defendant “learned that this trial was actually going to go forward finally.” The court continued, “I saw without a doubt an emotion in his eyes that I had not seen before. *** I saw furtive movements on the part of Mr. Urdíales; and I see quite frankly, honestly a desperate man.” The trial judge then embarked upon yet another diatribe against what he saw as the appellate court’s unwarranted intrusion into the security concerns of the circuit court, expressing his belief that the appellate court seemed “bent on causing trial judges trouble.” The judge indicated he would have a transcript of the proceedings sent to certain named justices of the appellate court. Following that harangue, the judge again indicated that he did not believe the jury could see the shackling of defendant because of skirting around the table where defendant was seated. He asked defense counsel: “[D]o you want me to free up Mr. Urdíales more than I am contemplating doing?” In response, attorney Skelton asked only that defendant be given a writing implement short enough that it would pose no danger to counsel or anyone else. The court then stated: “DOC has had in the past inch pencils. *** It’s a very small pencil. We’ll explore that and come up with a writing material that couldn’t do you harm.” Still addressing the security issue, Skelton then stated: “Half facetiously, the only thing I want to make sure of is that Mr. Urdíales is seated on a very heavy chair. For the record, I had an unfortunate experience about 14, 16 years ago where an inmate from Pontiac Correctional Center decided that a better place for a chair was on my head than on the floor. I know what the court’s talking about. I’ve been there.” Elmore thereafter sought to clarify what had prompted the defendant’s courtroom outburst, noting that defendant “became upset not because he was shackled but because he could not communicate with his parents and Kendra Moses.” Elmore explained that defendant had originally told a Livingston County correctional officer that Moses was an attorney, and Elmore subsequently told them otherwise, noting that she was a “mitigator,” not an attorney. According to Elmore, defendant then turned and “glared at [Elmore] for a second,” prompting Elmore to caution defendant, “Andrew, we’re not going to do that now. She’s not an attorney.” Elmore said a correctional officer then politely informed defendant that he could not talk to Moses at that point in time. Elmore explained, “That’s what precipitated him becoming upset. It wasn’t even, in my mind, *** the fact he was shackled that’s what caused him to go off. Just to support your position further, it wasn’t the shackling I don’t think that really upset him. It was the fact he couldn’t communicate with Moses, and he went off.” A prosecutor interjected, “He was lucky he was shackled at that point or he would have had much more free rein.” The same prosecutor added: “Mr. Elmore should tell you, but it’s up to him, that he knows something with regard to a previous meeting in prison in a room with Mr. Urdíales that he later learned endangered his own self; but he’d have to tell you that. I bring it up. I guess he doesn’t want to. It solidifies [the court’s] intuition, and I know about it from several months ago.” Although the judge indicated he would “ask the details,” the matter was apparently dropped as the court and parties moved on to matters bearing upon jury selection. Jury voir dire began on April 19, 2004. At the outset, the trial judge advised potential jurors: “You may or may not notice that Mr. Urdíales is in custody. And we have taken certain security measures because of that simple fact. You would expect us to do that for anyone who’s in custody. The fact that Mr. Urdíales is presently in custody should not impact in any way whatsoever on the determination of whether Mr. Urdíales is found guilty or not guilty ***.” A total of eight jurors were selected for trial on the first day of selection. When jury selection resumed on the morning of April 22, defense counsel advised the court in chambers that defendant, “without any urging,” had raised the possibility of entering an open plea of guilty to the murder charges against him. Attorney Skelton noted: “If *** Mr. Urdíales determines that he wants to plead guilty without — and we are talking a straight guilty plea — not trying to structure in a way of guilty but mentally ill plea, that would — and it is an understatement to say — substantially modify the manner in which we would approach potential jurors, the remaining four, plus alternates in this case.” The trial judge expressed concern over developments and stated the obvious: that defendant should take such an action only after “full deliberation.” The judge encouraged counsel to consult with defendant further. After another brief period of consultation with defendant, attorney Skelton reported that defendant was steadfast in his desire to plead guilty; however, it was likely that defendant would enter a plea of guilty but mentally ill. The defense contemplated “a waiver of jury as to the first phase of the proceeding, plea of guilty, with the court determining the existence or lack of mental illness.” The defendant would retain his right to a jury trial for the sentencing phase of the death penalty proceeding. A prosecutor advised the court and defense counsel that the State would dispute whether defendant was in fact “mentally ill,” as that term is defined in the statute. Attorney Skelton, again speaking to procedure, reiterated that the court would decide whether defendant was mentally ill: “There would be a bench trial as to the existence or lack of mental illness. There would not be a trial before the Court as to the elements of the offense, that is that he killed Cassandra Corum.” Counsel advised the court that a jury would be needed for the “second and third” stages of death penalty proceedings, the eligibility and aggravation/mitigation phases. After further discussion and consultation, it was decided that the court would admonish defendant the next morning and conduct a hearing on defendant’s plea of guilty but mentally ill (GBMI); however, the court would reserve ruling until jury selection was complete. Then the court would take additional evidence on mental illness, and either accept the plea of guilty but mentally ill or proceed with the jury trial. On April 23, 2004, the defendant tendered his plea of guilty but mentally ill. The trial court admonished defendant thoroughly concerning the nature of the charge, the possible penalties, the three separate stages of a capital trial, and the variety of verdicts possible in the event the defendant retained his right to trial. The trial court explained that, by pleading guilty but mentally ill, the defendant would be giving up the defense of insanity, and a finding of guilty but mentally ill would not insulate him from a possible death sentence. The defendant indicated he understood the admonitions. The judge determined that defendant had not been subject to threats or coercion, and that his plea of guilty but mentally ill was voluntary. The trial judge indicated he would not decide whether to accept the plea of guilty but mentally ill until there had been a full evidentiary hearing. The court explained the possible outcomes and ramifications of that proceeding, and defendant again indicated he understood. Defendant then signed and tendered a plea of guilty but mentally ill, which specified that he retained his right to jury trial on all issues if the plea was rejected, and his right to a jury for sentencing if the plea was accepted. The State then presented an extensive factual basis for the murder of Cassandra Corum. Defendant did not dispute the factual basis presented, and the court concluded that there was a sufficient factual basis “with respect to the murder elements themselves.” The court again indicated that it would not accept the plea of guilty but mentally ill until there had been an evidentiary hearing on the issue of mental illness. Thereafter, jury selection resumed, with four additional jurors, and six alternates, chosen over the next several days. After the completion of jury selection, defense counsel informed the court that, in the event the court rejected the plea of guilty but mentally ill, the defendant was considering waiving a jury for the guilt/innocence phase and requesting a bench trial to preserve his insanity defense. Noting that a jury had already been chosen and was waiting to hear the case, the trial judge expressed some reluctance to allow the jury waiver, as well as frustration with both the defense and the appellate court. Nonetheless, on May 4, 2004, the parties and the trial court agreed to conduct two hearings simultaneously. Pursuant to the agreed mode of procedure, the trial court would consider whether there was sufficient evidence of mental illness to support defendant’s plea of guilty but mentally ill, i.e., whether defendant suffered from “a substantial disorder of thought, mood, or behavior” which afflicted him at the time of the offense and “impaired his judgment.” See 720 ILCS 5/6 — 2(d) (West 2004). In the event the court ultimately rejected the GBMI plea, the judge would also consider whether defendant had established the defense of insanity. The defense stipulated that the prosecutor’s previously recited factual basis was sufficient to establish the basic elements of the murder charge. Defendant was admonished regarding the proposed procedure, and consented to it, waiving his right to a jury trial on the guilt/ innocence phase. For purposes of the dual proceedings, the trial court admitted and considered several exhibits documenting psychiatric evaluations of the defendant, and also heard live testimony from expert witnesses. The defense called three witnesses: Drs. Terry Killian, James Merikangas, and Daniel Cuneo. The State called two witnesses: Drs. Janet Wilier and Park Dietz. Written reports of Drs. Killian, Cuneo, Merikangas, and Dietz were among the exhibits considered by the court, as were reports received from two nontestifying defense experts, Drs. Charles Opsahl and Dorothy Otnow Lewis. Dr. Killian, a psychiatrist, believed defendant was legally sane, but mentally ill, at the time of Corum’s murder. Killian diagnosed defendant as suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), bipolar mood disorder, panic disorder with agoraphobia, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), dissociative disorder, Tourette’s, personality disorder, and mild neurological impairment. Killian felt the most significant of these was dissociation, which is something like multiple personalities. Killian believed, in defendant’s case, an “angry part” of him “takes some degree of control,” though it “does not appear to be complete control as you would see in a full blown, multiple personality disorder.” Dr. Killian believed defendant was not malingering because he did not volunteer symptoms as he could have. Killian acknowledged that defendant had read a book by Dr. Lewis, his expert for his unsuccessful insanity defense in Cook County, and could have feigned symptoms from that book. At one point in his testimony, Killian specifically stated that defendant, in his opinion, “was afflicted by a substantial disorder of thought, mood, or behavior which impaired his judgment but not to the extent that he was unable to appreciate the wrongfulness of his behavior.” Later, Killian was asked by defense counsel whether the term “mentally ill,” as used in section 6 — 2(d) of the Criminal Code, was consistent with his understanding of that term, as used in his practice. At that time, he acknowledged: “Mentally ill is a pretty vague term in a clinical sense. Mentally ill is generally used in psychiatry to refer to a wide range of psychiatric disorders that impair people to mild extents, substantial extents, or impair them to the point where they are unable to function; so it’s a very broad term without a very specific definition in clinical use.” Killian explained he could only “describe [defendant’s] symptoms [as observed or described to him],” put those together in “an organized diagnostic formulation,” and explain the “nature of the psychiatric disorders” and the reasons, and extent to which, defendant has them. He concluded, “[I]t is the fact finder’s position to decide whether that meets the burden of the law.” Dr. Daniel Cuneo, a psychologist, also testified that defendant “had a substantial disorder of thought, mood, and behavior which impacted upon his judgment.” Cuneo examined defendant in 2003 and 2004, and concluded that he suffered from PTSD, bipolar disorder, Tourette’s, OCD, personality disorder, mild neurologic impairment, and a history of sexually transmitted diseases. Unlike Killian, who believed that dissociation was the most significant or substantial of defendant’s mental maladies, Cuneo thought that PTSD was the most significant of defendant’s disorders. Cuneo did believe that the defendant occasionally suffered from episodes of dissociation, which occurred during periods of extreme stress. In that regard, he noted defendant’s use of the pronoun “we” and the names Eric, Andy, and Andrew to refer to aspects of his personality. Cuneo did not believe that defendant was malingering. In his report, Cuneo concluded that defendant’s mental illness “did not substantially impair his ability to appreciate the criminality of his conduct when he is alleged to have killed Cassie Corum. He could have controlled his behavior then and he knew that killing was wrong.” However, Cuneo testified to his belief that defendant’s “judgment was impaired throughout” due to escalating anger. On cross-examination, Cuneo acknowledged that defendant’s actions during the killings exhibited planning and preparation, and that defendant “was clever enough to have killed individuals and hid it for a period of time.” Cuneo also conceded that it is possible for a person to be a “clever, mean, sexual, sadistic individual who likes to kill women,” yet not suffer from a mental disorder. The prosecutor asked Cuneo about defendant’s “explosive anger,” which Cuneo believed had resulted in impaired judgment and violence. In posing that question, the prosecutor first noted that defendant had initially become angry with Cassandra Corum at Wolf Lake, “his favorite murder dumping ground of women.” The prosecutor next observed that defendant had restrained her there and then “drove a hundred miles from where he exploded in *** anger *** all the way to Pontiac, so he had a whole hour and a half of driving with her.” In light of those circumstances, the prosecutor asked whether defendant’s anger would have subsided by the time he got to Pontiac. In response, Cuneo stated that defendant’s debilitating anger would not have subsided until “the murder was done.” He continued, clarifying his position: “I don’t believe, at any point, this individual was impaired to the extent that he was unable to think *** what I am saying is that it’s an impairment of judgment ***.” Dr. Merikangas, a psychiatrist, opined that defendant had an organic brain disease, which rendered him insane at the time of the crime. Merikangas disagreed with Killian and Cuneo insofar as they diagnosed defendant with PTSD and dissociative personality disorder. Merikangas noted that scans of defendant’s brain in 2002 showed atrophy, which might have resulted from improper treatment of syphilis. Tests also showed frontal lobe damage, lack of reflexive response, and decreased blood flow and metabolism in the right temporal lobe of defendant’s brain. Dr. Merikangas believed episodes of loss of control and loss of reason were brought on by stress, such as sexual situations when defendant was belittled or there was a fight. Though Merikangas did not identify a source of stress, he reported that defendant had “a violent attack of rage at the Cook County jail” during Merikangas’ interview with defendant. Dr. Opsahl’s report set forth a diagnosis of “significant neuropsychological impairment” and “paranoid psychosis in the presence of a cyclic mood disorder that includes elements of both hypomania and depression.” The report did not address defendant’s behavior at the time of the murder. Dr. Lewis’ report concluded that defendant was “flamboyantly psychotic at the time of the alleged offenses and was operating in response to delusions and command hallucinations.” Lewis’ report contained statements by defendant that he heard voices that gave him instructions from the CIA. She also reported references to “Andrew and Eric” as separate personalities. Dr. Wilier, a psychologist who worked for the Veterans Administration, saw defendant approximately 105 times between 1991 and 1996. She believed defendant suffered from mild depression and avoidant personality disorder. Dr. Dietz, a psychiatrist, testified, rendering his opinion that, at the time of Corum’s murder, defendant had the capacity “to appreciate the criminality of his conduct and to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law,” and he did not fit within Illinois’ statutory definition of guilty but mentally ill. Dietz concluded that defendant did not have a substantial disorder of thought, mood, or behavior, as required by the statute. Dietz diagnosed defendant as suffering from Tourette’s syndrome, a personality disorder with schizotypal traits, and sexual sadism. He believed it was defendant’s anger, rather than a substantial mental disorder, that impaired defendant’s judgment when he murdered Cassandra Co-rum. Dietz did not believe that defendant had PTSD, but even if he did, Dietz categorized PTSD as an anxiety disorder, not a mental illness; thus, it would not meet the definition of mental illness under Illinois law. He also rejected the possibility of organic, brain damage because neurological tests, and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan in 2004, were within the normal range. In Dietz’s opinion, defendant’s use of the passive voice and plural pronouns when describing his actions while murdering his victims was nothing more than a linguistic device “to distance himself from responsibility for the offense.” Dietz believed that defendant’s judgment was in fact impaired when he committed the murder, but not by a mental illness. In Dietz’s opinion, “nearly everyone” who commits murder “has impaired judgment at the time, including this defendant.” Dietz testified that anger was the “one clearly provable element that impaired [defendant’s] judgment.” However, Dietz identified two other “prime candidates” as “sexual desire” and “a kind of predatory desire for conquest.” The latter observations were consistent with Dietz’s diagnosis that defendant was a sexual sadist, which he defined as one who exhibits “an enduring pattern of sexual excitement or desire involving the infliction of pain or the humiliation of others.” Dietz based his diagnosis of sexual sadism primarily upon the account given by defendant’s sole surviving victim, J.A. As Dietz noted, her description of defendant’s behavior at the time he raped and tortured her is the only description of defendant’s criminal actions that was not given by defendant. Dietz summarized J.A.’s account of her ordeal as follows: “[In] that incident he called her a bitch, held a knife to her throat, pulled her head into the dashboard, bound her hands behind her back, pulled her by the hair to force fellatio, cut off her shorts, underwear and bra, gagged her with her underwear and bra, called her a bitch, a whore, a slut, as he raped her vaginally, scripted her language, namely telling her exactly what to say. He directed her to say that she loved him. Hit her, strangled her to the point of unconsciousness, and bit her neck drawing blood. That is a classic textbook description of the abducting and rape of a woman by a sexual sadist. Because he is demeaning her, controlling her, causing her pain while experiencing sexual excitement. Every feature of that is exactly what we expect to find in sexually sadistic types. And the significance of [J.A.’s] account is that she is the only living victim of rape and abduction that can tell us what defendant actually does with a victim. For every other case, that is the eight homicides, we only know what the corpse can tell us and what the defendant is willing to say.” Dietz acknowledged that a single incident is not sufficient to diagnose sexual sadism, so he supported his diagnosis with another reported incident — one that led to defendant’s arrest — in which a prostitute described a 1997 encounter with defendant. Patricia Kelly reported that defendant had asked her to accompany him to the Wolf Lake area and allow him to handcuff her, duct tape her, tie her up, and have sex with her in the back of his truck. Dietz believed that request was also suggestive of sexual sadism. Dietz answered affirmatively when the prosecutor asked whether there were “some similarities concerning binding and gagging and binding and abusing the other victims even though they are not here to tell us.” Finally, Dietz reported that defendant had acknowledged that there is a part of him “that enjoys torture, that would like to inflict as much damage as possible, that enjoys bondage and sadomasochistic activity, that wants to control.” At the conclusion of the evidentiary portion of the hearing, the circuit court indicated it would entertain arguments of counsel. Attorney Skelton then asked the court: “What standard is the Court applying concerning the existence of the factual basis for the existence of mental illness at the time of the offense?” An extended discussion ensued between the parties and the court concerning the appropriate standards and evidentiary burdens the court would apply, with the defense arguing that the court had no authority to weigh the evidence adduced on the issue of mental illness. At the conclusion of that discussion, the court stated its belief that cases pertaining to uncontested guilty pleas would not apply to defendant’s plea of guilty but mentally ill, since the State, in this case, was contesting whether defendant was in fact mentally ill as defined in section 6 — 2(d) of the Criminal Code. The court nonetheless commented that “the burden the defense has at this proceeding *** dealing with whether the court should accept or reject the plea of guilty but mentally ill is not a preponderance of the evidence. That would be the case at bench trial. It is less than that.” However, the court still determined that it should “weigh” the evidence presented at the hearing, noting that defendant was not entitled to have the court “simply disregard the evidence presented by the State.” Following arguments of the parties, the court indicated it would recess over the weekend to consider the evidence and arguments. On the morning of May 10, 2004, the court announced its rulings in chambers in order to protect the defendant from media coverage and to ensure that the sentencing jury would not be tainted when it later heard evidence of mental illness. First, having weighed the evidence presented by the defense and the prosecution, the trial judge stated he was not satisfied that a factual basis existed to support defendant’s plea of guilty but mentally ill, noting that “the evidence fails to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant was guilty but mentally ill at the time of the incident complained of.” Moreover, the court ruled that defendant had not established, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he was insane at the time of Corum’s murder. Finally, the court found the State had proven, beyond a reasonable doubt, that defendant was guilty of first degree murder as charged in the indictment. In support of his ruling, the trial judge noted that the principal defense witnesses disagreed in their primary diagnoses. Cuneo believed that defendant suffered, primarily, from PTSD; Killian’s principal diagnosis was dissociation; and Merikangas determined that defendant suffered from organic brain disease, disagreeing with Killian’s and Cuneo’s diagnoses of PTSD and dissociative personality disorder. Killian and Cuneo believed that defendant was legally sane, but mentally ill, as defined in section 6 — 2(d); Merikangas testified that defendant was insane, as defined in section 6 — 2(a). The court also found that defendant’s experts had failed to explain how defendant was able to function in society during his seven years in the Marine Corps, or employed as a security guard, while suffering from the diagnosed illnesses. The court found that defendant’s actions during the offense were inconsistent with those of a person overcome by anger. To the contrary, they demonstrated planning and organization. The court rejected the assessments of Merikangas and Killian that defendant’s crimes were not characterized by planning and organization, noting that defendant brought a gun, a knife, duct tape, and handcuffs. The court concluded, “the defendant went prepared and in fact successfully carried out this murder as well as seven others.” With respect to the defendant’s psychiatric evaluations, the court observed that defendant had “learned some things” about evaluations in the course of his unsuccessful trial in Cook County. As Killian acknowledged in his testimony, defendant had read Lewis’ book, titled “Guilty But Mentally Ill.” The trial judge found the testimony of Dr. Dietz “substantially more persuasive and more convincing than that of the defense experts.” As noted, Dietz believed that defendant was not legally insane and he did not meet the statutory criterion for a finding of guilty but mentally ill. The court accepted Dietz’s assessment that defendant is a sexual sadist and is “angry at the world and his unsuccessful circumstances in life.” The court stated: “[T]o rule in favor of the defense, I would have to totally set aside the testimony of Dr. Park Dietz, which *** I find to be the most convincing and persuasive of the witnesses,” and “even more importantly, to find in favor of the defense, I would have to disregard the facts of this case.” After announcing his ruling, and before convening in open court, the trial judge revisited the issue of courtroom security, noting that the jury would not see the shackling of defendant because of skirting around defendant’s table, reiterating his earlier findings, and enunciating two additional factors. The court noted, since its original ruling regarding the physical restraint of defendant, the court had been apprised of the full extent and scope of defendant’s homicidal activities in California, and had heard psychiatric testimony pertaining to defendant’s explosive personality. With those additional comments, the court inquired of defense counsel: “THE COURT: So that is the record on shackling. I guess I should give the defense an opportunity to suggest that I do something differently. I would ask Mr. Skelton and Mr. Elmore, are you asking that I do something differently on shackling than I have decided to do? MR. SKELTON: Given the totality of the circumstances and the discretion given the Court which I believe is an accurate assessment of the physical layout of the courtroom and the shackling devices and means by which our client is secured in the courtroom, I don’t think it is an issue, Judge. THE COURT: All right. Mr. Elmore. MR. ELMORE: No, Judge. I think what you have done is appropriate under the circumstances.” The court then advanced the proceeding to the eligibility phase of sentencing. Defendant waived a jury for the purpose of determining whether he was eligible for the death penalty. Without objection, the State introduced defendant’s birth certificate, showing him to be over 18 years of age, and certified copies of defendant’s two murder convictions in Cook County. The trial court subsequently found that defendant was over the age of 18 when he murdered Cassandra Corum and he had been previously convicted of murdering two women in Cook County, thereby establishing his eligibility for a death sentence under section 9 — 1(b)(3) of the Criminal Code (720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(b)(3) (West 2004)). At the beginning of the third phase of this capital proceeding, the trial court advised the jurors of developments in the first two phases — to which the court had referred during jury selection — explaining why jurors had not participated in earlier stages of the proceeding, and bringing the jurors current on findings made during the initial phases of the trial. The court read the jurors the statutory definition of insanity, and advised jurors that the court, pursuant to defendant’s jury waivers, had determined (1) that the State had proven defendant guilty of Corum’s murder beyond a reasonable doubt, (2) that defendant had not proven by a preponderance of the evidence that he was legally insane at the time of the offense, and (3) that defendant was eligible for the death penalty because he was over 18 years of age at the time of the offense and had been previously convicted of murdering two or more persons. The court noted that those findings were binding upon the jury, and informed the jury that its function would be to determine whether death was the appropriate sentence. With that, the parties gave their opening statements. Early in defense counsel’s statement to the jury, he acknowledged that the trial judge had rejected defendant’s “plea of insanity,” but he advised the jurors that they could “still consider the background of Mr. Urdíales *** to see whether or not, not that he is insane, but did he suffer from any mental illness or mental disease or mental defects. Did it reduce his ability to think and act? Did it reduce his ability to perform like a normal, healthy person?” Counsel told the jurors, “Those are facts that you must also consider.” Later, when describing the harsh conditions of incarceration, which he likened to life “in a cage,” counsel again stated, “The evidence will show that while Andrew Urdíales is not insane, *** he suffers from mental illness or mental disease.” Still later, counsel stated: “Mr. Urdíales, in fact, does suffer from defects of the brain. And so the question then becomes do we as a society treat someone who is mentally ill as opposed to someone who is mentally healthy the same. And we suggest not. We suggest that the most appropriate way is to punish by life in prison without the possibility of parole.” Counsel concluded his opening statement with yet another reference to defendant’s mental illness. With the conclusion of opening statements, the State presented evidence in aggravation. In aggravation, the State presented evidence of the eight murders committed by defendant, as well as J.A.’s testimony describing how defendant kidnapped, raped, and attempted to murder her. In the interests of brevity, we will substantially summarize that evidence, which is derived from police investigations of the crime scenes and from interviews with defendant. We note that defendant’s description of events did not always agree with the physical evidence discovered at the crime scenes, as was the case with the murder of Cassandra Corum; however, to simplify the descriptions of the murders, we will generally recount defendant’s version of events. Defendant’s first murder victim was Robbin Brandley, a California college student he killed in January of 1986. At that time, defendant was in the Marines and stationed at Camp Pendleton in California. Defendant told police he was upset about some friendships at the base, so he decided to rob someone. Defendant took a “big old hunting knife,” approximately 11 inches long, and drove to a college just north of Camp Pendleton. When he arrived, he took up a position in a poorly lit area and waited for someone to walk by. When defendant saw Brandley, he came up behind her, put his hand over her mouth, and told her he wanted her purse. She immediately complied; however, defendant just put the purse on the hood of her car and began stabbing her in the back. After she fell to the ground, defendant stabbed her several more times in the chest. Once, when defendant stabbed her in the ribs, the knife got stuck, and he had to step on her body in order to remove it. Defendant left Brandley in the parking lot to die, having stabbed her a total of 41 times in the back, hands, neck, and chest. Defendant told police that his victim “could have been anybody,” and that Brandley “was just a random female.” After the murder, defendant had blood on his jeans, jacket, and hands. In order to conceal the blood, and get back on the base, defendant rubbed grease from his car’s engine over his clothes to hide the blood. When he returned to the base, defendant told the military police that his car had broken down and he had to fix it. The police believed defendant’s story, which made defendant think they were “dumb shits.” Defendant indicated he had the same knife with him when he later had sex with a prostitute in Hollywood. Defendant said, “[S]he was lucky.” In July of 1988, defendant committed his second murder, killing Julie McGhee in Cathedral City, California. Defendant picked up McGhee on a road frequented by prostitutes and drove her to a remote construction area, where they had sex. Afterwards, defendant got his gun and ordered McGhee out of the car. When she got out, he shot her in the head. Defendant noted he “really didn’t feel anything” after killing McGhee. He said it was “just so quiet and peaceful” that he got in his car and drove to a bar where he “had some beers and watched the girls dance.” In September of 1988, defendant killed his third victim, Mary Ann Wells. Defendant picked up Wells, who was working as a prostitute, and drove her to an industrial area in San Diego, where they had sex. After he finished, defendant shot Wells, recovered the $40 he had paid her, dumped her body in an alley, and drove away. Defendant murdered Tammy Erwin in Palm Springs in April of 1989. Defendant had had sex with Erwin on at least one occasion prior to April 1989. On the night of the murder, defendant picked up Erwin and took her to a vacant lot, where she performed oral sex on him. Defendant did not remember arguing with Erwin, but he did recall shooting her while he was outside of his truck. After defendant shot Erwin, he got into his truck to leave, but noticed that Erwin was still standing up, clutching her head. Without getting out of his truck, defendant shot Erwin a second time, after which she fell to the ground. Defendant shot her a third time, before driving off. Defendant was discharged from the Marines in 1991, and moved back to Chicago to live with his parents. In September of 1992, defendant returned to California for a short visit. During that visit, he kidnapped, raped, and attempted to murder J.A. In his statement to police, defendant indicated he first saw J.A. at a bus stop and offered her a ride. En route to J.A.’s house-sitting job, defendant obtained a telephone number from J.A., which he subsequently-determined was a “bum” number. The next morning, defendant waited for J.A. to get off work and offered to take her out for breakfast. J.A. agreed, and got in the car. Defendant later related he was “just feeling upset about the number or something,” and “something was just kind of building up, you know, tension.” After driving a short distance, defendant stopped the car, reached over and grabbed J.A. by the hair, and produced a gun. Defendant observed that J.A. became “pretty much submissive from that part forward.” Defendant ordered J.A. to turn around, and he tied her hands behind her back. Defendant later told a police officer: “I think *** before we started moving after I tied her hands up, I reached over and I kissed her. I just put my lips on her mouth and then I just started, you know, I was trying to make out with her.” When defendant started driving again, J.A. told defendant she would do anything he wanted, so defendant unzipped his pants, pulled J.A.’s head down, and said “suck my dick” or “suck my cock.” J.A. then performed oral sex on defendant until he tired of it and “picked her back up.” In an interview with police, defendant remarked: “She kept asking me where we were going and she’ll do anything I want. Shit like that, you know.” Defendant drove out into the desert, stopping at one point to cut J.A.’s panties and bra off. Defendant then rolled up J.A.’s panties and stuffed them in her mouth. Defendant eventually “tried to rape” J.A. Defendant said she “tried to help” him, but “nothing happened” because he could not achieve an erection. After a while, defendant became angry and the “tension” began to build. Defendant said he began to choke J.A., “and she kept kicking and *** her saliva was coming out of her mouth and *** her face was turning blue and then red and it was just a battle *** for awhile.” Eventually, defendant’s hand started to get tired and stiff, so he got off J.A. and sat down. Thereafter, defendant got his gun and pulled J.A. out of the car. He forced her to her knees and again made her perform oral sex on him. Defendant eventually tired of that. Frustrated, he grabbed J.A., walked her to the back of the car, forced her into the trunk, and drove off. At some point during the drive, the lid of the trunk popped open and defendant stopped to slam it shut. Before defendant could get underway again, the trunk popped open a second time, J.A. jumped out, and she ran away screaming. Defendant later told detectives his first thought was to shoot her, but he decided against it because there were several cars nearby. Defendant got into his car and drove away. He told the police: “So that was the last time I saw her. I don’t know if somebody else picked her up and finished where I started.” J.A., defendant’s sole surviving victim, testified at the defendant’s sentencing hearing. Because J.A.’s testimony provides unique insight into defendant’s activities with one of his victims, and the perspective of that victim, we discuss J.A.’s testimony at length. J.A. said she accepted a ride with defendant on the evening of September 27, 1992, because she would otherwise have been late for work. Defendant repeatedly asked her for her phone number, so she eventually gave him a fake number. He then dropped her off at work. The next morning, as J.A. left work, defendant drove up behind her and asked her if she wanted to get some breakfast. J.A. recalled that defendant “looked friendly again, just kind of smiling like. I wasn’t scared of him.” So, J.A. got into defendant’s car. Defendant soon confronted J.A. about the fake phone number. When she denied giving him the wrong number, defendant became angry. He pulled the car to the side of the road and produced a knife and twine. J.A. said, before she “even [had] time to think to jump out of the car,” defendant had the knife to her throat. He pushed her head into the dashboard, calling her a “whore, a bitch, and kinds of crazy things.” He then grabbed her arms behind her back and tied them together with the twine. Defendant hit J.A. and displayed a gun. J.A. testified she felt “totally helpless.” She recalled, “I was in his control totally; and I even told him, I let him know that I was.” As defendant started to drive again, he grabbed J.A.’s head and forced her to perform oral sex on him. Defendant drove into the desert and stopped the car. J.A. testified that she feared defendant would become even more aggressive if she attempted to resist him, so she said, “[I]f you are going to rape me, rape me. But please don’t kill me ***.” Defendant did not respond. He proceeded to pull off her shorts and shoes, hitting her in the head with one of her shoes. Defendant then cut off J.A.’s panties with his knife and shoved them into her mouth, causing her to vomit and gag. After that, defendant cut off J.A.’s bra and tied it tightly around her mouth. J.A. testified that defendant then raped her, an ordeal that she described in graphic detail: “And then he spread my legs open, and then he had sex with me. And then he was hitting on me and just staring at me; and then he was calling me a bitch, a whore, a slut, and I was just crying. *** Then he told me to tell him that I loved him. *** I thought it was kind of stupid because I had underwear shoved down my throat and a bra tied around my mouth; and I was thinking, how *** am I going to say anything ***? I’m gagged. So I just looked into his eyes; and he was saying, say it, bitch, say it. And I just looked into his eyes; and I tried to say like, hello, I can’t say anything. I’ve got stuff in my mouth. And when I tried to talk, I would just gag. *** I think he finally realized that I couldn’t talk with the underwear down my throat so he took it off. And he said, say it, bitch.” When J.A. said it, it — not surprisingly — sounded insincere. She observed, “It sounded like I was saying it so I wouldn’t die.” Defendant said, “You are lying,” and struck J.A. again. He repeatedly urged her: “[S]ay it. Say it. Tell me you love me like you mean it.” When J.A. was unable to do so in a satisfactory manner, defendant started strangling her with his hands. J.A. testified: “He just grabbed me by the throat and started strangling me until my eyes started rolling back in my head; and then he was yelling at me, calling me a bitch, a slut, a whore. And this whole time I was just so confused, thinking, oh my God, I’m going to die. *** I thought about everybody, and I was wishing some way they could know what my final thoughts were before I died because there was no way, there was no way nobody was going to know anything; and that was the scariest part was that something like this could happen when people are just driving around and going about their day; and I’m in the desert about to be murdered.” J.A. either lost consciousness momentarily or went into shock. She testified she could not feel anything for a while. During that period, which she described as “really peaceful,” she thought she had died, and she felt “happy.” However, that momentary respite passed, and J.A. soon realized that defendant was still choking her, “whipping [her] back and forth trying to get [her] back to it.” She related, “And then all of a sudden I just came back to it, and I could feel everything again.” J.A. testified that defendant then began fondling her breasts and “sucking” on her neck. Simultaneously, she felt something cold running down her neck. When defendant stopped, he put his face in front of hers. It was then that she noticed defendant had blood on his teeth, and J.A. started to panic again. She recounted: “I knew he tried to bite me; but I couldn’t feel it because I was in such bad shock some of the things I didn’t even feel. But then he opened the door.” Defendant exited the car with his gun, and pulled J.A. out of the car by her hair. With his pants down, defendant ordered J.A. to “suck it, bitch.” J.A. initially refused. She recalled: “I just wanted to die so I said no. And I was hoping that he would just shoot me because I couldn’t take it anymore, and I wanted to go back to that state I was in a little while ago.” Defendant again ordered J.A. to “suck it,” and he hit her in the head for emphasis. J.A. resolved to “suck it” and “bite it off.” However, immediately after she began, defendant “nailed [her] in the head again.” She recalled, “[H]e got really upset because it wasn’t erect to suck it. It was never erect the whole time, and I think that makes him really mad.” Defendant then left J.A. for a moment, removing a bag, with “knife blades sticking of it,” from the trunk of the car, and placing it in the backseat. J.A. seized the opportunity and tried to escape. She testified: “I started running through the field as fast as I could; and I could see nothing. I could see no roads. I could see nothing; and I knew I was doomed; but if I’m going to die, I want to at least *** have someone say that I tried to run.” Defendant eventually caught J.A. by the hair, “ripped it back,” and she fell to the ground. Defendant began to drag the partially naked J.A. through cacti and back to the car. . When he got J.A. back to the car, defendant decided to put her in the trunk. J.A. stated, “I just wanted him to kill me; and he decided not to kill me right then.” Defendant tried to force J.A. into the trunk, and she resisted. She recalled: “I thought if I go into this trunk *** I am going to be dead. But he kept prolonging it and prolonging it; and it was driving me mentally insane.” Defendant was eventually able to force J.A. into the trunk. J.A., who was tied with twine and clad only in a sweatshirt, thought “about being chopped up.” She thought she would be taken somewhere and would be “hacked up in pieces.” She tried to kill herself by holding her breath and by bashing her head against the inside of the trunk. She recalled, “I didn’t want him to kill me. I wanted to kill myself.” When J.A. was unsuccessful in that attempt, she suffered through periods of panic, and eventually experienced a loss of energy, “like *** having a seizure.” J.A. said she then started to pray. After praying, she got “really, really calm.” J.A. testified: “I just got all of my energy together; and then I just stretched my arms hardly; and all of the twine just busted right off my hands.” Having freed herself, J.A. again succumbed to panic and despair. She testified: “And I kept saying, now what, God? *** I’m in a frickin’ trunk. How am I going to get out of this? And so I just lost hope again; and I got the twine; and I wound it up; and I put it around my neck; and I squeezed it really tight; and I was trying to choke myself. *** I couldn’t strangle myself. And I couldn’t think of any other way to kill myself.” J.A. briefly entertained the idea of fighting defendant when he opened the trunk, but she quickly decided against it, concluding, “He’ll pull me out. We’ll struggle. One of us will die. Probably me since I have no weapons.” So, J.A. resolved to try and escape from the trunk. J.A. eventually found the latch of the trunk. She recalled she “pushed something, pulled something, turned something, and it went click.” She lifted the trunk a little bit and there was “light everywhere.” J.A.’s state of mind was such that she initially contemplated whether to “jump out and get run over and die,” which she “really didn’t mind” at that point, or to actually try to save herself. She decided on the latter course, and raised the trunk lid in such a way as to draw defendant’s attention. Defendant quickly pulled over, and shortly thereafter appeared at the rear of the car with his gun. Defendant slammed the trunk lid closed and yelled, “Don’t open that trunk, bitch. I’ll shoot out the back seat.” He then got back in the car, but was unable to drive away because the car had become stuck in the soft sand. Defendant kept trying to move the car while he intermittently threatened to kill J.A. if she tried to open the trunk again. J.A. eventually unlatched the trunk a second time, jumped out, and ran. As she did so, she looked back and saw defendant in pursuit with a machete. As she ran, J.A. tried to get motorists to stop, but they would just drive by. Finally, she saw a truck coming. J.A. recounted: “So I just ran in front of it with my eyes closed because I thought he was real near to me so I wanted to be run over before I was hit with that [machete].” The occupants of the truck, two Marines, grabbed J.A. and put her in their truck. When she told them what had happened, they initially began chasing defendant, until she told them he was heavily armed, at which point they desisted. The two Marines took J.A. to a nearby gas station; the police were called; and J.A. was thereafter taken to a hospital. Under cross-examination, J.A. acknowledged that she still has the experience “following [her] around” and that she is now “different mentally.” Three years after he kidnapped, raped, and attempted to kill J.A., defendant murdered Denise Maney in Palm Springs. During a vacation to California in March of 1995, defendant picked up Maney in the same area where he had earlier picked up McGhee and Erwin. Defendant drove Maney to the desert, and stopped the car on a deserted side road, where he ordered Maney to strip and perform oral sex on him. Defendant said he got “tired” of that after a while, so he grabbed Maney by the hair, walked her over to the front of the car, and told her to lie facedown on the ground. Defendant got on top of her and tied her hands behind her back. He again directed her to perform fellatio. However, defendant said, he “wasn’t really feeling satisfied,” so he turned Maney over on her knees and “shoved” one of his fingers into Maney’s anus. Maney screamed. Defendant recalled, “And then after awhile I drove in two fingers. I just kept going — shoving my fingers in her ass. *** And that went on for a while. I just kept doing that to her.” Defendant said, when he got tired of that, he picked her up and walked her toward the desert. When she turned around, defendant put his gun in her mouth. “And then it went off.” The gunshot blew off the back of Maney’s head. Defendant stated: “Then she fell and she was still like gurgling *** making a lot of noises. But I had some blood on me a little bit and the gun[,] so I just walked away.” Defendant got in his car, and started to drive away, but he eventually stopped. Defendant stated: “I didn’t feel nothing *** I didn’t really think. I just kind of like wiped — cleaned my hand off a little bit and I stopped, turned around and I went back to her.” Defendant then described his mood as “angry” and “very upset.” He said, this time, he took his knife out. In relating what he did next, defendant slipped back and forth between use of the singular pronoun “I” and the plural pronoun “we.” He told the police: “[W]e took the knife out and we went back toward the— back to her where she was lying at we just started stabbing for some reason. Just on the body several times, in the chest maybe, stomach. *** I remember I made a slashing motion by the throat. *** Then we went back to the car. And I — we, we — picked up her clothes. *** Then we were driving, we just started driving ***.” Defendant said he threw most of Maney’s belongings on the side of the road. However, he said, alternately: “We just *** I just” buried “her panties and her little lingerie stuff.” Defendant murdered a sixth woman, Laura Uylaki, in April of 1996. Defendant told police he met Uylaki in the winter of 1995-96, and they went out a few times. He and Uylaki had sex twice at Wolf Lake in a sleeping bag defendant kept in the back of his truck. In April of 1996, defendant again picked up Uylaki and they drove to Wolf Lake. On the way, they began to argue. According to defendant, when they arrived at Wolf Lake, defendant took his loaded .38-caliber revolver from underneath the driver’s seat and was “showing it to Laura,” when the gun went off, shooting a hole in the roof of the truck. Defendant stated, after his gun went off, “Laura got mad and all hell broke loose.” Defendant claimed that Uylaki grabbed for his gun, breaking his left index finger in the process. He said she then jumped out of the truck and began to run. Defendant stated that he followed her and fired “a couple more times” in her direction. She fell to the ground. When he determined that she was dead, he decided to throw her body into the lake. According to defendant’s version of events, he then took off her clothes, carried her body to the lake, and pushed her in. Thereafter, defendant said he drove back to Chicago, and on the way, he threw Uylaki’s clothes from the passenger side of his truck. Defendant told police he met Lynn Huber, his seventh murder victim, in the summer of 1996, when she was working as a prostitute in Chicago. Defendant said they had sex a couple of times that summer. One evening in late July or early August of 1996, defendant saw Huber carrying a large garbage bag full of clothes. He stopped and offered her a ride, which she accepted. According to defendant, he pulled into an alley to have sex with Huber, but she started arguing with him and “acting kind of ditzy.” Defendant said that Huber tried to get out of the truck, but he grabbed her and shot her in the head, using the loaded gun he kept under his seat. Defendant stated he then put Huber’s body in the bed of the truck and drove to Wolf Lake. In defendant’s version of events, he then removed Huber’s clothing and, in the process, pricked his finger with a needle. Defendant claimed that made him angry enough that he took out a knife, stabbed her “a lot of times” in the back, and shot her again. Defendant dragged her body to the lake and threw her in. Defendant later disposed of the clothes Huber had been wearing and gave her bag of clothes to the Salvation Army. Defendant observed, “[S]he won’t need them anymore.” Defendant told police he killed his eighth and final murder victim, Cassandra Corum, on the night of July 13, 1996. Defendant said he had known Corum for about two years prior to the murder. On the night of the murder, defendant met Corum in a Hammond, Indiana, bar and the two drove to Wolf Lake, where they had sex. According to defendant, Corum said something that made him angry — though he could not remember what — so he hit her in the face several times with his fist and open hand. Defendant stated that Corum started to become afraid and panicked, “so she began to fight *** back.” Defendant said it was at that point that he forced Co-rum’s hands behind her back and handcuffed her. He also claimed he then removed her clothing. Defendant told police that Corum “seemed numb with anxiety and fear. So she became passive and submissive.” Defendant then bound her feet together with duct tape, put duct tape over her mouth, and positioned her so that her head was in his lap. Defendant said he was “still pissed off” so he began driving south, down Interstate 55. He recalled he had driven “for a couple hours or so” when he started getting tired. At that point, he pulled off the interstate and continued driving until he went over a bridge that crossed a river. He then drove into a little park and shut off his truck. Defendant claimed he removed the duct tape and handcuffs from Corum — though that assertion is inconsistent with the state in which her body was found. Defendant said he and the still-naked Corum exited the truck. Defendant had gotten his gun from beneath the driver’s seat of his truck. Defendant stated that Corum had walked to the back of the truck, and had turned to face him, as if to say something, when he pointed the gun at her and fired once. She fell to the ground. Because he was still mad at her for fighting and biting him, he then got his knife out of the truck and stabbed her “a few times.” Thereafter, defendant picked up her body, carried it to the bridge, and dumped the body into the river. He observed that he “didn’t feel anything for Cassie *** she was just a whore.” He added that he was “trained to kill in the Marine Corps.” Defendant said he drove back toward home, throwing Corum’s clothes out the window on the way. He noted they were “just garbage *** and there was no sense in keeping them.” As noted, much of the foregoing evidence comes from defendant’s own statements to police. At sentencing, Detective Don McGrath of the Chicago police department testified that he escorted defendant back to the lockup after the interviews. McGrath testified, when they got to the lockup door, defendant looked at McGrath and said: “Well, you know, I’m kind of glad in a way that you caught me. *** I was starting to get the urge again.” When the State had finished presenting aggravating evidence of defendant’s criminal activity, the parties and the court discussed the commencement of the defense case in mitigation. In that regard, defense counsel stated his intention of introducing the psychiatrists’ reports into evidence and asking that the reports go back to the jury. The State objected to the reports going back to the jury, arguing that the experts should testify in person and “be subject to cross-examination.” The court expressed concern, noting that the reports in question were “extremely voluminous” and that Dr. Killian’s report alone was 75 pages long. The trial judge advised the parties: “I’m not limiting either the direct or cross-examination of a particular expert. So you want to have an expert on the stand for two days, that’s fine with me. You can go over his entire report if you like. *** [I]f all those questions are then asked of a witness, then the opposite side knows what to cross on. *** So the only point I’m making is that there is an unlimited opportunity to inquire of these experts.” The trial court subsequently ruled that the reports would not be sent back to the jury, noting, inter alia, “that’s why we have the experts testifying because we are in a realm beyond the normal knowledge of the jurors.” With that, the defense commenced its case in mitigation. In mitigation, the defendant called Drs. Merikangas and Killian, Kendra Moses, a mitigation expert, Roger Cowan, former warden of Menard Correctional Center, and Steven Hardy, a clinical psychologist. Kendra Moses, a defense mitigation specialist, testified regarding negative and positive experiences in defendant’s life and the impact of defendant’s conduct on his family. Moses observed that defendant was the youngest of six children. The Urdíales family was “fairly close” prior to defendant’s arrest for the Cook County murders; however, that is no longer the case. As of the time of trial, the only family members who regularly visited defendant in prison were his parents, his sister, Cynthia, and her son. All of the siblings and grandchildren, except for Cynthia and her son, stopped visiting defendant’s parents once they learned of the Cook County murders. Moses noted that defendant’s oldest brother, Alfred, was killed in Vietnam when defendant was three or four years old. Defendant was “very close” to Alfred. According to family members, defendant would sit on the porch and wait for his brother to come home, not understanding that his brother had died. Alfred’s death impacted defendant in another sense as well. After Alfred was killed, defendant’s mother suffered through an “extended period” of depression for “two or three years.” She had “trouble continuing to function in her everyday life.” Moses testified it was during that period of time that defendant’s older sisters, Cynthia and Monica, became his primary caretakers. Moses suggested it was “in that environment that Monica eventually started to sexually abuse” defendant, though it would appear that the abuse — reported by defendant to have taken place when he was 11 years old and Monica was 13 or 14 — would have taken place approximately four years after defendant’s mother’s period of depression. In any event, defendant told his psychologist and Moses that Monica had sexually abused him on several occasions and the abuse caused him intense feelings of fear and helplessness. Moses further testified that defendant was subjected to bullying, beatings, and harassment from third grade through eighth grade. She explained that the Urdíales family — of Mexican origin — moved to Burnham, Illinois, when defendant was in third grade. They were the only family of Hispanic heritage living in the area. That ethnic difference, as well as defendant’s small size and the developing symptoms of Tourette’s syndrome, led to neighborhood children harassing, chasing and physically attacking him on his way home from school. In one instance, the police were called. The harassment was so bad that the family moved back to Chicago when defendant was in high school. Defendant’s parents believed that defendant’s experiences growing up in Burnham made him “very anxious socially.” He did not develop friendships easily and in fact “had at various times maybe one friend that he would play with or hang out with.” As he got older, defendant was “fearful” around girls and did not date. When defendant graduated from high school, he enlisted in the Marines, serving from 1984 until he was honorably discharged in 1991. Moses described defendant’s experience in the military as “not a failed career,” but certainly “not the success he hoped it would be.” Moses indicated that defendant did not make friends in the Marines and he had some unspecified difficulties. When defendant was discharged from the Marines, he moved back to Chicago, where he lived with his parents. He is the godfather of Cynthia’s son, Brian, and the two were described as “very close.” Moses testified that defendant had a close relationship with all of his nieces and nephews. Finally, Moses testified that defendant did seek counseling through the Veteran’s Administration after his discharge from the Marines. He was referred to psychologist Janet Wilier. He advised Dr. Wilier that he needed help dealing with his temper and an inferiority complex. He also spoke to Wilier about childhood harassment, sexual abuse, inability to relate to women, and the death of his older brother. Defendant attended over 100 sessions with Wilier between 1991 and 1995. According to Moses, defendant stopped attending sessions when the Veteran’s Administration changed its billing practices and he “didn’t feel like he could afford the copayment.” The defense’s next witness was Roger Cowan, former warden of Menard Correctional Center. Defendant was incarcerated at Menard at the time of trial. Cowan explained that an inmate who serves a life sentence without the possibility of parole would always be housed in a maximum security facility; an inmate on death row would be segregated from the general population. Cowan described in detail the tight security and highly restrictive conditions that apply to an inmate serving a natural life sentence. Cowan characterized incarceration at Menard as “a very rigid lifestyle *** very demanding on the inmates *** a tough life.” He noted that Menard is not air-conditioned. Inmates can receive five visits per month, and they get five hours of recreation each week. Cowan noted that defendant had spent seven years in the correctional system. He had been ticketed only twice: once for throwing his lunch tray from his cell onto the floor; once for failing to enter his cell on time. Cowan offered his assessment that defendant had made a “very good adjustment” to prison life. Dr. Stephen Hardy, a clinical psychologist who had worked several years for both the Department of Corrections and the Department of Mental Health/Human Services, testified that he had evaluated defendant on six occasions and had reviewed records pertinent to defendant’s mental condition. Hardy diagnosed defendant with Tourette’s disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, bipolar disorder, and personality disorder with avoidant and borderline features. Hardy based the PTSD diagnosis on defendant’s “history of severe sexual and physical abuse involving an older sister and neighborhood bullies respectively.” Hardy explained that a PTSD diagnosis based on childhood sexual abuse does not necessarily have to entail “an event where the person was threatened or suffered serious injury. *** Sexually traumatic events may include developmentally inappropriate sexual experiences without threatened or actual violence or injury.” Concerning the abduction and murder of Cassandra Corum, Hardy concluded that defendant acted while “under the influence of an extreme mental or emotional disturbance but not such to constitute a defense to the prosecution.” Hardy noted in defendant’s history a “clear pattern” involving “chronic feelings of emptiness and inappropriate anger and difficulty controlling this anger.” Hardy recognized that defendant “had some difficulties getting along with people, and there were some personal conflicts at work.” Defendant consistently displayed an unwillingness to be involved with other people, particularly adult females. Notwithstanding defendant’s “difficulties getting along with people,” Hardy testified that defendant’s potential for acting out violently in prison was low, an assessment he based upon the structure of prison and the prison authorities’ ability to quickly intervene should defendant become violent. In that respect, Hardy concluded: “Looking at the circumstances under which he acted out violently in the past, examining the means he had to do so, the characteristics of his past victims, and you combine that with his behavior the past seven years in two maximum security environments, I think the potential for him to act out violently it’s my opinion is very low.” Hardy acknowledged that defendant would still come into contact with women in prison. He also described an incident during which defendant became very loud and threw some papers while Hardy was interviewing him. Although Hardy did not call the guards, Hardy was nonetheless “concerned about it.” Dr. James Merikangas reiterated much of his testimony from the bench trial/GBMI hearing. Commenting on the MRI and the single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) scan evidence, which suggested shrinkage of defendant’s brain, Merikangas observed that such findings were often associated with dementia, loss of intellectual capacity, and abnormalities of motor control. Merikangas did not believe that defendant’s criminal conduct could be explained simply in terms of inability to control his anger. Merikangas concluded: “I would call it rage attacks, I would call it impulse disorder, intermittent explosive disorder. I wouldn’t simply call it anger.” Merikangas stated his belief that antiseizure medication could prevent defendant’s violent outbursts and antipsychotic medication could be used to treat “the disorder of thinking that he has.” Under cross-examination, Merikangas maintained that defendant’s brain “shrinkage” and, inferentially, his “reduced mental capacity[,] *** probably did have something to do with the murders.” Merikangas rejected the prosecutor’s suggestion that defendant’s actions during the murders showed he had no “coordination problems,” and that he had displayed an “ability to plan,” and select as victims women whom he could manipulate, control, and ultimately kill. Merikangas insisted that defendant’s actions showed “an inability to communicate with women in a normal manner.” When the prosecutor stated that defendant “never had enough guts to do it to a man, *** he always had to pick out a woman,” Merikangas brought up “the outburst that he had here in the courtroom, when the jury wasn’t present, where he turned over the table and went wild with even these guards standing next to him.” Merikangas pointed to that incident as an indication that defendant suffers from a “real loss of control.” Inquiring further about defendant’s spontaneous loss of control, his impulse disorder, and his intermittent explosive disorder, the following colloquy ensued between the prosecutor and Merikangas: “PROSECUTOR: You think carrying around knives and a machete in a rental car in California when he picked up [J.A.], you think that showed a disorder of thought or did it show planning? MERIKANGAS: That shows that he was looking for something but also indicates a certain paranoia to be carrying all those weapons.” The final defense witness was Dr. Terry Killian. Killian testified consistently with his testimony from the bench trial/GBMI hearing, focusing again on the defendant’s mental state and dissociation at the time of Co-rum’s murder. Killian emphasized, however, that the defendant accepted responsibility for his conduct and did not blame it on an alter ego. Killian also believed that defendant’s voluntary counseling sessions with Dr. Wilier represented “a good-faith effort” to obtain treatment “within the limitations of what I believe he is capable of doing.” Killian’s testimony about defendant’s diagnosis, background, family history, childhood trauma, and history of mental health treatment was also consistent with his testimony from the bench trial/GBMI hearing. Killian noted that he had reviewed medical records, arrest reports, and police records, and had conducted over 22 hours of interviews. Summarizing his findings, Killian explained that defendant was not insane and was responsible for his actions; however, Killian concluded that defendant suffered from extreme mental and emotional disturbances that reduced his mental capacity at the time of his offenses. Killian believed that defendant felt some remorse for his actions, but, even though it would have been to his advantage to express remorse in death penalty proceedings, defendant feared that expressing remorse would be perceived as self-serving and insincere. On cross-examination, Killian testified that he had “reviewed” a sentence-completion test administered by Dr. Opsahl when forming his opinion. When the prosecutor handed Killian the sentence-completion test, and asked if that was the test he had reviewed, defense counsel objected, arguing that the test was not relevant unless Killian had relied upon the test in formulating his opinion. The prosecutor was then allowed to question Killian as to whether he had relied on the report when forming his opinion. Killian responded: “A. I looked at this, but I didn’t include this, I’m pretty sure I did not include a description of this in my report. I read through it and didn’t see anything that, that was significantly different from what I already knew about him; so I didn’t include the specifics of it. Q. Did you rely upon, at all, in any respect, rely upon, for your opinions here and your assessment of Mr. Urdiales’s personality, did you rely upon any of his answers here? A. I don’t think I did. I don’t think I put much into the sentence completion test. I remember looking at it but not making much of it and setting it aside, and I don’t think I relied on that. I relied on lots of other things but not that test specifically. Q. So you don’t recall if some of the answers that he gave on this two-page test helped you formulate that he had this rage towards women? A. I don’t specifically recall. I’d be happy to look at it if you’d like.” After looking at the report, Killian stated: “Well, they’re consistent with what I already believed about him from everything else I had read. In other words, he does make comments in here about women that are pretty negative. That should hardly be surprising given everything else about him.” When the prosecutor asked for specifics, defense counsel objected and asked to approach the bench. The court announced a brief recess and made the following comments out of the presence of the jury: “To cut to the core, the witness is not being responsive, and the right question I don’t believe has been answered. The witness has testified very clearly to the tune of $36,000 that he has gone over with great care all of the materials of a psychiatric nature. The witness has acknowledged that this is among the materials. Now, what the witness has said here, is he has not included it in his report because it is consistent with what he already knew. He has not yet testified that he disregarded it and did not rely on it, but yet he has skirted the issue and not testified that he discarded it and didn’t take it into account in arriving at his decisions. I think we need a vigorous interrogation on foundation by the State to see where this witness goes because he’s going in both directions.” In subsequent foundational questioning, out of the presence of the jury, Killian conceded that he had taken into account all the materials placed before him, and then qualified his answer by adding, “[I]t’s not accurate to say that each piece of paper received the same amount of attention as any other piece of paper.” The prosecutor then asked if defendant’s answers in the sentence-completion test were important in his analysis of defendant. Killian responded: “I’m answering this as well as I can.” At that point the court asked Killian if he understood the question, and directed him to answer it if he understood. The court advised Killian, if he did not understand, he should say so. At the court’s direction, the prosecutor’s question was read back, and Killian responded that he considered defendant’s answers in the sentence-completion test “somewhat important.” The prosecutor then returned to the critical question: “Did you take his answers to these questions into account in arriving at your conclusion?” Killian answered: “Not specifically, I did not include them in my report.” As the prosecutor began to protest, the court again interceded: “All right. Once again, let me stop you here. Sir, there was a question asked you and you answered a different question. I’m going to have the court reporter read back the question once again. *** I want you to listen to the question that’s asked of you and then I want you to answer that question unless you don’t understand it. Do we understand each other?” Killian answered affirmatively. When the question was read back by the court reporter, Killian finally answered, unequivocally: “Yes, I took them into account.” With that, the court determined there was a sufficient foundation to go into the report before the jury. Before the jury was called back into the courtroom, the court asked attorney Elmore if there was anything he wanted to contest in terms of that ruling. Defense counsel responded: “It’s proper, I agree. He took it into account; so, it’s fair game.” Before the jury, Killian again acknowledged that defendant’s answers in the sentence-completion test were considered in his assessment of defendant, and defendant’s answers were consistent with defendant’s attitudes toward, and feelings about, women. Although, at trial, the prosecutor then read aloud the open-ended portions of the sentences in the test, and Killian responded by supplying the words defendant used to complete the sentences, we set forth here the completed sentences, utilizing hyphens to separate the test portions from defendant’s responses: “Sentence # 2: A wife should — be a good provider. Sentence # 4: A man feels good when — he comes. Sentence # 7: Men are lucky because — we have cocks. Sentence # 8: I just can’t stand people who — get in my face. Sentence # 11: A woman feels good when — we stick it in them. Sentence # 12: My main problem is — people. Sentence # 13: A husband has the right to — beat his wife. Sentence # 14: A woman should always — please her man. Sentence # 19: If I can’t get what I want — I take it. Sentence # 22: My conscience bothers me — if I let it. Sentence # 23: A man should always — be right. Sentence # 25: When I am criticized — I get mad. Sentence # 27: Being with other people — sucks. Sentence # 30: What gets me into trouble is — sex. Sentence # 35: A woman has a right to — be silent.” After going through the foregoing portions of the sentence-completion test, the prosecutor asked: “Hates women, doesn’t he?” Killian agreed, adding that defendant had “a great deal of anger, and most of that anger is directed at women.” The prosecutor followed up by asking about the sexual abuse that defendant reported involving his sister, Monica. Killian acknowledged, on page 73 of his report, he wrote: “There were apparently only a few incidents of sexual activity between them, and Andrew told me that he did not experience the sexual contact with Monica as traumatic and he did not even think of it as being wrong until he was well into his adult years.” Killian, however, disagreed with the prosecutor’s assertion that there “wasn’t any sexual trauma,” suggesting that “it was more traumatic than he currently admits to for whatever reasons.” At the conclusion of Killian’s testimony, outside the presence of the jury, the court ruled that the sentence-completion test would be included in the record, but would not go to the jury. After Killian’s testimony, the defense rested. Defendant elected not to testify in his own behalf or deliver a statement in allocution. In rebuttal, the State called Dr. Park Dietz, who testified consistently with his testimony at the bench trial/ GBMI hearing. Prior to the defense’s stipulation that Dietz was qualified as an expert “in the area of forensic psychiatry,” the State elicited testimony that Dietz had been previously involved in examinations of various high-profile individuals such as John Hinckley, Jeffery Dahmer, and Ted Kaczynski, also known as the Unibomber. After the defense stipulation, Dietz testified to his finding that defendant shows clear signs of a personality disorder with antisocial and schizotypal features. Dietz defined a personality disorder as “a lifelong pattern of maladaptive behavior” that “tends to cause impairment” in a person’s “relationships with other people.” Dietz believed that three factors may have played a part — to a greater or lesser extent — in defendant’s development of a personality disorder. First and foremost, Dietz felt that the taunting and bullying defendant experienced as a child was a significant factor. Dietz noted that defendant had been “taunted and bullied and teased” as a child, and he “blamed his crimes to some extent o[n] what people had done to him as a kid because it made him so angry and resentful.” Second, Dietz believed that the death of defendant’s brother may have contributed to the development of his disorder. Although defendant did not remember his brother, and he did not feel impacted by his brother’s death directly, there was evidence that defendant’s mother became withdrawn after Alfred’s death, and was “no longer as attentive and participatory as a caretaker.” Finally, Dietz mentioned the defendant’s report of sexual intercourse with his sister as a possible factor; however, Dietz noted that defendant was not “particularly pleased or upset by it. He did not regard this as a very important aspect of what had happened to him as a child.” Dietz did not believe it was “a particular[ly] traumatic event” for defendant. He placed more importance on the “unavailability” of defendant’s mother after his brother’s death. Dietz believed that anger played an important part in all of the crimes committed by defendant, and in his work-related problems as well. Dietz also testified that hatred of women and sexual sadism were significant factors in the commission of defendant’s crimes. Under cross-examination, Dietz stated that he normally uses the terms “mental illness” or “mental disease” to describe conditions “in which the person’s experience is categorically different from normal human experience.” Using the terms in that manner would equate the terms to psychosis, and they would thus apply to persons with “hallucinations, delusions, or a formal thought disorder.” Dietz acknowledged Illinois’ definition of mental illness for purposes of a finding of guilty but mentally ill, and he paraphrased that definition for the jury, ¡Le., “a substantial disorder of mood, thinking or behavior that impaired judgment at the time of the crime.” Dietz concluded that defendant was not mentally ill when he killed Cassandra Corum. Following Dietz’s testimony, Cassandra Corum’s mother, Sherry Alsalah, read a victim impact statement, touching upon the effect Corum’s disappearance and murder had had upon her, the victim’s sister, and the victim’s young son. Prior to closing argument, the prosecutor sought clarification of the limits of permissible argument, inquiring as to which of the court’s rulings from the guilt phase would be the subject of proper comment. The prosecutor noted he had “planned on arguing that the Court has previously found the defendant to be sane, not to be mentally ill.” The court told the prosecutor: “No. You got to stay away from mental illness.” The prosecutor accepted that prohibition without objection or argument, stating, “That is what I wanted to be sure about.” Defense counsel then interjected, “Insanity is fair game.” The court confirmed that insanity was “fair game,” and the parties could discuss that finding, because the court had already advised the jury of that ruling. In his opening statement, the prosecutor told the jurors: “You’re not here to decide the Defendant’s guilt. That has already been decided. The Court decided, Judge Frobish has already decided that the Defendant is guilty of the murder of Cassandra Corum. He also has decided that the Defendant was not, at the time that murder was committed, insane.” The prosecutor subsequently acknowledged that defendant’s mental condition was relevant in the jury’s sentencing decision, noting that the jury would receive instructions pertaining to “extreme mental or emotional disturbance” and “reduced mental capacity.” In his closing statement, defense counsel summarized the evidence presented on defendant’s behalf, and took issue with the State’s evidence, particularly the testimony of Dr. Dietz. The focal point of the defendant’s closing argument was the defendant’s mental and emotional condition. Defense counsel informed the jury it was “a factor in mitigation” that defendant “suffers from a reduced mental capacity.” He suggested there was “[ajbundant testimony concerning that.” Counsel noted it was a mitigating factor that “the murder of Cassandra Corum was committed while Defendant was under the influence of an extreme mental or emotional disturbance although not such as to constitute a defense to the prosecution.” Counsel stated he had asked Dr. Dietz to provide a “definition of mental illness”; however, he provided the “definition of insanity.” Attorney Skelton underscored: “As Judge Frobish has told you, insanity is not an issue at this stage of the proceeding.” Counsel emphasized that insanity was not at issue and that Dr. Dietz had provided the “wrong definition of what we’re dealing with at this stage of the case.” Skelton observed that the jury had seen photographs evincing the “handiwork” of a “sick mind.” He directed the jury to “look at the mitigating factors,” noting that defendant “suffers from a mental illness” and “had a reduced mental capacity.” Counsel concluded: “What we are talking about here is mitigation. What we are talking about here is does society, do we as a people who do not have the same deficits, the same problems, the same illnesses as Andrew Urdíales, punish the mentally ill in the same fashion that we would punish someone who does not have that mental illness?” Counsel suggested that life in prison was the appropriate sentence. In rebuttal argument, the prosecutor reiterated that insanity was not an issue; however, he immediately followed that remark with a question that unequivocally apprised the jury that mental illness was still an issue: “Is [defendant] mentally ill at some level?” What followed was a discussion of the evidence and testimony bearing upon that issue. The prosecutor’s subsequent remarks also made clear that defendant’s mental state was considered a viable, and perhaps determinative, factor in the jury’s sentencing decision. We quote pertinent portions of the prosecutor’s argument: “Extreme mental or emotional disturbance or reduced mental capacity. That’s what you are going to see [in instructions] when you decide whether or not you believe that factor in mitigation and because of that its inappropriate to impose a death penalty. Reduced mental capacity. *** I pose to you, think about this. *** If this defendant were suffering from such an extreme emotional disturbance and reduced mental capacity, if a cop was at his elbow during all these crimes, he’d still do them because he couldn’t help himself because he’s suffering from those types of mental problems. Does one of you think that if there was a policeman at his elbow when [J.A.] was in that trunk she would have still been in the trunk and that he would have done that? Do you think if a policeman would have been at his elbow that he would have blown the back of Denise Haney’s head off? Do any of you really think that that if there would have been a cop there with him, I’m just emotionally disturbed, I can’t help myself, and he’d do it anyway? Is there a single person that can truly believe that?” The prosecutor noted, even if the jurors believed that defendant was “emotionally disturbed” or his “mental capacity was reduced,” they could still “vote to impose the death penalty despite that.” Following the arguments of the parties, the trial court issued final instructions to the jury. The jury was instructed that mitigating factors include: “First: Any or all of the following if supported by the evidence: The murder was committed while the defendant was under the influence of an extreme mental or emotional disturbance, although not such as to constitute a defense to the prosecution. The defendant suffers from a reduced mental capacity. Second: Any other reason supported by the evidence why the defendant should not be sentenced to death. Where there is evidence of a mitigating factor, the fact that such mitigating factor is not a factor specifically listed in these instructions does not preclude your consideration of the evidence.” During jury deliberations, the jury sent a note asking to see the sentence-completion test. The court initially considered whether to send only the portion of the test referred to in the questioning of Dr. Killian. The court then inquired, “Should they get the questions that were not asked of Dr. Killian?” Attorney Skelton responded for the defense, “I need to review the entirety of the exhibit before I can comment on that.” After further consideration, attorney Shelton stated: “I would suggest that it be sent in its entirety.” Attorney Elmore concurred. By agreement of the parties, the entire sentence-completion test was sent to the jury. The jury ultimately determined that death was the appropriate sentence. Subsequently, defendant filed a posttrial motion, which was considered and denied. The court sentenced defendant to death, and this appeal followed. ANALYSIS Pretrial Proceedings I. Shackling and Other Security Measures Defendant first contends that he was deprived of due process and fundamental fairness where the trial court initially ordered defendant’s legs shackled under a skirted table during courtroom appearances and later, after defendant created a disturbance in the courtroom, ordered his left arm shackled under the table as well. Defendant also argues that he was improperly denied writing utensils after the courtroom disturbance and, in the issue statement of his brief, suggests that the court erred in “instruct[ing] the jury that the defendant was restrained for security reasons.” In response to defendant’s contentions, the State first argues that defendant acquiesced in the trial court’s ordering of restraints and forfeited the issue by failing to object at trial or preserve the issue in a posttrial motion. Beyond that, the State contends that defendant cannot obtain relief under the plain error doctrine because there was no error. In addressing defendant’s plain error argument, we first “consider whether error occurred at all.” People v. Wade, 131 Ill. 2d 370, 376 (1989). Applying the principles expressed in People v. Buss, 187 Ill. 2d 144 (1999) — which remain good law after this court’s decision in People v. Allen, 222 Ill. 2d 340 (2006), and the Supreme Court’s opinion in Deck v. Missouri, 544 U.S. 622, 161 L. Ed. 2d 953, 125 S. Ct. 2007 (2005) — we conclude that no error occurred as a result of the defendant’s wearing shackles during the proceedings in this case. We note that the trial court made findings sufficient to justify the use of physical restraints, it appears the shackling was not visible to the jury, and the measures imposed by the trial court did not affect defendant’s ability to assist and communicate with counsel. In People v. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d 261, 265 (1977), this court noted that shackling is generally disfavored because (1) it tends to prejudice the jury against the accused; (2) it restricts the defendant’s ability to assist counsel during trial; and (3) it offends the dignity of the judicial process. Nonetheless, this court explained that a defendant may be shackled if there is an indication he may try to escape, pose a threat to the safety of courtroom occupants, or disrupt the order of the courtroom. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 266. The Boose court identified several factors a circuit court should consider in determining whether to shackle a defendant, including: “ ‘[T]he seriousness of the present charge against the defendant; defendant’s temperament and character; his age and physical attributes; his past record; past escapes or attempted escapes, and evidence of a present plan to escape; threats to harm others or cause a disturbance; self-destructive tendencies; the risk of mob violence or of attempted revenge by others; the possibility of rescue by other offenders still at large; the size and mood of the audience; the nature and physical security of the courtroom; and the adequacy and availability of alternative remedies.’ ” Boose, 66 Ill. 2d 266-67, quoting State v. Tolley, 290 N.C. 349, 368, 226 S.E.2d 353, 368 (1976). The need for shackling is a determination within the discretion of the circuit court. Buss, 187 Ill. 2d at 216. A court of review will examine that decision to determine whether the trial court abused its discretion. Boose, 66 Ill. 2d 267. Consequently, a trial court must — outside the presence of the jury — place its reasons for shackling a defendant on the record and provide defense counsel with an opportunity to offer reasons why the defendant should not be shackled. Buss, 187 Ill. 2d at 216. As this court observed in Buss, a single reason for shackling has generally been held to be insufficient justification for the restraint; whereas, “Illinois courts have found no abuse of discretion in shackling a defendant when the circuit court has expressed more than a single reason for shackling a defendant.” Buss, 187 Ill. 2d at 216-17 (compiling cases). Perhaps because the trial judge in this case had been subject to appellate court criticism in a previous matter, he was particularly sensitive to the Boose issue, and he took care to comply with the mandated procedure. The court first noted that defendant’s legs would be shackled under a skirted table and that the jurors would not be aware of it unless defendant drew their attention to it. The judge asked defense counsel if they had “any objection on the record.” Counsel responded that the defense had “no objection to it now.” The trial court then specifically identified three factors to support its decision to shackle defendant’s legs. First, the court observed that defendant had been recently convicted of two murders in Cook County and had been sentenced to death. Although his death sentence was subsequently commuted, he was, at the time of trial, still serving two life sentences. Second, the court mentioned defendant’s physical attributes, noting that he was in good health and had no difficulty getting around. Third, the court made reference to the age of the Livingston County courthouse and stated there were “all kind of security problems with the building and the courtroom.” Although the court did not initially mention the first Boose factor, i.e., the seriousness of the charge against defendant, that consideration must have been obvious to all, and the court’s subsequent reference to that factor indicates that it no doubt was significant in the court’s ruling at the outset. After the court set forth its reasons for the restraint, the judge stated his intention to instruct the jury that “security measures have been taken, such as the guards being here.” With those comments on the restraint of defendant and attendant security measures, the trial court again asked: “Is there anything else on that issue that either the State or the defense wishes to bring up?” For the defense, attorney Skelton responded, “No, sir.” The court then recessed prior to the commencement of jury voir dire. During that recess, defendant began cursing and threw a cup of water because a guard, and his own attorney, had instructed him that he could not speak with his parents and Kendra Moses. Defendant had to be physically subdued and handcuffed, and he turned over a table in the process. After the trial judge ascertained what had happened, the court asked defendant: “Will you promise to behave yourself if I do not shackle you?” Defendant gave no explicit assurances, stating only, through counsel, that he had not been shackled in the prior Cook County proceedings, and there had been no outbursts or problems. The court then made the additional observation: “[Y]ou are on trial here for your life.” As a result of the outburst, the court ordered defendant’s left arm shackled under the table as well and directed that defendant be given no pencils or pens. Two days later, in chambers, the court revisited the issue of security. The court observed that two “very large guards” had been necessary to restrain defendant “notwithstanding that he was already shackled to an eyebolt on the floor.” The judge described defendant’s conduct and characterized it as going “ballistic” or “berserk.” Attorney Elmore, for the defense, acknowledged that the court had not overstated the severity of the incident. The court then stated that defendant was a “high risk individual” and noted that his demeanor had changed after it became clear that the trial was “actually going to go forward finally.” The judge stated his belief that defendant was a “desperate man.” With those additional observations, bearing upon the second and sixth factors mentioned in Boose (see Boose, 66 Ill. 2d at 266-67 (“ ‘defendant’s temperament and character’ ” and “ ‘threats to harm others or cause a disturbance’ ”), quoting State v. Tolley, 290 N.C. 349, 368, 226 S.E.2d 353, 368 (1976)), the court again asked defense counsel: “[D]o you want me to free up Mr. Urdíales more than I am contemplating doing?” Attorney Skelton initially responded by asking that the court reconsider its decision to deny defendant a writing implement. The court then stated: “DOC has had in the past inch pencils. *** It’s a very small pencil. We’ll explore that and come up with a writing material that couldn’t do you harm.” Other than that single request, defense counsel did not object to the security measures ordered by the court, and in fact concluded his remarks on the subject by implicitly agreeing that the court’s measures were appropriate under the circumstances, stating, “I know what the court’s talking about. I’ve been there.” We find that the trial court set forth more of record than was necessary to justify the physical restraints and security measures it utilized. The court gave the defense an opportunity to offer reasons why defendant should not be shackled, and the defense in effect conceded that the court’s actions were appropriate. The use of physical restraints, which were not visible to the jury, did not impair defendant’s ability to communicate with counsel and assist in his defense. In short, we find that the court acted appropriately, and did not abuse its discretion in this regard. Although we believe the court would have been justified in denying defendant writing implements, and such a deprivation would not have affected his ability to communicate with counsel — who was sitting right next to defendant — the record does not support defendant’s contention that the court actually denied defendant the means to write. There is no indication in the record that the court did not, ultimately, “come up with a writing material that couldn’t do [defense counsel] harm.” We note that an appellant has the burden of presenting the court with an adequate record regarding a claimed error, and any doubts arising from an inadequate record will be resolved against him. See Redmond v. Socha, 216 Ill. 2d 622, 631 (2005); Haudrich v. Howmedica, Inc., 169 Ill. 2d 525, 546-47 (1996). Although defendant, in the issue statement of his brief, claims that the court erred in “instruct[ing] the jury that the defendant was restrained for security reasons,” defendant misrepresents the trial judge’s statement, apparently in an attempt to link it to his shackling argument. The court did not tell jurors that defendant was “restrained.” Rather, the court advised jurors that defendant was “in custody” and “certain security measures” had been taken. While that admonishment might have been the basis for an argument in and of itself, defendant’s brief includes no argument or citation of authority bearing upon either the trial court’s actual statement to the jury or the statement as he misrepresents it. A point raised in an appellant’s brief must be supported by argument and relevant legal authority. People v. Davis, 213 Ill. 2d 459, 470 (2004); People v. Jackson, 205 Ill. 2d 247, 278 (2001). Failure to comply with those requirements results in forfeiture. People v. Ward, 215 Ill. 2d 317, 332 (2005); Davis, 213 Ill. 2d at 470; Jackson, 205 Ill. 2d at 278. Defendant has forfeited the issue. II. Remarks Regarding Appellate Court Opinions Defendant next contends that he was “deprived of due process and fundamental fairness where the [trial] judge disparaged various justices of the Illinois appellate court, expressed contempt for recent appellate opinions restricting a trial court’s authority to shackle or restrain defendants, and indicated he would mail a transcript regarding the defendant’s single courtroom disruption to appellate and supreme court justices who potentially would review this case on appeal.” Defendant cites this court’s decision in In re Dominique F., 145 Ill. 2d 311 (1991), for the proposition that “[i]t is unacceptable for a trial judge to disregard *** precedent because he disagrees with it.” We find that the trial judge in this case registered his disagreement with precedent, but he did not disregard it. As previously noted, perhaps because the trial judge in this case had been subject to appellate court criticism in a previous matter, he was particularly sensitive to the Boose issue, and he took care to comply with the mandated procedure. The trial court set forth more of record than was necessary to justify the physical restraints and security measures it utilized. Thus, defendant was not denied due process or fundamental fairness by the court’s comments, all of which were made outside the presence of the jury. We do not, however, mean to encourage the kind of rambling, amorphous diatribe in which the trial court engaged. While restrained and reasoned disagreement with the ruling of a superior court is not to be discouraged, and may well be constructive in a proper setting, as our appellate court has observed, dignity is necessary for judicial proceedings. See People v. Thurmond, 317 Ill. App. 3d 1133, 1145 (2000). As the appellate court noted in Thurmond, a trial judge should be the exemplar of dignity, he should exercise restraint over his conduct and utterances, and should control his emotions. Thurmond, 317 Ill. App. 3d at 1145. We trust that the judge in this case will, in the future, circumscribe his conduct and comments so as to reflect the dignity his office, in particular, and that of the judicial system, of which he is but one part. III. Involvement of DPT A Attorneys Defendant next contends that he was deprived of due process and fundamental fairness because the trial court “disparaged the motives and conduct of attorneys for the State Appellate Defender Death Penalty Trial Assistance Unit, who were an integral part of the defense team representing Andrew Urdíales.” Defendant states that the trial court’s “expressed animosity” may indicate that the judge was not “impartial.” Defendant also argues: “Once [the trial judge] appointed the Appellate Defender and Mr. Richards, the trial judge had no authority to preclude Mr. Richards from assigning his assistants to the case, or to strike Mr. Hanlon and Mr. Sincox from the entry of appearance.” Moreover, defendant submits that the court excluded Sincox because the court “objected to his demeanor” and the court had “no inherent authority to discipline” Sincox in that manner. We begin this portion of our analysis with a review of the pertinent statutes. Section 10 of the State Appellate Defender Act prescribes the powers and duties of the State Appellate Defender (725 ILCS 105/10 (West 2004)), and applies to all attorneys employed by the Office of the State Appellate Defender (OSAD) (725 ILCS 105/2 (2) (West 2004)). The Act governs the circumstances under which the State Appellate Defender may be appointed to represent defendants in any given case (Kirwan v. Welch, 133 Ill. 2d 163, 164-65 (1989)), and the attorneys of that agency may represent defendants “only as the Act provides.” (Emphasis in original.) Kirwan v. Karns, 119 Ill. 2d 431, 434 (1988); see also Alexander v. Pearson, 354 Ill. App. 3d 643, 647 (2004). The State points out that the version of the State Appellate Defender Act in effect at the time of defendant’s trial did not “mandate” that an attorney from OSAD be allowed to file his or her appearance as trial counsel in a death penalty case and participate in that capacity. Our reading of the statute in question indicates that it did not even authorize OSAD attorneys to act as trial counsel in capital cases, much less “mandate” that they be allowed to do so. See 725 ILCS 105/10(a), (b)(5) (West 2004) (“The State Appellate Defender shall represent indigent persons on appeal *** when appointed to do so by a court under a Supreme Court Rule or law of this State. *** The Office of the State Appellate Defender shall not be appointed to serve as trial counsel in capital cases”). In fact, a literal reading of the pertinent statute indicates it did not even authorize the assistance of attorneys from OSAD. Section 10(c)(5) of the applicable version of the Act stated in relevant part: “(c) The State Appellate Defender may: (5) in cases in which a death sentence is an authorized disposition, provide trial counsel with the assistance of expert witnesses, investigators, and mitigation specialists from funds appropriated to the State Appellate Defender specifically for that purpose by the General Assembly. The Office of State Appellate Defender shall not be appointed to serve as trial counsel in capital cases.” (Emphasis added.) 725 ILCS 105/10(c)(5) (West 2004). Under a literal reading of the provision, the statute allowed the State Appellate Defender to provide only “the assistance of expert witnesses, investigators, and mitigation specialists.” Of course, with the passage of Public Act 94 — 340, effective January 1, 2006, the State Appellate Defender Act was amended to specifically allow the State Appellate Defender to provide trial counsel in capital cases with “legal advice,” in addition to the services previously authorized (725 ILCS 105/10(c)(5) (West Supp. 2005)), and the Capital Crimes Litigation Act was amended to provide as follows: “At the request of court appointed counsel [in capital cases], attorneys employed by the State Appellate Defender may enter an appearance for the limited purpose of assisting counsel appointed under this Section.” 725 ILCS 124/5 (West Supp. 2005). Although the amended versions of the State Appellate Defender Act and the Capital Crimes Litigation Act were not in effect at the time of his trial, defendant simply proceeds in his argument as if they were. He does not argue that those provisions apply retroactively; he does not advance reasons why they should apply retroactively; and he cites no relevant authority in that regard. Thus, defendant has forfeited any contention that the amended provisions apply. See People u. Mertz, 218 Ill. 2d 1, 91 (2005) (defendant’s failure to offer analysis and cite legal authority in support of retroactive application resulted in forfeiture of the issue). We thus examine defendant’s contentions utilizing the statutes in effect at the time of defendant’s trial — the provisions presumably known to the presiding trial judge. Those provisions did not, by their terms, authorize OSAD attorneys to serve as counsel in capital cases or provide legal advice to the attorneys actually serving as trial counsel. If they did, it would hardly seem necessary to amend section 10(c)(5) of the State Appellate Defender Act to specifically so state, and that is exactly what Public Act 94 — 340 did. See 725 ILCS 105/10(c)(5) (West Supp. 2005) (adding the phrase “legal advice”). The version of the Act in effect at the time of trial, and the current version, both state that the “State Appellate Defender shall not be appointed to serve as trial counsel in capital cases.” Compare 725 ILCS 105/10(c)(5) (West 2004) with 725 ILCS 105/10(c)(5) (West Supp. 2005). That provision is at once a prohibition directed to circuit courts and to the attorneys of OSAD. Trial courts are not to appoint attorneys of that agency to serve as trial counsel in capital cases, and attorneys of that agency are not statutorily authorized to serve in that capacity. The State Appellate Defender Act governs the circumstances in which the attorneys of that state agency are authorized to render their state-supported services. They are not free agents who can act as counsel when and where they see fit. That is not to say that the unauthorized actions of an OSAD attorney on behalf of a criminal defendant are a nullity. After all, the attorney who chooses to exceed his statutory authorization, and is allowed to do so by a trial court, is nonetheless a licensed attorney, and his actions will be judged by the standards applicable to any licensed attorney acting in that context. However, such an attorney has no right to interject himself, or herself, into the trial. Applying those principles to this case, it is clear that the trial court was not required to allow OSAD attorneys to participate as “part of the defense team.” In fact, the court should not have allowed Richards to participate. Defendant was fortunate to receive the able services of Richards, but he was not statutorily entitled to them. Because Sincox and Hanlon were not statutorily authorized to participate as defendant’s attorneys in this case, and the trial judge was not required to allow them to do so, the judge did not err in striking their names from the entry of appearance filed by Richards. For the same reasons — and irrespective of the concerns actually expressed by the court — there would have been no error in precluding Sincox from participating in the deposition of Dietz. However, the record indicates the court never denied defendant’s motion for Sincox to participate in that deposition. Defendant’s trial attorney, Elmore, appeared to agree with the court’s statement that the defense motion was moot because Elmore and Skelton planned to travel to California for the deposition, and, in any event, defense counsel never obtained a ruling on the motion. A movant has the responsibility to obtain a ruling on his motion if he is to avoid forfeiture on appeal. People v. Redd, 173 Ill. 2d 1, 35 (1996). Because defendant did not obtain a ruling, the issue is forfeited. The court’s comments about Sincox’s behavior in the courtroom — though apparently warranted — are irrelevant, given that Sincox did not, and could not, represent the defendant. We note that the court’s remarks regarding the attorneys who actually represented the defendant were highly complimentary, and there was no hint of animosity or disparagement therein. None of the court’s comments to or about the attorneys were made in the presence of the jury. We are compelled to comment on one remark the court made about attorneys Richards and Sincox. At one point, during a discussion of the contemplated deposition of Dr. Dietz in California, the trial court expressed concern that attorneys Sincox and Richards had “an agenda far greater than” the defendant’s case. Later, in that same discussion, the trial judge specified the nature of his concern, focusing on attorney Sincox. Referring specifically to Sincox, whose possible participation in the anticipated deposition had been broached by attorney Skelton, the court stated: “His conduct in this courtroom was most unprofessional. It is clear to me that he has an agenda far greater than Mr. Urdíales and he is motivated by that. And I am concerned that his conduct will be governed by that. *** And if he goes far afield out there, we have got a mess on our hands in terms of, well, now the deposition wasn’t completed.” Clearly, although the court included attorney Rich- ards in his initial remark, the comment was prompted by the suggestion that Sincox participate in the deposition of Dietz. We note that attorney Richards was otherwise treated with respect and consideration by the court in all of the pretrial proceedings in which he participated. We see no evidence of prejudice with respect to him. With respect to Sincox, the record suggests that the court may have had good reason to mistrust him and question his professionalism. In any event, placed in context, the judge’s initial statement, and his subsequent expansive comments, appear to reflect the court’s justifiable concern that the admittedly broader agenda of the DPTA might result in questioning “far afield” in areas not particularly pertinent to defendant’s case, resulting in an unnecessary delay and docketing problems. We believe those were valid considerations. We note that allegations of judicial bias or prejudice must be viewed in context and should be evaluated in terms of the trial judge’s specific reaction to the events taking place. People v. Jackson, 205 Ill. 2d 247, 277 (2001). The fact that a judge displays displeasure or irritation with an attorney’s behavior is not necessarily evidence of judicial bias against the defendant or his counsel. Jackson, 205 Ill. 2d at 277. As noted, the report of proceedings reveals nothing in the way of judicial displeasure or irritation with Richards. Since Sincox was not allowed to serve as counsel for defendant, or represent him in any way, we need not consider the possible repercussions of the court’s interaction with Sincox. In short, the court’s conduct with respect to the DPTA attorneys did not deny defendant due process. Guilt Phase Guilty Plea and Bench Trial Defendant next contends that the trial court abused its discretion in rejecting his plea of guilty but mentally ill, and, in a related claim, argues that the trial court’s bench trial verdict of guilty, “rather than guilty but mentally ill,” was against the manifest weight of the evidence. The relief defendant requests in each instance is “a new sentencing hearing.” Defendant suggests he is “entitled to a new capital sentencing hearing because the trial court’s rejection of his GBMI plea tainted the weight and credibility of his mitigation evidence” at his sentencing hearing. We begin this section of our analysis with a review of the applicable statutes and this court’s pertinent opinions. The pertinent version of section 6 — 2 of the Criminal Code of 1961 provides: “(c) A person who, at the time of the commission of a criminal offense, was not insane but was suffering from a mental illness, is not relieved of criminal responsibility for his conduct and may be found guilty but mentally ill. (d) For purposes of this Section, ‘mental illness’ or ‘mentally ill’ means a substantial disorder of thought, mood, or behavior which afflicted a person at the time of the commission of the offense and which impaired that person’s judgment, but not to the extent that he is unable to appreciate the wrongfulness of his behavior or is unable to conform his conduct to the requirements of law.” 720 ILCS 5/6 — 2(c), (d) (West 1994). The burden is on the defendant to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he was mentally ill, as defined in subsections (c) and (d) of section 6 — 2. 725 ILCS 5/115 — 3(c)(3), 116 — 4(j) (West 2004); People v. Lantz, 186 Ill. 2d 243, 254 (1999). When a trier of fact finds a defendant guilty but mentally ill, that verdict does not relieve a defendant of criminal responsibility. People v. Johnson, 146 Ill. 2d 109, 131 (1991). A defendant who has been found guilty but mentally ill is subject to any sentence that could have been imposed upon a defendant who had been convicted of the same offense without a finding of mental illness, including the death penalty. Johnson, 146 Ill. 2d at 131-32. Indeed, the only discernible difference between the two verdicts is that, upon a finding of guilty but mentally ill, the Department of Corrections must “cause periodic inquiry and examination to be made concerning the nature, extent, continuance, and treatment of the defendant’s mental illness” and provide “such psychiatric, psychological, or other counseling and treatment for the defendant as it determines necessary.” 730 ILCS 5/5—2—6(b) (West 2004); see People v. Morris, 237 Ill. App. 3d 140, 145 (1992). As is the case when a defendant raises a defense of insanity, for which a defendant also bears the burden of proof, the existence of “mental illness,” as defined in section 6 — 2, is a question of fact; thus, the trial court’s resolution of that issue will not be overturned unless it is contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. See Johnson, 146 Ill. 2d at 128-29. The Criminal Code also provides for a plea of guilty but mentally ill. Section 115 — 2 of the Criminal Code governs pleas of guilty, as well as pleas of guilty but mentally ill. Subsection (b) of section 115 — 2 provides that a plea of guilty but mentally ill “may be accepted” by the court when, inter alia: “(3) the judge has held a hearing, at which either party may present evidence, on the issue of the defendant’s mental health and, at the conclusion of such hearing, is satisfied that there is a factual basis that the defendant was mentally ill at the time of the offense to which the plea is entered.” 725 ILCS 5/115 — 2(b)(3) (West 2004). Defendant initially argues that the trial court erred when it rejected his plea of guilty but mentally ill and, in doing so, “decided that the legal standards for determining a factual basis for a traditional plea *** were inapplicable to determining the factual basis for pleas of guilty but mentally ill.” Citing this court’s decision in People v. Sorenson, 196 Ill. 2d 425 (2001), defendant maintains that this aspect of his argument presents a purely legal question subject to de novo review. We agree with defendant as to the applicable standard of review. However, we otherwise reject the substance of his argument. Defendant notes that the language of subsection (b) of section 115 — 2, i.e., “may be accepted,” substantially mirrors the language of subsection (a), which addresses “the traditional guilty plea.” Ergo, defendant argues that cases interpreting standards applicable to subsection (a) should provide guidance as to the proper interpretation of subsection (b). Defendant conveniently overlooks a significant difference between the procedures set forth in subsections (a) and (b). Subsection (b) appears to provide for a contested hearing “on the issue of defendant’s mental health,” a hearing “at which either party may present evidence.” Notwithstanding this difference, defendant maintains that proceedings on a plea of guilty but mentally ill should be governed by the identical principles applicable to “the traditional guilty plea,” and cites this court’s decision in People v. Barker, 83 Ill. 2d 319, 328 (1980), for the following proposition: “In evaluating the sufficiency of the factual basis to support a plea of guilty, a trial judge is in much the same position and would apply similar standards as those used in determining the sufficiency of the State’s evidence at trial to withstand a motion for a directed verdict of not guilty.” Defendant’s argument suggests that the trial court was obligated to accept his plea, and thus find he was “mentally ill” as defined in section 6 — 2 of the Criminal Code, if defendant presented some evidence to support such a finding, irrespective of evidence to the contrary presented by the State. Defendant’s position is untenable. It would seem self-evident that a proceeding in which there are no contested issues may be subject to different standards than one in which a controversy exists. In this case, the State chose to dispute the existence of “mental illness,” as defined in section 6 — 2 of the Criminal Code. Because there was a dispute regarding an element of the guilty plea, this case does not present a “traditional guilty plea,” we are not concerned with one party’s evidence alone, and the standard for sufficiency referenced in the quoted passage from Barker cannot ultimately apply. Whether evidence could support a particular finding or verdict (the inquiry upon a motion for directed verdict) is a different question from whether the evidence does in fact support that finding or verdict after a full evidentiary hearing. See People v. Connolly, 322 Ill. App. 3d 905, 915 (2001). In the latter instance, the trier of fact necessarily weighs all the evidence and passes upon the credibility of witnesses in resolving disputed issues. Connelly, 322 Ill. App. 3d at 915. Because the State contested the existence of mental illness, that is what the trial court was obligated to do in this case. Acceptance of defendant’s argument would allow defendants who plead guilty but mentally ill to effectively evade the burden of proof that the legislature has placed upon those who raise the issue at trial. The legislature could not have intended such a result. As we have noted, a defendant whose case is tried would have to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he or she is mentally ill, as defined in subsections (c) and (d) of section 6—2. 725 ILCS 5/115—3(c)(3), 115—4(j) (West 2004). A preponderance of the evidence is evidence that renders a fact more likely than not. Lyon v. Department of Children & Family Services, 209 Ill. 2d 264, 279 (2004); see Lindsey v. Board of Education of the City of Chicago, 354 Ill. App. 3d 971, 986 (2004). Thus, at trial, following the presentation of evidence by both the defendant and the State, a trial court would have to determine whether it was “more likely than not” that defendant suffered from a mental illness, as defined in the statute, at the time he or she committed the offense. A defendant pleading guilty but mentally ill should have the same burden of proof. He cannot absolve himself of that burden by admitting an element he has the burden of proving. The directed verdict standard, mentioned in Barker, cannot apply to a contested proceeding, where evidence is adduced to controvert defendant’s claim of mental illness. We also find meritless defendant’s claim that the trial court erred in rejecting his plea of guilty but mentally ill, and his contention that the trial court’s verdict of guilty, as opposed to guilty but mentally ill, was against the manifest weight of the evidence. As the foregoing analysis indicates, defendant had the burden of proving his mental illness by a preponderance of the evidence. As our subsequent discussion will show, the court’s determination, that he did not sustain that burden, was not against the weight of the evidence. As Illinois courts have noted, the credibility and weight to be given psychiatric testimony are matters for the trier of fact, who is not obligated to accept the opinions of defendant’s expert witnesses over those opinions presented by the State. People v. Mahaffey, 166 Ill. 2d 1, 18 (1995); see People v. Dresher, 364 Ill. App. 3d 847, 855-56 (2006). In fact, “[e]ven if several competent experts concur in their opinion and no opposing expert testimony is offered, it is still within the province of the trier of fact to weigh the credibility of the expert evidence and to decide the issue *** in light of all of the facts and circumstances of the case ***.” In re Glenville, 139 Ill. 2d 242, 251 (1990). In this case, the trial court found that defendant had not established, by a preponderance of the evidence, that he was mentally ill, as defined in section 6 — 2, when he killed Cassandra Corum. In announcing that ruling, the trial judge stated he found the testimony of Dr. Dietz “substantially more persuasive and more convincing than that of the defense experts.” However, the court also found the facts of the case themselves a compelling refutation of testimony given by the defense experts. As previously noted, Dietz testified that defendant suffered principally from a personality disorder, and he displayed obvious characteristics of a sexual sadist. Dietz did not consider personality or anxiety disorders to be mental illnesses, as defined in section 6 — 2 of the Criminal Code. He believed that defendant’s criminal behavior was driven by sexual desire, anger, and “a kind of predatory desire for conquest.” If defendant’s judgment was impaired, Dietz believed those were the factors causing impairment, not mental illness. Dietz also rejected Merikangas’ diagnosis of organic brain disease, noting that defendant’s 2004 MRI was within the normal range, and defendant’s actions at the time of Corum’s murder did not bespeak someone who suffered from significant impairment of the central nervous system. Dietz noted that the murder required planning— defendant brought handcuffs, duct tape, a knife, and a gun with him — a certain degree of physical prowess and coordination — defendant was able to overpower Corum, drive her 100 miles, murder her, and carry her body to a bridge, where he threw her into the river — and rational thought — insofar as defendant decided to drive Corum to a secluded location, where he could kill her without being observed. The trial court observed that the principal defense witnesses disagreed in their primary diagnoses. Cuneo believed that defendant suffered, primarily, from PTSD; Killian’s principal diagnosis was dissociation; and Merikangas determined that defendant suffered from organic brain disease. Merikangas disagreed with Killian’s and Cuneo’s diagnoses of PTSD and dissociative personality disorder. Killian and Cuneo believed that defendant was legally sane, but mentally ill, as defined in section 6 — 2(d). Merikangas testified that defendant was insane. In addition to their conflicting diagnoses, the court noted that the testimony of defendant’s experts also failed to account for defendant’s ability to function adequately in the Marine Corps, and later as a security guard, while suffering from the diagnosed illnesses. Their diagnoses failed to explain how a person thus afflicted could successfully plan, execute, and conceal eight murders over a period of 10 years. Disagreeing with the assessments of Merikangas and Killian — that defendant’s crimes were not characterized by planning and organization — the court noted that defendant brought a gun, a knife, duct tape, and handcuffs on the night of Corum’s murder. The court believed that defendant’s actions during the offense were inconsistent with those of a person overcome by anger, noting, on the night defendant killed Cassandra Corum, he drove well over an hour, and approximately 100 miles, after he supposedly became angry and kidnapped her. It would appear that defendant had time to cool off, but defendant killed Corum anyway. We have held that a judgment is against the manifest weight of the evidence when an opposite conclusion is apparent, or when the findings appear to be unreasonable, arbitrary or not based on the evidence. Rhodes v. Illinois Central Gulf R.R., 172 Ill. 2d 213, 242 (1996). After careful review of this record, we cannot say that the trial court’s rulings in this regard were against the manifest weight of the evidence. Although defendant argues that Dietz’s definition of mental illness was unduly restrictive and his views diverged from those generally accepted in the psychiatric community, a review of an expert opinion recently rendered in another capital case would seem to refute defendant’s position. We note the testimony of Dr. Andrew Kowalkowski, as summarized in People v. Thompson, 222 Ill. 2d 1 (2006). Like Dr. Dietz, Kowalkowski believed that mental disorders or illnesses are characterized by evidence of delusions, false fixed beliefs, or misinterpretation of external reality. Thompson, 222 Ill. 2d at 24-25. Kowalkowski differentiated such “delusional disorders” from “behavioral” disorders, such as personality disorders, which are “not significant mental disorders.” (Emphasis in original.) Thompson, 222 Ill. 2d at 39. Kowalkowski believed that Thompson’s personality disorder “manifested itself in *** his impulsiveness, his irritability and aggressiveness, his repeated failure to maintain consistent work behavior and his lack of remorse.” Thompson, 222 Ill. 2d at 25. Kowalkowski testified that Thompson’s killing spree could be explained by his personality disorders. Thompson, 222 Ill. 2d at 40. The similarities between Dietz’s and Kowalkowski’s diagnoses, and Thompson’s and this defendant’s symptoms, are so obvious as to require no further comment. Dietz’s opinion does not appear to be out of the mainstream of his profession, and it finds support in the facts of record. As the trial court’s ruling suggests, the attendant facts and circumstances of defendant’s crimes are themselves a compelling refutation of testimony given by the defense experts, independent of Dietz’s testimony. For the foregoing reasons, we find no basis for reversing the trial court’s determination that defendant failed to sustain his burden on the issue of mental illness. We would add, even if we were to assume, arguendo, that the circuit court erred in rejecting defendant’s plea of guilty but mentally ill, defendant is not entitled to a new sentencing hearing, as he argues before this court. As we will explain later, the circuit court’s rejection of defendant’s plea did not affect defendant’s ability to present mitigating evidence of his mental condition at sentencing, and references to defendant’s unsuccessful insanity defense were proper and duly circumscribed. Sentencing I. Ruling Regarding the Admission of Experts’ Reports Defendant next claims that the trial court deprived him of his right to present relevant mitigating evidence to the sentencing jury when the court denied defense counsel’s request to provide the jury with the defense experts’ written reports. Quoting People v. Davis, 185 Ill. 2d 317, 344 (1998), defendant observes that “the State cannot place any limitation on the admission of relevant and reliable evidence offered in mitigation at a death penalty hearing” and “the sentencing authority, whether judge or jury, may not refuse to consider such mitigating evidence as a matter of law.” As the State points out, the trial court’s ruling was a limitation only on the method defendant could use to present evidence, not on the admission of evidence itself. When defense counsel stated his intention of introducing psychiatrists’ reports into evidence, and asked that the reports go back to the jury, the State objected, arguing that the experts should testify in person and “be subject to cross-examination.” The court expressed concern, noting that the reports in question were “extremely voluminous” and that Dr. Killian’s report alone was 75 pages long. The trial judge then advised the parties: The trial court subsequently ruled that the reports would not go to the jury, noting, inter alia, “that’s why we have the experts testifying because we are in a realm beyond the normal knowledge of the jurors.” The court’s statement evinces its concern that, in the absence of explanatory expert testimony, psychiatric reports in the hands of the jurors could have been a source of misunderstanding, confusion, and unchallenged opinion evidence. “I’m not limiting either the direct or cross-examination of a particular expert. So you want to have an expert on the stand for two days, that’s fine with me. You can go over his entire report if you like. *** [I]f all those questions are then asked of a witness, then the opposite side knows what to cross on. *** So the only point I’m making is that there is an unlimited opportunity to inquire of these experts.” We find no error in the circuit court’s ruling. No restrictions were placed on defendant’s right to present relevant evidence. The court made clear that defendant could call an expert and “go over his entire report” if defendant chose to do so. The limitation the court placed on the method for introducing that evidence appears, in part, to have been for the purpose of safeguarding the opposing party’s right of confrontation and cross-examination, and in part to ensure that the jury received adequate explanatory testimony. We find that the court’s ruling was reasonable and entirely proper. Defendant could have called any of his experts he deemed necessary. Presumably, he called those whom he believed were important to his defense. Moreover, defendant could have questioned the experts he did call about specific information contained in a nontestifying expert’s report, so long as the former relied upon information contained in the report of the latter. In that way, he could have elicited some of the information contained in the reports of nontestifying experts. We conclude there was no error, and defendant was accorded the rights he was due. II. Trial Court’s Conduct in the Cross-Examination of Killian Defendant next contends that the trial court deprived him of due process by acting “as an advocate for the State, where the trial judge assisted the prosecutor in cross-examining a defense expert and establishing a foundation for admission of an exhibit that was highly prejudicial to the defense.” For purposes of clarity, we note that defendant’s argument of error is confined to the trial court’s conduct in the sentencing examination of Dr. Killian. Defendant does not otherwise argue that the evidence in question was improperly elicited and placed before the jury. In fact, his argument appears to concede that there was an adequate foundation for the introduction of the evidence. The evidence elicited consisted of certain questions posed to defendant by Dr. Opsahl as part of the sentence-completion test, and defendant’s answers to those questions. During the prosecutor’s cross-examination of Dr. Killian, Killian admitted that he had “reviewed” the sentence-completion test when forming his opinion. When the prosecutor handed Killian the sentence-completion test, and asked if that was the test he had reviewed, defense counsel objected, arguing that the test was not relevant unless Killian had relied upon the test in formulating his opinion. The prosecutor was then allowed to question Killian as to whether he had relied upon the report. Killian responded to the prosecutor’s question by first acknowledging that he had “looked at” the test, but had “not included a description” of it in his own report. When the prosecutor again asked if Killian had relied on the test in his assessment of defendant, Killian said, equivocally, he did not “think” he did. Pressing for an unequivocal answer, the prosecutor again asked if some of the answers on the test had helped Killian formulate his opinion. Killian then answered that he could not “specifically recall,” but offered to examine the test again. After he had done so, Killian stated that the defendant’s test answers were “consistent with” what Killian “already believed about him from everything else [Killian] had read.” When the prosecutor asked Killian to specify, defense counsel objected and asked to approach the bench. The trial court responded by announcing a brief recess and, outside the jury’s presence, observed that the witness was “not being responsive.” The court noted that Killian had stated he had not included the test in his report, but had not unequivocally stated whether he had disregarded the test or relied upon it. He had essentially “skirted the issue.” The court concluded: “I think we need a vigorous interrogation on foundation by the State to see where this witness goes because he’s going in both directions.” It is unclear from the transcript whether Killian was present when the court’s remarks were made; however, it is obvious that the remarks were not directed to him personally. When questioning resumed, out of the presence of the jury, Killian conceded that he had taken into account all of the materials placed before him, and then qualified his answer by adding, “[Ijt’s not accurate to say that each piece of paper received the same amount of attention as any other piece of paper.” When the prosecutor asked if defendant’s test answers were important in Killian’s analysis, Killian stated: “I’m answering this as well as I can.” The court then admonished Killian to answer the question asked, if he understood it, and, if he did not understand the question, to simply say so. When the court had the question read back, Killian appeared to better understand the question, and answered that he considered defendant’s answers to the sentence-completion test “somewhat important.” When the prosecutor returned to the critical question he had posed at the outset, asking Killian whether he taken defendant’s answers into account in arriving at his conclusion, Killian responded with the same unresponsive answer that had initiated the exchange: “Not specifically, I did not include them in my report.” As the prosecutor began to protest, the court again interceded, stating: “Sir, there was a question asked you and you answered a different question. *** I want you to listen to the question asked of you and then I want you to answer that question unless you don’t understand it. Do we understand each other?” Killian responded affirmatively. When the question was read back, he finally answered, unequivocally, that he took defendant’s answers into account when forming his own opinion. With that, the court determined that a sufficient foundation existed to go into the sentence-completion test before the jury. Before the jury was called back into the courtroom, the court asked defense counsel if there was anything he wanted to contest in terms of that ruling, and counsel responded, “It’s proper, I agree. He took it into account; so, it’s fair game.” The prosecutor then proceeded to question the witness about the sentence-completion test, questioning which — as we have observed — defendant does not otherwise challenge. We note that a trial judge has the discretion, when necessary to admonish a witness to answer questions directly and responsively. People v. Arnold, 2 Ill. 2d 92, 97 (1954); see People v. Gonzalez, 238 Ill. App. 3d 303, 320 (1992). In our view, the trial court properly exercised its discretion in this case, admonishing a witness who was being evasive. Similar admonitory remarks, even when made in front of a jury, have been found appropriate and not prejudicial. See People v. Kukulski, 358 Ill. 601, 608-09 (1934) (repeatedly advising the witness to listen and answer the question); People v. Williams, 201 Ill. App. 3d 207, 221 (1990) (defendant complained that the court had admonished the defense expert by saying, “Doctor, would you do me a favor? Answer the question yes or no, don’t ramble.” “The witness has a tendency to ramble. These are yes or no questions and a date is a date”); People v. Osborne, 78 Ill. App. 2d 132, 139 (1966) (“Mr. Jones, the question is simple. The court believes the witness is being evasive about answering it”). We find that the court in this case did not act in the capacity of an advocate, as defendant suggests. Rather, the court sought to ensure the State’s right to responsive answers from an evasive witness. III. Comments Regarding Defendant’s Insanity Defense Defendant next contends he was “denied due process and fundamental fairness where the trial judge informed the sentencing jury that he had rejected the defendant’s insanity defense at trial, and where the prosecutor reminded the sentencing jury in closing argument that the trial judge had rejected the insanity defense.” According to defendant, those statements “improperly demeaned [his] mitigating evidence of mental illness, and punished [him] for exercising his constitutional right to present a defense.” The State points out, inter alia, that defense counsel asked the trial court to explain to the jurors why insanity was no longer an issue in the case, and attorney Elmore and the court advised the prosecutor that he could clarify the status of insanity as an issue in closing argument. Thus, the State contends, if there was error, the defense invited the court and prosecutor to commit it. We would agree; however, we conclude there was no error. When the initial eight jurors were selected, they were told that defendant had asserted the defense of insanity and they were questioned about their ability to find defendant not guilty by reason of insanity if the defendant established that defense by a preponderance of the evidence. When the defendant subsequently chose to have the trial court consider and decide whether he was legally insane at the time of the offense, that issue was removed from the jury’s consideration, and some explanation became necessary. Recognizing that need, attorney Skelton asked the trial judge to “give thought to a potential admonition” to the jurors. Skelton explained: “I think in fairness to the State as well as the defense, the Court needs to advise them *** not that they were selected under *** a now nonexistent theory, but something to lighten the blow for both *** of us. *** And there might be some fallout. I think the likely destination for that fallout is on the defense. But I would like the Court to give some thought to a potential admonition to the jury to straighten them out.” Pursuant to that request, the court later submitted its proposed remarks to counsel for the defense and the State. Both defense attorneys indicated they had no problem with the content of the court’s proposed explanation. The court then read those remarks to the jurors, explaining why they would not be participating in the first two stages of the tripartite capital procedure, and advising them of the findings the court had made in the first two phases. In the course of the court’s explanation, the judge told jurors he had rejected defendant’s defense of insanity, and thrice read the jurors the statutory definition of insanity. He did not mention the rejection of defendant’s plea of guilty but mentally ill, and he did not in any way suggest that defendant’s mental condition was irrelevant to the jury’s sentencing decision. Moreover, as previously noted, defense counsel’s opening statement to the jurors made clear that they could still consider whether defendant “suffer[ed] from any mental illness or mental disease or mental defects” that affected his behavior. In their closing arguments during the sentencing phase, the parties both acknowledged that “insanity” was no longer an issue; however, the existence and consequences of defendant’s alleged mental or personality disorders were nonetheless the subject of extensive comment. Indeed, after each of two instances when the prosecutor reminded the jury that insanity was no longer an issue, he eventually addressed statutory mitigating factors pertaining to defendant’s mental condition. His argument made clear that defendant’s mental condition was a viable sentencing issue, but he felt that defendant should receive a death sentence notwithstanding. Finally, the trial court’s instructions to the jury also underscored the relevance of defendant’s mental condition in the sentencing decision. Under the circumstances, we conclude that the comments of the court and the prosecutor were proper, and no error occurred. IV Other Prosecutorial Comments Defendant contends that other comments of the prosecutor were improper and denied him a fair sentencing hearing. Specifically, defendant argues that the prosecutor acted improperly when he (1) “emphasized that the jurors had taken an oath and promised to follow the law, and then argued that the evidence in aggravation required them under oath to impose a death sentence”; (2) invoked the integrity of his office as a justification for seeking the death penalty; and (3) inflamed the passions of the jurors by referring to the families of the victims left behind and speculating about “how many children and grandchildren will not be born because of the actions of the defendant.” Defendant’s first claim of error is based upon two remarks of the prosecutor that appear 90 pages apart in the record of proceedings. In the early portion of his closing argument, the prosecutor told the jurors: “[Y]ou were all selected to serve in this serious case based on those promises that you made to the attorneys during jury selection. Now on behalf of the People of the State of Illinois and the People of the County of Livingston, I’m asking you to keep those promises that you made under oath several weeks ago.” Much later, the prosecutor stated: “Is he really worthy of your mercy? Ask yourselves with all he did, is he really worthy of your mercy? I hate to admit it, but we’ve really become a nation of excuse makers. There’s always an excuse. Nothing is ever our fault. There must be something in this person’s past that made him do things. Well, we can’t take responsibility. Allowing Andrew Urdíales to receive a natural life sentence rather than the death penalty diminishes the importance of Cassie Corum’s life and doesn’t serve the ends of justice.” Defendant actually argues that these two passages are related and that the jurors would have so perceived them: “Collectively, these comments lectured the jury that imposing any penalty short of a death sentence would be irresponsible, and would constitute a violation of the jury’s oath.” Obviously, the prosecutor never told the jurors that their oath required them to impose the death penalty. The construction defendant places upon these remarks is simply preposterous. The quoted comments do not support defendant’s claim of error even when they are taken out of context and placed in artificial tandem for argumentative exposition. This allegation of error deserves no further comment. We also reject defendant’s contention that he was denied a fair sentencing hearing because the prosecutor, during closing argument, improperly “invoked the integrity of his office as a justification for seeking the death penalty.” We note, initially, that defendant did not object to the remarks in question; therefore, he has forfeited this issue. See People v. Franklin, 135 Ill. 2d 78, 111 (1990). As in Franklin, we find that the remarks did not constitute error in any event. Defendant cites the following remarks in support of his argument: “The decision to seek a death penalty is not a decision that is lightly made by any prosecutor. A lot of things go into consideration as to whether or not a person such as myself would decide to seek the death penalty. I think a lot of people think that every time there’s a murder committed that a prosecutor gets to decide whether or not he’s going to seek the death penalty. That’s simply not true. The law of the State of Illinois only provides for the death penalty under certain circumstances; and when those certain circumstances exist, it is only then that the prosecutor has the discretion to make the decision of whether or not to seek the death penalty. Careful consideration has to be given and justice must be done, and careful consideration has been given in this case as to whether or not to seek the death penalty. Now we’re seeking that justice be done in this case.” Although not referenced in defendant’s brief, the prosecutor made other pertinent comments thereafter, remarks that we believe have a bearing upon the disposition of this issue. For example, soon after he made the foregoing statements, the prosecutor made clear to the jurors that the decision to impose the death penalty was theirs, and theirs alone: “You’ve seen and heard all the evidence that’s going to be introduced in this case, and now the decision is yours. It’s your decision to decide whether or not this Defendant, Andrew Urdíales, in this case if it’s appropriate to impose the death penalty. That’s your decision.” The prosecutor later spoke to the jurors about the procedures for determining whether defendant would receive a death sentence. He correctly informed them that they would consider factors in aggravation and mitigation in arriving at the appropriate sentence, that unanimity would be required for a death sentence, and that defendant would be sentenced to life in prison, without the possibility of release, if they were unable to find unanimously that death was the appropriate sentence. The prosecutor made clear that his role in the adversarial process, his “job,” was to talk to the jury about aggravating evidence. He observed: “My job is not to mitigate here. *** [Yjou’ll hear mitigating evidence when the defense gets to argue. But at this point in time, I’m going to give you the reasons, the evidence that support [sic] the Defendant should receive the death penalty from you folks when you go in and deliberate.” The prosecutor then discussed, at length, the aggravating evidence, and urged the jury find that death was the appropriate sentence. As he concluded the initial portion of his closing argument, the prosecutor’s remarks again served to remind the jurors that he, as the prosecutor, was part of an adversarial process: “I’m sure that Mr. Skelton will have the opportunity now to address you; and he’ll make a detailed argument as to why these eight murders and rape don’t justify a verdict on you folks’ part in favor of the death penalty.” Following defense counsel’s closing argument, wherein he discussed the evidence in mitigation, the prosecutor made an abbreviated rebuttal argument, and the jury was then instructed in the applicable law. It is in this context that we consider the defendant’s claim of error. As we observed in People v. Jamison, 197 Ill. 2d 135, 161 (2001), this court has long recognized that the State’s Attorney is endowed with the exclusive discretion to decide which of several charges shall be brought, or whether to prosecute at all. A prosecutor’s discretion extends to the decision about whether or not the death penalty should be sought. Jamison, 197 Ill. 2d at 162. In this case, the prosecutor correctly explained to the jurors the procedure for seeking the death penalty, and advised them of his role in the capital process, as well as theirs. He obviously believed it was appropriate to seek the death penalty, or he would not have done so. In that respect, his comments did not tell the jurors anything they had not already deduced. To suggest that those comments could have improperly swayed the jury is, in our opinion, to discredit the common sense and intelligence of those who served on the jury. In his argument, the prosecutor left no doubt that his role was that of an advocate in an adversarial process, and he clearly and repeatedly advised the jurors that the decision whether or not to impose the death penalty was theirs alone. In that respect, the prosecutor’s argument was very different from those found objectionable in other cases. For example, in People v. Yates, 98 Ill. 2d 502, 536-38 (1983), the prosecutor, in effect, told the jury that he would assume responsibility for imposition of the death penalty. As this court noted, the assistant State’s Attorney in that case also suggested that his “previous experience was somehow relevant to whether [the] defendant should be sentenced to death.” Yates, 98 Ill. 2d at 539. This court ordered a new sentencing hearing, concluding that both remarks were improper: the former, because it “obviously served to diminish the jury’s sense of responsibility and mitigate the serious consequences of its decision”; the latter, because it “served to inject an improper and irrelevant consideration into the jury’s deliberations.” Yates, 98 Ill. 2d at 538-39. In this capital case, as in others, a principal concern in our review is that comments of the prosecutor in closing argument do not diminish the sentencing jury’s sense of responsibility. See People v. Flores, 153 Ill. 2d 264, 288 (1992); People v. Franklin, 135 Ill. 2d 78, 111 (1990). A capital sentencing jury bears the sole responsibility for determining whether a defendant is sentenced to death, and it may not be informed either directly or by implication that this responsibility is shared or rests elsewhere, either with the court (see Flores, 153 Ill. 2d at 288) or with the prosecutor (see Yates, 98 Ill. 2d at 537-38). In this case, the prosecutor advised the jury that it was his decision to seek the death penalty, and it was for them to decide whether to impose it. That is a correct statement of law and procedure. His comments further made clear that he was not an impartial arbiter on the question of whether the death penalty should be imposed, but was in fact an advocate for a position in an adversarial process. Common sense would indicate that his opinion was reflected in the discretionary actions he took — as is the case with any prosecutor. The comments in question did not undermine or diminish the jury’s sense of responsibility. Considering the complained-of remarks in the context of the entire closing argument, we find no error. We finally consider defendant’s contention that the prosecutor “improperly inflamed the passions of the jury by referring to the families the victims left behind and speculating about ‘how many children and grandchildren will not be born because of the actions of the defendant.’ ” During closing argument to the sentencing jury, the prosecutor stated: “J.A. is the only one to get away with her life. The others weren’t so lucky. How many children and grandchildren will not be born because of the actions of the defendant? Each of these girls had a family. Each one of them had their lives in front of them. Each one of them would have been able to have kids probably I assume at some point in their lives. Those were all taken away by the acts of this one man.” In People v. Emerson, 189 Ill. 2d 436, 508-10 (2000), this court held that similar remarks constituted an improper appeal to the emotions of the jurors. In Emerson, the prosecution argued: “ ‘Her name was Belinda Byrd. Belinda Byrd, a victim in this case. She had a life. She had hopes. She had dreams. They were taken away from her by Bennis Emerson. They were taken away from her only because he cared about nothing. Nothing, but himself. The last moments of her life were spent struggling for breath while 90 percent of her skin was being burned. Imagine her terror. Imagine her fear. *** *** This is the defendant that did that to her, that turned her into a corpse, who took away all her hopes and dreams and took away all of what she could contribute to society and to the community, and all of what she could contribute to everyone that knew her and enriched their lives.’ ” Emerson, 189 Ill. 2d at 508-09. Although we found the foregoing remarks improper, we nonetheless concluded that the comments, “in and of themselves,” were not so prejudicial as to deprive the defendant of a fair sentencing hearing. Emerson, 189 Ill. 2d at 510. Similarly, in People v. Kokoraleis, 132 Ill. 2d 235, 285 (1989), the prosecutor commented on the victims’ rights to get married, have a family, have children, and spend time with their families. Though this court found that the prosecutor’s argument was improper, the court concluded that the remarks did not affect the overall fairness of the sentencing hearing. Kokoraleis, 132 Ill. 2d at 285. We so find in this case. The jury heard the details of defendant’s eight murders and the graphic testimony of his one surviving victim. The prosecutor’s brief and isolated comments, while improper, were not so prejudicial as to deprive the defendant of a fair sentencing hearing or change the outcome of the proceeding. V Instructions Pertaining to Mitigation Defendant next contends that his “death sentence is fundamentally unjust because the sentencing jury was never instructed that it could consider the defendant’s background of extreme emotional or physical abuse as a mitigating factor.” As defendant points out, as part of the death penalty reforms enacted by the General Assembly (see Pub. Act 93—605, eff. November 19, 2003), a new provision was added to section 9 — 1(c) of the Criminal Code, specifically stating that a defendant’s background of “extreme emotional or physical abuse” shall be considered as a mitigating factor. Although defendant’s brief does not acknowledge that this provision was in effect at the time of his trial in May of 2004, it clearly was in effect as of November 19, 2003. We note, initially, that defendant tendered an instruction addressing applicable mitigating factors, and that instruction was given by the trial court; however, the tendered instruction did not include the language which defendant now claims was erroneously omitted. It is well established, by case law and rule, that a defendant may not raise on appeal the failure to give an instruction unless the defendant tendered the instruction at trial. People v. Hopp, 209 Ill. 2d 1, 7 (2004); People v. Casillas, 195 Ill. 2d 461, 473 (2000); People v. Alvine, 173 Ill. 2d 273, 286 (1996); 155 Ill. 2d R. 366(b)(2)(i). The pertinent portion of the instruction tendered by defendant read as follows: “Mitigating factors include: First: Any or all of the following if supported by the evidence: The murder was committed while the defendant was under the influence of an extreme mental or emotional disturbance, although not such as to constitute a defense to the prosecution. The defendant suffers from a reduced mental capacity. Second: Any other reason supported by the evidence why the defendant should not be sentenced to death. Where there is evidence of a mitigating factor, the fact that such mitigating factor is not a factor specifically listed in these instructions does not preclude your consideration of the evidence.” Obviously, the language that forms the basis of defendant’s contention of error was not included in the instruction tendered by defense counsel — the instruction the trial court ultimately gave. The issue was not raised in a posttrial motion. Defendant does not claim that trial counsel was ineffective insofar as he tendered an instruction that did not include the language in question. The defendant does not argue plain error. Rather, defendant repeatedly refers to subsection (c)(6) of section 9 — 1 as “recently enacted” and “new,” suggesting that he erroneously believes the statutory provision was not in effect at the time of his sentencing hearing. This inference is supported by a concluding sentence in his original brief: “That future defendants will have that benefit, while Andrew Urdíales did not, is ‘fundamentally unjust.’ ” Subsection (c)(6) was available to defendant; however, trial counsel did not utilize it in their tendered instruction. Defendant does not claim that they were ineffective in that respect; nor does he explain why he believes the statutory provision was not available to counsel. In short, defendant does not address his procedural default in any way. Thus, defendant has forfeited the issue. Although defendant does not cite Supreme Court Rule 451(c) (177 Ill. 2d R. 451(c)), we note that rule’s “exception to the waiver rule for substantial defects applies when there is a grave error or when the case is so factually close that fundamental fairness requires that the jury be properly instructed.” Hopp, 209 Ill. 2d at 7. Neither factor is a consideration in this case. The instruction the jury received was adequate to encompass consideration of the evidence in question. In addition to specific instructions bearing upon defendant’s mental state, the jury was instructed that it could consider, in mitigation, “[a]ny other reason supported by the evidence why the defendant should not be sentenced to death.” Continuing, the instruction informed the jury: “Where there is evidence of a mitigating factor, the fact that such mitigating factor is not a factor specifically listed in these instructions does not preclude your consideration of the evidence.” In People v. Kirchner, 194 Ill. 2d 502 (2000), this court considered the efficacy of an identical catchall instruction. In that case, defendant claimed he was improperly denied a specific instruction pertaining to the likelihood of his rehabilitation. Defendant claimed reversible error because the trial court refused to instruct the jury that mitigating factors include that “[t]he defendant may be rehabilitated or restored to useful citizenship.” Kirchner, 194 Ill. 2d at 554-55. In Kirchner, this court determined that a new sentencing hearing was not necessary, holding that the catchall instruction was adequate, under the facts of that case, to apprise the jury that it could consider defendant’s potential for rehabilitation. Kirchner, 194 Ill. 2d at 556-57. In this case, Kendra Moses, defendant’s mitigation expert, testified at length about the hardships and abuses defendant suffered in his formative years. Moreover, the jury heard extensive evidence regarding defendant’s mental condition — be it a mental illness or personality disorder — and the origins of that condition. At least three of the testifying experts, including the State’s expert, believed that defendant’s childhood experiences of abuse and/or neglect were contributing factors in the formation of his current mental makeup, a conclusion that few laymen would find surprising. That testimony was inextricably tied to defendant’s argument that his mental condition militated against the imposition of the death penalty. We have no doubt that the jury considered defendant’s formative experiences — particularly his mother’s temporary withdrawal, his sexual experience with his sister, and childhood teasing and bullying — and, correlatively, his mental condition, and appropriately weighed them against the details of eight brutal murders and the terrorization of J.A. We have thoroughly reviewed the evidence in this case. Assuming, arguendo, that the abuse defendant suffered would qualify as “extreme,” we are confident that the jury’s verdict would not have been otherwise had the instruction been given with the proposed language. See Kirchner, 194 Ill. 2d at 557, quoting Alvine, 173 Ill. 2d at 290 (“An error in a jury instruction is harmless if the result of the trial would not have been different if a proper instruction had been given”). Apprendi Issue Finally, defendant argues that the Illinois death penalty statute violates principles announced in Apprendi in that it does not require application of the reasonable doubt standard at the second stage of capital sentencing proceedings. We have addressed and rejected that argument in People v. Thompson, 222 Ill. 2d 1, 52-54 (2006), People v. Mertz, 218 Ill. 2d 1, 93-94 (2005), and People v. Ballard, 206 Ill. 2d 151, 202-05 (2002). Defendant raises no new arguments in this respect, and we decline to revisit the issue. CONCLUSION We find in defendant’s arguments no basis for reversal or remand. Although defendant has not specifically argued that the evidence is insufficient to support his death sentence, it is our responsibility in every death penalty case to consider the appropriateness of the sentence. People v. Heard, 187 Ill. 2d 36, 85 (1999). After careful consideration of the evidence adduced, we concur in the jury’s determination that death is the appropriate penalty. Pursuant to section 9 — l(i) of the Criminal Code (720 ILCS 5/9 — l(i) (West 2004)), we find no fundamental injustice in this case. For the reasons stated herein, we affirm the defendant’s conviction and death sentence. We direct the clerk of this court to enter an order setting Tuesday, May 8, 2007, as the date on which the sentence of death shall be carried out. Defendant shall be executed in the manner provided by law. 725 ILCS 5/119 — 5 (West 2004). The clerk of this court shall send a certified copy of the mandate in this case to the Director of Corrections, the warden of Tamms Correctional Center, and the warden of the institution where defendant is confined. Affirmed.

=== CASE 9739479 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:15:54.662723+00 ===

JUSTICE KILBRIDE, concurring in part and dissenting in part: I agree with the majority’s analysis of virtually all the issues presented in this case, including its examination of the questions impacting on the guilt phase of defendant’s trial. I part company only with the majority’s view that during the sentencing phase the jury need not be specifically instructed on the mitigating effect of a defendant’s history of abuse, as expressly required by subsection (c)(6) of section 9 — 1 (720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(c)(6) (West 2004)). 225 Ill. 2d at 449. Subsection (c)(6) is one of a parcel of statutory protections enacted following the spate of seriously flawed capital cases that prompted the current moratorium on executions in this state. This subsection states: “The court shall consider, or shall instruct the jury to consider any aggravating and any mitigating factors which are relevant to the imposition of the death penalty. *** Mitigating factors may include but need not be limited to the following: * * * (6) the defendant’s background includes a history of extreme emotional or physical abuse[.Y’ (Emphases added.) 720 ILCS 5/9—1(c)(6) (West 2004). After noting that this subsection was in effect at the time of defendant’s trial, the majority concludes that he has forfeited this claim. 225 Ill. 2d at 450. Ordinarily, I would agree that it is unnecessary to conduct a new sentencing hearing solely due to the omission of a specific mitigating factor as long as a catchall instruction is included informing the jury that the failure to list a particular mitigating factor “ ‘does not preclude [the jury’s] consideration of the evidence’ ” (225 Ill. 2d at 449). See Kirchner, 194 Ill. 2d at 556-57. In this instance, however, I am otherwise persuaded by the historical underpinnings of the statutory changes at issue. The legislature enacted those changes to reform our seriously flawed capital punishment system. The legislature’s efforts, combined with those of this court (see 188 Ill. 2d Rs. 43, 411, 412(c), 416, 417, 701(b), 714), have effectuated fundamental changes in capital proceedings with the laudable goal of reducing the number of erroneous capital convictions and sentences entered in this state. With that goal in mind, the legislature added subsection (c)(6), requiring a jury instruction specifically pointing out the need for jurors to consider a defendant’s background as a victim of abuse. 720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(c)(6) (West 2004). The statutory language mandates that the court “shall" instruct the jury on the listed mitigating factors, including a history of abuse noted in subsection (c)(6). The plain language added to redress Illinois’ troubled capital punishment system demonstrates the legislature’s clear intent to differentiate this factor from the myriad of possible mitigation sources encompassed by the catchall instruction relied on by the majority. 225 Ill. 2d at 450. Thus, where, as here, there was evidence that defendant had undergone emotional and physical abuse as a child, the statute obliged the trial court to instruct the jury on this mitigating factor. Reliance on a catchall instruction does not adhere to the will of the legislature or uphold the spirit of the amendments. Furthermore, the legislature added another statutory protection to overcome the fundamental defects in our prior capital punishment system. That provision grants this court the authority to vacate a particular death sentence and impose a term of years if that sentence is “fundamentally unjust” (720 ILCS 5/9 — 1 (i) (West 2004)). Here, it is fundamentally unjust to ignore the legislature’s clear mandate that juries must be specifically apprised of the relevance of mitigating abuse evidence. Our legislature’s capital punishment reforms merit the highest degree of judicial adherence because they are designed to rectify the serious problems in our prior system. In addition, all the mental-health witnesses in this case agreed that defendant suffered from some type of mental disorder, including possible organic brain disease, although they could not agree on a single diagnosis. 225 Ill. 2d at 374-81. To submit to a jury the question of whether to impose the death penalty on defendant without strict adherence to the safeguards imposed by both this court and our legislature flies in the face of fundamental justice and undermines these fundamental reform efforts. The absence of the mitigating-factor instruction in subsection (c)(6) unjustly contravenes the clear intent of our legislature and leaves the jury to resolve the life-and-death issue of imposing the death penalty without the specific guidance of a mitigating factor the legislature has deemed sufficiently critical to single out for express consideration. Here, the evidence of abuse was relegated to the broad, undefined category of nonspecific potential mitigation material, failing to give it the distinct recognition intended by the legislature. Given the immense gravity of the issues in capital proceedings, I believe both fundamental justice and the reliability of this state’s capital punishment system require our courts to apply all legislative and judicial reform measures unwaveringly. If we do not, we risk a recurrence of the tragic circumstances that prompted those reforms. Thus, although I abhor the heinous crimes committed by this defendant, I cannot countenance any erosion of our revised system of capital punishment caused by lax enforcement of the newly minted safeguards. Because the jury was not properly instructed in this case, I would remand this cause for a new sentencing hearing incorporating an instruction specifically noting the mitigating effect of emotional or physical abuse inflicted on defendant. For these reasons, I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion.

=== CASE 2219963 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:29.693276+00 ===

871 N.E.2d 145 (2007)
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois,
v.
Manuel SUASTEGUI, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 1-05-2429.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Third Division.
June 13, 2007.
Rehearing Denied July 18, 2007.
*147 Richard A. Devine, Cook County State's Attorney (James E. Fitzgerald, Veronica Calderon Malavia, Christopher Petelle, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel), for Appellee.
Thomas C. Brandstrader, Chicago, for Appellant.
Justice KARNEZIS delivered the opinion of the court:
Following a jury trial, defendant Manuel Suastegui was convicted of first degree murder and was sentenced to 45 years' imprisonment. On appeal, defendant contends: (1) the trial court erred in denying defendant's motion to dismiss the indictment; (2) the trial court erred in excluding defendant's exculpatory evidence; (3) the evidence was insufficient to sustain his conviction; (4) his sixth amendment rights were violated because testimonial evidence was admitted without the opportunity for cross-examination; and, (5) photographs of his tattoos were irrelevant and the admission thereof was highly prejudicial. We affirm the judgment of the trial court.
On September 26, 1995, at about 9:15 p.m., the victim, Daniel Matias, was shot and killed near 1745 North Keystone Avenue in Chicago. Jessica Rivera was walking with the victim at the time but was not harmed. According to Rivera, she did not see the shooter. Another individual, Christina Herrera, also witnessed the shooting. At trial, Herrera testified that she saw a person standing on top of the railroad viaduct shoot at the victim, who was walking on the street below. The person who was shooting had dark clothing and was wearing a black hoody. She did not see the shooter's face.
Dr. Edmund Donoghue performed an autopsy on the victim. He testified that the victim had been shot five times and the wounds were consistent with being shot from an elevated location. Dr. Donoghue recovered bullet fragments from two locations within the body, but could not determine what type of bullets they were from. He further stated that the victim had several tattoos, including a "YLO" tattoo.[1]
Several years later, in January 1998, Ignacio Salgado was arrested for selling narcotics. He was questioned about the victim's murder and gave a statement implicating defendant. Defendant was subsequently arrested for the victim's murder in September 1999.
Salgado testified at trial that in 1995, he was a member of the Insane Spanish Cobras (Spanish Cobras) street gang. At that time, the Cobras were "at war" with another gang, the Young Latin Organized Disciples (YLO Disciples). Salgado stated that the president of the section of the Spanish Cobras of which he was a member was Ramiro Alvarez, who also went by the nickname Tiger. The section was referred to as "Keeler and Dickens," which referred to the street names that encompassed the *148 gang's boundaries. He stated that defendant was also a member of the Spanish Cobras and went by the nickname Gato. Defendant served as an "enforcer," which meant that he helped enforce the laws of the gang. Alvarez called weekly meetings, and at the meeting shortly before the victim was shot, Alvarez told the members that they had to "take care of business" and "pop a D," which Salgado explained meant to shoot a YLO Disciple. Alvarez pulled a couple of people aside, including defendant and another individual, Andy Montanez. Salgado saw Alvarez hand defendant a gun. About 5 to 10 minutes later, while Salgado was at a taco stand at the corner of Keeler Avenue and Armitage Avenue, he heard gunshots coming from the nearby train tracks. Shortly thereafter, he saw defendant run past him from the direction of the train tracks. Defendant told Salgado that he "shot a D." Salgado stated that defendant was carrying a revolver and it looked like the same gun that was given to defendant at the meeting. He described the revolver as blue.
On cross-examination Salgado admitted that during his grand jury testimony, he had testified that defendant served as a soldier in the gang, rather than an enforcer. He also admitted that he had testified before the grand jury that the revolver was black, rather than blue. He further admitted that he had not told police officers or the grand jury that he heard gunshots prior to seeing defendant run past him. He also stated that he did not tell police officers about the gang's weekly meetings. Salgado also stated that when he saw defendant running, he saw that defendant had something in his hand, but was not sure whether it was a gun. Salgado further admitted that he pled guilty and received probation for the charges stemming from his arrest for selling narcotics.
Sergeant Anthony Wojcik testified that defendant was arrested on September 1, 1999, at about 5:30 p.m. At about 10:15 p.m., Sergeant Wojcik and his partner advised defendant of his Miranda rights and interviewed defendant for about 45 minutes to an hour. Defendant told them that he had been a member of the Spanish Cobras from the age of 13 to the age of 18 or 19. Defendant indicated that the knew Alvarez and Salgado. The officers took pictures of his tattoos and ended the interview. At about 1:30 a.m. the next day, defendant was interviewed again. After reading defendant his Miranda rights, they specifically told him that they were investigating the victim's murder. Sergeant Wojcik stated that defendant began shaking and pacing and they took him to the bathroom, where he was sick. Defendant denied knowing anything about the murder. The interview ended at about 3 a.m. At about 5 a.m., defendant was read his Miranda rights and was interviewed again. Defendant identified the victim, whom he knew by the name "Snoop." Defendant told officers that the Latin Kings had killed the victim. Officers showed defendant a picture of Montanez and told defendant that they had been told a different story. Defendant then told officers that Montanez shot the victim and that he was with Montanez at the time. At about 10 a.m., defendant was interviewed by an assistant State's Attorney.
Sergeant Wojcik further testified that in 1998, the Chicago police department launched an operation in which they attempted to obtain information on several unsolved gang-related murders. Undercover officers would buy narcotics from gang members, arrest them, and then attempt to obtain information regarding the unsolved murders. Officers did not offer any "deal" or "quid pro quo" for a gang members' cooperation. He stated that *149 Salgado was arrested as a result of the operation.
Assistant State's Attorney Christine Stephens testified that she read defendant his Miranda rights before interviewing him and the interview lasted about an hour. Defendant told Stephens that on the night the victim was shot, defendant encountered Montanez at the corner of Keeler Avenue and Dickens Avenue. Montanez was carrying a revolver. Montanez indicated that a Spanish Cobra had been beaten by a YLO Disciple earlier that evening and that he wanted to "take care of the D's." Defendant and Montanez walked toward Cortland Street and Keystone Avenue, which was the YLO Disciples' territory. They were walking along the train tracks when Montanez pointed the revolver down toward the street and shot five times. Defendant later heard that the victim had been shot. Defendant did not mention encountering Salgado at a taco stand. Defendant further indicated that he only acted as a lookout while Montanez shot the victim.
On appeal, defendant first contends that the trial court erred in denying his motion to dismiss the indictment. Defendant argues that he was indicted pursuant to the "Illinois Compiled Statutes 1992, as amended," and because the Illinois Compiled Statutes did not become effective until 1993, his conviction is based on a nonexistent statute and is void.
Defendant's indictment for first degree murder stated in part:
"They without lawful justification shot and killed Daniel Matias with a gun knowing that such shooting with a gun created a strong probability of death or great bodily harm to Daniel Matias, in violation of Chapter 720, Act 5, Section 9-1-A(2) of the Illinois Compiled Statutes 1992, as amended."
Public Act 87-1005, which became effective on September 3, 1992, modified and amended the Legislative Reference Bureau Act (25 ILCS 135/1 et seq. (West 1992)) and replaced the organizational and numbering scheme of the Illinois Revised Statutes with the Illinois Compiled Statutes. Section 5.04(a) provided that the reorganizing and renumbering or "compilation" shall take effect on January 1, 1993. However, section 5.04(e) provided that "reports of criminal, traffic, and other offenses and violations that are part of a state-wide reporting system shall continue to be made by reference to the Illinois Revised Statutes until July 1, 1994, and on and after that date shall be made by reference to the Illinois Compiled Statutes." Pub. Act 87-1005 § 5.04(e) (1992).
Throughout section 5.04, which is entitled "Codification and revision of statutes," the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or ILCS, are referred to as an "organizational and numbering scheme." Nowhere in that section does it state that the statutes themselves are new or that the Illinois Revised Statutes are no longer in existence. Section 5.04 merely states that Illinois statutes will no longer use their Illinois Revised Statutes citation, but will be reorganized and renumbered and will be cited as Illinois Compiled Statutes.
We disagree with defendant's contention that because the Illinois Compiled Statutes did not become effective until 1993, defendant was indicted pursuant to a nonexistent statute. Regardless whether defendant's indictment for first degree murder used the Illinois Revised Statutes citation or Illinois Compiled Statutes citation, the first degree murder statute was in existence before, during and after defendant's indictment. Defendant's indictment merely referred to the first degree murder statute by a new number and designation. Defendant was not charged under a new *150 law. Therefore, we find that defendant was properly charged with violating the first degree murder statute despite the indictment's citation to the "Illinois Compiled Statutes 1992, as amended." Moreover, defendant does not argue that the indictment failed to adequately set forth "the nature and elements of the offense charged," as required by section 111-3(a)(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (725 ILCS 5/111-3(a)(3) (West 1998)) and both the United States Constitution (U.S. Const., amend. VI) and the Illinois Constitution (Ill Const. 1970, art. I, § 8).
Next, defendant contends that the trial court erred when it excluded defendant's exculpatory evidence. Specifically, defendant argues that the trial court prevented him from calling Jessica Rivera to testify that she had identified someone other than defendant as the shooter. Defendant maintains that her testimony was admissible pursuant to section 115-10.1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Code) (725 ILCS 5/115-10.1 (West 2004)).
The trial record reveals the following with respect to Rivera. At the time of the shooting, Rivera told police officers that she did not see the shooter. Subsequently, a police report compiled in 1997 indicated that Rivera identified the shooter as a person named Diego LaLuz. However, prior to trial, Rivera spoke with Assistant State's Attorney Thomas Darman as well as defendant's investigator, and she denied identifying LaLuz as the shooter and maintained that she did not see the shooter. Defendant subpoenaed Rivera to testify at trial; however, she refused to appear. The State objected to her testimony on the basis that her testimony did not come within the purview of section 115-10.1 of the Code. The trial court agreed and denied defendant's request to call Rivera as a witness.
Section 115-10.1 of the Code provides in part:
"In all criminal cases, evidence of a statement made by a witness is not made inadmissible by the hearsay rule if
(a) the statement is inconsistent with his testimony at the hearing or trial, and
(b) the witness is subject to cross-examination concerning the statement, and
(c) the statement
(1) was made under oath at a trial, hearing, or other proceeding, or
(2) narrates, describes, or explains an event or condition of which the witness had personal knowledge, and
(A) the statement is proved to have been written or signed by the witness, or
(B) the witness acknowledged under oath the making of the statement either in his testimony at the hearing or trial in which the admission into evidence of the prior statement is being sought, or at a trial, hearing, or other proceeding, or
(C) the statement is proved to have been accurately recorded by a tape recorder, videotape recording, or any other similar electronic means of sound recording." 725 ILCS 5/115-10.1 (West 2004).
Here, defendant sought to introduce Rivera's alleged prior statement that Diego LaLuz shot the victim as substantive evidence to support defendant's position that he did not shoot the victim. "`Substantive evidence is evidence which is "adduced for the purpose of proving a fact in issue, as opposed to evidence given for the purpose of discrediting a witness * * * or of corroborating his testimony." [Citation.]'" People v. Posedel, 214 Ill. App.3d 170, 177, 157 Ill.Dec. 838, 573 N.E.2d 256 (1991), People v. Redd, 135 *151 Ill.2d 252, 302, 142 Ill.Dec. 802, 553 N.E.2d 316 (1990), quoting Black's Law Dictionary 1281 (5th ed.1979). Unless a prior inconsistent statement qualifies under section 115-10.1, it is not admissible as substantive evidence. The determination of whether evidence is relevant or admissible is a matter within the discretion of the trial court, and we will not reverse such a determination unless the trial court abuses that discretion. People v. Singleton, 367 Ill. App.3d 182, 189, 304 Ill.Dec. 984, 854 N.E.2d 326 (2006).
Defendant does not argue that Rivera's alleged statement was admissible pursuant to section 115-10.1; rather, defendant argues that the trial court erred because it prevented the defense from calling Rivera "at all." Defendant maintains that the trial court should have allowed defendant to call Rivera "in order to determine whether she would [have] acknowledge[d] the prior statement under oath" and then the court could have determined whether the statement would have been admissible pursuant to section 115-10.1. Defendant contends that the trial court prevented him from presenting a defense by excluding Rivera as a witness.
Here, it is clear from the record that had the trial court permitted Rivera to testify, her alleged prior inconsistent statement would have been inadmissible. Defendant sought to introduce the inconsistent statement as substantive evidence to support his position that someone else shot the victim. In order to introduce the statement as substantive evidence, the statement needed to satisfy the criteria in section 115-10.1. Because Rivera continued to deny making the prior inconsistent statement, defendant could not satisfy subsection (B), which required the witness to acknowledge making the statement under oath. The record belies defendant's contention that had Rivera not been excluded she "may have" acknowledged her inconsistent statement under oath. The record indicated that Assistant State's Attorney Darman and defendant's investigator spoke with Rivera prior to trial and Rivera indicated that she did not know who the shooter was and denied ever telling officers otherwise. There is no indication that Rivera would testify any differently. We conclude that Rivera's testimony would not have satisfied the criteria in section 115-10.1 and the trial court's ruling excluding her testimony was not an abuse of discretion.
Next, defendant contends that the evidence was insufficient to sustain his conviction. Defendant argues that Salgado's testimony was not credible and the oral statement attributed to defendant failed to prove he was accountable for the victim's murder.
When considering the sufficiency of the evidence on appeal, we view the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution and determine whether any rational trier of fact could have found the elements of the crime proven beyond a reasonable doubt. People v. Young, 128 Ill.2d 1, 49, 131 Ill.Dec. 86, 538 N.E.2d 461 (1989). We will not reverse a conviction on grounds of insufficient evidence unless that evidence is so unsatisfactory as to raise a reasonable doubt of defendant's guilt. People v. Furby, 138 Ill.2d 434, 455, 150 Ill.Dec. 534, 563 N.E.2d 421 (1990).
A person is legally accountable for the conduct of another when, either before or during the commission of an offense, and with the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of that offense, he solicits, aids, abets, agrees, or attempts to aid the other person in the planning or commission of the offense. (720 ILCS 5/5-2(c) (West 1998)); People v. J.H., 136 Ill.2d 1, 17, 143 Ill.Dec. 889, 554 N.E.2d 961 (1990).
*152 Here, the jury found defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Although defendant claims that Salgado's testimony was not credible, the jury heard his testimony as well as the several inconsistencies pointed out by defense counsel during cross-examination. Specifically, the jury was apprised of Salgado's inconsistent testimony regarding the color of the gun, defendant's rank in the gang, whether Salgado actually saw defendant holding a gun after the shooting, and that Salgado had not told officers about the gang's weekly meetings or that he had heard gunshots before defendant ran past him. Nevertheless, defendant's oral statement to Assistant State's Attorney Stephens in which he admitted being present at the scene corroborated Salgado's testimony that defendant was near the scene of the shooting at the time the shooting occurred. And, defendant's oral statement that he acted as a lookout for Montanez was sufficient to find defendant guilty based on a theory of accountability. Further, Sergeant Wojcik testified that there was no "quid pro quo" for Salgado's cooperation with officers. Despite the inconsistencies in Salgado's testimony, we find that there was sufficient evidence to sustain defendant's conviction.
Next, defendant contends that his sixth amendment rights were violated when testimonial evidence was admitted without the opportunity for cross-examination. He argues that Sergeant Wojcik's statement that Andy Montanez corroborated Salgado's testimony violated his sixth amendment right to be confronted by the witnesses against him pursuant to Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36, 124 S.Ct. 1354, 158 L.Ed.2d 177 (2004).
During defendant's cross-examination of Sergeant Wojcik, the following colloquy occurred:
"[Mr. Lopez]: After you spoke to Andy, then you went out to look for Ramiro Alvarez, is that right?
[Wojcik]: Well, we talked to Andy, and he corroborated what [Salgado] told us. So, at that point, we want to speak to [Salgado] again."
Defendant maintains that the statement that Montanez corroborated Salgado's testimony was testimonial and defendant was prejudiced because he was not able to cross-examine Montanez because Montanez asserted his fifth amendment rights and did not testify at trial.
We first note that defendant did not object to Sergeant Wojick's testimony at trial. However, defendant did include the issue in his second posttrial motion.[2] Nevertheless, in order to preserve an issue for appeal, a party must both object at trial and raise the issue in a posttrial motion. See People v. Enoch, 122 Ill.2d 176, 186, 119 Ill.Dec. 265, 522 N.E.2d 1124 (1988). Defendant has failed to preserve the issue for appeal. Waiver aside, the statement that Montanez corroborated Salgado's testimony was not testimonial; rather, it showed the course of conduct that officers took to investigate the shooting. The statement was not offered to prove any issue, but was responsive to defendant's questions about how the police investigation proceeded. We disagree with defendant's contention that the statement violated his sixth amendment rights *153 to be confronted by the witnesses against him.
Lastly, defendant contends that the trial court erred when it introduced photographs of his tattoos, which were irrelevant and highly prejudicial. During Sergeant Wojcik's testimony, the State questioned Sergeant Wojcik about the photographs taken of defendant and his tattoos at the time of his arrest.
Defendant had a tattoo of "SC," which allegedly referred to the Spanish Cobras. He had a tattoo of "Mi Vida Loca," which allegedly stood for "my crazy life." Another tattoo showed a diamond with an "SC" and upside down pitchforks. Sergeant Wojcik stated that a diamond is the Spanish Cobras' insignia and upside down pitchforks showed disrespect to the Disciples. Defendant also had a diamond tattoo on his ankle and another tattoo that said "love mom." Defendant maintains that the photographs of the tattoos served no purpose other than to inflame the jury and there was no evidence that he had the tattoos at the time of the victim's murder in 1995.
Evidence that the defendant was a member of a gang or participated in gang-related activities may be admissible at trial, despite its prejudicial effect, to establish a common purpose or design or to provide a motive for an otherwise inexplicable act. People v. Patterson, 154 Ill.2d 414, 458, 182 Ill.Dec. 592, 610 N.E.2d 16 (1992). However, the evidence's prejudicial effect must not substantially outweigh its probative value. People v. Fluker, 318 Ill.App.3d 193, 204, 252 Ill.Dec. 261, 742 N.E.2d 799 (2000). The trial court's ruling is not to be overturned on appeal unless a clear abuse of discretion is shown. People v. Hamilton, 328 Ill.App.3d 195, 202, 262 Ill.Dec. 123, 764 N.E.2d 1240 (2002).
Here, defendant did not object to the introduction of the photographs during Sergeant Wojcik's testimony, but did raise the issue in his second posttrial motion. In order to preserve an issue for review, there must be an objection at trial and the issue must be raised in a posttrial motion. Enoch, 122 Ill.2d at 186, 119 Ill.Dec. 265, 522 N.E.2d 1124. Defendant has failed to preserve the issue for appeal. Waiver aside, the tattoos were relevant to show defendant's participation in the Spanish Cobras. The entire case was about the "war" between the Spanish Cobras and the YLO Disciples, and the Spanish Cobras' need for retaliation, which was the reason for the victim's murder. Defendant's tattoos helped to illustrate this point. The tattoos themselves merely depicted the Spanish Cobras' symbols and did not contain additional language or illustrations that would be inflammatory or prejudicial to defendant. We find no abuse of discretion in the admission of the photographs of defendant's tattoos.
Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court.
Affirmed.
THEIS, P.J., and GREIMAN, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  "YLO" refers to the street gang Young Latin Organized Disciples.
[2]  The record indicates that defendant filed two posttrial motions. The first motion entitled "Motion For a New Trial or Judgment of Acquittal" was filed on March 31, 2004. The second motion entitled "Motion of Acquittal Notwithstanding the Verdict and/or For New Trial" was filed on May 3, 2005. It is unclear from the record whether the court ruled on defendant's first motion.

=== CASE 9739480 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:00.774477+00 ===

JUSTICE CARTER delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant Todd Saxon was convicted of first degree murder (720 ILCS 5/9 — 1(a)(1) (West 2004)), arson (720 ILCS 5/20 — 1(a) (West 2004)), and concealment of homicidal death (720 ILCS 5/9 — 3.1(a) (West 2004)) following a jury trial. Defendant now appeals that conviction, contending that he was not proven guilty of the offenses beyond a reasonable doubt. FACTS Victim O.W, a 12-year-old girl, was found stabbed to death inside a garage that had been burned down in Kankakee, Illinois, on March 30, 1995. Defendant Todd Saxon was charged with first degree murder, arson, and concealment of a homicide on February 26, 2002, in connection with O.W.’s death. Specifically, defendant was charged with three counts of first degree murder on the theories that he intended to kill O.W by stabbing her, that he stabbed her knowing such act created a strong possibility of death or great bodily harm, and that he killed her during the course of a felony, criminal sexual assault. He was also charged with arson in that he knowingly damaged a building at 1074 East Merchant Street, Kankakee, which was the property of Dave McDaniel, by means of fire. Defendant was further charged with concealment of a homicidal death in that he, with knowledge that O.W had died by homicidal means, concealed her death by placing her body in a structure at 1074 East Merchant Street, Kankakee, and destroyed that structure by fire. Defendant was indicted on these charges on April 11, 2002. Defendant elected to proceed to jury trial, and the jury was empaneled and the trial began on February 24, 2005. The first witness called by the State at trial was the victim’s mother, Regina Collins. Collins testified as follows. O.W., who was 12 years old on March 27, 1995, lived with her at 156 South Wildwood in Kankakee. Also living in the house at that time were Collins’s boyfriend Pierre Saxon (the uncle of defendant), Pierre Saxon’s mother Elsi Saxon (who shared a room with O.W), Collins’s son and O.W.’s brother John; Collins’s goddaughters Contessa Kilpatrick and Catrina Haut; Collins’s brother, Webster Collins; and Catrina’s mother, Bobbie Jackson. On the night of O.W’s disappearance, March 27, 1995, O.W went to bed at around 9 p.m., as it was a school night. Around 11:30 p.m. to midnight, a fight broke out between Contessa Kilpatrick and her boyfriend Dwight Phagan. After telling them to keep it down, Collins went to check on O.W, who was sleeping in her bed, and went back to sleep. The next morning, March 28, 1995, Collins told John to go wake his sister. John reported back to Collins that O.W was not in her bed, and after checking the rest of the house and with the neighbors, Collins called the police. Collins noted that defendant was at her house almost every day and had been there around the time of the fight between Contessa Kilpatrick and Dwight Phagan, but she thought he had left. Next to take the stand was Contessa Kilpatrick, who testified as follows. She was staying at Regina Collins’s home in March 1995 and cooked dinner for O.W. and the rest of the children on the night of March 27, 1995. The dinner consisted of fried chicken, macaroni and cheese, and corn and was consumed between 5 and 6 p.m. that evening. Later that evening her boyfriend, Dwight Phagan, came home from work and the two began arguing. They were arguing in the upstairs hallway when Collins came out of her room and told them to be quiet. During this argument, when Dwight was in the bathroom, O.W came out of her room and asked who was in the bathroom. Contessa told her “that bitch” was in the bathroom, referring to Dwight, prompting O.W. to laugh. This was the last time Contessa saw O.W. alive. Contessa testified that defendant was present in the house that night. Pierre Saxon took the stand following Contessa Kilpatrick. He testified as follows. Defendant, his nephew, was in the house at 156 South Wildwood often. After going to bed on the evening of March 27, 1995, he was awakened by the fight between Contessa and Dwight around midnight. After telling them to take the fight outside so as not to wake the children, he checked on O.W. and his mother Elsi. That was the last time he saw O.W. alive. Pierre Saxon also testified that the next morning there were, to his knowledge, no signs of a break-in. Next to take the stand was John, O.W’s brother. John, 24 at the time of trial, had a brain aneurysm in 2002, but could still remember events before and after the aneurysm, but not during. He testified that he shared a room with defendant at the house at 156 South Wild-wood when defendant would stay there. Defendant would, when Regina Collins was not around, play wrestle with O.W. and drag her into Regina Collins’s room and lock the door. O.W. was between 11 and 12 years old at this time. On cross-examination, John admitted that he did not initially tell police about defendant and O.W’s play wrestling, but denied that he waited until February 2005 to inform the police about the wrestling. After John’s testimony a stipulation was read from David McDaniels, stating that he was the owner of the garage and that he had not given defendant or anyone consent or permission to burn down the garage. The State then called Daniel Arseneau, a lieutenant with the Kankakee fire department in March 1995. He testified as follows. On March 30, 1995, he responded to a fire at a garage at 1074 East Merchant, which he described as being “fully involved,” meaning that it was out of control. Upon sifting through the ashes of the burned-out structure, Arseneau came upon what he thought was a mannequin. The mannequin turned out to be a human body and he subsequently called the police and fire investigation. Arseneau then moved the body about eight feet from where it was originally located because that area was still smoldering and he wanted to avoid any further damage to the body. The scene was then secured for fire investigation and police to arrive. Next to the stand was arson investigator Mitchell Kushner. He testified as follows. Kushner arrived on the scene of the garage fire on March 30, 1995, accompanied by a dog trained to be alerted at the presence of accelerants. The dog indicated the presence of accelerants at three locations in the garage. While collecting evidence from an area where the dog indicated the presence of accelerants, Kushner smelled an odor of gasoline. On cross-examination, Kushner admitted that he did not know who put the gas there or how long it had been there. The State then called Officer Jeffrey Powell of the Kankakee police department to the stand. Powell arrived on the scene of the garage fire at around 3:30 a.m. on the morning of March 30, 1995. He smelled gas within the foundations of the garage and saw the remains of the charred female body. Powell did not remember seeing any clothing on the body, but did find a shirt and a pair of “female underwear” a few feet away from the body (albeit after the body had been moved). Powell spoke with defendant on April 25, 1995, about O.W.’s disappearance and death. Defendant told Powell that he last saw O.W. between 8 and 9 p.m. on March 27, 1995. Defendant told Powell of the fighting at Regina Collins’s house between Contessa and Dwight. Defendant said he left the house between 11:40 p.m. and midnight after Regina Collins and Pierre Saxon had gone to bed. Defendant’s home was about four or five blocks from O.W.’s home. Defendant told Powell that he did not see O.W. at all during Contessa and Dwight’s fight. Powell was taking blood from everyone in the house that night to eliminate them as suspects. Defendant told Powell that he would be willing to give him a blood sample and that he would come in the next day to provide the blood. Defendant did not come to the station on April 26, 1995. The police met with defendant twice more after April 25, 1995, and although he was asked to come in and provide a sample, defendant never did, always citing an excuse. Officers made further attempts to contact defendant through phone calls and family members, but defendant never returned the calls, never contacted the police, and never provided his blood sample before 2000. The next State witness was forensic scientist Dr. Joseph Sapala. He testified as follows. Sapala performed the autopsy of O.W He had to use a dentist to identify the body as that of O.W. O.W’s cause of death was hemorrhagic shock due to two stab wounds to the left chest, one of which went straight to the heart. Sapala determined that based on the color of the blood, O.W. was dead before the fire. She had been killed by the stab wounds. During the autopsy, there was a strong odor of gasoline coming from the body. Sapala found semi-digested beans and corn in O.W.’s stomach. To check for signs of sexual assault, Sapala used a “Vitullo kit,” also commonly known as a rape kit, and took swabs of O.W.’s vagina, cervix, anus, and mouth to get biological samples for further testing. He then turned the kit over to Officer Kil-man of the Kankakee police. Next to testify was Kankakee police detective Larry Osenga. Osenga interviewed defendant in September 1995, around five months after Officer Powell’s April 1995 interview of defendant. Defendant told Osenga that he was at O.W.’s house on March 27, 1995, at around 10 or 11 p.m. or midnight and that there was lots of partying going on at the house. Defendant told Osenga that O.W was developing quickly at an early age and that her mother, Regina Collins, was not doing a good job of taking care of and watching over the children. Defendant told Osenga that he went to a gas station around 8 or 9 p.m. to get a soda and that he stopped by O.W.’s house at around 11 p.m. or midnight that night and remembered Dwight Phagan and Contessa Kilpatrick fighting. Defendant helped look for O.W on March 28, 1995, when it was discovered she was missing. Osenga interviewed defendant again on September 2, 1997, to convince him to provide a blood sample in connection with the investigation of O.W’s murder. A blood draw of defendant was arranged for September 4, 1997, but defendant never called and never came in to provide a sample. Following Osenga’s testimony, a stipulation was read regarding the testimony of chain of custody of the DNA collected by Dr. Sapala from O.W A stipulation by Melissa Staples, a qualified DNA examiner, said that based on the DNA evidence, Pierre Saxon, Dwight Phagan, and several others were excluded as sources of the DNA obtained from the sperm fraction of the rectal swab of O.W. Staples also concluded that if the sperm fraction of the rectal swab originated from only one source, Sanford Saxon, Sr., was to be excluded as a source of the DNA. Next to testify for the State was Daniel Gondor, a forensic scientist with the Illinois State Police. He testified as follows. He performed only a limited DNA profile of the sperm found in O.W’s rectum, in that he only tested at 9 locations, or “loci,” instead of the usual 13, but that the 9 locations he tested at indicated this specific DNA profile would be found in only 1 in 24 trillion African-Americans. In his professional opinion, after comparing the two DNA profiles, the DNA removed from O.W.’s rectum came from defendant. Also, depending on the habits of the individual, it would be less likely to obtain a DNA profile from sperm recovered from an individual’s rectum more than 72 hours after sexual intercourse. Jay Etzel, a detective-sergeant for the Kankakee police department, was next called to the stand. He testified as follows. In February 2000 he obtained a search warrant for defendant’s DNA. He later received word that after the lab analysis, defendant’s DNA matched the DNA recovered from the rectum of O.W On February 16, 2001, Et-zel interviewed defendant. At the beginning of the interview, defendant appeared very nervous and was pacing. Defendant told Etzel that he had no idea who killed O.W and that he told the detectives everything he knew about the case back in 1995. Etzel read defendant his Miranda rights. When confronted with the DNA evidence, defendant continued to deny any involvement with O.W., saying it could not be his and that he never touched her. Defendant denied being in O.W.’s house on March 27, 1995. Etzel then showed defendant Contessa Kilpatrick’s statement claiming that defendant was in the house that night. Defendant then admitted to being present in O.W’s house, saying he was there at 10 p.m. for about 20 seconds. He then said he saw Cont-essa and Dwight’s fight and also saw O.W Etzel noted that defendant would initially not respond to questions about having sex with O.W, but then said he did have sex with O.W., but that it only happened once. Defendant claimed he had sex with O.W only once and that it was two days prior to her disappearance and was at her house in her brother John’s bedroom (the same bedroom that defendant shared with John whenever he stayed over at the house). Defendant stated he knew O.W had not told anyone they had had sex. Defendant then told Etzel that O.W. was having sex with lots of boys and that he had once walked in on O.W having sex with various boys and he chased them off, but never told O.W.’s mother or anyone else about her behavior. Defendant also told Etzel that he had seen O.W. run upstairs from her basement followed by Marvin Landfair, who was pulling his pants up, but that he never told anyone about what he observed. Defendant said he loved O.W. and that he was the only one she could trust. Defendant then told Etzel that he knew who killed O.W. and that it was Marvin Landfair, whom he had seen four days after O.W.’s disappearance with blood on his jacket. Defendant then refused to give Etzel a written statement of everything he had just told him. Next to testify was Jennifer Schnell, the nurse who drew defendant’s blood in 2000. She noted that defendant was apprehensive about the blood draw, but cooperated after being shown the search warrant authorizing the drawing of his blood. Next to testify was Catrina Háut, Regina Collins’s goddaughter who lived in the house at 156 South Wildwood. She testified as follows. She lived with her children in a room across from O.W’s room in March 1995. O.W never told her she was sexually active. Further, O.W was not the type to go out on her own. She had also seen defendant “wrestle around” with O.W, as if play wrestling like a brother and sister. Next to testify was Alean Ward, defendant’s aunt, whom defendant lived with in March 1995 at 241 East Locust in Kankakee. She had previously lived at 1074 East Merchant Street for about two years and recalled defendant visiting her there often. She recalled hearing on either March 30 or March 31, 1995, that the garage at 1074 East Merchant Street, her old house, was on fire and that there was a body found inside. Defendant then told her that the body was probably that of O.W because she was missing. When she told him it could be anybody, defendant, who was “kind of upset,” still said he thought it was O.W. Last called to the stand was Ann Valerio, who lived at 1074 East Merchant in March 1995. She never gave anyone permission to use the garage behind her house, and on cross-examination, she testified that she did not use the garage and did not park any of her cars in the garage. After Ann Valerio’s testimony the State rested. The trial court then entertained and denied a defense motion for a directed verdict. After defendant exercised his constitutional right not to testify in his own defense, the defense rested. On March 1, 2006, after hearing closing arguments and receiving instructions from the trial court, the jury retired to the jury room to deliberate. Later that day the jury returned with a verdict of guilty on all counts. The jury also found beyond a reasonable doubt that the murder was accompanied by brutal and heinous conduct indicative of wanton cruelty. The matter proceeded to sentencing on April 26, 2005, where defendant was sentenced to concurrent terms of natural life imprisonment for first degree murder, seven years for arson, and five years for concealment of a homicidal death. Defendant immediately filed notice of appeal. ANALYSIS On appeal, defendant contends that the evidence presented at trial by the State was insufficient to sustain a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. There is no issue in this case as to whether the victim was murdered and her body burned. The only issue in this case is whether defendant was the person who committed the crimes charged. Defendant asks this court to reverse his convictions of first degree murder, arson, and concealment of a homicidal death. We find the evidence presented at trial was sufficient for the jury to find defendant guilty and therefore affirm the finding of guilt on all charges. Given the circumstances, we find that a rational trier of fact could find defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. When faced with a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the reviewing court must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution and determine whether any rational trier of fact could have found the elements of the crime proven beyond a reasonable doubt. People v. Collins, 106 Ill. 2d 237, 261, 478 N.E.2d 267, 277 (1985). “Under this standard, a reviewing court must allow all reasonable inferences from the record in favor of the prosecution.” People v. Bush, 214 Ill. 2d 318, 326, 827 N.E.2d 455, 460 (2005). This standard of review applies in cases whether the evidence is direct or circumstantial. People v. Pintos, 133 Ill. 2d 286, 291, 549 N.E.2d 344, 346 (1989). The reviewing court will not retry the defendant. People v. Milka, 211 Ill. 2d 150, 178, 810 N.E.2d 33, 49 (2004); People v. Hall, 194 Ill. 2d 305, 329-30, 743 N.E.2d 521, 536 (2000); People v. Jimerson, 127 Ill. 2d 12, 43, 535 N.E.2d 889, 903 (1989). “[D]eterminations of the credibility of witnesses, the weight to be given to their testimony, and the reasonable inferences to be drawn from the evidence are responsibilities of the trier of fact.” Jimerson, 127 Ill. 2d at 43, 535 N.E.2d at 903. A reversal is warranted only if the evidence is so improbable or unsatisfactory that it leaves a reasonable doubt as to defendant’s guilt. People v. Ehlert, 211 Ill. 2d 192, 202, 811 N.E.2d 620, 625 (2004); People v. Flowers, 306 Ill. App. 3d 259, 266, 714 N.E.2d 577, 582 (1999). “Where evidence is presented and such evidence is capable of producing conflicting inferences, it is best left to the trier of fact for proper resolution.” People v. McDonald, 168 Ill. 2d 420, 447, 660 N.E.2d 832, 843 (1995). “When weighing the evidence, the trier of fact is not required to disregard inferences that flow from the evidence, nor is it required to search out all possible explanations consistent with innocence and raise them to a level of reasonable doubt.” McDonald, 168 Ill. 2d at 447, 660 N.E.2d at 843. “An inference is a factual conclusion that can rationally be drawn by considering other facts. Thus, an inference is merely a deduction that the fact finder may draw in its discretion, but is not required to draw as a matter of law.” People v. Funches, 212 Ill. 2d 334, 340, 818 N.E.2d 342, 346 (2004). The trier of fact heard the evidence and “was not obligated to accept any possible explanation compatible with the defendant’s innocence and elevate it to the status of reasonable doubt.” People v. Sutherland, 223 Ill. 2d 187, 233, 860 N.E.2d 178 (2006).  “ ‘A conviction can be sustained upon circumstantial evidence as well as upon direct, and to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt does not mean that the jury must disregard the inferences that flow normally from the evidence before it.’ ” People v. Patterson, 217 Ill. 2d 407, 435, 841 N.E.2d 889, 905 (2005), quoting People v. Williams, 40 Ill. 2d 522, 526, 240 N.E.2d 645 (1968). Circumstantial evidence is proof of facts or circumstances that give rise to reasonable inferences of other facts that tend to establish guilt or innocence of the defendant. A defendant can be convicted solely on circumstantial evidence. The trier of fact does not have to be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt as to each link in the chain of circumstantial evidence. Milka, 211 Ill. 2d at 178, 810 N.E.2d at 49. “It is sufficient if all the evidence taken as a whole satisfies the trier of fact beyond a reasonable doubt of the defendant’s guilt.” People v. Edwards, 218 Ill. App. 3d 184, 196, 577 N.E.2d 1250, 1258 (1991).  False exculpatory statements are “ ‘probative of a defendant’s consciousness of guilt.’ ” Milka, 211 Ill. 2d at 181, 810 N.E.2d at 51, quoting People v. Shaw, 278 Ill. App. 3d 939, 951, 664 N.E.2d 97, 105 (1996). “The commission of a crime leaves usually upon the consciousness a moral impression that is characteristic. The innocent man is without it; the guilty naan usually has it. Its evidential value has never been doubted. The inference from consciousness of guilt to ‘guilty’ is always available in evidence.” 1A J. Wigmore, Evidence §173, at 1840 (Tillers rev. 1983). Although “a false exculpatory statement is not conclusive evidence of the defendant’s consciousness of guilt (People v. Puente (1981), 98 Ill. App. 3d 936, 424 N.E.2d 775), a pre-arrest exculpatory statement is admissible in the State’s case-in-chief as probative evidence of the defendant’s consciousness of guilt.” People v. Buss, 112 Ill. App. 3d 311, 319, 445 N.E.2d 894, 900 (1983). On appeal, defendant challenges aspects of the State’s case, alleging that the State’s evidence was weak and so unreasonable, unsatisfactory, or improbable as to leave a reasonable doubt of his guilt. Defendant contends that the admitted sexual intercourse with the victim does not translate into proof of the offenses of murder, arson, and concealment of a homicidal death. Defendant argues that the State’s theory as to motive and opportunity, that defendant killed the victim to cover up his alleged sexual act, was mere speculation. Defendant also argues that his inconsistent statements regarding his contacts with the victim before her disappearance, his failure to volunteer a DNA sample, and his denial of even being in the intended victim’s house would not establish his guilt, but merely create a “strong suspicion” of defendant’s guilt. Defendant further argues that the lack of direct physical evidence connecting him to the crime as well as other possibilities serve to negate findings of guilt. Defendant argues that his mere presence at the victim’s house on the evening of her disappearance and his familiarity with the residence are not sufficient to establish guilt. Thus, defendant argues that the case against him leaves a reasonable doubt of his guilt. We disagree. All of the above evidence was presented to the jury and defendant’s arguments were rejected. Given all the circumstances, we cannot conclude that findings of guilt were so unreasonable that they must be rejected on appeal. The fact finder need not accept defendant’s version of events and we should not retry defendant. See Milka, 211 Ill. 2d at 178, 810 N.E.2d at 49.  When viewed as a whole, and given the circumstances, the evidence presented could lead the jury to believe that defendant had performed anal intercourse on a 12-year-old girl around the time of her disappearance and in order to cover up his crime, defendant murdered her and then burned her body inside the garage fire to cover up the murder. The jury could base this decision on inferences derived from the evidence it was presented. On review, this court must allow all reasonable inferences from the record in favor of the prosecution. Bush, 214 Ill. 2d at 326, 827 N.E.2d at 460. Defendant was in the victim’s house that night, was familiar with the victim’s house and the property where the body was found, and admitted to having sex with an underage girl around the time of her disappearance. Defendant had motive, opportunity, and access to commit the crimes of which he is accused. People v. Howery, 178 Ill. 2d 1, 39, 687 N.E.2d 836, 854 (1997) (where the evidence was largely circumstantial, evidence of motive, opportunity, presence of accelerant on defendant’s clothing on night of fire, and inconsistent statements made following fire were sufficient to convict defendant of arson and first degree murder). Taken together with the other pieces of circumstantial evidence, such as defendant’s inconsistent statements and other conduct before and after the fire, we find that this evidence, when viewed in the light most favorable to the State, allowed a rational trier of fact to find defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of the crimes charged. Defendant’s convictions are affirmed. Affirmed. LYTTON, EJ., concurs.

=== CASE 9739481 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:00.779744+00 ===

JUSTICE McDADE, dissenting: The majority has affirmed the conviction of defendant, Todd Saxon, for first degree murder, arson, and concealment of a homicide. Because he was convicted of those crimes solely on the basis of sexual misconduct — with which he was not charged, of which he was not convicted, and which, according to forensic evidence, may have occurred three days before the murder — and because there is no evidence that he actually committed them; I respectfully dissent from that decision. Defendant has admitted having anal sex with the victim. Because she was only 12 years old at the time, such sex was nonconsensual as a matter of law. Defendant confessed to the sexual misconduct. This confession should never have been before the jury because it was irrelevant to the crimes actually charged. Although the State had a “confession,” defendant was never charged with sexual assault (as-sertedly because the statute of limitations had run) and his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt was never proven in court. This fact did not stop the State from using that crime as the sole fount of all inferences “proving” the crimes charged. The victim, O.W, was stabbed to death, and her partially charred body was found in a burned-out garage. Defendant was charged with her murder and with a possible arson that has been characterized as an attempt to conceal the homicide. There is exactly zero direct evidence tying defendant to any of the charged crimes. Looking first at the murder, the police found no weapon, no fingerprints, no DNA evidence, no bloodstained clothing, no witness who saw the victim and defendant together that night, no witness who put defendant at or near the garage at relevant times, and no testimony from O.W.’s grandmother (with whom she shared the bedroom) about when or with whom O.W may have gone out. In short, there was no direct evidence that this defendant had anything to do with O.W.’s murder. What about the arson/concealment of a homicide? There was no accelerant container, and, necessarily, no fingerprints on such a container, no witness who placed defendant at or near the garage at any relevant time, no clothing with accelerant stains, no clothing reeking of smoke or with signs of burning, nothing to suggest that defendant had been in the garage with the victim at the relevant time or, indeed, at any time. The concealment charge is yet another inference — this one from the apparent arson. The State argues and the majority apparently agrees that this complete lack of evidence is offset by the State’s argument that defendant’s sexual assault of O.W. yields sufficient inferences to support his convictions for murder, arson, and concealment of a homicide. Certainly, reasonable inferences are tools that have long been used to supplement weak evidence in criminal cases. Here, however, the majority — as did the State and the trial court — finds that it is reasonable to draw inferences from no evidence relating to the crimes charged. But that is not the law in Illinois nor apparently in the federal courts. In People v. Davis, 278 Ill. App. 3d 532, 663 N.E.2d 39 (1996), the court stated: “A reasonable inference within the purview of the law must have a chain of factual evidentiary antecedents. If an alleged inference does not have a chain of factual evidentiary antecedents, then within the purview of the law it is not a reasonable inference but is instead mere speculation.” Davis, 278 Ill. App. 3d at 540, 663 N.E.2d at 44. See also United States v. Jones, 371 F.3d 363, 366 (7th Cir. 2004) (“although a jury may infer facts from other facts derived by inference, ‘ “each link in the chain of inferences must be sufficiently strong to avoid a lapse into speculation.” ’ United States v. Peters, 277 F.3d 963, 967 (7th Cir. 2002) (quoting Piaskowski v. Bett, 256 F.3d 687, 693 (7th Cir. 2001))”). Accord United States v. Cruz, 285 F.3d 692, 699 (8th Cir. 2002); United States v. Rahseparian, 231 F.3d 1257, 1262 (10th Cir. 2000); United States v. D'Amato, 39 F.3d 1249, 1256 (2d Cir. 1994). The facts on which the State relied in the instant case are fully recounted by the majority. As can initially be seen, the State was allowed to present evidence to, in essence, “try” defendant for the sexual assault of O.W — despite the facts that he was not charged with that crime and that his prosecution for it was admittedly barred by the statute of limitations. His tacit “conviction” of that crime then served as the sole “factual” predicate for his actual conviction of the charged crimes. As to those convictions: although the State presented evidence that O.W. was murdered and that the garage burned as a result of arson, it presented no evidence that tied defendant to either of those crimes. The defense presented a motion for directed verdict at the close of the State’s evidence and it was, in my opinion, gross error for the trial court to deny it. As the Davis court concluded: “It follows that without a single factual evidentiary antecedent to support it, the State’s alleged inference that Davis had the opportunity to commit the homicide cannot bear water. It also follows that the State’s alleged derivative inference that Davis was the one who used the gun at the time of the homicide is not a reasonable inference within the purview of the law but is, instead, mere speculation. A person’s liberty is an endowment that is too valuable to be lost on speculation of wrongdoing. Our system of government demands more: proof! Moreover, the proof must be beyond a reasonable doubt. It does not exist in this case. [Citation].” Davis, 278 Ill. App. 3d at 541, 663 N.E.2d at 45. Nor does it exist in the instant case. The State has clearly established that O.W. was a victim of murder followed by arson; has plainly shown that defendant sexually assaulted her; has made weak and ineffectual stabs at showing that defendant had motive1 and opportunity to commit the crimes; but has presented no evidence and no reasonable inferences to show that he, in fact, did commit them. If defendant’s fingerprints had been found on an accelerant container or if a knife with even trace evidence of blood of OW’s type had been found in a place where he lived or frequented or if defendant had been the only outsider at the house that night rather than one of numerous others, I might still be uncomfortable about the correctness of the conviction but would most likely be writing a special concurrence rather than this dissent. But with no actual, forensic or tenable circumstantial evidence, I simply cannot see how a jury could fairly or validly conclude that defendant was guilty of murder, arson, and concealment of a homicide beyond any reasonable doubt. But the majority has another prong to its decision to affirm. Citing John Henry Wigmore (1863-1943), it sets up the premise that: “The commission of a crime leaves usually upon the consciousness a moral impression that is characteristic. The innocent man is without it; the guilty man usually has it. Its evidential value has never been doubted. The inference from consciousness of guilt to ‘guilty’ is always available in evidence.” 1A J. Wigmore, Evidence §173, at 1840 (Tillers rev. 1983). Despite its undeniable whiff of mysticism, divination, and the occult, courts have long accepted the concept of consciousness of guilt as probative of guilt. Fortunately, some courts, including our supreme court, have required that there at least be some concrete manifestation of this consciousness. One of those accepted manifestations is false exculpatory statements made by the defendant. People v. Milka, 211 Ill. 2d 150, 178, 810 N.E.2d 33, 49 (2004). Viewed in the abstract, “consciousness of guilt” is itself a circular and therefore flawed logical construct. Its application requires the fact finder to assume the ultimate fact — that the defendant committed the murder — in order to conclude that a particular act or statement of the defendant was motivated by his knowledge that he had committed the murder and is, therefore, evidence of his guilt. The concept presumes guilt to prove guilt and also impermissibly shifts the burden to the defendant to disprove that it was his/her awareness of guilt that caused the doing of the act or the making of the statement. It has no place in a system of law that presumes the innocence of the defendant until actual conviction by the finder of fact. Beyond pointing out this weakness, I will forgo indulging in any discussion of significant but more amorphous concerns such as how someone who is not a close friend or associate of defendant could actually know or correctly interpret the meaning and messages of his or her body language and evasions. What does require discussion in the instant case is that we know that this defendant engaged in sexual misconduct; we know he lied about it; and we know that he tried diligently for over two years to avoid being charged with it. How could the police or the prosecutors or the jurors (who could not observe it but only heard about it from others) possibly know that his denials of the sexual assault constituted a consciousness of guilt — if indeed he felt and/or communicated such an emotion or awareness — that was totally related to the sexual misconduct and totally unrelated to the child’s death? More importantly, how can we as an objective reviewing court find that this “consciousness of guilt” coupled with guilt of sexual assault, but also with a complete absence of any direct, forensic, or tenable circumstantial evidence proving any element (let alone all of them) of the charged crimes somehow creates an inference strong enough, inevitable enough, compelling enough, to say that it supports defendant’s conviction for first degree murder, arson, and concealment of a homicide beyond a reasonable doubt? I am well aware that the public and the media frequently say that a case was reversed “on a technicality.” And I can well imagine the ridicule — even in our courts — that attends discussions of logical constructs, flawed logic and circular arguments. But the technicalities are constitutional guarantees, supreme court rules and legislative directives designed to ensure, as much as possible, that the person who is convicted of a crime is, in fact, the person who committed it. And the mental evaluations are necessary to tease out flaws in the bases on which we deprive people of their liberty and their lives. These are not intellectual exercises undertaken in a vacuum. There are people attached to them. According to the Innocence Project of the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law, as of July 12, 2007, there have been 203 postconviction exonerations since the availability of DNA testing in 1989. That means that there are at least 203 innocent people who were convicted, whose convictions were affirmed at least once on review, and who were incarcerated for periods of time ranging from 1 year to 26 years, with the average sentence being 12 years.2 Fifteen of those found innocent were on death row. Of the persons exonerated, approximately 70% are members of minority groups, with the vast majority of those being African-Americans. Despite these horrific statistics, the people involved are actually “lucky.” There was physical evidence in their cases which could be tested for DNA. We have, of course, no way of knowing how many other residents of the nation’s prisons have been falsely convicted and, perhaps, executed. The Innocence Project has also attempted to document the causes of wrongful convictions and has concluded they result from systemic defects that are a catalog of “tried and true” forms of what we consider to be the “best” evidence. Over 75% are attributable to erroneous eyewitness identification.3 Of particular concern in the present case, more than one-third of the wrongful convictions were linked to the misapplication of forensic disciplines — which the Project defines as where “forensic scientists and prosecutors presented fraudulent, exaggerated, or otherwise tainted evidence to the judge or jury which led to the wrongful conviction.”4 www.innocenceproject.org. The instant case is, in my opinion, a prime example of the manipulation and exaggeration of data to cover up the complete lack of any competent evidence that the defendant actually committed the crimes with which he was charged. I do not believe that the nation’s appellate and supreme courts can shrug off our responsibility for wrongful convictions. It is easy to say that the police did not do an adequate investigation, that the trial attorneys conducted themselves improperly or performed inadequately, or that the trial judges glossed over something required of them by rule, statute or case law. But the bottom line is that we — the reviewing courts — are the ones who exculpate those shortcomings. We decry prosecutorial argument that is violative of the rules but persist in finding it to be “harmless.” When we turn ourselves in knots and defy logic to affirm convictions rather than requiring that the process be done correctly, we are not doing our jobs. To put it bluntly, we have met the enemy of justice and it is us. This defendant is not a nice man. He molests little girls and he needs to be punished for that. But we pervert the system and rule of law that is the foundation of our principles of justice when we validate his conviction for crimes he has not been proven to have committed. Beyond that we set a precedent that can be used to support further erosions and reduce the protection against wrongful conviction that our nation and our system promise to the innocent. Of equal importance in a system that substitutes the rule of law for personal retribution, if the convicted defendants did not commit the crimes, the victims have not gotten justice because their violators go unpunished. For all of the foregoing reasons, I cannot concur with the majority’s decision. I agree that the jury apparently concluded that the State’s smorgasbord of non-evidence was sufficient to find defendant, Todd Saxon, guilty, beyond a reasonable doubt, of murder, arson, and concealment of a homicide. I dissent from the majority’s finding that People v. Collins, 106 Ill. 2d 237, 261, 478 N.E.2d 267, 277 (1985), requires us to hold that the jury’s conclusion was supported by the evidence presented by the State, was based on evidence that was sufficient to prove any of the elements of the crimes charged, even when viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecution, or that the conviction is reasonable or sustainable on appeal. If Collins does so require, then I, with the utmost respect, would suggest to the supreme court that the decision has created a standard for validating rather than revealing erroneous judgments and it should be revisited and clarified.  The State complains in its brief about the trial court’s exclusion of evidence that defendant had committed eight other sex offenses against children, one of which “involved defendant taking the victim to a garage,” presumably for sex. There is no assertion that defendant murdered and burned any of those other victims (or that he attempted to do so). Moreover, the testimony of O.W.’s brother suggests that there had been prior sexual conduct between O.W. and defendant, but clearly he had not previously killed and burned her (or attempted to do so). It appears to me that the reasonable inferences to be drawn here militate against any notion that this defendant feels a need to kill the victims of his sexual perversions.   Twenty-seven of those exonerated are from Illinois. Of those, 5 served between 20 and 26 years; 19 served between 10 and 19 years; and 3 served between 6 and 9 years. None served less.   I personally know of several cases where the procedures for securing these identifications were so flawed that the convictions should never have been affirmed.   Other principal factors identified as leading to wrongful convictions are false confessions; the use of jailhouse informants, especially in exchange for deals, special treatment, or the dropping of charges; and bad lawyering, including failure to investigate, failure to call witnesses, and the inability to prepare for trial (due to caseload or incompetence).

=== CASE 9739631 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:49.731783+00 ===

JUSTICE MYERSCOUGH, specially concurring: I agree with the majority’s interpretation and application of section 912 in this case. I write separately only to emphasize that section 912 operates to grant title to forfeited or abandoned railroad rights-of-way only to those with title regardless of whether the right-of-way traverses an even- or odd-numbered section of land. Although we have previously found that the plain language of section 912 explicitly requires title to the land underlying the right-of-way (Marlow, 315 Ill. App. 3d at 813, 734 N.E.2d at 200-01), the legislative history leading to the enactment of section 912 clearly supports our interpretation and application as well. In its report to the House of Representatives regarding House Bill 244, later passed as section 912, the Committee of Public Land and Surveys wrote: “The object of this bill is to provide for disposition of lands embraced in forfeited or abandoned railroad rights[-]of[-]way on what was originally public lands. In some cases[,J a right[-]of[-J way was granted by the [gjovemment and later forfeited, while in other cases change in the location of the railroad resulted in the abandonment of the old right[-]of[-]way. The act of March 3, 1875, under which most of the rights[-]of[-]way over public lands have been granted contains a provision for forfeiture of the grant for failure to construct the railroad within a specified time succeeding the date of the grant. Under the decision of the courts[,] railroad companies receiving such grants take a qualified fee with an implied condition of reverter in the event the companies cease to use the lands for the purpose for which they were granted. Upon abandonment or forfeiture, therefore, of any portions of such right[-]of[-]way the land reverts to and becomes the property of the United States. It is, however, a fact that in making conveyances of subdivisions traversed by such rights[-]of[-]way the United States issues patents for the full area of the tracts or legal subdivisions, making no diminution by reason of the prior grant of the right[-]of[-]way. It seemed to the committee that such abandoned or forfeited strips are of little or no value to the [g]overnment and that in case of lands in the rural communities they ought[,] in justice[,] to become the property of the person to whom the whole of the legal subdivision had been granted or his successor in interest. Granting such relief in reality gives him only the land covered by the original patent.” H.R. Rep. No. 67-217, at 1-2 (1921). See also S. Rep. No. 67-388, at 2 (1922) (letter from E.C. Finney, Acting Secretary) (recommending to the Senate that House Bill 244 should be passed and adopting the explanation in the above-quoted House Report). Therefore, based upon the plain language of section 912 and the legislative history, section 912 operates in the following manner regardless of whether the right-of-way traverses an even- or odd-numbered section of land. As in the present case, the United States either grants or issues a patent for an entire tract or subdivision of land to a person or company (hereinafter patentee). See H.R. Rep. No. 67-217, at 1-2 (1921). By virtue of that conveyance, the patentee owns the entire tract or subdivision covered by the patent or conveyance without qualification. The United States, however, also grants a right-of-way for railroad passage across that tract or subdivision. According to the United States Supreme Court, the United States’ grants of these railroad rights-of-way actually only grant the railroad a qualified fee with implied condition of reverter. Northern Pacific Ry. Co. v. Townsend, 190 U.S. 267, 271, 47 L. Ed. 1044, 1047, 23 S. Ct. 671, 672 (1903). Accordingly, whenever a railroad forfeits or abandons a right-of-way, the land underlying the right-of-way reverts to the United States government. See H.R. Rep. No. 67-217, at 1-2 (1921). Because these forfeited or abandoned strips of land were of little or no value to the United States (see H.R. Rep. No. 67-217, at 2 (1921)), Congress enacted section 912 to divest the United States of these railroad rights-of-way. Essentially, section 912 works much like the doctrine of after-acquired title. The doctrine of after-acquired title generally provides that when one conveys real estate by a deed purporting to convey the same in fee simple, any legal estate that the grantor acquires after the sale or conveyance passes to the grantee or the grantee’s successor in interest. 23 Am. Jur. 2d Deeds § 347 (1983); see also Tomkins State Bank v. Niles, 127 Ill. 2d 209, 217, 537 N.E.2d 274, 278 (1989) (stating that the Illinois statute regarding this issue provides that “if a person sells or conveys to another an estate in land which the vendor does not possess, but then after the sale or conveyance, the vendor does ‘become possessed of and confirmed in the legal estate to the land or real estate so sold or conveyed [(Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 30, par. 6)],’ the vendor holds the subsequently acquired estate in trust for the person or entity to whom the original conveyance was made”). Therefore, upon forfeiture or abandonment, the railroad right-of-way reverts to the United States government. By operation of section 912, the United States’ reverted interest then vests in the patentee who received interest in the entire tract or subdivision or their successors in interest. Often, however, railroads abandon rights-of-way long after the original patent or grant. By the time the railroad abandons the right-of-way, the patentee may have divided and conveyed some or all of the tract or subdivision. If in dividing or conveying portions of the subdivision the patentee has conveyed or, more accurately, purported to convey an interest in the land underlying the right-of-way, any after-acquired interest the patentee receives by operation of section 912 will be transferred to grantees or the grantee’s successor in interest who received a deed for the patentee’s interest in the land underlying the right-of-way. If the patentee only conveyed the land on either side of the right-of-way but never conveyed the land underlying the right-of-way, the land underlying the right-of-way remains the property of the original patentee or his heirs. Likewise, if hypothetically the United States never issued a patent or conveyed the land underlying the right-of-way to anyone, then when the railroad company abandons the right-of-way and the land underlying the right-of-way reverts to the United States, the United States remains possessed of the fee simple interest in that land. In such a case, section 912 would not apply. Therefore, persons with title only to the land bordering or adjacent to the right-of-way may not claim the land underlying the right-of-way merely by virtue of their adjacency. Persons seeking to claim interest in an abandoned railroad right-of-way by operation of section 912 must have title to the land underlying the right-of-way. Title must emanate from the original interest of the United States, either through a patent or other similar grant such as a purported conveyance from the United States to a railroad company and thereafter from the railroad company to individual persons or corporations. Marlow, 315 Ill. App. 3d at 813, 734 N.E.2d at 200-01. Moreover, these principles are applicable both to situations in which the entire section of land was granted to the railroad company to subsidize the construction of the railroad (see Marlow, 315 Ill. App. 3d at 815, 734 N.E.2d at 202) and to situations, as in the present case, in which the United States apparently never granted the entire section to the railroad company. In Marlow, the right-of-way crossed an even-numbered section that the United States had granted to the railroad to sell and subsidize the railway construction. Marlow, 315 Ill. App. 3d at 815, 734 N.E.2d at 202. In the present case, however, the disputed right-of-way crosses an odd-numbered section of land. Therefore, because the United States did not historically grant the odd-numbered sections to the railroad companies (Act of September 20, 1850, 9 Stat. 466 (1850); Illinois Central, 246 Ill. at 197, 92 N.E. at 820) and the record fails to indicate the complete chain of title, we must assume that the United States did not grant this particular section to the railroad as it had with the section in Marlow. This fact, however, does not change the underlying analysis regarding ownership of the abandoned right-of-way or application of section 912. I, therefore, agree that no logical reasons exist for applying different standards to these two situations. For the foregoing reasons, I specially concur.

=== CASE 9739483 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:03.776418+00 ===

MAY, J.,
concurring in result with separate opinion.
I believe M.Q.M. was correctly decided and a defendant may not be convicted of theft or auto theft without proof of intent to permanently deprive the owner of the item’s value or use. Nevertheless the evidence most favorable to the judgment is sufficient to meet this standard. I would therefore affirm Bennett’s convictions and I concur in the result.
The majority attempts to distinguish the cases cited in M.Q.M. because they “did not directly address a defendant’s claim of insufficient evidence regarding the element to permanently deprive.” (Op. at 322.) I do not find that distinction meaningful. In all of the decisions cited in M.Q.M., our Indiana Supreme Court discussed the elements of theft. Regardless whether the court was defining the elements of theft for sufficiency or jury instruction purposes, the elements of theft are the elements of theft.
Moreover, the three decisions relied on by the majority were decided in 1987, 1986, and 1985, while the cases cited in M.Q.M. are from 2000, 1991, and 1988. It is unnecessary to speculate why our Supreme Court more recently decided “permanent” deprivation is an element of theft; I simply believe we must follow the most current pronouncement of our State’s highest court. Accordingly, I would follow Chanley, In re Kouros, and Decker, as we did in M.Q.M., and hold the State was required to prove Bennett intended to permanently deprive Hardison of his car, knife, tool boxes, and tools.
Nevertheless, I would affirm Bennett’s convictions. The facts most favorable to the auto theft conviction are that Bennett took Hardison’s car without permission on the night of October 22, 2005. When police located the car three days later, Bennett was in the driver’s seat and the motor was running. The clothing, socks, underwear, deodorant, and food bags in the car demonstrated Bennett had been living in the car. A reasonable jury could conclude from those facts Bennett did not intend to return Hardison’s car. I would accordingly affirm Bennett’s conviction of auto theft.
Similarly, I find the evidence sufficient to convict Bennett of theft of the hunting knife, toolboxes, and tools. Those items were in Hardison’s car when Bennett stole it, and they were not in the car when the police recovered it. Regardless what Bennett did with those items, their absence from the vehicle demonstrates he had no intention of returning them to Hardison, and thus intended to permanently deprive Hardison of their use or value.
For these reasons, I concur in the result.

=== CASE 2219994 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:30.598418+00 ===

871 N.E.2d 406 (2007)
Dan & Susan MILLER, Appellants-Plaintiffs,
v.
HAGUE INSURANCE AGENCY, INC., a/k/a Lizenby-Hague Insurance Agency, Inc., Indiana Farmers Mutual Insurance Company, and Jason Hague, Appellees-Defendants.
No. 66A03-0606-CV-278.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
August 8, 2007.
Patrick B. McEuen, Millbranth & Bush, Valparaiso, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Mark R. Smith, Smith Fisher Maas & Howard, P.C., Indianapolis, IN, Attorney for Appellee.
OPINION
MATHIAS, Judge.
Daniel and Susan Miller ("the Millers") appeal from the Pulaski Superior Court's order of summary judgment in favor of Indiana Farmers Mutual Insurance Co. ("Farmers Mutual"). Concluding that the Millers failed to timely file their brief according to Indiana Appellate Rule 45(B), we dismiss this appeal.
Facts and Procedural History
This appeal involves the issue of homeowner's insurance coverage for Susan Miller's jewelry collection, which was stolen from her home. The jewelry was worth over $100,000. Farmers Mutual denied indemnification because the Millers did not have a rider to provide specifically for the jewelry. The Millers, however, insisted that they told their agent of their need to have the jewelry insured and that he had assured them it would be covered under their policy. The Millers filed claims for indemnification against their homeowner's insurer, Farmers Mutual, their insurance agent, Jason Hague ("Jason"), and Jason's employer, Hague Insurance Agency ("Hague Insurance").
On January 11, 2006, Farmers Mutual filed a motion for partial summary judgment on counts one and three of the Millers' complaint. The first count of the complaint alleged that the jewelry was covered under the contract provision insuring personal property. The third count alleged that Farmers Mutual had acted in bad faith. The trial court granted Farmers Mutual's request for partial summary judgment on both counts. Pursuant to the *407 Millers' request, the trial court certified these orders as final appealable judgments on June 7, 2006.
The Millers filed a notice of appeal on June 7, 2006 and a case summary on June 22, 2006. Then the Millers' counsel, Patrick McEuen ("McEuen"), went on vacation from mid-June until July 5, 2006. While McEuen was on vacation, his staff received a letter from the Pulaski Superior Court indicating that the record and the transcript were complete. The notice of completion of clerk's record and completion of the transcript were filed on June 23, 2006. McEuen's office paid the invoice for the transcript on June 30, 2006, while McEuen was still on vacation.
McEuen returned from vacation on July 5th. However, the Millers did not file their brief or appendix by the July 24, 2006 deadline. On July 31, 2006, our court made an entry on the docket indicating that the case would be transmitted for dismissal in twenty days. On August 29, 2006, the docket was transmitted for dismissal. On the same day, the Millers filed a verified motion to reinstate and for extension of time to file appellants' brief. Then on August 31, 2006, the Millers simultaneously filed their appellants' brief and appendix with a motion for leave to file a belated appellants' brief and appendix. This filing occurred thirty-eight days after the deadline to file an appellant's brief and appendix.
On September 11, 2006, our court denied the Millers' motion to reinstate as moot and granted the Millers' motion to file a belated brief and appendix. On the same day, Farmers Mutual filed an objection to the Millers' motions, which was treated by our court as both a motion to reconsider and a motion for dismissal. On October 24, 2006, our motions panel denied Farmers Mutual's motion but ordered the Millers to file an appendix in conformity with the Indiana Appellate Rules. This appeal ensued. Additional facts will be provided as necessary.
Discussion and Decision
On appeal, Farmers Mutual asks this court to revisit the issue of whether the Millers' belated brief was a flagrant violation of the Indiana Rules of Appellate Procedure, thus warranting dismissal. Even though our motions panel has already ruled on this issue, Farmers Mutual is not precluded from presenting its arguments to us. Smith v. Deem, 834 N.E.2d 1100, 1103 (Ind.Ct.App.2005), trans. denied. "It is well established that we may reconsider a ruling by the motions panel." Cincinnati Ins. Co. v. Young, 852 N.E.2d 8, 12 (Ind.Ct.App.2006), trans. denied. While we are reluctant to overrule orders decided by the motions panel, this court has inherent authority to reconsider any decision while an appeal remains in fieri. See Davis v. State, 771 N.E.2d 647, 649 n. 5 (Ind.2002); State v. Moore, 796 N.E.2d 764, 766 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. denied.
Indiana Appellate Rule 45(B) states that "[t]he appellant's brief shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days after . . . the trial court clerk or Administrative Agency issues its notice of completion of the Transcript." Rule 45(D) further provides that "[t]he appellant's failure to timely file the appellant's brief may subject the appeal to summary dismissal." "Dismissal for the late filing of an appellant's brief is within the discretion of this court." Haimbaugh Landscaping, Inc. v. Jegen, 653 N.E.2d 95, 99 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied. Although we will exercise our discretion to reach the merits when violations are comparatively minor, if the parties commit flagrant violations of the Rules of Appellate Procedure we will hold issues waived, or dismiss the appeal. Terpstra v. Farmers & Merch. Bank, 483 N.E.2d 749, 752 (Ind. Ct.App.1985), trans. denied; Town of *408 Rome City v. King, 450 N.E.2d 72, 76 (Ind.Ct.App.1983).
In Howell v. State, we opted to exercise such discretion when the appellant's brief was filed one day late. 684 N.E.2d 576, 577 (Ind.Ct.App.1997). Likewise, in Haimbaugh, we concluded that filing an appellant's brief one day late was not a flagrant violation of our appellate rules. 653 N.E.2d at 99. In Meyer v. Northern Indiana Bank & Trust Co., we again decided to exercise our discretion when the appellant timely filed an oversized brief, and our court subsequently denied appellant's motion to file an oversized brief. 490 N.E.2d 400, 403-404 (Ind.Ct.App. 1986).
Here, appellant's brief was filed thirty-eight days after the July 24, 2006 deadline. In the Millers' motions filed with this court, McEuen claims that his failure to timely file the appellants' brief was due to mistake or excusable neglect. He explains that he was never aware that the transcript had been completed in this matter because the notice had arrived while he was on vacation. McEuen states that he did not learn that the transcript had been filed until August 29, 2006, sixty-seven days after the clerk had filed her notice of completion of transcript.
"[I]t is the duty of an attorney and his client to keep apprised of the status of matters before the court." Sanders v. Carson, 645 N.E.2d 1141, 1144 (Ind.Ct. App.1995).
While the filing of a brief one day late has been considered a minor violation of our appellate rules, the filing of a brief thirty-eight days late is not.
Dismissed.
NAJAM, J., and MAY, J., concur.

=== CASE 2219996 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:30.783648+00 ===

188 Ill. App.3d 792 (1989)
544 N.E.2d 809
BETTY MIJATOV, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
FRANKLIN GRAVES, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 2-89-0037.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District.
Opinion filed September 8, 1989.
Rehearing denied October 27, 1989.
*793 Thomas J. Tartaglia, of River Grove, and Bryan J. O'Connor, Jr., of Nevoral & Corrigan, Ltd., of Chicago, for appellant.
Glen E. Amundsen, of Querrey & Harrow, Ltd., of Waukegan, for appellee.
Judgment affirmed.
*794 PRESIDING JUSTICE UNVERZAGT delivered the opinion of the court:
Plaintiff, Betty Mijatov, appeals from a summary judgment entered in the circuit court of Lake County, in favor of defendant, Franklin Graves. Plaintiff raises one issue on appeal: whether an employee who has entered into a lump-sum settlement agreement of a worker's compensation claim may recover damages from a co-worker in a common-law tort suit.
Plaintiff filed a three-count complaint alleging that defendant and plaintiff were employed by the Illinois Tollway Authority (Tollway Authority) and that while they were at work, defendant kicked plaintiff, injuring her. Count I alleged that the act was intentional; count II alleged that it was willful and wanton; and count III alleged that it was negligently committed.
Defendant filed a motion for summary judgment on the basis that the incident occurred while plaintiff and defendant were on a paid break; that plaintiff was in the course of her employment at the time the incident occurred; and that plaintiff filed for and collected worker's compensation as a result of her injury. Defendant argued that plaintiff was precluded from suing for civil damages since plaintiff had already collected compensation for her injury under the Workers' Compensation Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 48, par. 138.1 et seq.). Defendant submitted excerpts from plaintiff's discovery deposition in which she admitted that she filed the worker's compensation claim in the belief that the injury occurred in the scope of her employment and that she recovered $4,000 from worker's compensation. Defendant also submitted a copy of the settlement agreement entered into between plaintiff and the Tollway Authority. The terms of the settlement provided:
"Respondent expressly denied that the Petitioner was injured while working for Respondent on April 24, 1986. In order to forsake further litigation, Respondent offers to pay and Petitioner agrees to accept the sum of $4,000.00 in full and final settlement of all claims relative to an alleged injury of April 24, 1986. Petitioner expressly waives review under Section 19(h) and 8(a) of the Illinois Workmen's Compensation Act."
In her response to the motion, plaintiff argued that her claim was not barred because the Tollway Authority denied that the injury arose in the course of her employment. Plaintiff also argued that her claim should be allowed because she settled for less than her actual medical expenses and was therefore never compensated by the Tollway Authority for her injury. Plaintiff asserted that there was a genuine issue *795 of material fact regarding whether the injury arose out of the course of her employment. The circuit court granted defendant's motion, and plaintiff timely filed this appeal.
 1 Summary judgment should be granted when the pleadings, depositions, admissions on file, and affidavits present no genuine issue of material fact. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2-1005(c).) In deciding a summary judgment motion, the court must construe the pleadings, depositions, and affidavits liberally in favor of the opponent and strictly against the movant. (In re Estate of Whittington (1985), 107 Ill.2d 169, 177.) Summary judgment is an expeditious method of disposing of a lawsuit and should only be allowed when the right of the party moving for summary judgment is free from doubt. (Kelman v. University of Chicago (1988), 166 Ill. App.3d 137, 141.) Although a plaintiff has an affirmative duty to present evidence establishing a cause of action when the defendant moves for summary judgment, the plaintiff is not required to prove his case at that stage. Knief v. Sotos (1989), 181 Ill. App.3d 959, 963.
 2 Plaintiff contends on appeal that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether she was in the course of her employment when defendant kicked her. An employee who files a claim under the Workers' Compensation Act (Act) is limited by sections 5(a) and 11 of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 48, pars. 138.5(a), 138.11) to the recovery available under the Act. Section 5(a) of the Act provides in part:
"No common law or statutory right to recover damages from the employer, his insurer, his broker, * * * or the agents or employees of any of them for injury or death sustained by any employee while engaged in the line of his duty as such employee, other than the compensation herein provided, is available to any employee who is covered by the provisions of this Act * * *." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 48, par. 138.5(a).)
The Act further limits the employee's remedies as follows:
"The compensation herein provided, together with the provisions of this Act, shall be the measure of the responsibility of any employer * * * for accidental injuries sustained by any employee arising out of and in the course of the employment * * *." (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 48, par. 138.11.)
To avoid the effect of these sections, plaintiff would have to prove any of the following: (1) the injury was not accidental; (2) the injury did not arise from the employment; (3) the injury was not received during the course of the employment; or (4) the injury was noncompensable under the Act. Collier v. Wagner Castings Co. (1980), 81 Ill.2d 229, 237.
*796  3 Injuries inflicted intentionally by a co-worker are accidental and compensable under the Act if the injuries arise out of and in the course of the employment. (Fregeau v. Gillespie (1983), 96 Ill.2d 479, 483.) The court in Fregeau determined that if an employee has been compensated for an injury under the Act, he cannot recover under a common-law intentional tort suit against a co-worker. Fregeau, 96 Ill.2d at 486.
Under Collier and Fregeau it is clear that, if plaintiff has already recovered under the Act, she is barred from collecting civil damages from defendant. Plaintiff, however, argues that Collier and Fregeau are distinguishable because in both of those cases the injured employee "undeniably acknowledged" receiving benefits under the Act, whereas plaintiff does not acknowledge the receipt of benefits. According to plaintiff, this is significant because in spite of her assertion that she was injured in the course of her employment, the Tollway Authority never admitted that allegation and it was therefore never adjudicated by the Industrial Commission. Plaintiff urges us to find that since it was never adjudicated, the question of whether she was injured in the course of her employment existed in the common-law litigation.
 4 Plaintiff based her claim for worker's compensation on the position that she was injured in the course of her employment, then assumed the contrary position for the civil suit against defendant. This conduct is prohibited by the rule of judicial estoppel which precludes a party from adopting inconsistent positions in separate legal proceedings. (Giannini v. First National Bank (1985), 136 Ill. App.3d 971, 983.) This doctrine was designed to promote the truth and prevent litigants from deliberately shifting positions to suit the exigencies of the moment. Department of Transportation v. Coe (1983), 112 Ill. App.3d 506, 510.
 5 Plaintiff also argues that the exclusivity provisions of the Act do not apply because she did not receive an "award" under the Act, but instead entered into a lump-sum settlement agreement. We find this argument to be without merit. Where a plaintiff has collected compensation on the basis that her injury was compensable under the Act and pursuant to an agreement executed in lieu of a common-law or statutory claim, that lump-sum settlement attains the status of an award, and the plaintiff is precluded from subsequently suing for civil damages. (Sims v. Teepak, Inc. (1986), 143 Ill. App.3d 865, 871.) Plaintiff agreed to the terms of the settlement and the amount of compensation. She cannot now seek additional compensation in a civil suit merely because she agreed to an amount less than she might *797 have received had the claim been fully adjudicated before the Industrial Commission.
 6 Since plaintiff accepted the award on the basis that her injury arose in the course of her employment, there existed no question of fact in that regard. We therefore conclude that the trial court properly granted summary judgment in favor of defendant.
The judgment of the circuit court of Lake County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
NASH and DUNN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739486 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:06.389062+00 ===

GIVAN, Justice.
A Clay Cireuit Court jury trial in 1982 resulted in the conviction of appellant of Murder, Rape, and Robbery. The jury recommended, and the trial court imposed, a sentence of death. Upon direct appeal, we found appellant's right to counsel had been impinged and thus an inculpatory statement made to police several hours after his arrest and introduced at trial was inadmissible. We reversed and remanded for a new trial. Minnick v. State (1984), Ind., 467 N.E.2d 754, cert. denied, Indiana v. Minnick (1985), 472 U.S. 1032, 105 S.Ct. 3512, 87 L.Ed.2d 642. Upon a retrial in the Lawrence Circuit Court in 1985, appellant was again found guilty of Murder, Rape, and Robbery and sentenced to death.
The facts are: On the afternoon of October 26, 1981, James D. Payne returned from work to his home in Greencastle, Indiana. He discovered his wife's body on the bedroom floor. He immediately called police. The ensuing investigation revealed Martha Payne had been raped, anally sodomized, stabbed in the right rear shoulder, and struck on the head with a table lamp. In addition, ligature marks on her neck indicated she had been strangled, and burn marks on her ankles showed the perpetrator had attempted to electrocute her as well. The cause of death was determined to be the knife wound in her upper back, which penetrated her lung and severed her pulmonary artery.
That night Sergeant Rodney Cline became aware that a "Dukes of Hazzard"-type car had been observed parked in a college fraternity's lot near the victim's home around the time of her death. Cline confirmed the driver's description matched that of appellant, who had spoken to Cline outside the victim's house that afternoon to apologize for a dispute the two had engaged in a week earlier concerning the involuntary towing of appellant's distine-tive orange Dodge Charger.
Appellant was subsequently arrested and search warrants were obtained for his car and for specimens of his blood and hair for comparison with samples taken at the crime seene. A strand of hair found adhering to a length of electrical wire in appellant's car was determined to be of common origin with hair samples taken from the victim. Laboratory tests revealed the vie *474tim's blood was type B and matched blood specimens found on a broken table lamp and kitchen knife found at the crime scene. Semen specimens recovered from the carpet underneath the victim turned out to be from two separate donors: one a type O secretor, i.e., one who secretes the antigens used in typing blood in other body fluids, and the other a non-secretor of unknown type. The victim's husband and appellant were each determined to have type O blood-the husband a secretor, appellant a non-secretor. Thus appellant was neither positively identified nor definitively ruled out as a donor of the semen found under the victim's body.
Appellant's alibi witnesses testified as to his whereabouts at various times the afternoon of the murder. Due to technical oversights following discovery of the victim's body, however, authorities were unable to pin down her time of death with any precision. Appellant admitted to Sergeant Cline that he had been in the victim's home that afternoon to see about doing some remodeling work for the Paynes. In addition, two witnesses testified at trial that appellant had made inculpatory admissions relating certain details of the murder while incarcerated.
After hearing oral argument in this cause, we remanded to the trial court for the limited purpose of hearing appellant's motion for new trial based upon two issues: 1) a misstatement by an expert witness for the State detected by appellant only after the filing of appellee's brief, and 2) newly-discovered evidence relating to blood group test results from samples taken from appellant and from the crime scene.
After hearing evidence, the trial court found that appellant had not been prejudiced by the misstatement and that the new evidence would not change the outcome upon retrial. The motion for new trial was denied, and appellant appeals.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in finding that the erroneous testimony of Michael Oliver had no effect on the outcome of the trial. The original brief of appellee included in its statement of facts that Sergeant Michael Oliver, a laboratory technician for the Indiana State Police, testified that he found seventeen hairs from the victim's pubic combing which were sufficiently similar to the suspect's pubic hair standard to be of common origin. The State included this testimony in its brief as evidence linking appellant to the crime.
In his reply brief, appellant strenuously maintained that the State had misrepresented the record. After consulting with the trial prosecutor, who could recall no such evidence at trial, counsel for appellee obtained the transcript and verified the statement. The witness was contacted and stated he did not remember so testifying, and that if he did so testify, he misspoke and what he meant to say was that the only pubic hair found on the person of the vie-tim was her own hair. The court reporter was then contacted; she verified from the audio tape of the trial that the transcript was correct. Subsequently, the parties stipulated it was a misstatement.
Appellant argues that this misstatement, which "verified direct contact between the pubic areas of the Decedent and Appellant," undoubtedly influenced the jury and led to his conviction. In support, he maintains that absent the misstatement, the State had only a weak circumstantial case against him, devoid of any direct physical evidence linking him to the crime. He claims that since the experienced counsel for appellee was misled by the misstatement, the jury must have been misled also.
However, the record reveals there was in fact other physical evidence to link appellant to the crime. State's Exhibit 37-A, a strand of hair adhering to a length of electrical wire found in appellant's car, was determined to be of common origin with hair samples taken from the victim. We further note that the misstatement was made as part of a very lengthy response to a single question, in essence listing the results of all of the witness' hair sample tests and to the effect that aside from the test on Exhibit 87-A, none of the tests yielded material results.
A trial court's denial of a motion for a new trial will be reversed only upon *475abuse of the trial court's discretion. Moredock v. State (1982), Ind., 441 N.E.2d 1372. Such an abuse must be shown by prejudice to the accused. Winker v. State (1977), 174 Ind.App. 258, 367 N.E.2d 26. In this instance, we agree with the trial court's finding that in light of its overwhelmingly contradictory context and the absence of any emphasis upon the misstated "fact," it likely failed to influence the jury and had no effect on the outcome of the trial.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in denying his motion for new trial based on newly-discovered evidence relating to blood type and secretor status. Due to refinements in laboratory testing procedures, it was discovered just before retrial that a Type O secretor semen stain found on the carpet beneath the victim was actually two stains, the second being from a non-secretor donor of unknown type. Subsequent to retrial it was determined that appellant was not a Type O secretor, but was instead a non-secretor. Appellant argues this new evidence is so exculpatory that it warrants a new trial.
To justify a new trial, newly-discovered evidence must, among other things, be likely to produce a different result upon retrial. Smith v. State (1982), Ind., 429 N.E.2d 956. In the case at bar, the jury was told that both appellant and the victim's husband were Type O secretors and that semen found in and beneath the victim was from a Type 0 secretor donor. Upon retrial, a new jury would be told that appellant was instead a Type O non-secretor and that the semen found beneath the victim came from two donors, one a Type O se-cretor, the other a non-secretor of unknown type. The trial court on remand decided this new evidence did not warrant a new trial because appellant was not ruled out as a possible donor of semen found on the carpet.
Appellant argues the trial court erred in concluding the non-secretor semen stain could have been deposited at the time of the murder. In support, he maintains that the reason the non-secretor semen was not detected when the carpet sample was first tested is because the non-secretor semen was already dried and not as fresh as the secretor semen and thus could not have been deposited when the victim was murdered.
The record, however, fails to bear out appellant on this point. Both expert witnesses testifying at the hearing on remand stated there was no method by which to compute the age of the semen stains, and neither was able to advance an opinion as to when either sample was deposited. We find no evidence in this record which rules out appellant as a potential donor. The newly-discovered serological. evidence would not, therefore, be likely to produce a different result upon retrial.
The denial on remand of appellant's motion for a new trial was not error.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in denying his motion to dismiss the charging information, which he contends subjected him to "double jeopardy" because it failed to specify whether he was charged with intentional murder or felony murder. Appellant argues that by failing to specify whether he was charged with felony murder with rape and robbery as the underlying felonies, or with intentional murder committed in the course of rape and robbery, the State prejudicially denied him due process of law by presenting the jury with alternative theories of the crime and thus two approaches toward conviction arising out of one set of operative facts.
The State correctly points out that the doctrine of merger prevents a defendant from being sentenced twice for certain offenses arising from the same set of facts. Appellant thus was never subjected to double jeopardy. Johnson v. State (1987), Ind., 510 N.E.2d 174, modified, 516 N.E.2d 1053. Appellant then states in his reply brief that he takes exception not to the State charging alternative theories of murder, but to the State's vagueness in not denoting either intentional or felony murder so as to enable him to prepare a defense. He argues that because he was "made to guess" whether to defend against murder or felony murder, the information *476"did in fact submit him to double jeopardy‘H
However, it is obvious that any felony murder defense asserting that appellant had not participated in the perpetration of a felony resulting in death would necessarily also defend against a charge of perpetrating an intentional killing arising from the same set of facts. For this reason, the information did not fail to sufficiently apprise appellant of the nature of the charges against him. Because appellant has failed to show any prejudice resulted from the information's alleged vagueness, the trial court did not err in denying his motion to dismiss. See Burris v. State (1984), Ind., 465 N.E.2d 171, cert. denied, 469 U.S. 1132, 105 S.Ct. 816, 83 L.Ed.2d 809.
Appellant contends Ind.Code § 35-50-2-9, the statutory authority by which he was sentenced to death, violates his Fourteenth Amendment right to equal protection in that it allows an intentional murderer to receive merely a prison sentence while a non-intentional felony murderer may receive a death sentence if the underlying felony is among those enumerated in the statute. Thus, he reasons, those persons convicted of certain felony murders may be sentenced to death not for the murder itself but rather for the underlying felony.
However, as pointed out by the State, Ind.Code § 35-50-2-9(b)(1) provides for the death penalty where "[the defendant committed the murder by intentionally killing the victim while committing [one of seven listed felonies, including rape and robbery]." Thus it is obvious that an "accidental" felony murderer must accumulate, aside from the underlying felony, at least one of the other nine aggravating circumstances set forth in § 9(b). Four of the nine involve killings that are premeditated, and the others involve the purposeful use of explosives, multiple homicides, prison inmates with at least twenty years remaining to serve, and duty-related killings of certain public officers.
As appellant was not convicted of felony murder but rather of murder, and his sentence moreover was not aggravated using any of the last four circumstances listed above, he lacks standing to raise this issue. Fleenor v. State (1987), Ind., 514 N.E.2d 80. As our prior cases have held, our death penalty statute does not deny equal protection of the law to felony murderers. Id.
Appellant contends our death penalty statute violates the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments because it imposes cruel and unusual punishment in some cases by failing to provide adequate guidelines for the sentencing authority so as to prevent an "accidental" felony murderer from receiving a death sentence. Our discussion above as well as our prior holdings dispose of this issue. Id.; Resnover v. State (1984), Ind., 460 N.E.2d 922, cert. denied, 469 U.S. 873, 105 S.Ct. 231, 83 L.Ed.2d 160.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in denying his motion to dismiss due to lack of probable cause for his arrest. Appellant's admissions to police made after requesting an attorney were held to be inadmissible by this Court under direct appeal from his first trial and conviction. Minnick, supra. We remanded for a new trial. We did not remand, however, for de movo charging proceedings; thus the trial court did not err in refusing to hold a probable cause hearing. Regarding the original probable cause finding, our cases hold that probable cause to arrest exists when at the time of the arrest the officer has knowledge of facts and cireumstances which would warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe the defendant had committed the crime in question. Funk v. State (1981), Ind., 427 N.E.2d 1081.
In the case at bar, appellant's admission to Sergeant Cline that the former had been in the victim's home the afternoon of the murder, made while Cline was securing the perimeter of the Payne home, verified that appellant and his car had in fact been in close proximity to the murder that afternoon and, combined with Cline's knowledge of appellant's propensity toward burglary, provided sufficient probable cause for appellant's arrest.
*477Appellant argues his motion to dismiss should have been granted for the additional reason that he was "restrained" from attending the probable cause hearing and because no probable cause was found to support the rape and robbery charges. However, he offers no authority nor cogent argument to support these assertions; hence they are waived. Ind.R.App.P. 8.3(A)(7); Smith v. State (1984), Ind., 465 N.E.2d 1105.
Appellant contends his motion to dismiss should have been granted because his initial hearing before a magistrate was held four hours beyond the twenty-four hour time limit set by Ind.Code § 18-1-11-8, in violation of his Fourth and Fifth Amendment rights. The remedy, however, for violation of the twenty-four hour limit is not, as appellant suggests, dismissal of charges; it is suppression of any statements made by the defendant found by the trial court to have resulted from the inherently coercive effective of prolonged detention. Richey v. State (1981), Ind., 426 N.E.2d 389. We note parenthetically that the legislature in 1981 revised the twenty-four hour limit into a requirement that the arrestee "be taken promptly before a judicial officer ... for his initial hearing in court." Ind.Code § 35-83-7-1. Unless appellant can affirmatively show the error was prejudicial to his substantial rights, he will not be entitled to a reversal of his conviction. Wagner v. State (1985), Ind., 474 N.E.2d 476. Appellant's confession made prior to his initial hearing was excluded at the instant trial. It thus is apparent the four-hour technical violation, absent any showing of prejudice, does not amount to reversible error.
Appellant contends the waiver of his rights obtained when he first was questioned by Sergeant Cline was procured perfunctorily and was not given intelligently, so that evidence obtained using a search warrant based upon remarks made by appellant subsequent to his waiver, yet prior to his request for counsel, should have been suppressed. Appellant claims he was told that signing the waiver was merely a formality and that he did not understand his Miranda rights.
However, Sergeant Cline testified appellant told him he was "well aware" of his rights and having just read them to appellant, Cline believed him. In reviewing the voluntariness of an inculpatory statement, we look only to whether the trial court's ruling was supported by substantial evidence of probative value. Smith v. State (1986), Ind., 491 N.E.2d 193. Here, Sergeant Cline's testimony adequately supports the trial court's admission of appellant's statement that he had been in the victim's home the afternoon of her murder; this custodial statement was thus properly used in obtaining a warrant to search appellant's car.
Even assuming for the sake of argument that appellant's remarks made at the police station were elicited illegally, Sergeant Cline testified appellant told him essentially the same things earlier, on the evening of the murder while Cline was posted outside the victim's home. When an independent source exists upon which to base a search, the coexistence of tainted "fruit" as an alternate basis does not preclude the admission of the results of the search. Nix v. Williams (1984), 467 U.S. 431, 104 S.Ct. 2501, 81 L.Ed.2d 377. Whether appellant's remarks at the police station were elicited voluntarily or otherwise, his comments outside the victim's house were volunteered, so that probable cause for the search warrant and for the arrest were properly found to exist.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in admitting over his objection State's Exhibit No. 29, the Miranda rights and waiver form signed by appellant. Our discussion above disposes of appellant's repetitive assertion that his waiver was not given knowingly and intelligently. Moreover, he fails to show that any prejudice resulted from the admission of the rights and waiver form itself. A trial court's decision whether to admit evidence will not be reversed absent a showing of manifest abuse of the trial court's discretion resulting in denial of a fair trial. Jackson v. State (1986), Ind., 490 N.E.2d 1115. Thus in the *478instant case, even if admission of the waiver form were error, it would not be reversible error.
In appellant's car were found a length of electric cord matching some cord found at the murder scene, a strand of hair adhering to the cord matching the victim's hair, and a black shaving bag containing coins. Appellant argues that discrepancies between the lengths of the hair and the wire and the mildewy odor of the shaving bag as described on the search warrant return, and as described at trial by witriess-es, renders their admission erroneous. As these items were positively identified at trial as having been found in appellant's car, such discrepancies as alleged by appellant go only to their evidentiary weight and not to their admissibility. See Kappos v. State (1984), Ind., 465 N.E.2d 1092. The evidence was properly admitted.
Appellant contends the trial court committed fundamental error when it allowed jurors to communicate with members of their families after issuing a sequestration order. At that time, the trial court announced that visitation of the jurors by members of their immediate families would be allowed.
The State contends this "error" was waived by appellant, who voiced no objection until his motion to correct error. Counsel for appellant, of course, could have objected during the pretrial conference or in chambers during the trial while the "error" could still have been remedied. Appellant now argues that because his sequestration motion was "granted as filed," any "violation" of it amounts to fundamental error.
However, appellant's counsel's affidavit pertaining to the matters dealt with at the pretrial conference tends to show his motion was granted as modified by the trial court, making allowance for family visitation of the sequestered jurors. It thus was not a "violation" of the sequestration order to allow the visitations. Moreover, we have held that any error in failing to enforce jury sequestration is waived by failure to object contemporaneously. Smith v. State (1985), Ind., 475 N.E.2d 1139. Thus any error resulting from the less-than-total sequestration of the jury, if error at all, was clearly not fundamental error and was waived by appellant's silence before and during the trial.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in admitting, allegedly over his objection, three photographs taken of the victim during life. State's Exhibit No. 18 is a wedding picture; No. 19 depicts the victim opening bridal shower gifts; and No. 20 portrays the victim and her husband standing before a covered bridge at Cataract Falls.
Appellant argues the photographs were irrelevant to any material issue and were introduced merely to inflame the jury with their "sympathetic settings" thereby violating his due process right to a fair trial. However, as pointed out by the State, the victim's time of death was at issue as it related to appellant's alibi defense. The exhibits were used for identification by witnesses who had observed the victim's movements and whereabouts on the day of her murder. Thus utilized, they were instrumental in completing the picture of the events surrounding the offense in question. A trial judge has great latitude in admitting evidence when the issue of its relevance is raised. Patterson v. State (1975), 263 Ind. 55, 324 N.E.2d 482. Here the questioned evidence was repetitious of facts already in evidence, viz, the victim's marital status and her identity. The pictures were not unusual. Id. We see no reversible error in their admission.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in refusing to allow appellant and his girl friend, Charlene Jones, to testify regarding the "ill will"" of Sergeant Cline which resulted in appellant becoming the sole target of the murder investigation. The record reveals that after hearing an offer of proof and argument by both sides, the trial court ruled the proffered testimony would be more confusing than clarifying as to any material facts at issue and excluded it.
Whether an arresting officer harbors a personal dislike for a criminal defendant *479has no bearing upon whether that defendant committed the acts charged. Thus not tending to make any alleged material fact more or less probable, evidence of Sergeant Cline's hostility would be irrelevant and inadmissible. See, e.g., Engle v. State (1987), Ind., 506 N.E.2d 3. The trial court did not err in refusing testimony concerning Sergeant Cline's ill will.
Appellant contends the State's exhibits, numbering around fifty, were improperly admitted due to defects in the chain of custody. He objects to the chain only in regard to an alleged lack of proof of custody of the exhibits from the time his first trial ended in the Clay Circuit Court until they were obtained from there three years later for their admission at the instant trial in the Lawrence Circuit Court.
Appellant argues the State should have provided testimony by a Clay Circuit Court official, "even the Judge," to establish by what means the exhibits had remained secure from tampering. He specifically notes the wire found in his car was listed as being twelve inches long on the search warrant return, thirty-six inches long in the first trial record, and measured thirty-two inches long at the instant trial.
As the State points out, the officer who made out the return merely estimated the length of the coil of wire so as not to disturb it. And the roughly ten percent variance in described length between the two trials falls far short of conclusive proof of tampering.
To establish a proper chain of custody, the State need only present evidence which strongly suggests the whereabouts of the evidence at all times since coming into police possession. The State need not exclude all possibility of tampering but must provide some reasonable assurance the evidence remained in undisturbed condition. An argument merely raising the possibility of tampering will not support exclusion of the evidence. Gardner v. State (1987), Ind., 514 N.E.2d 1261.
In the case at bar, testimony showed the exhibits were received from the Clay Circuit Court evidence vault. Moreover, each exhibit still bore the numbered marking tag from the first trial. The chain of custody of the State's exhibits was sufficiently demonstrated such that their admission was not error.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in denying his motion for mistrial made when State's witness Norman Varvel testified he had turned over an exhibit to the Clay Circuit Court, "thereby advising the jury of a former trial" in violation of a pretrial agreement, of Ind.Code § 35-1-42-1 (repealed in 1977) and of our case law. He also argues that letting the jury know the victim's date of death, which was nearly four years prior to the instant trial, advised them of a prior trial.
However, how the witness actually testified, in response to questions directed towards an exhibit's chain of custody, is as follows:
"[Prosecutor] Q. Alright, and was that bottle then turned over to a Court from that period on?
A. Yes, it was."
This testimony on its face fails to convey the fact of a prior trial. The "Court" mentioned might well have referred to the instant trial court safeguarding the evidence after a suppression hearing. It clearly fails to have subjected appellant to a position of grave peril such as would mandate a mistrial. See Pillow v. State (1985), Ind., 479 N.E.2d 1301.
Appellant's argument that it required him subsequently to refer to the prior trial, ie., while reading from the prior trial record to impeach State's witnesses by means of inconsistencies between their current testimony and "prior testimony under oath," which might have meant "depositions," is similarly without merit. The trial court did not err in denying the motion for mistrial.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in admitting into evidence over his objection State's Exhibits No. 22, a search warrant; No. 28, a black shaving bag; No. 26, a Jim Beam bottle; No. 27, a receipt for money found in the bottle; and No. 87, the wire found in appellant's car. He cites *480Clark v. State (1978), 177 Ind. App. 376, 379 N.E.2d 987 for the impropriety of introducing a search warrant into evidence along with the items seized.
However, Clark and Brandon v. State (1979), 272 Ind. 92, 396 N.E.2d 365 stand primarily for the proposition that it is not necessary to introduce a search warrant as a foundation for seized evidence; no ineurable prejudice is presumed from a warrant's admission into evidence. As appellant mentions, the warrant exhibit was not passed to the jury. His assertion that he was prejudiced to an extent requiring reversal by "the mere fact that [the jury] heard the judge allow it into evidence" is patently untenable. Moreover, appellant failed to make this or any other specific objection to the search warrant's admission at trial. He thus failed to preserve it as error. Bedgood v. State (1985), Ind., 477 N.E.2d 869. The search warrant's admission was not reversible error.
Appellant argues the bag, bottle, and receipt for change were erroneously admitted because no connection was shown between the items and either appellant or the instant crimes. The victim's husband testified that a cider jug containing change was missing after the murder, but he could not recall the last time he had seen it in his home. An acquaintance of appellant, Mark Secrest, testified he had been paid approximately $50 appellant owed him on a car purchase. The $50 paid by appellant was in change contained in a black shaving bag along with broken pieces of clear glass.
We have repeatedly held that a conviection may be supported by circumstantial evidence alone. Hill v. State (1988), Ind., 517 N.E.2d 784. Appellant has failed to demonstrate any reversible error in the admission of State's Exhibits Nos. 22, 28, 26, 27 or 37.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in overruling his oral motion in limine to exclude any evidence of or reference to the alleged anal penetration of the victim. At appellant's first trial, he was granted a directed verdict of acquittal on a charge of Criminal Deviate Conduct. He objected at the instant trial to testimony by pathologist Dr. John Pless concerning trauma to the victim's anus. He argues such testimony subjected him to double jeopardy because the prior deviate conduct charge had been resolved in his favor.
However, appellant misconstrues the concept of double jeopardy as prohibited by the Fifth Amendment. He argues allowing Dr. Pless's testimony was "to allow evidence on which appellant ha[d] been found not guilty." He was not charged with criminal deviate conduct in the instant trial.
Appellant also argues the testimony of anal penetration violated his due process right to a fair trial because it was irrelevant to the instant charge of rape, yet was highly prejudicial. The record of the first trial reveals the directed verdict was granted as to the criminal deviate conduct charge because Dr. Pless was not able to conclude the anal penetration was perpetrated while the victim was still alive.
The autopsy results remain as evidence of occurrences comprising the res gestae of the crime at bar. Such evidence of happenings near in time and place which complete the story of the crime are admissible even if tending to establish the commission of other crimes not included among those being prosecuted. Taylor v. State (1986), Ind., 496 N.E.2d 561. It thus was not error to admit Dr. Pless's testimony regarding anal penetration of the victim.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in admitting over his objection the testimony of Jo Anne Hayes, a Clay County Jail dispatcher who over a monitor heard appellant say to another inmate, "and then Martha said .. No, Billy don't .. please don't." Appellant argues that a videotape recorded by the jail's monitoring system would be the best evidence of what the witness heard and thus her live testimony should have been excluded. He concedes our cases have applied the best evidence rule only to the content of writings, i.e., where the content of a writing is in dispute; yet he argues we should, "in the interests of justice review the circumstances present to determine whether this witness's *481memory, or even integrity, warrants her testimony."
However, we will not judge credibility on review; to do so would be to invade the province of the jury. Maynard v. State (1987), Ind., 513 N.E.2d 641. The trial court did not err in ruling the witness herself was the best evidence of what she had heard and seen.
Appellant also maintains that his remarks made while incarcerated were not part of the res gestae of the crime and thus are inadmissible, presumably because as related by witness Hayes they constitute hearsay. As the State asserts, appellant's remarks fall into the category of admissions against interest. When a criminal defendant makes a statement against interest it is admissible. Washburn v. State (1986), Ind., 499 N.E.2d 264.
The trial court did not err in admitting the testimony of Jo Anne Hayes regarding appellant's admissions overheard in the Clay County Jail.
Appellant contends there is insufficient evidence to uphold his convictions of rape, robbery, and murder. To support his claim, he discusses discrepancies between various witnesses' testimony and between his first and second trials. This Court will neither reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of the witnesses. Jones v. State (1988), Ind., 518 N.E.2d 479. Having found above that various evidence was properly admitted, we now find there is sufficient evidence to support the jury's verdict.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in failing "to properly weigh the aggravating and mitigating circumstances, and further failed to ... take into consideration the pre-sentence report" in arriving at a sentence of death. He first argues the trial court "did not in fact consider the jury's recommendation to not impose the death penalty." His counsel has submitted an affidavit alleging he was informed by the trial prosecutor and several jurors that after delivering their sentencing recommendation the jurors were released to the jury room. While there, they were informed by the prosecutor of appellant's suppressed confession, his first trial, and the resulting death sentence, whereupon some of the jurors remarked, in the presence of the trial judge, that had they known of the confession they too would have recommended a death sentence.
Appellant argues the trial court "could not have helped to be prejudiced by these remarks of both the prosecutor and the jurors" and offers as proof of such prejudice the fact the death sentence did not follow the jury's recommendation. We presume to the contrary that the trial court based its sentence upon those considerations stated upon the record. See Stoner v. State (1982), Ind., 442 N.E.2d 983. In the case at bar, they are as follows:
"[Mr. Nasser, appellant's trial counsel, asks the court whether it was taking the suppressed confession into consideration.]
THE COURT: I would not take the confession into consideration at this time. I excluded it. If I were going to consider it I would have admitted it.
MR. NASSER: Fine. Thank you.
THE COURT: The record should show then that the court, as required by statute, has considered the jury's recommendation. The law requires me to find the aggravating and mitigating circumstance es and at this time I order those findings made a written part of the record. Pursuant to Indiana Code 85-50-2-9 I find that beyond a reasonable doubt, based on the evidence presented at the trial, that William A. Minnick murdered Martha Payne while committing rape and robbery. I specifically find as aggravating circumstances that the decedent was in her own home where she had every right to be secure from William Minnick. I further find as an aggravating circumstance that the crime mutilated her body and defiled her even after death, that the crime was the kind of horrendous crime that the legislature anticipated when it listed rape or robbery as aggravating circumstances. Therefore, I specifically find that the cireumstances of the crime, the violence of the attempted electrocution, the strangling, and the knifing are those kinds of aggravating cireumstance-*482es. I also find as aggravating circumstance[s] the rape and the after death violation of Martha Payne's body. [The trial court then states it has looked for mitigating circumstances from the statutory list and any others appropriate for consideration, and finds none except appellant's youthful age, ie., eighteen years old.] ... I find that the aggravating circumstances overwhelmingly outweigh the mitigating cireumstances. ..."
In Martinez Chavez v. State (1989), Ind., 534 N.E.2d 731, reh 'g denied, 539 N.E.2d 4, we articulated our standard of review in cases where the trial court imposes a death sentence notwithstanding the jury's recommendation to the contrary. In order to override the jury's life recommendation, "the facts justifying a death sentence should be so clear and convincing that virtually no reasonable person could disagree that death was appropriate in light of the offender and his crime." Id. at 785. We then vacated the trial court's override of the jury's life recommendation in light of the facts showing Chavez to be markedly less culpable than his codefendant Rondon, for whom the jury had recommended a sentence of death.
In the instant case, however, the evidence at trial revealed that appellant shares his culpability with no one. He alone bears criminal responsibility for this singularly brutal homicide in the course of which the victim was raped, sodomized, stabbed, bludgeoned, strangled, and electrocuted. In light of these cireumstances, it seems fair to state that no reasonable person would find a death sentence inappropriate here.
Neither the speculative effect of the jurors' remarks nor the fact of having imposed the death penalty over the jury's recommendation leads us to conclude the trial court improperly failed to consider the jury's recommendation.
Appellant next argues the trial court improperly considered statutory aggravating factors from sections other than Ind.Code § 85-50-2-9(b). He claims using factors from Ind.Code § 35-4.1-4-7 (recodi-fied 1983 as Ind.Code § 35-88-1-7), the section listing factors to consider in determining the length of felony sentences, was error. He is incorrect in this regard. We have previously held that as long as at least one of the aggravating cireumstances from the death penalty statute is proven and set forth in the sentencing statement, a trial court may find the existence of other statutory aggravators and consider them in regard to capital sentencing. Davis v. State (1985), Ind., 477 N.E.2d 889, cert. denied, 474 U.S. 1014, 106 S.Ct. 546, 88 L.Ed.2d 475. The trial court did not consider improper aggravating factors in rendering a sentence of death.
Appellant argues the trial court failed to "verify" that she had considered the presentence report by mentioning it during sentencing, and since a presentence investigation report is mandated by Ind. Code § 85-88-1-12, he thus was sentenced to death illegally. His argument is without merit. The record discloses the probation officer who prepared the report testified at the sentencing hearing and was cross-examined by appellant. Appellant clearly had ample opportunity to refute any part of the report he found to be misleading or inaceu-rate, yet no exception to the report was taken during the hearing. Appellant himself testified at the hearing and thus had opportunity to voice any mitigating factors not included in the report.
Finally, appellant fails to specify that anything contained in the report was overlooked or ignored by the trial court, or that he was prejudiced thereby. The requirements of Ind.Code § 85-38-1-12, which states a defendant must be advised of the results of his presentence investigation, thus were met. The trial court's failure to explicitly refer to the presentence report in her sentencing statement was not error.
The trial court did not err in the process of reaching and rendering a sentence of death.
The trial court is affirmed.
SHEPARD, C.J. and PIVARNIK, Jl, concur.
*483DeBRULER, J., concurs and dissents with separate opinion in which DICKSON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739487 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:06.394563+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
concurring and dissenting.
Appellant contends that it was impermissible for the trial court to consider as aggravating factors anything other than the statutory aggravating circumstances set out in 1.C. 85-50-2-9(b), being nine in number at the time of this killing in 1981. Appellant argues that the trial court was in error in applying the standard sentencing procedure's list of aggravating cireum-stances for enhancing terms of years set forth in I.C. 85-88-1-7, the criteria for sentencing. The attorney general argues that the case of Davis v. State (1985), Ind., 477 N.E.2d 889, holds that once the trial court finds that one of the specific aggravating cireumstances enumerated in the death sentence statute has been proved, it may then go on and give additional weight to other rational aggravating cireumstanc-es which are proved and which would be cognizable under I.C. 85-38-1-7, the general felony sentencing process, but which are not found in I.C. 35-50-2-9(b), the death sentence statute. I do not agree that Davis holds this. It does instead hold that once the judge is satisfied that one aggravating cireumstance set out in the death statute is pleaded and proved, the court may also give weight to other aggravating circumstances from that same statute which are proved but not charged. Since Judge Chezem gave weight to aggravating circumstances not specified in the death statute when comparing the weight of the mitigating side of the ledger to that of the aggravators, her decision cannot stand. Indiana's statutory system for giving death requires the sentencer to balance the weight of aggravating circumstances enumerated in the death statute against any mitigating circumstances. This is our death sentence procedure and it does not permit the sentencer to consider aggravating circumstances other than those enumerated in the death sentence statute when engaged in the weighing process.
In the foregoing respect, the Indiana statute is unlike the statutes in some other states, where the statutory aggravating cireumstances, once proved, provide an open door to a final and basically unfettered discretionary death decision. See Zant v. Stephens, 462 U.S. 862, 103 S.Ct. 2733, 77 L.Ed.2d 235 (1983). In our stat ute, by contrast, the enumerated aggravating cireumstances do not merely play a role in the "definition stage" by narrowing the class of defendants to which the death penalty may properly be given, but they also play a role in the "selection process" by providing weight upon which the death penalty in the individual case must rest, which weight can be offset only by the weight of mitigating circumstances.
The construction of the death statute put forth by appellant is further supported by the language of LC. 85-50-2-9(d). There it is provided that the jury at the sentencing hearing may consider the evidence at trial and that the defendant may present additional evidence concerning "the aggravating circumstances alleged." The word "alleged" here shows that the search at the sentencing hearing is limited by the allegations set forth in the State's charge, which is itself limited to the statutory list of aggravators, and therefore is not open to other menus of aggravating circumstances found, for example, in the general criteria for felony sentencing, 1.C. 35-88-1-7.
The court's findings at sentencing also were that the court was satisfied that appellant did murder the victim. The term "murder" includes both an intentional killing and a knowing killing. Death is appropriate only if the killing is intentional and the aggravating circumstance is the confluence of an enumerated felony with the intentional killing. 1.C. 35-50-2-9(b)(1). One might infer that the trial court used the term "murder" to mean an intentional killing; however, I cannot vote to permit the death sentence to be carried out without an express clarification because the finding of an intentional killing is necessary.
Appellant also contends that the evidence of robbery was insufficient. I agree. *484Shortly after the crime, appellant was in possession of a lot of change which was in a musty-smelling shaving kit. There was also some broken glass among the coins. The victim's husband testified that he and the victim kept a lot of change in a glass jug in the house and that the jug was there on September 20, 1981, when he travelled to California to do a job. He took no note of the jug again until he noticed that it was missing after the crime, which occurred on October 26, 1981. Between those two dates, the victim was present in the house for substantial periods of time. The victim's billfold was examined at the scene and found to be empty. From this evidence, a rational trier of fact could not conclude to a certainty beyond a reasonable doubt that appellant took the money he had from the presence of victim. The musty bag in which appellant had the coins was not connected to the crime. None of appellant's incriminating admissions contained references to money or a robbery. The broken glass in the bag would tend to support an inference that a glass container holding the coins was broken; however, the evidence as a whole supporting the verdict and the finding of the trial judge, that appellant did rob the victim, is insufficient. On this basis, I would reverse the robbery conviction and also set aside the death sentence.
Following our preliminary remand, it has become clear that the corpus delicti for rape is no longer present. It is no longer to be found as previously thought in inferences from the general violence to the person of the victim together with the presence of hair like appellant's on the victim's pubic region and the presence of secretions like appellant's in the victim's vagina. Now that we know that these last two items must be disregarded as a matter of law, the corpus delicti must be found, if at all, in the remaining evidence material on the point, namely, the general violence done to the person of the victim, and some material from a non-secretor of unknown blood type, deposited there at some unknown time, and in the same location on the rug as some other like material from a blood-type O secretor. The victim's husband was a blood-type O secretor, appellant was a blood-type O non-secretor. Surely this residual of lawful evidence is insufficient to warrant any rational inference that the victim suffered unlawful carnal knowledge at the occasion of her murder. The sole remaining evidence of guilt is the statement of appellant, attributed to him by his girlfriend, who was motivated to testify and repeat the statement out of a desire to save him from the electric chair, which statement was that it was "Ace" who had killed the woman, but that he, the appellant, did rape her.
The evidence of the rape is simply insufficient after excision of the statement of the officer that the hair from the victim's pubic region was similar to appellant's and the statement of Dr. Pless that secretions in the victim's vagina were like those of appellant. In my view, the trial court was in error on remand and should have granted the motion for new trial, set aside the conviction for rape and ordered the defendant discharged on that offense. I would therefore reverse the decision of the trial court, order the convictions for rape and robbery vacated and the death sentence set aside, and require a term of years for the crime of murder to be imposed.
DICKSON, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739488 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:06.672056+00 ===

JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH delivered the opinion of the court: After a jury trial, defendant, Larry Dean Mays, was found guilty of unlawful delivery of a controlled substance (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 56½, par. 1401(c)) in Jefferson County and was sentenced to 12 years’ imprisonment. Defendant appeals his conviction. In this cause, defendant raises the following issues: (1) whether the trial court erred in allowing into evidence the tapes of the alleged drug transaction between defendant and Larry Wade, (2) whether the trial court erred by refusing to allow defendant to present witnesses who would testify to Wade’s mental health and by not requiring witness Wade to reveal his street address, (3) whether the trial judge’s conduct during the trial indicated hostility toward defendant’s case to so prejudice defendant as to require defendant’s conviction be reversed and remanded for a new trial, and (4) whether the trial court abused its discretion in sentencing defendant to an extended-term sentence of 12 years. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand for a new trial. During the late afternoon of October 21, 1986, an eavesdrop was conducted of an alleged drug transaction in Mt. Vernon. Agents with the Illinois Department of Criminal Investigation (DCI) and an agent from the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) met with Larry Wade, an informant for both agencies, to prepare Wade for a prearranged purchase of cocaine from defendant. Prior to the drug purchase, Wade was strip-searched by agents who recovered a $50 bill and 13 cents in change. Wade was then fitted with a recording device and given $350 to make the purchase. Wade and four agents went in a van to an area near defendant’s mother’s house where the transaction was to take place. Wade was dropped off a few blocks from the residence and walked the rest of the way to the house. He proceeded to the residence and returned to the agents with a clear plastic bag containing 3.58 grams of a white powdery substance later determined to be cocaine. The transaction was recorded on audio tape. Grand jury proceedings concerning this drug transaction were conducted on May 20, 1987. DCI Agent Bill Stanhouse testified before the grand jury that Wade had informed him he had arranged for the purchase of cocaine from defendant. Agent Stanhouse testified that he then informed DEA about the purchase, as DEA was simultaneously conducting an investigation of the sale of “black tar” heroin in the Mt. Vernon area. Defendant was indicted by the grand jury on June 11, 1987, for unlawful delivery of a controlled substance. He filed a motion to suppress the recording of the drug ! transaction. At the hearing on this motion, DEA Agent Herman Hogue testified that there had been an ongoing Federal investigation into the sale of “black tar” heroin in Mt. Vernon. Larry Wade had mentioned to Agent Hogue that defendant was an associate of John “Corky” Moore, who was the target of a Federal investigation. Based on this information and verbal consent by Wade, Agent Hogue obtained Federal authorization to eavesdrop on defendant during the cocaine transaction. The motion to suppress was denied. At trial, Special Agent Stanhouse testified that he had used Larry Wade as a confidential informant from September 2, 1986, through March 1987. DCI had paid Wade $1,075 for the information Wade supplied to the Department. Wade was paid $60 for the information obtained on defendant. Wade had called Stanhouse and told him that he had set up a one-eighth ounce of cocaine buy in the Mt. Vernon area. At 3:15 p.m. on October 21, 1986, defendant met with Agents Stanhouse, Spain, Parker, and Sergeant Townsend of DCI, along with Agent Hogue, in an area outside Mt. Vernon. Sergeant Townsend did the actual hookup of Wade to the recording device. Agent Stanhouse drove the van. Special Agent Spain rode in back with Larry Wade, and Sergeant Townsend rode in front. Hogue and Parker traveled singularly in their respective vehicles. The van stopped at 17th and Perkins at approximately 3:45 p.m., and Wade then started walking toward defendant’s residence. Wade arrived at defendant’s home at 3:53 p.m. Agents were monitoring Wade on the equipment in the van. Wade left defendant’s home at approximately 3:57 p.m. Stanhouse observed him walking at 3:58 p.m. At approximately 4 p.m., the agents met with defendant back at 17th Street and Perkins. Wade entered the back of the van and gave Agent Spain a clear plastic bag with a white powdery substance inside. Spain then gave the plastic bag to Stanhouse. Other agents related basically the same facts. Larry Wade testified about the alleged drug buy. He also stated that he had been convicted of shoplifting, a Federal weapons offense that had resulted in an 18-month penitentiary sentence, and theft. Wade admitted that he had used drugs, but denied that he was an addict. He further testified that on April 18, 1986, he had checked himself into a detoxification center. On cross-examination, defendant asked, “Where are you living now, Mr. Wade?” The prosecution’s objection was sustained on grounds of relevancy. Wade was also asked by defense attorney if he had attempted suicide while in the Jefferson County jail in May 1986. Wade explained that he did hang himself by the neck with a towel tied around the bars, but that his cellmate, Leroy Hooker, had been standing there holding his feet. Wade explained that he had “faked” this suicide attempt in order to get to see a judge. He also explained that Leroy Hooker had been enlisted by Wade to help him stage this attempt. Defendant called as his first witness Leroy Hooker, Jr. Before Hooker began his testimony, and before any objection by the State, the trial judge stopped the trial, summoned counsel into chambers and asked defense attorney why Hooker had been called to testify. Defense counsel explained that Hooker would testify that Wade’s suicide attempt was in fact real, which would be used to impeach Larry Wade on the issue of credibility and which would go to Wade’s mental capacity. Defense counsel was allowed to begin questioning Hooker. The prosecution objected and the jury was then recessed. The State argued that questioning Hooker about the suicide attempt was impermissible impeachment on a collateral issue. The State further argued that no single act was admissible to prove Wade was incompetent because of a mental defect. The trial judge agreed that the suicide attempt was a collateral issue. While Hooker could testify as to Wade’s mental condition, Hooker’s opinion could not be based on one act. Defense counsel was allowed to make an offer of proof on the suicide attempt. Hooker testified that on May 9, 1986, he found Larry Wade hanging from the cell bars with his neck tied in a towel or sheet. Wade’s feet were not touching the ground. Hooker then lifted Wade to take the weight off Wade’s neck, lowered Wade to the ground, and performed mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. He also noted that Wade was “foaming at the mouth” when he found him. Hooker denied helping Wade “stage” the suicide attempt. On cross-examination, Hooker noted that he had known Wade since 1984 and he had always known Wade “wasn’t wrapped tight, that he had some problems.” During the five days he spent with Wade in jail in May 1986, he found Wade to be “in a state of depression, paranoia, fearful.” The stipulated testimony of the jailer, George Buretz, was short and to the effect that Wade’s suicide attempt was genuine. This testimony was also excluded on the basis that the suicide attempt was a collateral issue, and while it could be used to prove mental defect, the suicide attempt alone was not enough to do so. During closing arguments, defense counsel was explaining why he was angry during cross-examination of Larry Wade. In so explaining, he stated, “I believe that — .” The prosecution objected as to what counsel believed, and the objection was sustained. The jury found defendant guilty of unlawful delivery of a controlled substance. Defendant filed a post-trial motion on October 1, 1987. On November 6, 1987, a hearing was held on defendant’s post-trial motion. At the hearing, defense counsel testified that the trial judge threw down his pencil, made facial gestures, and heaved a sigh in response to a question posed by defense counsel to Larry Wade during cross-examination. Defense counsel stated that he observed at least six jurors make an obvious response to what the judge did. He stated that he did not object at the time for fear of aggravating the situation. He could not remember the specific question which elicited such a response by the trial judge. The prosecutor testified that during cross-examination of Larry Wade, his attention was focused on Mr. Wade. He testified that he could not say for sure that the court did or did not do the things that the defense attorney alleged. He heard nothing and saw no reaction among the jurors. Judge Krause did not remember making the gestures described by defense attorney. He stated that he would rule on the motion at the sentencing hearing. At the sentencing hearing on November 9, 1987, the court reporter at trial was called as a witness to supplement defendant’s post-trial motion. She testified that during cross-examination of Larry Wade, after defense attorney had asked a question, Judge Krause slammed down a pencil or pen on the bench. She remembered being startled because she was concentrating on taking down the “intense cross-examination” that was underway. She could not tell if the jury reacted to this incident because her back was to the jury. Judge Krause denied defendant’s post-trial motion and sentenced defendant to an extended term of 12 years. Defendant’s first issue on appeal is whether the trial court erred in refusing to suppress the tapes of the alleged drug transaction between defendant and Larry Wade. Defendant argues that the tapes should have been suppressed because State and Federal law enforcement officials acted to circumvent the Illinois eavesdropping statute (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 14 — 1 et seq.), which is more stringent than the Federal eavesdropping statute (18 U.S.C. §2511(2)(c) (1982)). Defendant maintains that even though DCI and DEA carried out the taping in concert, their cooperation amounted to collusion, thereby making the tape inadmissible. We disagree.  The Illinois eavesdropping statute prohibits the use of an eavesdropping device to record all or part of any conversation unless all parties to the conversation consent or unless one party consents and prior judicial authorization is obtained in accordance with statutory directives. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 14 — 2.) The Federal eavesdropping statute is less stringent. An eavesdrop may be obtained by a person acting under color of law where that person is a party to the communication, or if one party has given prior consent to the eavesdrop. (18 U.S.C. §2511(2)(c) (1982).) Where evidence is obtained by Federal law enforcement officials under authority of a Federal search warrant obtained as the result of electronic eavesdropping which conforms to Federal constitutional and statutory requirements, the evidence is admissible, notwithstanding the failure to comply with the Illinois eavesdropping statute. (People v. Fidler (1979), 72 Ill. App. 3d 924, 391 N.E.2d 210.) Even when Federal and State agents are engaged in a joint investigatory enterprise, noncompliance with the Illinois eavesdropping statute does not require suppression of electronically obtained evidence so long as Federal directives are followed and there is not collusion among the authorities to evade State law. People v. Winchell (1986), 140 Ill. App. 3d 244, 488 N.E.2d 620; People v. Manna (1981), 96 Ill. App. 3d 506, 421 N.E.2d 542.  The eavesdropping in the instant case was carried out by both State and Federal agents who complied with Federal law, but ignored Illinois directives. DEA was conducting an ongoing investigation in Jefferson County of “black tar” heroin. Defendant argues that the testimony of State and Federal officials involved in the eavesdrop presented differing bases for the obtaining of Federal eavesdropping authorization. We find no discrepancies which would warrant a finding of collusion between the agencies. The fact that cocaine was the drug purchased rather than “black tar” heroin is not relevant. The basis on which Federal authorization was obtained was the fact that defendant was an associate of John “Corky” Moore, who was a target of the “black tar” heroin investigation. This information was received from Larry Wade, an obviously reliable informant who had been paid at least $1,375 for information he supplied to both DEA and DCI. Larry Wade had already put into motion a drug buy of an eighth ounce of cocaine with defendant. We can find no evidence in the record that leads to the conclusion that there was collusion between Federal and State agents to circumvent Illinois requirements for eavesdropping. The eavesdropping was conducted in compliance with Federal law in an ongoing Federal/State investigation. Therefore, it was not error for the trial court to refuse to suppress the tapes. Defendant’s next issue on appeal is whether the trial court erred by denying defendant’s request to attempt to impeach Larry Wade by refusing to allow defendant to present witnesses who would testify about a prior suicide attempt by Wade. Defendant argues that Wade’s suicide attempt was in fact genuine. A suicide attempt is indicative of an irrational mind, and such an outward manifestation of a witness’ mental condition is a valid area of inquiry for purposes of discounting the credibility of a witness. The State replies that the trial court properly denied defendant’s request to present witnesses who would testify as to Wade’s suicide attempt, as that testimony would constitute impeachment on a collateral issue.  In the instant case, Larry Wade was asked on direct examination about an incident in May 1986, at the Jefferson County jail where he was found hanging with a towel around his neck. Wade had been in jail for approximately five days and had not yet seen a judge. According to Wade, this incident was a “stunt,” not a real suicide attempt. He hoped that his faked attempt at suicide would lead him to seeing a judge. Defendant attempted to introduce the testimony of Leroy Hooker, Jr., Wade’s cellmate at the time of the incident, and George Buretz, a guard at the jail, to impeach Larry Wade’s testimony. The trial judge sustained the State’s objection to the admissibility of this testimony, finding that Hooker’s opinion of Wade’s mental state was based on the observation of the suicide attempt alone and found this to be a collateral issue. However, after review of the offer of proof testimony of Leroy Hooker, Jr., we find that Hooker’s observations were not based on the suicide attempt alone. Hooker testified that he had known Wade since 1984. He stated that he had always known Wade was a “strange guy” and that he “wasn’t wrapped tight. That he had some problems.” As to the suicide attempt, Hooker testified that he found Wade hanging by his neck from the bars of his cell with his feet off the floor. Hooker administered mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. Buretz’s stipulation would have corroborated Hooker’s testimony that the hanging incident was a genuine suicide attempt. Given the fact that the State’s case hinged on Wade’s testimony, we find that the trial court abused its discretion in not allowing the jury to hear Hooker’s or Buretz’s testimony. Buretz’s testimony corroborated a sufficient part of Hooker’s testimony and should have been allowed. The State points out that this suicide attempt occurred over five months prior to the drug transaction in question, arguing that it is therefore too remote in time and thus collateral as to mental state. However, the testimony of Hooker and Buretz in conjunction with Wade’s prior convictions, drug usage, and informant status severely damaged Wade’s credibility. Further, Wade’s own admission that this was a staged event to get him before a judge drastically undermined his credibility. Anyone who would perform such an act could have the capacity to lie under oath. The jury should have been allowed to hear all this testimony to decide what weight should have been given to Wade’s testimony. For this reason alone, the cause needs to be reversed and remanded for a new trial. Given the importance of this testimony to the issue of credibility, we need not reach the issue of impeachment as to Wade’s mental condition. We move next to the issue whether defendant was denied his right to confront Larry Wade because during cross-examination Wade was not required to disclose where he lived. Defendant argues learning Wade’s address would aid in leading defendant to other areas of questioning that would present a more complete picture of Wade, especially his questionable credibility. The State responds that this issue has been waived because defense counsel withdrew the question and did not raise this as an issue in his post-trial motion. We agree.  The court ruled that the witness, Larry Wade, did not have to reveal his street address when asked to do so by defense counsel. The trial court found that Wade’s revelation that he was living in the Mt. Vernon area was sufficient. Defense counsel chose to withdraw the question rather than attempt to prove its relevance to defendant’s case outside the presence of the jury. As pointed out by the State, the issue of Wade’s address was not raised in any of defendant’s post-trial motions. In order to preserve an issue for appellate review, it must be raised in a written post-trial motion. (People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 176, 522 N.E.2d 1124.) In the instant case, there is no issue left for appeal, as defense counsel withdrew the question. Even if the issue had not been waived, we cannot say that it was prejudicial error to sustain the State’s objection. While it is generally accepted that a defendant has a right to ask a witness where he resides in order to identify him with his environment (Smith v. Illinois (1968), 390 U.S. 129, 131, 19 L. Ed. 2d 956, 959, 88 S. Ct. 748, 750), if a witness’ life would be endangered due to the revelation of his address, the witness need not disclose that information. United States v. Palermo (7th Cir. 1969), 410 F.2d 468, 472; United States v. Varelli (7th Cir. 1969), 407 F.2d 735, 750. The fact that Wade was a paid informant to both DEA and DCI unquestionably made him a target for those involved in illicit activities. This was dramatized during the trial when the proceedings had to be stopped in order to look for a court spectator who was observed “making gestures by curling his — extending his index finger and curling his other fingers around in the shape of a gun and moving his thumb as a trigger hammer in the direction of the witness as he testified.” A search ensued, but the threatener could not be found. The gesture described in the transcript is not lost on this court. Wade was obviously in danger because of his status as an informant. In this instance, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in sustaining the State’s objection to defense counsel’s question requesting Wade’s street address. This leads us to the issue whether during the trial, the trial judge’s conduct indicated hostility toward defendant to so prejudice defendant to require defendant’s conviction to be reversed and remanded for a new trial. According to defendant, during cross-examination of Larry Wade, the trial judge slammed down his pencil, heaved a sigh, and made facial gestures in response to a question posed by defense counsel. According to defendant, these actions by the trial judge demonstrate that the trial court presumed the worst of defendant and unduly prejudiced him. We agree.  In a criminal case, it is not the province of the judge to convey by word or deed his opinions relative to determinations of fact, credibility of witnesses, and weight to be afforded their testimony. (People v. Santucci (1962), 24 Ill. 2d 93, 180 N.E.2d 491.) Defendant stated in his motion for a new trial that during cross-examination of Larry Wade, the trial judge “threw down his pencil on the stand and displayed obvious anger in the presence of the jury.” Defense counsel did not object at the time “for fear of exacerbating the situation in the presence of the jury and calling to their attention the blatant display of improper judicial conduct by this court.” This highlights the State’s contention that the failure of defense counsel to timely object precludes our consideration of this question. We agree with the State that in most instances failure to make a timely objection would ordinarily prohibit review of the matter; however, there are instances, such as presented here, that it is not always practical or wise to object to unjudicial conduct before a jury. Less rigid application of the rule requiring timely and proper objection and preservation of rulings thereon should prevail where the basis for the objection is conduct of the trial judge. (People v. Sprinkle (1963), 27 Ill. 2d 398, 189 N.E.2d 295.) The Sprinkle court stated: “The making of an objection to questions or comments by a judge poses a practical problem for the trial lawyer. It can prove embarrassing to the lawyer, but, more importantly, assuming that most juries view most judges with some degree of respect, and accord to them a knowledge of law somewhat superior to that of the attorneys practicing before the judge, the lawyer who objects to a comment or question by the judge may find himself viewed with considerable suspicion and skepticism by the very group whom he is trying to convert to his client’s view of the facts, thereby perhaps irreparably damaging his client’s interests. If he fails to object, he may, on appeal, be faced, as defendant here is, with the claim that his failure to act has precluded consideration of the error, and it is not always a sufficient answer to this situation to say that the objection can be made and ruling secured outside the hearing of the jury. It is particularly incumbent upon the trial judge to exercise a higher degree of care in his comments regarding, or interrogations of, witnesses before a jury in order to avoid influencing the jurors to any extent, and we therefore hold that a less rigid application of the rule requiring timely and proper objection and preservation of rulings thereon should prevail where the basis for the objection is the conduct of the trial judge than is otherwise required.” 27 Ill. 2d at 400-01, 189 N.E.2d at 297. At the hearing on the motion for a new trial, defense counsel described the acts he witnessed by the trial judge in response to a question asked by him during cross-examination. Defense counsel stated that at least six jurors took note of the court’s action and made an obvious response to the court’s actions. The prosecuting attorney also testified at the hearing. During cross-examination of Wade, he was seated at the table closest to Mr. Wade and his attention was focused on Wade. He could neither confirm nor deny the defense attorney’s allegations about the pencil-slamming incident. On a later date, the court reporter for the proceedings in which the incident allegedly took place testified about her recollection of the event. The following is her estimation of what transpired: “Q. During that cross-examination, what if anything unusual did you observe the court do? A. The only thing that I remember, and the only reason I remember it is because at this time it happened, it startled me, was during the cross-examination, I remember out the the [sic] peripheral vision of my eye, I remember the Judge putting (Physical indication by the witness.) the pencil down on the desk or pen or something, but I assume it was a pen or pencil. Q. When you say put down, do you mean slam down? A. I would say that’s — yes. Q. It was not an inadvertent slip (Physical indication by Attorney McHaney.), was it? A. Not like that. When it came down (Physical indication by the witness.), it was in the hand with — it wasn’t — the pencil didn’t drop by itself. It came down with a hand (Physical indication by the witness.). Q. Do you recall that that occurred immediately after the question to Mr. Wade, where did you hide the eightball of cocaine? On the porch? A. That’s my recollection of where it happened. Q. Was your back to the jury? A. I sit-in Courtroom A, the jury is over here and the way I was facing, because there was a witness on the stand, I was turned more towards the — angled more towards the court and would be towards Defense Counsel table with — where I had a peripheral vision of the far extension of the jury and then I could see the court, you know, the witness out of the comer of my eye. Q. To view the jury, you would have had to have turned your head, wouldn’t you? A. Right. Well, with the exception of the tail end of the jury as I described, the far end of the jury, not the end closest to me but the point farthest away. I could see them out of the peripheral vision, but to see the ones behind me, I would have had to turned my head.” Judge Krause stated that he had no recollection of such events. He mentioned that he sometimes experienced respiratory problems which forced him to breath through his mouth, an act that might be interpreted by some as sighing.  The most enlightening testimony in our mind is that of the court reporter, an experienced courtroom observer and an unbiased witness. The fact that she was startled by the judge’s actions, especially in the midst of some “rather heavy cross-examination,” leads us to believe that the trial court acted improperly. It is apparent to us that the jury could infer from this that the judge believed Wade and that the cross-examination that was taking place should not be given consideration. Finally, during closing argument defense counsel was explaining to the jury why he was angry while cross-examining Larry Wade. Defense counsel stated, “There was anger. Because I believed that — .” The State objected to what defense counsel believed and the trial court sustained the objection. Defendant argues that this ruling effectively stymied defendant’s case by not allowing counsel to pursue what was perhaps an important argument. Because defense counsel could not complete the sentence, we have no way to know upon what defense counsel was going to express an opinion. If a prosecutor is allowed to express an opinion during closing argument based on facts in evidence (People v. Jones (1982), 108 Ill. App. 3d 880, 888, 439 N.E.2d 1011, 1018), clearly a defense attorney should have such latitude. Even though we will never know exactly what the defense attorney had planned to say, we find the court’s ruling premature. We conclude that the actions of the trial judge complained of here were unnecessary. They did not constitute harmless error. Defendant may have been prejudiced in the eyes of some or possibly all of the jurors, and the cause must be remanded for a new trial. Because of this ruling, we need not address defendant’s contention that the trial court abused its discretion in sentencing defendant to an extended term of 12 years. For the foregoing reasons, this court reverses the judgment of the circuit court of Jefferson County and remands for a new trial. Reversed and remanded. LEWIS, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739489 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:06.677447+00 ===

JUSTICE HOWERTON, specially concurring: I address only the issue raised by defendant’s thwarted attempt to introduce Leroy Hooker’s testimony that he found Larry Wade hanging by his neck from the bars of his cell with his feet off the floor and that he gave Wade mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, and that Wade was a “strange guy” and “wasn’t wrapped tight.” Hooker’s testimony was offered for a dual purpose. The first purpose was to impeach Wade’s testimony by showing that he had a mental condition, thereby raising the inference that Wade’s perceptions and memories of the events about which he testified were faulty. Mental capacity is a proper subject for lay opinion testimony. However, Hooker’s testimony was not admissible for this purpose for two reasons: firstly, a lay witness can give an opinion as to mental condition only after stating facts in sufficient detail to show knowledge of the mental condition of the person in question (Walker v. Struthers (1916), 273 Ill. 387, 112 N.E. 961; see E. Cleary & M. Graham, Handbook of Illinois Evidence §704.3, at 379 (3d ed. 1979)); and secondly, the mental condition is not relevant to credibility if it is too remote in time from the events about which testimony is given. (People v. Helton (1987), 153 Ill. App. 3d 726, 506 N.E.2d 307.) In this case, “strange guy” and not being “wrapped tight” do not state facts. Furthermore, Hooker was testifying about Wade’s mental condition five months before the events about which Wade was testifying; this is too remote. Hooker’s observations would have to relate to the time of Wade’s perceptions and the formation of his memory about the events in order to be relevant. People v. Helton (1987), 153 Ill. App. 3d 726, 506 N.E.2d 307. Hooker’s testimony is admissible, however, for its second purpose, namely, to raise an inference that Wade lied on the witness stand when on direct examination he testified that his suicide attempt was a “stunt” to get him in front of a judge. That portion of Hooker’s testimony wherein he stated he found Wade hanging by the neck with his feet off of the ground and that he saved Wade’s life by administering mouth-to-mouth resuscitation directly contradicts Wade on a matter Wade injected into the case, and therefore, is not collateral. That contradiction attacks Wade’s credibility and is admissible. I otherwise concur.

=== CASE 2220008 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:31.139418+00 ===

188 Ill. App.3d 689 (1989)
544 N.E.2d 441
JOHN T. CUNNINGHAM, SR., et al., Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
MILLER'S GENERAL INSURANCE COMPANY, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 4-89-0046.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fourth District.
Opinion filed September 19, 1989.
*690 Frank H. Byers, of Byers, Byers & Greenleaf, Ltd., of Decatur, for appellants.
Clausen, Miller, Gorman, Caffrey & Witous, P.C., of Chicago (James T. Ferrini, Edward M. Kay, William J. Schaefle, Michael L. Foran, and Sonia V. Odarczenko, of counsel), for appellee.
Judgment affirmed.
JUSTICE LUND delivered the opinion of the court:
On December 19, 1988, the circuit court of Macon County vacated a default judgment entered against defendant Miller's General Insurance Company. Plaintiffs John and Cora Cunningham appeal this determination.
On March 2, 1987, plaintiffs' home suffered severe fire damage. Their home insurance carrier was defendant. After an extensive exchange of information, defendant denied coverage. Accordingly, on February 9, 1988, plaintiffs filed suit against defendant. Summons was served on defendant on February 23. No answer was filed, and on April 8, 1988, plaintiffs moved for and received a default judgment. On May 10, a hearing was conducted on damages, and defendant was not given notice. The court set the judgment at $65,478 plus attorney fees of $600.
On June 14, a nonwage garnishment summons was issued on defendant's bank account. On June 23, upon being advised of the garnishment, defendant filed a motion to stay execution of the judgment. This stay was entered. On June 28, defendant filed a petition to vacate the default judgment, pursuant to section 2-1401 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Code) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2-1401).
Defendant's petition alleged it acted with due diligence in that *691 upon being served with plaintiffs' complaint, the matter was forwarded to counsel in Chicago. This counsel, after reviewing the matter, prepared an answer and arranged for a Decatur law firm to serve as local counsel. On March 23, 1988, the answer was placed with an overnight delivery service for delivery to the Decatur law firm. It never arrived. The first anyone knew of the problem was when plaintiffs garnisheed defendant's bank account. This history was supported by numerous affidavits, including one by the delivery service that stated they turned the envelope over to Federal Express, and Federal Express records show it was not delivered.
The petition also alleged defendant had meritorious defenses of fraud and arson. Again, these allegations were supported by numerous affidavits. These affidavits establish that a trail of a combination of a petroleum naphtha and kerosene, which are combustibles, was found running between the bedrooms where the fire was located, and that the opinion of several experts who viewed the scene was that the fire was intentionally set. The petition also alleged plaintiffs were having financial problems and had a suspicious fire at the same residence several years earlier.
Plaintiffs' answer to the petition averred that defendant was negligent and not diligent by failing to follow up on the filing of the original answer. It further alleged, and supported with plaintiffs' affidavit, that plaintiffs did not set the fire, had received threats from disgruntled ex-tenants, and some unknown person had gained forced entry on the night of the fire.
After hearing arguments, the circuit court concluded:
"An attorney who undertakes the representation of a client has the obligation to the client, to the court, to the rules of practice and to the Supreme Court Rules to assure the timely filing of pleadings. These rules are there for a reason and they are to assure the orderly flow of cases through the system. At the same time justice requires that matters such as this be heard on their merits. While I feel very strongly that the defendant's counsel here was, as counsel has put it, mistaken as to their follow up to assure the timely filing of its answer, that nonetheless this court has long held the belief that matters should be heard on their merits unless there has been a flagrant violation of the laws of practice which in this case there is not. * * * I am going to vacate this judgment because, as I said, it's my belief that matters should be heard on their merits, but at the same time, I hope if you undertake to represent clients in other counties outside your own county in the future, *692 that you take a little bit of time to learn what their rules of practice are."
 1, 2 Section 2-1401 of the Code provides a comprehensive statutory procedure for which judgments can be challenged more than 30 days after their rendition. To be entitled to relief under this section, the petitioner must affirmatively set forth specific factual allegations supporting each of the following elements: (1) the existence of a meritorious defense or claim; (2) due diligence in presenting this defense or claim to the court in the original action; and (3) due diligence in filing the section 2-1401 petition for relief. (Smith v. Airoom, Inc. (1986), 114 Ill.2d 209, 221, 499 N.E.2d 1381, 1386; First National Bank v. Mattoon Federal Savings & Loan Association (1988), 175 Ill. App.3d 956, 959, 530 N.E.2d 666, 668.) The quantum of proof necessary to sustain a section 2-1401 petition is a preponderance of the evidence. (Airoom, 114 Ill.2d at 221, 499 N.E.2d at 1386.) Whether such a petition should be granted lies within the sound discretion of the circuit court, depending on the facts and equities presented. (Airoom, 114 Ill.2d at 221, 499 N.E.2d at 1386; Beno v. DeBoer Asphalt Paving Co. (1983), 114 Ill. App.3d 871, 873-74, 449 N.E.2d 1021, 1022-23.) As such, a court of review is justified in disturbing the judgment of the circuit court only if it finds that the court abused its discretion. Kaput v. Hoey (1988), 124 Ill.2d 370, 378, 530 N.E.2d 230, 234; Airoom, 114 Ill.2d at 221, 499 N.E.2d at 1386.
It is readily apparent the court did not apply this standard in reaching its determination. Rather, the court based its decision on its belief that matters such as this one are better resolved on their respective merits. While we wholeheartedly agree with this general principle of law, this is not the standard for analysis in section 2-1401 petitions. We encourage the court in the future to make its decision based on the three recognized elements. However, even though the wrong analysis was applied, our independent review convinces us that the court's ultimate decision to vacate the default judgment should be affirmed.
Initially, plaintiffs contend the vacature order is incorrect because defendant failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that it had a meritorious defense. They note that the burden is on defendant, and that Airoom requires an evidentiary hearing be held when the facts are in contention. Since no evidence was presented, they maintain that defendant has not met its burden of proof as to the existence of a meritorious defense.
 3 It is correct that when the central facts, sufficient to support the grant of relief under section 2-1401 are controverted, an evidentiary *693 hearing must be held. (Airoom, 114 Ill.2d at 223, 499 N.E.2d at 1387; Ostendorf v. International Harvester Co. (1982), 89 Ill.2d 273, 286, 433 N.E.2d 253, 259.) However, these "central facts" of a section 2-1401 petition are not those which would establish the underlying action, but rather facts which are sufficient merely to support an order vacating the judgment. Manning v. Meier (1983), 114 Ill. App.3d 835, 840, 449 N.E.2d 560, 564; Yorke v. Stineway Drug Co. (1982), 110 Ill. App.3d 1009, 1014, 443 N.E.2d 644, 648.
 4 In the case now before us, defendant has alleged, through numerous affidavits, facts that show the fire was intentionally set, that it was surrounded with some unusual circumstances, and that plaintiffs may have had a financial motive for setting the fire. Plaintiffs alleged facts which would show that they did not set the fire, and that some third person broke into the house and started it. This conflict of facts goes to the merits of the underlying action. It does not affect whether there is the existence of a meritorious defense. Accordingly, no hearing was required.
Further, the Airoom court observed that a party can waive this evidentiary hearing by failing to request one. (Airoom, 114 Ill.2d at 223, 499 N.E.2d at 1387.) In the case at bar, neither party requested such a hearing. Therefore, even if one should have been held, it has been waived, and the determination is properly based on the pleadings, affidavits, and supporting materials in evidence. See Airoom, 114 Ill.2d at 223, 499 N.E.2d at 1387.
 5 As has been suggested by the above discussion, we find by a review of the documents that defendant has established the existence of a meritorious defense. Without going into great detail, defendant's petition and affidavits establish that plaintiffs had left the residence that evening to go to Chicago and had locked the house. Around 1 a.m., a fire was found in the home. Analysis found the presence of liquid accelerants at the fire scene. Experts concluded the fire was intentionally set. It was further alleged that six years prior to this, a similarly suspicious fire occurred in the residence and that plaintiffs' financial situation, according to their income tax statements, was precarious.
While plaintiffs refuted some of these allegations with their response and affidavits, it is not up to the court in a section 2-1401 petition to determine the ultimate outcome of the proceeding. Defendant has asserted sufficient facts which, if believed by the trier of fact, would defeat plaintiffs' claim. This is sufficient.
 6 Plaintiffs next contend defendant has failed to show it acted with due diligence in defending the original lawsuit. Due diligence requires *694 the section 2-1401 petitioner have a reasonable excuse for failing to act within the appropriate time. (Airoom, 114 Ill.2d at 222, 499 N.E.2d at 1386.) The petitioner must show that his failure to defend against the lawsuit was the result of an excusable mistake, and that under the circumstances, he acted reasonably, and not negligently, when he failed to resist the judgment. (First National Bank, 175 Ill. App.3d at 960, 530 N.E.2d at 669.) The courts are primarily concerned with determining whether a party has wilfully disregarded the process of the court, or is so indifferent to it, that he is chargeable with culpable negligence. (Beno, 114 Ill. App.3d at 874, 449 N.E.2d at 1023.) In determining the reasonableness of the excuse offered by the petitioner, all the circumstances attendant upon entry of the judgment must be considered, including the conduct of the litigants and their attorneys. Airoom, 114 Ill.2d at 222, 499 N.E.2d at 1387.
The facts in Verson Allsteel Press Co. v. Mackworth Rees, Division of Avis Industrial, Inc. (1981), 99 Ill. App.3d 789, 426 N.E.2d 241, are similar to our present situation. There, defendant's president was served with a summons. The evidence showed that it was the company's procedure for that document to be forwarded to the head of the insurance department. The evidence also showed it did not arrive there and, accordingly, defendant did not answer the complaint and was defaulted. The appellate court concluded that this breakdown in defendant's customary procedure for processing legal documents did not constitute inexcusable neglect nor demonstrate a conscious disregard of the court's processes, and it vacated the default order. See also Bird v. Kostbade (1977), 52 Ill. App.3d 741, 367 N.E.2d 1058; Spencer v. American United Cab Association (1965), 59 Ill. App.2d 165, 208 N.E.2d 118.
 7 Similarly, in the present case, we find defendant exhibited due diligence. The record shows that upon receipt of this summons, it was sent to counsel in Chicago. This counsel arranged for local counsel to file the answer in the proper court. The answer was then sent by an overnight delivery service. The delivery service records show they received the package, but indicated it was not delivered. We do not believe this conduct shows inexcusable neglect or demonstrates a conscious disregard of the court's processes.
 8 Admittedly, with better follow-up procedures by defendant's counsel, most of this could have been avoided. However, this does not alter the fact that defendant intended to contest the action, and defendant and his counsel acted promptly to answer the complaint. The fact the overnight carrier lost the package should not preclude *695 defendant from its desire to litigate the case on its merits. Where a reasonable excuse is shown, a party should be allowed to have its day in court, provided no prejudice results to the opposing party. (Verson Allsteel, 99 Ill. App.3d at 793, 426 N.E.2d at 245.) Here, the only prejudice to plaintiffs is that they must now contest the matter on its merits, rather than receive a windfall through the default procedures.
Since defendant has proved the existence of a meritorious defense and that it acted with due diligence in the original action, its section 2-1401 petition should have been granted. Thus, even though the wrong standard was applied, we affirm the court's decision to vacate the default judgment.
Affirmed.
KNECHT and GREEN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739490 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:13.049927+00 ===

JUSTICE SCARIANO delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant appeals from an order of the circuit court granting in part plaintiffs motion for a preliminary injunction and ordering the Chicago Board of Education to assess the readiness of plaintiff to attend kindergarten pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois School Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 122, par. 1 — 1 et seq.). Plaintiff cross-appeals from the denial of his requests for preliminary and permanent injunctions seeking to compel defendant to enroll him, based on various asserted grounds. Defendant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the trial court erred in ordering it to assess the readiness of the plaintiff to attend school in light of the fact that the language of the statute relating to assessments was clearly permissive. Plaintiff raises the following issues on cross-appeal: whether the trial court erred in denying his motion for preliminary and permanent injunctive relief because (a) defendant operates on a full year school basis and he was five years of age on September 4, 1988; (b) his statutory right to an equal education entitles him to enrollment; or (c) reading the statute and rules literally, his birth date actually qualified him for enrollment; and whether defendant violated his civil rights when it initially refused to enroll him, or alternatively, to assess his readiness to attend school. Plaintiff, Daniel Morrison, is a minor child who attained the age of five on September 4, 1988, and who sought admission into the kindergarten program at Edgebrook School, operated by defendant, the Board of Education of the City of Chicago (the Board). At all times relevant to this cause, defendant’s actions were governed by the Illinois School Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 122, par. 10 — 20.12), and certain rules adopted by the Board pursuant thereto which establish the school year and school age. Section 10 — 20.12 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 122, par. 10 — 20.12) provides as follows: “School year — School age. To establish and keep in operation in each year during a school term of at least the minimum length required by Section 10 — 19, a sufficient number of free schools for the accommodation of all persons in the district over the age of 5 and under 21 years, and to secure for all such persons the right and opportunity to an equal education in such schools; provided that children who will attain the age of 5 years by November 1 after the first day of the 1986-1987 school term, October 1 after the first day of the 1987-1988 school term, and September 1 of the year of the 1988-1989 school term and each school term thereafter may attend school upon the commencement of such term. Based upon an assessment of a child’s readiness to attend school, a school district may permit a child to attend school prior to the dates contained in this Section. In any school district operating on a full year school basis children who will attain the age of 5 within 30 days after the commencement of a term may attend school upon the commencement of such term. The school district may, by resolution of its board, allow for a full year school plan.” Section 6 — 2 of the Board Rules provides as follows: “Admission to Elementary School. All children residing within the limits of the city who are not otherwise disqualified shall be entitled at the beginning of the school year to enter kindergarten or first grade if they will have reached the age of five or six years, respectively, by October 1 of the 1987-88 school year and by September 1 of the 1988-89 school year and each year thereafter. Based upon an assessment of a child’s readiness to attend school, a child may be permitted to attend school prior to the dates contained in this Rule. The principal of the elementary school in the sub-district in which they reside shall require the parent to present birth certificate, baptismal record, or other satisfactory evidence of the date and place of birth.” Because plaintiff would not have attained the age of five by the statutorily mandated September 1 cutoff date, defendant refused to enroll him or to assess his readiness to attend school; and although defendant conducted readiness assessments for children who were going to be five years of age by November 1 of the 1986-87 school year and for children who were going to be five years of age by October 1 of the 1987-88 school year, it determined that it would not be doing so for the 1988-89 school year but would instead strictly adhere to the September 1 cutoff date. Plaintiff subsequently filed a complaint for injunctive and other relief and a motion for a preliminary injunction requesting, inter alia, that the court order defendant to assess the readiness of plaintiff to attend school pursuant to section 10 — 20.12 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 122, par. 10 — 20.12), and on August 10, 1988, the court granted plaintiff’s motion and ordered defendant to assess the readiness of plaintiff to attend school prior to the date prescribed by the School Code. On August 22, 1988, the court held a further hearing on the remaining counts of plaintiff’s complaint and denied plaintiff’s motion for injunctive relief as to those counts. Defendant’s appeal and plaintiff’s cross-appeal followed. Defendant did in fact assess the readiness of plaintiff and enrolled him in kindergarten after the filing of this appeal. I  Plaintiff first argues that this appeal is moot inasmuch as the Board voluntarily conceded plaintiff’s asserted right when it enrolled him in school after it had assessed his readiness, citing Panduit Corp. v. All States Plastic Manufacturing Co. (1980), 84 Ill. App. 3d 1144, 405 N.E.2d 1316: “A case becomes moot when, pending the decision on appeal, events occur which render it impossible for the reviewing court to grant effectual relief to any party involved in the suit.” Panduit, 84 Ill. App. 3d at 1148. We do not deem the case sub judice to be moot since Illinois recognizes a public interest exception to the mootness argument raised by defendant. Under this doctrine, a case may be decided on appeal despite its mootness if the issues raised are of substantial public interest. (Iowa-Illinois Gas & Electric Co. v. Illinois Commerce Comm’n (1980), 91 Ill. App. 3d 96, 414 N.E.2d 287.) The test for determining whether a sufficient degree of public interest exists requires that three elements be considered: (1) the public nature of the question presented; (2) the need for an authoritative determination for the future guidance of public officials; and (3) the likelihood of recurrence of the question. (City of Chicago v. Leviton (1985), 137 Ill. App. 3d 126, 129, 484 N.E.2d 438, citing People ex rel. Wallace v. Labrenz (1952), 411 Ill. 618, 104 N.E.2d 769, cert. denied (1952), 344 U.S. 824, 97 L. Ed. 642, 73 S. Ct. 24.) Each criterion must be met to avoid dismissal of moot questions on appeal. City of Chicago v. Leviton, 137 Ill. App. 3d at 129.  The facts presented in this case easily come under the public interest exception: first, the issue raised is of a public nature in that it affects the rights of a large number of children to a clear, early and effective determination of their entitlement to enroll in our public schools; second, there is a desire and a need for guidance and clarification respecting the law regarding readiness assessments among lilinois public school districts; and third, there is more than a great likelihood that the issue will recur. II Defendant contends that the circuit court erred in ordering it to assess the readiness of plaintiff to attend school because the language of the statute relating to assessments is clearly permissive. It argues that it is well established that where the legislature has empowered a school board to perform certain functions, the courts will not interfere with the exercise of such powers nor substitute their discretion for that of the school board unless the board’s action is palpably arbitrary, unreasonable, or capricious. (Braught v. Board of Education (1985), 136 Ill. App. 3d 486, 483 N.E.2d 623; Tyska v. Board of Education (1983), 117 Ill. App. 3d 917, 453 N.E.2d 1344.) Defendant further maintains that there was nothing arbitrary, unreasonable or capricious about its decision to adhere strictly to the school age cutoff date imposed by the Illinois School Code and not to conduct readiness assessments, and it urges that since the court improperly substituted its judgment for that of defendant in ordering it to assess plaintiff’s readiness to attend school, the court’s order should be reversed. We agree. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s granting of a preliminary injunction which ordered defendant to assess the readiness of plaintiff. Inasmuch as the facts are undisputed, we need be concerned only with the trial court’s application of the law to those facts, and issues of law are determined on appeal independently of the trial court’s judgment. Crum v. Gulf Oil Corp. (1979), 70 Ill. App. 3d 897, 388 N.E.2d 1008. Plaintiff argues that defendant was required to make the readiness assessment, which would serve as the basis of its enrollment decision, pointing to the following provision of section 10 — 20.12 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 122, par. 10 — 20.12): “Based upon an assessment of a child’s readiness to attend school, a school district may permit a child to attend school prior to the dates contained in this Section.” Plaintiff notes that defendant relies entirely upon the use of the word “may” in the above-quoted sentence, and claims that this reliance is misplaced. Plaintiff argues that the word “may” does not give defendant discretion in making readiness assessments; rather, plaintiff contends, it gives defendant discretion in deciding whether or not to enroll a child on the basis of the assessment. Plaintiff contends that it follows logically that defendant is obligated to make an assessment of the child upon the request of the parents, and that once the assessment has been made, defendant then has the discretion, based upon the assessment, to make its enrollment decision. Plaintiff further argues that defendant’s duty to assess is entirely consistent with the statutory scheme of section 10 — 20.12 and with defendant’s own understanding of the scheme as expressed in its published, written policies. Prior to its amendment by Public Act 84 — 126, effective August 1, 1985, section 10 — 20.12 provided for a December 1 cutoff and did not contain the provision here at issue regarding readiness assessments. As noted above, the amendment gradually rolled back the cutoff date to November 1 for the 1986-87 school year, to October 1 for the 1987-88 school year, and September 1 for the 1988-89 school year, while providing for readiness assessments for children born after the cutoff dates. Accordingly, plaintiff maintains, the requirement of readiness assessments goes hand in hand with the rollback of cutoff dates; having inserted the new cutoff dates, the legislature also provided a way to keep the school doors open to younger children, like plaintiff, who were ready for school.  We hold the trial court’s order to be contrary to the legislative intent of the General Assembly as expressed in the clear language of the statute. Statutes must be construed so as to ascertain and give effect to the intention of the legislature as expressed in the statute, and absent some clear legislative intent to the contrary, terms are to be given their ordinary and commonly understood meaning. The language used in a statute is the primary source for determining legislative intent, and where that language is certain and unambiguous, the proper function of the courts is to enforce the statute as enacted. (General Motors Corp., Fisher Body Division v. Industrial Comm’n (1975), 62 Ill. 2d 106, 338 N.E.2d 561.) The statute as a whole must be evaluated with each provision being construed in light of the statute’s general purpose (I.F. v. Department of Children & Family Services (1986), 146 Ill. App. 3d 68, 496 N.E.2d 1162), and the court must choose a construction which gives the statute a clear, logical meaning, rather than a meaning that renders the statute illogical, useless or unreasonable. City of Rolling Meadows v. Kyle (1986), 145 Ill. App. 3d 168, 494 N.E.2d 766. In the case at bar, section 10 — 20.12 of the School Code is clear and unambiguous. It provides the Board with discretion to permit a child to attend school prior to the cutoff date subject only to the condition that it do so based on a child’s assessed readiness to attend. It is to be noted that the legislature did not provide that school districts “shall” or “must” conduct readiness assessments, in which case conducting assessments would be an obligation. (People v. Emrich (1986), 113 Ill. 2d 343, 498 N.E.2d 1140.) And we note that nowhere does the statute require action on the part of the Board upon anyone’s request. The general purpose of the statute is to impose an age limit on students eligible to attend public schools. The legislature, in the debates involving this provision, stated that the imposition of an earlier cutoff date was due to studies that have shown that the older a child is upon entering kindergarten the more successful the schooling experience. 84th Ill. Gen. Assem., Senate Proceedings, July 2, 1985, at 98.  In evaluating the statute in light of its general purpose, it is clear that the legislature intended to impose a strict age limitation on students eligible for kindergarten or first grade. Having imposed the September 1 cutoff, the legislature expressly granted school districts the discretion to permit children to attend prior to this date based on a structured assessment of their readiness to attend. This grant in no way mandated such testing. The dissent in this case agrees “with the majority that the power to assess the readiness of a child to attend school if the child has not reached the age of five by September 1 is discretionary under the statute,” but it reasons, “[b]y the adoption of Rule 6 — 2, the board assumed the duty to assess a child’s readiness so that the child may be permitted to attend school prior to the dates contained in the rule.” (Emphasis added.) (188 Ill. App. 3d at 600-01.) However, the dissent neglects to explain the process by which a law it readily acknowledges to be permissive when enacted by the legislature becomes metamorphosed into a duty when it is redundantly adopted by a local board of education. Even plaintiff recognizes no such transformation, for, as noted above, his argument throughout this entire proceeding has been that “the Board is obligated to make an assessment of the child upon request of the parents,” and that “the use of the word ‘may’ does not give the Board discretion in making readiness assessments,” whether under the statute or the rule. “Rather,” he concludes, “it gives the Board discretion in deciding whether or not to enroll a child on the basis of the assessment.” (Emphasis added.) More important, nowhere does plaintiff make the argument that the mere adoption of a rule or policy in the precise words of a statute, whether the language of that law be discretionary or mandatory, charges the rule or policy by which the statute is adopted with a completely opposite effect. Nor does Tyska, the case cited in the dissent, come anywhere near the neighborhood of authority for the proposition advanced by the dissent. Defendant’s decision was not arbitrary, unreasonable or capricious, but in harmony with the language and purpose of the School Code. The court’s order requiring it to assess the readiness of the plaintiff to attend school is contrary to law, and consequently reversed. Ill Plaintiff cross-appeals, asserting that the circuit court erred in denying plaintiff’s motion for preliminary and permanent injunctive relief because: (1) defendant operates on a full year school basis and the plaintiff was five years of age on September 4, 1988; (2) the plaintiff’s statutory right to an equal education entitles him to enrollment; or (3) reading the statute and rules literally, the plaintiff’s birth date actually qualified him for enrollment.  Plaintiff’s initial argument is that defendant operates some of its schools on a full year school basis; consequently, he was entitled to enrollment in kindergarten. Plaintiff cites section 10 — 19.1 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 122, par. 10 — 19.1), which states: “Full year school plan. Any school district may, by resolution of its board, operate one or more schools within the district on a full year school plan approved by the State Board of Education. Any board which operates under this Section shall devise a plan so that a student’s required attendance in school shall be for a minimum term of 180 days of actual attendance, including not more than 4 institute days, during a 12 month period, but shall not exceed 185 days. Under such plan, no teacher shall be required to teach more than 185 days. A calendar of 180 days may be established with the approval of the State Board of Education.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 122, par. 10 — 19.1.) Plaintiff also notes the following portion of section 10 — 20.12 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 122, par. 10 — 20.12): “In any school district operating on a full year school basis children who will attain age 5 within 30 days after the commencement of a term may attend school upon the commencement of such term.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 122, par. 10 — 20.12. Plaintiff asserts that a full school year basis means nothing more than a plan whereby a student’s attendance in school is for a minimum of 180 days of actual attendance, not including four institute days, during a 12-month period, which does not exceed 185 days. Plaintiff argues that he is entitled to enrollment under sections 10— 19.1 and 10 — 20.12, as defendant operates under a 180- to 185-day per school year basis and meets the statutory definition of a full year school plan. We disagree. While section 10 — 19.1 permits any school district to operate one or more schools on a full year school basis, there is nothing in the statute that supports plaintiff’s interpretation of what constitutes a full year school plan. All Illinois school districts, including the defendant district, operate on a school calendar term basis (as opposed to a calendar year basis) pursuant to section 10 — 19, which establishes the length of the school term for all school districts. This section provides in relevant part: “Each school board shall annually prepare a calendar for the school term, specifying the opening and closing dates and providing a minimum term of at least 185 days to insure 176 days of actual pupil attendance *** Except as provided in Section 10 — 19.1, the board may not extend the school term beyond such closing date unless that extension of term is necessary to provide the minimum number of computable days.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 122, par. 10-19. It is clear from a reading of the foregoing section that a full year school basis is the exception to the general requirement that school districts prepare a specific calendar under which they will operate. Schools operating on a full year school basis differ significantly from those schools operating under section 10 — 19. Schools operating on a full year school basis operate four consecutive 45-day terms in order to insure 180 days of actual attendance. These terms are separated by 15-day recess periods. Defendant’s calendar identifies only the Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention Center and its branches and the Cook County jail as schools which operate throughout the calendar year. But for these two exceptions, operated in cooperation with corrections authorities, neither of which exceptions is relevant to this case, it is clear that defendant does not operate on a full year school basis. Consequently, we affirm the lower court as to this issue.  Second, plaintiff argues that section 10 — 20.12 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 122, par. 10 — 20.12) grants “the right and opportunity to an equal education” to all children “over the age of 5.” Plaintiff argues that defendant’s policy denies him any education at all until he is six years of age, and even then only to provide him with a part-time kindergarten education until he is seven years of age. Plaintiff argues that this result is particularly egregious in view of the fact that he was five years of age at the commencement of the 1988-89 school term. Plaintiff cites Morgan v. Board of Education (1974), 22 Ill. App. 3d 241, 317 N.E.2d 393, as controlling. In Morgan, he asserts, the appellate court upheld a mandatory injunction ordering the school district to enroll plaintiff in first grade, holding that the school district’s refusal to so enroll her denied plaintiff her statutory right to an equal education and her right to equal protection under the laws. Plaintiff argues that the Illinois legislature has now expanded the right of equal education to five-year-olds, and that a straightforward application of Morgan to the case at bar dictates that his right to an equal education entitles him to enrollment. Defendant has not violated plaintiff’s right to an equal education. Board Rule 6 — 2 provides for the equal education of children who will have attained the age of five and six, as the case may be, by the legislatively mandated September 1 cutoff date; nothing can change the fact that plaintiff could not be five by September 1 of the 1988-89 school year, nor would he be six by September 1 of the 1989-90 school year. Plaintiff’s reliance on Morgan is unwarranted. Unlike the instant case, the plaintiff in Morgan was six years old and had already attended kindergarten. The issue in that case was whether the school district’s requirement that she pass a readiness assessment before going on to the first grade denied her an equal education in light of the fact that seven-year-olds who moved into the school district were automatically registered in the first grade without taking such an examination. The plaintiff in Morgan was being forced to repeat part-time kindergarten when other children in her category were being admitted as full-time first graders without an assessment. The issue in the case at bar is not whether part-time kindergarten is equal to full-time first grade, but rather whether plaintiff fit within the age classification articulated by the School Code. Plaintiff was not entitled to enroll in kindergarten.  Third, plaintiff argues that his birth date entitles him to enrollment under a literal reading of the statute and defendant’s rules. Plaintiff contends that a literal application of section 10 — 20.12 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 122, par. 10 — 20.12) shows that “September 1” as used in the statute means September 1, 1989, not 1988. Plaintiff reaches this conclusion by noting that the Board’s school year did not begin until September 5, 1988. Since September 1, 1988, was prior to the start of the school term, September 1, 1988, was not “of the year of the 1988-1989 school term,” as it precedes the school term. Therefore, plaintiff argues, “September 1 of the year of the 1988-1989 school term” must mean September 1, 1989, and since he is now and was five years of age on September 1, 1989, plaintiff asserts that he was entitled to enrollment. Plaintiff’s legal reasoning is pinched. Section 10 — 20.12 clearly states that “children who will attain the age of 5 years by *** September 1 of the year of the 1988-1989 school term *** may attend school upon the commencement of such term.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 122, par. 10 — 20.12.) Contrary to plaintiff’s contention, Board Rule 6 — 10 merely established the date for the commencement of classes for the 1988-89 school term. The 1988-89 school term extends from September 1988 through June 1989. September 1989 commences the 1989-90 school term. The legislature clearly granted defendant discretion in deciding when to commence classes, and the fact that defendant elected to begin the term after September 1 does not in any way affect the age limitation that the legislature clearly and unambiguously enacted.  Plaintiff’s final argument is that defendant violated the minor plaintiff’s civil rights when it initially refused to enroll him, or alternatively, to assess his readiness to attend school. Plaintiff avers that he has an absolute statutory right to enrollment for the 1988-89 school term. Alternatively, he argues that he had a statutory right to have defendant assess his readiness to attend school and to have it decide whether or not to enroll him “based upon” said assessment. Plaintiff asserts that there is no question but that defendant is a public governmental body, and there is no question but that the Board acted under color of law in denying him enrollment and refusing to make an assessment of his readiness to attend school. As a result of the Board’s actions, plaintiff claims that he had to file suit to protect his claimed statutory civil rights. Plaintiff adds that if his theories have any validity, it necessarily follows that the Board, under color of law, deprived him of his statutory civil rights and is liable to him under 42 U.S.C. section 1983 (1982), and the trial court should have so found. Plaintiff fails to inform us as to where he finds this gloss. At any rate, since plaintiff recognizes that his section 1983 action lacks viability if the other theories he advances in this cause have no validity, and since it is quite evident that we have in fact held such theories to be without foundation, it follows that his purported civil rights action is equally infirm, thus foreclosing any further discussion of this last claim. Reversed in part; affirmed in part.

=== CASE 9739491 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:13.054488+00 ===

JUSTICE DiVITO, specially concurring: I write in special concurrence to make the following points: (1) Insofar as Daniel J. Morrison is concerned, the issues on this appeal are, as he contends, moot: he has been assessed for early readiness and has already been enrolled as a student. (2) The issues raised here, however, are of substantial public interest and should be addressed. We have been informed, for example, through an appropriate motion filed in this case, of a lawsuit which has been filed in the circuit court of Cook County which raises issues similar to those in this case. (3) Considering the substantial public interest in the issue of readiness testing for those children who have not attained the age of five years by September 1, the following points should be made succinctly. Both of my colleagues agree that the language of the enabling legislation confers a discretionary power upon school districts to test children for early readiness. They disagree as to the effect of the Chicago Board of Education’s adoption of Rule 6 — 2, which contains substantially the same language as the statute. It seems to me that the resolution of their disagreement is wholly dependent upon the Board’s implementation of its adopted rule. If the Board denies readiness assessments to all children, such denial, it seems to me, represents a proper exercise of its discretionary ability under both the statute and the rule. If, however, the Board makes readiness assessments available to some children but not to all, a denial would represent an abuse of its discretionary ability. (4) As the dissent notes, the mere amendment of Rule 6 — 2 by the Board, by not addressing the issue of early readiness assessments or by specifically discontinuing them, would put these “issues of substantial public interest” to rest.

=== CASE 9739492 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:13.057711+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE BILANDIC, dissenting in part: The fixing of a school age is a quasi-legislative function delegated to the Board of Education by the legislature. The Illinois School Code requires a school board to operate schools for all persons in the district over the age of five and under the age of 21, “to secure for all such persons the right and opportunity to an equal education in such schools; provided that children who will attain the age of 5 years by *** September 1 of the year 1988-1989 school term and each school term thereafter may attend school upon the commencement of such term. Based upon an assessment of a child’s readiness to attend school, a school district may permit a child to attend school prior to the dates contained in this Section.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 122, par. 10-20.12. I agree with the majority that the power to assess the readiness of a child to attend school if the child has not reached the age of five by September 1 is discretionary under the statute. “The legislature has placed the administration of schools within the domain of the school board and courts will not interfere with the exercise of the board’s powers unless such exercise is shown to be arbitrary or capricious. [Citations.] Where the legislature has empowered a school board to perform certain functions, the courts will not interfere with the exercise of such powers or substitute their discretion for that of the school board unless the board’s action is palpably arbitrary, unreasonable or capricious. [Citations.]” Tyska v. Board of Education of Township High School, District 214 (1983), 117 Ill. App. 3d 917, 922, 453 N.E.2d 1344. In the exercise of power granted to it by the legislature, the Board adopted Rule 6 — 2, which provides in pertinent part: “All children residing within the limits of the city who are not otherwise disqualified shall be entitled at the beginning of the school year to enter kindergarten *** if they will have reached the age of five *** years *** by September 1 of the 1988-89 school year and each year thereafter. Based upon an assessment of a child’s readiness to attend school, a child may be permitted to attend school prior to the dates contained in this Rule.” The enabling legislation did not require the Board to assess readiness. “Rules adopted by the school board are to be filed for public inspection in the administrative office of the district. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 122, par. 10 — 20.5.) A school board is bound to act in accordance with the rules and regulations it has made pursuant to statutory authority.” Tyska, 117 Ill. App. 3d at 923. By the adoption of Rule 6 — 2, the Board assumed the duty to assess a child’s readiness so that the child may be permitted to attend school prior to the dates contained in the rule. If the Board decides that the policy is no longer viable, it is free to amend its rule and discontinue assessments of early readiness. In my opinion, the majority went awry when it correctly interpreted the enabling legislation as granting discretionary power to the Board, and then ignored the rule by which the Board exercised its discretion. I, therefore, respectfully dissent to that portion of the majority opinion.

=== CASE 2220039 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:31.997183+00 ===

544 N.E.2d 490 (1989)
Andrew A. SZAKALY, Jr. and Nancy Szakaly, Appellants (Plaintiffs below),
v.
Ron SMITH and Linda Smith, Appellees (Defendants below).
No. 03S04-8910-CV-751.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
October 10, 1989.
*491 Andrew A. Szakaly, Jr., Nashville, for appellants.
Timothy J. Vrana, Sharpnack, Bigley, David & Rumple, Columbus, for appellees.
DICKSON, Justice.
In an opinion holding that grantees of servient tenements are charged with knowledge of "all the information supplied by the recorded conveyances of a common grantor," the Court of Appeals reversed a trial court determination that Andrew and Nancy Szakaly had no easement by deed over adjacent property owned by Ron and Linda Smith. Szakaly v. Smith (1988), Ind. App., 525 N.E.2d 343. While agreeing with the Court of Appeals to reverse the trial court, we grant transfer to discuss and clarify the extent to which belatedly recorded conveyances of a common grantor provide constructive knowledge to subsequent grantees.
The common grantors of the parties, Sherrill and Isabell Arvin, owned a 195-acre tract of land. In 1956, the Arvins conveyed a 190-acre portion to the Szakalys' predecessor in title. The deed also granted an easement of right-of-way over the Arvins' retained five-acre tract, but this deed was not recorded until 1965. In 1957, the remaining five-acre tract was conveyed through a trustee for reconveyance to Isabell Arvin alone. Though promptly recorded, these deeds to the five-acre tract did not contain any reference to the easement. Subsequent conveyances of this tract likewise omitted mention of the easement. In 1979, Ronald Smith acquired the smaller tract. In 1982 and 1983, the Szakalys took title to the larger tract. The parties dispute whether the 1965 recording of the 1956 deed creating the easement constitutes constructive notice to grantors of the five-acre tract which beginning in 1957 was conveyed by recorded deeds absent reference to the easement.
Relying on Hazlett v. Sinclair (1881), 76 Ind. 488, the Court of Appeals reasoned that the Smiths had constructive notice of all recorded deeds of their remote grantors. The Smiths argue that they cannot be charged with constructive notice because the deed granting the easement is out of their chain of title because it was recorded after their five-acre tract was first conveyed from the Arvins to the trustee for reconveyance. The Smiths, in effect, argue "once out, always out."
The recording statutes offer protection to subsequent purchasers, lessees, and mortgagees. State v. Anderson (1960), 241 Ind. 184, 170 N.E.2d 812; Gratzinger v. Arehart (1936), 209 Ind. 547, 198 N.E. 787. Indiana Code § 32-1-2-16 provides:
Every conveyance ... of lands or of any interest therein ... shall be recorded in the recorder's office of the county where such lands shall be situated; and every conveyance ... shall take priority according to the time of the filing thereof, and such conveyance ... shall be fraudulent and void as against any subsequent purchaser, lessee or mortgagee in good faith and for valuable consideration, having his deed, mortgage or lease first recorded.
County recorders must maintain a name index system for recording deeds and mortgages. Ind. Code § 36-2-11-12. Under this system all deeds are indexed alphabetically by grantor and by grantee, both with cross-references to the other party to the deed. Id. The indices describe the tract and show the date of the deed's recording. The indices refer a prospective purchaser or encumbrancer to the recorded instruments.
In a title search, the prospective purchaser or his abstractor assesses the marketability of title to a tract of land by determining the "chain of title." Beginning with the person who received the grant of land from the United States, the purchaser or abstractor traces the name of the grantor until the conveyance of the tract in question. The particular grantor's name is not searched thereafter. As the process is repeated, *492 the links in the chain of title are forged. Schroeder, Title Searches and Marketable Title, Basic Real Estate Practice I-30 (1986).
A "purchaser of real estate is presumed to have examined the records of such deeds as constitute the chain of title thereto under which he claims, and is charged with notice, actual or constructive, of all facts recited in such records showing encumbrances, or the non-payment of purchase-money." Smith v. Lowry (1887), 113 Ind. 37, 44, 15 N.E. 17, 20. Accord Mettart v. Allen (1894), 139 Ind. 644, 39 N.E. 239; Wagner v. Winter (1889), 122 Ind. 57, 23 N.E. 754; State ex rel. Lowery v. Davis (1884), 96 Ind. 539. A record outside the chain of title does not provide notice to bona fide purchasers for value. Rogers v. City of Evansville (1982), Ind. App., 437 N.E.2d 1019; Residents of Green Springs Valley Subdivision v. Town of Newburgh (1976), 168 Ind. App. 621, 344 N.E.2d 312.
The Court of Appeals construes Hazlett as charging remote subsequent purchasers with constructive notice of all deeds by any prior common grantor that are recorded before the recording of the deed to the purchaser. Szakaly, 525 N.E.2d at 345-46. However, the facts recited in Hazlett do not disclose the dates of recording of the involved deeds, making it impossible to determine whether the deed creating the easement was within the purchaser's chain of title. Thus Hazlett does not establish that a grantor is charged with constructive knowledge of conveyances from a remote grantor that are outside his chain of title. In light of Rogers and Residents of Green Springs Valley Subdivision, we view the language in Hazlett as limited by the chain of title requirement.
Therefore, if the 1956 deed to the 195-acre tract, recorded in 1965, had been outside Smith's chain of title, it would not have constituted constructive notice to him. However, when the 1956 deed was recorded in 1965, the titled owner of the five-acre tract and Smith's predecessor in title was Isabell Arvin who did not convey title to her grantee until 1966. An examination of the grantor index for Isabell Arvin from the date that she acquired her interest in the property to the date she conveyed to her grantee would have disclosed the recording of the 1956 deed from Isabell Arvin and her husband Sherrill which granted the right-of-way easement across the five-acre tract.
We therefore agree with the Court of Appeals that Smith had constructive notice of the easement encumbering the five-acre tract he purchased in 1979. We reach this conclusion not because Smith was charged with constructive notice of all subsequent conveyances of any prior common grantor, but because the specific encumbrance was disclosed in Smith's chain of title.
The judgment of the trial court is reversed and this cause is remanded for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
All Justices concur except GIVAN and PIVARNIK, JJ., who dissent without opinion.

=== CASE 9739493 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:21.745324+00 ===

JUSTICE RYAN delivered the opinion of the court: In October 1986, appellee Allan Schoeberlein (Schoeberlein), an Illinois resident, filed a products liability suit in the circuit court of Kane County. Schoeberlein alleged that appellants Purdue University and the Board of Trustees of Purdue University (Purdue) sold a defective Central Hadron Calorimeter to Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Illinois. Schoeberlein’s complaint further stated that this product fell upon and injured him during its installation. Purdue responded to this complaint by seeking removal to the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois. Although removal was granted, Schoeberlein filed a motion to remand and, by agreed order, the district court remanded the case back to the Kane County circuit court. After remand, Purdue entered a special and limited appearance (see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2— 301), and filed a motion to dismiss under section 2 — 619 of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 619). In its motion, Purdue contended that it was an instrumentality of the State of Indiana and, therefore, immune to suit in Illinois by virtue of the eleventh amendment (U.S. Const., amend. XI) and the full faith and credit clause (U.S. Const., art. IV, §1). Purdue also claimed immunity under the principle of comity, arguing that the Illinois trial court defer to an Indiana statute which provides that the State of Indiana is immune to suit outside its own courts. The trial court granted Purdue’s motion to dismiss. The appellate court for the second district, with one justice dissenting, reversed. (167 Ill. App. 3d 734.) We granted Purdue’s petition for leave to appeal as a matter of right under our Rule 317 (107 Ill. 2d R. 317). We reverse the appellate court and affirm the trial court’s dismissal of the suit. Both parties agree that Purdue is an instrumentality of the State of Indiana. (See also Kashani v. Purdue University (7th Cir. 1987), 813 F.2d 843.) Consequently, the sole issue on appeal is whether Purdue, as an arm of the State of Indiana, is immune from this suit brought in Illinois. Purdue raises three grounds upon which its claim of immunity may rest: the eleventh amendment (U.S. Const., amend. XI), the full faith and credit clause (U.S. Const., art. IV, §1), and the principle of comity. Purdue urges that we recognize the immunity granted it by the Indiana Code of Civil Procedure, which states: “Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of the eleventh amendment to the Constitution of the United States, as consent by the State of Indir ana or its employees to be sued in any federal court or as consent to be sued in any state court beyond the boundaries of the state of Indiana.” Ind. Code Ann. §34 — 4— 16.5 — 5(d) (West 1987). The seminal Supreme Court decision that addressed the issue of State sovereign immunity asserted on the basis of the eleventh amendment, full faith and credit, and comity was Nevada v. Hall (1979), 440 U.S. 410, 59 L. Ed. 2d 416, 99 S. Ct. 1182. The Hall Court first held that the eleventh amendment does not prohibit a State from being sued in another State’s courts; it only prohibits such suits in Federal court. (Hall, 440 U.S. at 420-21, 59 L. Ed. 2d at 425, 99 S. Ct. at 1188.) Second, the Hall Court found that the full faith and credit clause does not require the forum State to apply another State’s law concerning sovereign immunity if it would contravene the forum State’s own legitimate public policy. (Hall, 440 U.S. at 422, 59 L. Ed. 2d at 426, 99 S. Ct. at 1189.) Finally, the Hall Court stated that although a State may recognize another State’s sovereign immunity based on comity, it is not constitutionally mandated. Hall, 440 U.S. at 426, 59 L. Ed. 2d at 428, 99 S. Ct. at 1191. Recognition of a foreign State’s law based on comity is not a constitutional command, but rather a common law doctrine. Moreover, we are not restricted by the Constitution in employing this doctrine in the area of State sovereign immunity. (See Hall, 440 U.S. at 426, 59 L. Ed. 2d at 429, 99 S. Ct. at 1191.) We have held that constitutional questions will not be considered if the case can be decided on other grounds. (In re Application of Rosewell (1983), 97 Ill. 2d 434, 440; In re Estate of Ersch (1963), 29 Ill. 2d 572, 576-77.) Therefore, we decline to address the eleventh amendment or full faith and credit concerns raised by Purdue, because we find that we can resolve the issue before us on the common law principle of comity. Judicial comity is defined as “[t]he principle in accordance with which the courts of one state or jurisdiction will give effect to the laws and judicial decisions of another, not as a matter of obligation, but out of deference and respect.” (Black’s Law Dictionary 334 (4th ed. 1951).) Comity may be granted to another State’s law, or to the law of a foreign nation. The intimate nature of the States’ relationships with one another leads to a greater degree of comity toward each other than a State may give a foreign nation’s law. (16 Am. Jur. 2d Conflict of Laws §10 (1979).) Interstate comity is viewed more favorably because the purpose of comity is to foster cooperation, promote harmony, and build goodwill (Lee v. Miller County (5th Cir. 1986), 800 F.2d 1372, 1375), and to encourage amiable and respectful relations among individual States (16 Am. Jur. 2d Conflict of Laws §9 (1979)). In discussing comity in the context of State sovereign immunity, the Supreme Court said: “It may be wise policy, as a matter. of harmonious interstate relations, for States to accord each other immunity or to respect any established limits on liability. They are free to do so.” Hall, 440 U.S. at 426, 59 L. Ed. 2d at 429, 99 S. Ct. at 1191. In Illinois, we have not had occasion to consider whether on the basis of comity our courts should respect another State’s statutorily imposed sovereign immunity in a tort context. Unless we elect to extend such a statute through the doctrine of comity, the statute generally would be without force beyond the jurisdiction of the enacting State. (See Dougherty v. American McKenna Process Co. (1912), 255 Ill. 369, 371.) When deciding whether to apply foreign law in our courts, we must examine the relevant public policies of the State of Illinois. Comity does not obligate us to employ a foreign law that is contrary to a public policy of this State. (Thomas v. First National Bank (1904), 213 Ill. 261, 266; see also Wall v. Chesapeake & Ohio Ry. Co. (1919), 290 Ill. 227, 230.) Thus, in Illinois, we have also characterized comity as “providing] a means for courts to refuse to apply foreign law which [is] clearly contrary to the ‘public morals, natural justice, or the general interest of the citizens of this State.’ [Citation.]” Nelson v. Hix (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 343, 352. Probing the interest the citizens of Illinois have in this issue, we note initially that our State constitution provides that “[e]very person shall find a certain remedy *** for all injuries and wrongs.” (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §12.) This concept is the same in our current constitution as in our 1870 Constitution, but the drafters of our current constitution substituted “shall” for “ought to.” (Ill. Ann. Stat., 1970 Const., art. I, §12, Constitutional Commentary, at 556 (Smith-Hurd 1971).) This change reflected the interpretation given the word “ought” in this section in prior case law. (3 Record of Proceedings, Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention 1490-91.) Nevertheless, we have held that this constitutional provision merely expresses a philosophy, and does not mandate a certain remedy be provided in any specific form. (Sullivan v. Midlothian Park District (1972), 51 Ill. 2d 274, 277.) Consequently, it is not violative of this aspirational goal to limit or restrict available remedies. See Sullivan, 51 Ill. 2d at 277-78. In fact, had Schoeberlein sued an instrumentality of the State of Illinois, his remedy would have been only a limited one. First, our legislature vested jurisdiction over this type of action solely in the Illinois Court of Claims. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 37, par. 439.8.) Thus, a suit filed against this State in an Illinois circuit court would fail for want of proper subject matter jurisdiction. (See Ellis v. Board of Governors (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 387.) Moreover, any tort recovery would be limited to $100,000 in the Court of Claims (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 37, par. 439.8(d).) Finally, to successfully seek relief in the Court of Claims for personal injuries, a litigant must meet strict notice requirements. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 37, pars. 439.22 — 1, 439.22 — 2. Similar to our Court of Claims Act, Indiana limits the remedy a litigant can seek when suing the State of Indiana. Indiana law provides sovereign immunity from suit, except when filed in an Indiana court. (Ind. Code Ann. §34 — 4 — 16.5—5(d) (West 1987).) Indiana statutes cap potential recovery at $300,000 (Ind. Code Ann. §34 — 4— 16.5 — 4 (West 1987)), and also provide for a notice requirement (Ind. Code Ann. §34 — 4 — 16.5—7 (West 1987)). Within these limitations, however, Indiana freed Schoeberlein to pursue his claim in its courts, thereby affording him a remedy for a proven injury or wrong, a remedy not unlike that furnished by our Court of Claims Act. Therefore, it cannot be said that by honoring Indiana’s sovereign immunity statute, this court leaves Schoeberlein without redress, contravening Illinois public policy as stated in our constitution. Schoeberlein had a remedy, but it was one that depended on selecting the proper forum for his grievance. Furthermore, forum limitations are how both Illinois and Indiana address the issue of sovereign immunity. Both States have statutes limiting State liability and restricting the forum for suit, reflecting public policy considerations. In Illinois, our 1970 Constitution abolished sovereign immunity, “[ejxcept as the General Assembly *** provided] by law.” (Ill. Const. 1970, art. XIII, §4.) Concurrent with the effective date of the 1970 Constitution, however, the legislature reenacted the Court of Claims Act. Members of the legislature felt that maintaining limited sovereign immunity was extremely important and necessary to prevent litigation chaos. 77th Ill. Gen. Assem., Senate Proceedings, October 18, 1971, at 22. There are serious practical problems regarding sovereign immunity that can result if States do not honor each other’s immunity provisions. A dissenting opinion in Nevadla v. Hall illustrated some potential difficulties: “I am also concerned about the practical implications of this decision. The federal system as expressed in the Constitution — with the exception of representation in the House — is built on notions of state parity. No system is truly federal otherwise. This decision cannot help but induce some ‘Balkanization’ in state relationships as States try to isolate assets from foreign judgments and generally reduce their contacts with other jurisdictions. That will work to the detriment of smaller States — like Nevada — who are more dependent on the facilities of a dominant neighbor — in this case, California. The problem of enforcement of a judgment against a State creates a host of additional difficulties. Assuming Nevada has no seizable assets in California, can the plaintiff obtain enforcement of California’s judgment in Nevada courts? Can Nevada refuse to give the California judgment ‘full faith and credit’ because it is against state policy? Can Nevada challenge the seizure of its assets by California in this Court? If not, are the States relegated to the choice between the gamesmanship and tests of strength that characterize international disputes, on the one hand, and the midnight seizure of assets associated with private debt collection on the other?” (Hall, 440 U.S. at 443, 59 L. Ed. 2d at 439, 99 S. Ct. at 1199-1200 (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).) Prior to Nevada v. Hall, the Supreme Court presumed that States intended to honor each other’s declarations of sovereign immunity based on comity. (See Hall, 440 U.S. at 425, 59 L. Ed. 2d at 428, 99 S. Ct. at 1190.) Our legislature enacted the Court of Claims Act, in part, to protect the State from interference in the performance of governmental functions and to preserve control over the government’s fisc. (S.J. Groves & Sons Co. v. State (1982), 93 Ill. 2d 397, 401.) Undoubtedly, our legislature hoped that other States would respect the Court of Claims Act by refusing jurisdiction over suits in which Illinois is a party defendant. See Ramsden v. State (Mo. 1985), 695 S.W.2d 457 (Missouri declined jurisdiction over suit brought against Illinois); contra Struebin v. State (Iowa 1982), 322 N.W.2d 84 (Iowa refused to respect Illinois’ immunity based on comity). One case in which this court declined to honor a sovereign immunity claim was People ex rel. Hoagland v. Streeper (1957), 12 Ill. 2d 204. In Streeper, this court refused to respect the State of Missouri’s asserted sovereign immunity claim in an in rem action concerning property located within Illinois. Nevertheless, because it was an in rem property action, Streeper is clearly distinguishable from the case at bar and not dispositive of the issue before us. There are also other aspects of Streeper which make the holding in that case inapplicable here. We note that our sister States, when faced with the issue confronting us today, are split on whether to respect State sovereign immunity. Several States have declined jurisdiction, honoring immunity provisions: Indiana (Clement v. State (1988), _ Ind. App. _, 524 N.E.2d 36), Missouri (Ramsden v. State (Mo. 1985), 695 S.W.2d 457), North Dakota (Paulus v. State (1924), 52 N.D. 84, 201 N.W. 867), South Carolina (Newberry v. Georgia Department of Industry & Trade (1985), 286 S.C. 574, 336 S.E.2d 464), and Texas (Lee v. Miller County (5th Cir. 1986), 800 F.2d 1372 (5th Circuit Federal Court of Appeals applying Texas law)). Other States have refused to recognize State sovereign immunity laws: California (Hall v. University of Nevada (1972), 8 Cal. 3d 522, 503 P.2d 1363, 105 Cal. Rptr. 355), Colorado (Peterson v. State (Colo. App. 1981), 635 P.2d 241), District of Columbia (Biscoe v. Arlington County (D.C. Cir. 1984), 738 F.2d 1352 (Federal Court of Appeals for D.C. Circuit applying D.C. law)), Iowa (Struebin v. State (Iowa 1982), 322 N.W.2d 84), Nevada (Mianecki v. Second Judicial District Court (1983), 99 Nev. 93, 658 P.2d 422), and New York (Ehrlich-Bober & Co. v. University of Houston (1980), 49 N.Y.2d 574, 404 N.E.2d 726, 427 N.Y.S.2d 604). We note that in Hall v. University of Nevada, wherein comity was denied by the California court, the State of California had waived its own immunity from liability in similar circumstances and permitted full recovery against the sovereign State of California. (See Nevada v. Hall (1979), 440 U.S. 410, 424, 59 L. Ed. 2d 416, 427, 99 S. Ct. 1182, 1190.) In Biscoe v. Arlington County, the court noted that although Arlington County would be granted immunity if sued in the State of Virginia, the court would not recognize that immunity in the District of Columbia, because had the acts complained of been committed by the police of the District of Columbia, sovereign immunity would not bar suit against the District. (Biscoe v. Arlington County (D.C. Cir. 1984), 738 F.2d 1352, 1357.) Also, in Struebin v. State, wherein the Iowa Supreme Court refused to recognize the sovereign immunity of the State of Illinois, the supreme court of Iowa noted that the State of Iowa permits suits against Iowa under similar circumstances and permits full compensation. (Struebin v. State (Iowa 1982), 322 N.W.2d 84, 86.) Likewise, in Mianeeki v. Second Judicial District Court, wherein the Nevada Supreme Court would not recognize Wisconsin’s claim of sovereign immunity, the court pointed out that had the same acts been committed in the State of Nevada, sovereign immunity would not bar suit against that State. Mianecki v. Second Judicial District Court (1983), 99 Nev. 93, 97, 658 P.2d 422, 424. However, in Peterson v. State, the Colorado appellate court would not recognize the claim of sovereign immunity of the State of Texas, although a statute granted immunity to Colorado’s public entities in situations similar to those involved in that lawsuit. The Colorado court relied upon general language of the California Supreme Court in Hall v. University of Nevada (1972), 8 Cal. 3d 522, 503 P.2d 1363, 105 Cal. Rptr. 355, without discussing the fact that under California law, full recovery could be had against the State of California, and sovereign immunity was not recognized in circumstances similar to those involved in Hall v. University of Nevada. Also, in Ehrlich-Bober & Co. v. University of Houston, the court of appeals of New York refused to grant sovereign immunity to the State of Texas in a case involving commercial litigation because of New York’s recognized interest in maintaining and fostering its undisputed status as the preeminent commercial and financial nerve center of the nation and the world. (Ehrlich-Bober, 49 N.Y.2d at 581, 404 N.E.2d at 730, 427 N.Y.S.2d at 608.) The dissent, however, points out that New York, as does Texas, recognizes the principle of sovereign immunity and states that since New York State’s policy parallels that of Texas, New York should recognize and give effect to the legislatively declared policy of Texas. Thus, the generally accepted rationale of the States that have not, through comity, accepted another State’s claim of sovereign immunity is that a sister State’s claim of immunity will not be recognized if the forum of litigation permits recovery against the home State under similar circumstances. In Illinois, as noted above, under the circumstances presented in this case, Illinois could not be sued in the circuit courts of this State, and a limitation is placed on the amount that may be recovered against Illinois in the Court of Claims. We conclude that on the basis of comity, it is consistent with policies expressed by our Court of Claims Act and not inconsistent with policies in our State constitution to honor Indiana’s reservation of sovereign immunity. We hold that the trial court properly granted Purdue’s motion to dismiss, declining jurisdiction over this cause. Accordingly, the decision of the circuit court is affirmed, and the decision of the appellate court is reversed. Circuit court affirmed; appellate court reversed.

=== CASE 9739494 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:21.749745+00 ===

JUSTICE CALVO, dissenting: Because I conclude that recognition of the Indiana sovereign immunity statute violates Illinois’ public policy of compensating injured persons, I respectfully dissent. The majority admits that our State constitution reflects a policy to provide every injured person with a remedy. (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §12.) Pursuant to this policy, Illinois allows full compensation in its courts for persons injured as a result of the negligence of residents or nonresidents. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 209(a); see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 621.) Schoeberlein resides in and the injury occurred in Illinois. Illinois could hardly have any greater interest than it does here in providing an injured person with a remedy. Indiana, through Purdue, voluntarily sold an allegedly defective product to a company in Illinois and the product injured an Illinois resident. Indiana conducted itself in Illinois as if it were any other nonresident business. Indiana chose to sell its product outside its boundaries, thereby taking the risk that the product would injure someone outside its borders. The California court in Hall v. University of Nevada stated: “We have concluded that sister states who engage in activities within California are subject to our laws with respect to those activities and are subject to suit in California courts with respect to those activities. When the sister state enters into activities in this state, it is not exercising sovereign power over the citizens of this state and is not entitled to the benefits of the sovereign immunity doctrine as to those activities unless this state has conferred immunity by law or as a matter of comity.” (Hall v. University of Nevada (1972), 8 Cal. 3d 522, 524, 503 P.2d 1363, 1364, 105 Cal. Rptr. 355, 356, aff’d (1979), 440 U.S. 410, 59 L. Ed. 2d 416, 99 S. Ct. 1182.) I find the reasoning in Hall v. University of Nevada persuasive and applicable to the case at bar. Indiana elected to do business and perform activities in Illinois and, therefore, subjected itself to the risk of liability in Illinois. Consequently, Indiana should not be allowed to shield itself from liability in Illinois. The majority is concerned that a contrary decision would jeopardize Illinois’ own sovereign immunity. The majority asserts that Indiana and Illinois have similar limited sovereign immunity doctrines. Illinois has not waived its sovereign immunity completely, the majority argues, because Illinois wants “to protect the State from interference in the performance of governmental functions and to preserve control over the government’s fisc.” As the majority notes, Illinois can only be fully protected from suits in other States if the other States recognize Illinois sovereign immunity and refuse jurisdiction over suits brought against Illinois. No direct harm to Illinois sovereign immunity would occur if we allowed Schoeberlein’s suit because Illinois is not a party to the suit. Any harm would only be indirect in that other States may not, likewise, recognize Illinois sovereign immunity. After Nevada v. Hall (1979), 440 U.S. 410, 59 L. Ed. 2d 416, 99 S. Ct. 1182, however, other States are not obligated to recognize Illinois sovereign immunity (see Struebin v. State (Iowa 1982), 322 N.W.2d 84 (Iowa refused to recognize Illinois sovereign immunity)), even if Illinois recognizes their immunity. The majority quotes at length Justice Rehnquist’s dissenting opinion in Nevada v. Hall. In his dissent, Rehnquist discussed the problems that might arise if States refused to honor each other’s immunity statutes. (Hall, 440 U.S. at 443, 59 L. Ed. 2d at 439, 99 S. Ct. at 1199-1200.) The holding of Nevada v. Hall, however, is that a forum State can choose not to recognize another State’s immunity if the forum State decides that such recognition would violate the public policy of the forum State. (Hall, 440 U.S. at 425-27, 59 L. Ed. 2d at 428-29, 99 S. Ct. at 1190-91.) Thus, the majority in Nevada v. Hall decided that the forum State’s public policy considerations could take precedence over the forum State’s concerns with harmonious interstate relations. Hall, 440 U.S. at 426, 59 L. Ed. 2d at 429, 99 S. Ct. at 1191. The majority states that by recognizing Indiana sovereign immunity Schoeberlein is not left without redress because he could have filed suit in Indiana. Schoeberlein simply chose the wrong forum. Thus, the majority concludes, Illinois’ public policy of compensating the injured is not violated. The actual result of the majority’s decision, however, completely denies Schoeberlein any recovery. In Indiana, an injured person has to provide the State with notice of the injury within 180 days of the occurrence of the injury. (Ind. Code Ann. 34 — 4 — 16.5—6 (West 1987).) Schoeberlein can no longer seek redress in Indiana because of the 180-day notice requirement. The majority emphasizes that had Schoeberlein sued an instrumentality of Illinois in Illinois, he could have only brought suit in the Court of Claims. He could not have filed suit against an instrumentality of Illinois in an Illinois circuit court. I find that distinction irrelevant. Indiana does not have a court of claims, so if Schoeberlein filed suit in Indiana, an Indiana circuit court would have tried his case. The Court of Claims has jurisdiction primarily over suits brought against an instrumentality of the State of Illinois. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 37, par. 439.8.) Because Indiana is not an instrumentality of lilinois, Schoeberlein can properly file suit against Indiana in an Illinois circuit court. Although Illinois has retained its sovereign immunity, that immunity is limited. Illinois has a substantial interest in compensating its injured citizens. (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §12; Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, pars. 2 — 209(a), 2 — 621.) I agree with the Colorado court that “where the injured party is a citizen of this state, injured in this state and sues in the courts of this state, there is no immunity, *** as a matter of comity, covering a sister state’s activities in this state.” (Peterson v. State (Colo. App. 1981), 635 P.2d 241, 243.) As the majority acknowledges, the Colorado court in Peterson v. State would not acknowledge Texas sovereign immunity even though Colorado public entities would have had immunity under similar circumstances. (See Peterson, 635 P.2d at 242.) In addition, in Ehrlieh-Bober & Co. v. University of Houston (1980), 49 N.Y.2d 574, 404 N.E.2d 726, 427 N.Y.S.2d 604, New York did not recognize Texas sovereign immunity even though New York and Texas had similar sovereign immunity policies. (See Ehrlich-Bober, 49 N.Y.2d at 584, 404 N.E.2d at 732-33, 427 N.Y.S.2d at 610-11 (Jones, J., dissenting).) Thus, even assuming Illinois and Indiana have similar immunity policies, Illinois need not recognize Indiana sovereign immunity because Illinois has a strong public policy of protecting and compensating its injured citizens. In light of Nevada v. Hall, such a decision would not harm Illinois sovereign immunity. Consequently, I would affirm the decision of the appellate court.

=== CASE 9739495 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:16:22.615524+00 ===

JUSTICE CLARK delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant, James Harris, was charged by indictment in the circuit court of Cook County with four counts of murder (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, pars. 9 — 1(a)(1) through (a)(3)), two counts of armed robbery (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 18 — 2(a)), four counts of aggravated kidnapping (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, pars. 10— 2(a)(3), (a)(5)), one count of unlawful use of weapons (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, pars. 24 — 1(a)(4), (b)), one count of attempted murder (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 8 — 4), two counts of aggravated battery (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 12 — 4(a)), and four counts of armed violence (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 33A — 2). All of these charges stemmed from his alleged involvement in an incident during which Theresa Woods was wounded and Jesse James, Sr., killed. Prior to trial, all of the kidnapping, armed violence, and weapons counts were dismissed. Before the case was submitted to the jury, the State withdrew, without objection, the armed robbery counts and substituted three counts of attempted armed robbery (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 8 — 4). The jury found defendant guilty of the murder of Jesse James, Sr. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(a)(1)), the attempted murder of Theresa Woods (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 8 — 4), the aggravated battery of Theresa Woods (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 12 — 4(a)), and the attempted armed robbery of Theresa Woods and Jesse James, Sr. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 8 — 4). Defendant waived a jury for the death sentencing hearing. The trial court found defendant eligible for the death penalty based on the presence of the statutory aggravating factor that the murder had been committed during the course of an attempted armed robbery (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(b)(6)). The trial court also found no mitigating circumstances sufficient to preclude the imposition of the death penalty. It sentenced defendant to die by lethal injection for the murder of Jesse James, Sr. Defendant was also sentenced to terms of 15 years for each of the attempted armed robbery convictions, the terms to run concurrently, and 30 years on the attempted murder conviction, the term to run consecutively to the terms for the attempted armed robbery convictions. Because the death penalty had been imposed, defendant appealed directly to this court pursuant to Rule 603 (107 Ill. 2d R. 603). Defendant challenged his convictions on various grounds, which can be grouped under four headings. He claimed that he was denied a fair trial because of (1) the prosecutor’s use of peremptory challenges to exclude blacks from the jury; (2) the prosecution’s alleged failure to disclose exculpatory material to the defense; (3) the ineffective assistance of counsel; and (4) the prosecutor’s allegedly prejudicial remarks in summation. Defendant’s various challenges to his sentence can be grouped- under two headings. Defendant claimed that his sentence must be reversed because of (1) various errors claimed in connection with the trial court’s consideration of evidence, presented at the aggravation-mitigation stage of the death penalty hearing, that the defendant killed a person in 1969, a charge that had been dismissed upon the State’s motion of nolle prosequi, and (2) the alleged unconstitutionality of the Illinois death penalty act. While defendant’s appeal was pending, the United States Supreme Court held in Batson v. Kentucky (1986), 476 U.S. 79, 96, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69, 87, 106 S. Ct. 1712, 1722-23, “that a defendant may establish a prima facie case of purposeful discrimination in selection of the petit jury solely on evidence concerning the prosecutor’s exercise of peremptory challenges at the defendant’s trial.” The Court subsequently held that the rule announced in Batson applied retroactively to all cases that had been pending on direct review at the time Batson was decided. (Griffith v. Kentucky (1987), 479 U.S. 314, 328, 93 L. Ed. 2d 649, 661, 107 S. Ct. 708, 716.) We therefore issued a supervisory order retaining jurisdiction of this case but remanding it to the trial court for a hearing to determine whether the State used peremptory challenges to unconstitutionally exclude blacks from the jury. At the hearing, the trial court determined that defendant established a prima facie case of discrimination. However, the court concluded that the State presented neutral, nonracial reasons for its use of peremptory challenges, thereby rebutting defendant’s prima facie case. Upon return of the case to this court, defendant renews his earlier arguments and further claims that the trial court’s finding at the Batson hearing was incorrect. TRIAL Defendant’s convictions stem from events occurring in the early morning hours of February 10, 1983. The State’s chief witness to these events was Theresa Woods, a waitress at the tavern owned by Jesse James, Sr. According to her testimony, she and James began closing the tavern at 2 a.m. After closing, she checked out the cash registers, leaving $30 in each. Sometime between 3:30 and 4 a.m., Woods and James finished and left the tavern, stopping to lock the door and set the alarm. As Woods and James were leaving, a man whom Woods had never seen before approached them and asked what time the buses stopped running. Woods replied that she did not know and continued to walk away with James. James and Woods walked across 69th Street to James’ car. James stopped to put jumper cables into the trunk. Suddenly, the man who had approached the pair and asked for the time came towards them again, this time grabbing Woods by her coat and pointing a gun at her head. Woods’ legs slipped out from under her, and as the man pulled her back up she saw his face. The assailant ordered Woods and James to get into James’ car. Woods went into the rear seat, and following the assailant’s command, sat behind James, who was sitting in the driver’s seat. Woods testified that from her position in the back seat, and with the aid of streetlights in the area, she was again able to view the assailant’s face. Her assailant remained in this position during the time the three spent driving around the streets in the area. The assailant ordered James to drive to the next corner. When they arrived at the corner, the assailant then ordered James to turn into an alley, drive to the end of it, and stop the car. James complied. The assailant threatened to kill James and Woods if they did not give him $300. He also told them that he did not “care about” killing the two of them because if he was caught he would be “up for good.” James replied that he had some money at his tavern. The assailant then told James to drive back to the tavern. James did so, stopping the car in an alley perpendicular to 68th Street, just behind the tavern. The assailant then ordered Woods to go into the tavern and retrieve the money. He told her that if she did not return in three minutes, with the money, he would kill James. Woods then ran to the tavern, opened the door, and jumped over the counter to the cash register. She took all the paper money from both cash registers and, without stopping to count it, ran back outside. When she returned, she noticed that the car had been moved from its original position and was now at the intersection of the alley and 69th Street. When she reached the car, the assailant ordered her to get in. James protested, saying that there was no need for Woods to reenter the car. The assailant then told James to “shut up,” and that he, the assailant, was “running this.” Woods testified that she then saw the assailant pull James toward himself, and shoot James in the head. Woods turned and ran, tripping and falling a short distance from the car. She landed on her left side and turned over on her back. The assailant came towards her, stood over her, and pointed his gun at her face. He said: “You bitch.” She began pleading: “[Pjlease do not do this to me,” and raised her hands in the air to protect her face. She rolled to her left as the assailant fired. She then remained lying face down, not realizing at that point that a bullet had entered her right shoulder. She continued to remain in this position for several minutes, pretending to be dead. After a few seconds she heard the footsteps of a person running away, first on the pavement and then through weeds growing in an empty lot on the north side of the street. After several seconds had passed she stood up and saw James lying on the ground. She also noticed that the car had now collided with the glass window of a building adjacent to the alley. She then ran back into the bar and called the police. Chicago police officer Abraham Wilson testified that he arrived at the scene a few minutes after 4:18 a.m. He met Theresa Woods, who said that she and a man had been shot. Officer Wilson then saw James lying on the ground and went over to him. Officer Wilson testified that James told Wilson that an assailant had reached over and shot James and that “he didn’t have to do that.” Officer Wilson then called for an ambulance, which took Woods and James to a hospital. James later died of a bullet wound to the head. In order to impeach Theresa Woods’ testimony, the defense called Chicago police officer Rene Daniels, Officer Wilson’s partner, and Chicago police detective Geraldine Perry. Officer Daniels testified that Woods provided Daniels with a description of the assailant from which Daniels inferred that the assailant was 5 feet 6 inches tall, a height several inches shorter than that of the defendant. Detective Perry, who interviewed Theresa Woods in Billings Hospital, testified that Woods told Perry that Woods had seen the defendant and James struggling in the car as she emerged from the tavern with the money, that the car was moving, and that she saw it collide with the building on the north side of 69th Street. Woods did not tell Perry that she had approached the driver’s side of the car, or that she heard any words spoken between James and the offender. Defense counsel also cross-examined Theresa Woods about statements she had given at the hospital to a Dr. Marion Chung, but the defense did not call Dr. Chung to testify to these statements. Cleveland Johnson testified that, as he was driving to work, he stopped at the intersection of 63rd and State Streets at approximately 4:15 a.m. While at the intersection, he noticed a man running out from under the State Street underpass. This man, whom Johnson identified as defendant, stopped at the corner of 63rd and State Streets and ducked behind a traffic control box. Johnson then noticed that a police patrol wagon was turning from State Street onto 63rd Street. After the police patrol wagon had passed by, defendant stepped out from behind the box and crossed the street. Meanwhile Johnson, continuing to watch defendant, had slowly turned his car off 63rd Street and onto State Street. Defendant began running behind and alongside the passenger side of Johnson’s still moving car. When defendant began hitting the side of the car with his left hand, Johnson stopped the car, reached over to the passenger side and rolled the window several inches down. Defendant then offered Johnson $5 for a ride to 51st Street. As Johnson was considering this offer, defendant reached down with his right hand and tugged at the waistband of his pants. Of&cers Michael Grady and Ted Kurzweil of the Conrail police testified that at 4:20 a.m. they were sitting in the front seat of a Chevy Blazer parked on 63rd Street, one block east of State Street. Two Chicago police officers came by and gave the two Conrail officers the description of the man they were looking for in connection with the shootings of Woods and James: “a male black, wearing a blue jean jacket with a large ’fro.” The Conrail officers then drove to the corner of State and 63rd Streets, where they saw a man fitting that description, and whom they identified in court as defendant. This man was running alongside a slowly moving car. Officer Grady testified that defendant was holding a gun in his right hand. The two officers turned down State Street, sped up to catch Johnson’s car, and pulled up in front of it. They left their own car and pointed their guns at defendant just as Johnson was considering defendant’s offer of five dollars for a ride. Officer Grady ordered defendant to “freeze” and drop his gun. According to Grady, defendant placed the gun in his waistband and said that he “gave up.” Officer Grady then pushed defendant over the hood of Johnson’s car, patted defendant down, and took a .32 caliber revolver from his waistband. At trial the prosecution’s expert on ballistics testified that, in his opinion, this revolver possessed characteristics identical to those of the weapon which fired the bullet recovered from James’ head. He also testified that he had examined the revolver on February 12, 1983, two days after the incident, and that, in his opinion, it had been fired three times shortly before that date. Shortly after the shooting, Chicago police officers visited Woods in her hospital bed and showed her 10 photographs of faces, including one of the defendant. From this array, Woods selected defendant’s photo, and identified him as her assailant. She also identified defendant in court. At trial, defendant admitted to being the man arrested by the Conrail officers, but denied that he was Woods’ assailant. Defendant stated that, on February 9, 1983, he lived alone at 1809 East 71st Street, in an apartment next door to his mother’s apartment. At approximately 10 p.m. that evening, defendant went to meet Marie Brown, one of his sisters, at the Toast of the Town Lounge at 71st Street and Stony Island Avenue. He stayed with this sister at the lounge until 3 a.m., when he walked her the half block to her home. Defendant accompanied her into her apartment and helped her move some furniture. He left her apartment some time later and went to the house of a second sister at 70th Street and Harper Avenue. There he called his wife, and after a while walked to the corner of 71st Street and Stony Island to wait for a bus. After a few minutes he realized that the 71st Street bus did not run that late, so he began walking north towards 63rd Street, where he knew he could catch a bus. After catching a bus there, he left the bus at the corner of 63rd and State Streets, walked a short distance and stood in front of a corner tavern, waiting for the northbound State Street bus. As he was waiting, he noticed a car traveling slowly north along State Street in front of the tavern. Defendant walked over to the car, knocked on the window, and asked the driver for a ride to 53rd Street. The driver rolled down his window. Defendant offered to pay the driver $5 for the ride. As he was making this offer, a “jeep or truck” pulled up and two men with guns jumped out. When they pointed their guns at defendant, defendant raised his hands in the air. According to defendant’s testimony, when arrested he had no gun in his possession. One of the two officers told him to lean over the hood of the car, and he was then handcuffed and searched. Defendant testified that the officer did not take any object from defendant’s possession. Defendant’s sister, Marie Brown, testified that she was with defendant at the Toast of the Town Lounge from 11 p.m. on the night of February 9, 1983. According to Brown, the two of them left the lounge not at 3 a.m. but at 2:15. They then went to Brown’s house, where defendant helped her move some furniture. Defendant then left her house at 2:45 a.m. At the conclusion of the trial, the jury found defendant guilty of murder, attempted murder, aggravated battery, and attempted robbery. DEATH SENTENCING HEARING After the jury returned its verdicts, the State moved to hold a death sentencing hearing. Defendant waived his right to a jury at this hearing. At the first stage of the hearing, the death qualification stage, all of the evidence presented at trial was admitted by stipulation. In addition, the defense called Dr. Marion Chung, a physician who had interviewed and treated Theresa Woods shortly after the shooting. The State argued that defendant was eligible for the death penalty because he was over 18 years of age at the time of the offense; the killing took place in the course of another felony, attempted armed robbery; and Jesse James was actually killed by defendant. Dr. Chung testified to a statement made by Theresa Woods. The defense argued that this statement impeached Woods’ testimony at trial and established that the killing had not taken place during the course of a robbery. According to Dr. Chung, Theresa Woods stated that “a gentleman had come into her working place and had shot the owner and when she saw that happen she turned and tried to flee. She fell, the bullet hit her right shoulder in the back. She fell to the ground and she hit her chin. After she felt the bullet in the right shoulder she fell to the ground.” The trial court found that defendant was eligible for the death penalty (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 9— 1(b)(6)). During the second phase of the death penalty hearing, the aggravation-mitigation phase, the State introduced evidence of defendant’s eight prior convictions: four for theft, two for armed robbery, and one each for burglary and robbery. Additionally, the State presented evidence that, on April 15, 1969, defendant killed a person named Gary Green. Although the State had initially charged the defendant with that killing, it moved to nolpros the charge at a hearing held on January 27,1972. Shortly after the State began direct examination of its first witness to this earlier killing, defense counsel stated that he objected to the testimony of the witness and asked to be heard at a sidebar. At the sidebar, defense counsel first stated that he had subpoenaed police reports on the 1969 shooting and had not yet received them. After further discussion, defense counsel stated that he had ordered, but not yet received, the transcript of the January 27, 1972, proceeding at which the charge was nol-prossed. The following colloquy then took place: “THE COURT: Now, is this — is the point that you are making that you should have transcripts to be able to impeach? MR. KUNZ: Yes. THE COURT: That is your total point? MR. KUNZ: Well my first point is that the state should not be allowed to prove up in aggravation now a case which on their motion was nolled in 1971 or ’72. THE COURT: You are satisfied that it was not a finding of not guilty? MR. KUNZ: Yes. THE COURT: It was not a finding of guilty? MR. KUNZ: I am satisfied with that. THE COURT: All right. Insofar as — do you have any law to the effect that a case nolled cannot be used by the State in aggravation? MR. KUNZ: No. THE COURT: Is there anything about the passage of time that you are incorporating to make your point? MR. KUNZ: Yes. I would like — I have been telephoning — well, for one thing I need some time to bring in my rebuttal witnesses. I would like to bring in the brother or unless the State will stipulate to the transcript when I get it, that that was his testimony. THE COURT: Well, you will be allowed all the time that is necessary to bring in witnesses. Excuse me.” After some discussion as to whether the witness who was currently testifying had previously testified at the 1972 nolle prosequi hearing, defense counsel said: “I am just suggesting that I might ask to recall this witness to reopen my cross examination in the event that the transcript I ordered weeks ago shows that this witness did testify.” The court responded: “All right. Very well. The record will show that.” There is no further indication of any ruling on defense counsel’s initial objection to the testimony of the State’s first witness, or on counsel’s argument that the State should not be allowed to introduce in aggravation facts relating to a charge which the State had previously moved to nol-pros. The State’s first witness was Lynn McDonald. At the time of Gary Green’s death in 1969, McDonald lived in the same housing project as Green and defendant. McDonald belonged to a gang known as the Disciples, while defendant belonged to a rival gang, the Blackstone Rangers. McDonald had convictions for bribery and theft. McDonald testified that on April 15, 1969, he was on the fifteenth floor of an apartment building with several other persons, including Gary Green and Gary’s brother, Rochester Green. At approximately 8 p.m. they heard gunshots coming from downstairs. They all went downstairs to the front of the building and to a wall which separated the building from a nearby school. Gary Green went over to the east end of the wall and looked over the top. As Gary Green did this, McDonald saw defendant and another person in the schoolyard opposite the wall. He saw a rifle in defendant’s hands. After a few gang slogans were yelled out from both sides of the wall, McDonald saw defendant fire the rifle, turn and walk away. After a moment, he saw defendant turn again and fire a shot towards the place where Gary Green was standing. Rochester Green, the brother of Gary Green, also testified that he was present when Gary Green was shot. According to Rochester Green, he, Lynn McDonald, and others were all present at the wall between the school and the apartment building at 8 p.m. on April 15, 1969. They heard a shot and all fell to the ground. After a while Gary Green rose and went to the east part of the wall. Lynn McDonald followed him, as did Rochester Green. As they were going, Rochester Green heard a second shot. He then walked up to the top of the wall and saw defendant and another person running away from the wall towards the street. The State also called Rudolph Nimocks, a Chicago police officer. Nimocks testified that he had investigated the killing of Gary Green in 1969 and had interviewed Lynn McDonald and Rochester Green. Over a hearsay objection, he testified that both McDonald and Green told him that they were standing at the wall, heard a shot, and, after hearing the shot, looked over the wall to see defendant — first standing and holding a gun, and then running away. Rochester Green had also testified at the 1972 nolle prosequi hearing. At that time he stated he had been playing on a ball field at the time of the shooting, that he had seen the person who shot his brother, a person who had the nickname of “Rat,” and who was not defendant. The defense adduced expert testimony that the bullet which killed Gary Green could only have been fired from a handgun, and could not have been fired from a rifle such as the one Lynn McDonald testified he had seen defendant fire at Gary Green. Defense counsel also attempted to introduce into evidence statements made by the assistant State’s Attorney at the nolle prosequi hearing. At that hearing the assistant State’s Attorney stated to the court: “Your honor, based on this information, and I would first indicate as I told Mrs. Janie Green and also her boy, that on their part, being related to the victim, I am very impressed and the State was very impressed by their candor and by their appearance and their apparent search for the truth during the time this matter had been pending when they found out who, in fact, was the actual murderer, since they called it to our attention this morning, the State would at this time, being interested only in justice, your honor, move to nolle prosse this case.” At the sentencing hearing defense counsel also attempted to introduce evidence that at the nolle prosequi hearing, the court sustained the State’s motion to nolpros and stated: “The record should indicate that the People of the State of Illinois in this instance, has done what the.court feels is right, and they are to be commended for their actions.” At the sentencing hearing, the court sustained the State’s objection to all of these statements. Defendant presented the following evidence in mitigation. He testified that, as a youth, he had been intimidated by gang members and forced to pay protection money. Since he seldom had any money he eventually formed for his own protection his own gang, which, he admitted, later became affiliated with the gang known as the Blackstone Rangers. However, he denied killing Gary Green. He was first sent to Cook County jail at the age of 16. During this stay in prison he admitted fighting with other inmates but testified that he fought only in order to protect himself from homosexual rape. During this first stay in prison he was often subject to discipline. During a second stay in prison he was a model inmate. He taught art classes, was never subject to discipline, was never placed in segregation, and received several commendations. He received one commendation for helping a fellow inmate who had been stabbed several times in the chest in a gang-related incident. Defendant approached the wounded inmate as he lay bleeding in the prison gallery, and persuaded another inmate to help him carry the wounded man to the prison hospital. After receiving the commendation, defendant wrote to prison authorities asking that he receive good-time credit in addition to the commendation. Defendant also presented evidence of his long-standing talent for, and interest in, art, both by his own testimony, and by the admission of many of his paintings. Defendant also presented the testimony of his current parole officer. She testified that he had complied with all rules and regulations pertaining to his parole and had fully availed himself of supervision. Finally, defendant presented the testimony of Anna and Fred Warnken, at whose Kansas farm defendant had stayed for three weeks in October 1982. They both testified that they trusted defendant and would invite him to stay with them again. The trial court, assessing the evidence in the aggravation-mitigation phase, found that defendant had killed Gary Green, and had a long and significant history of criminal activity. In addition, the court found that defendant had intentionally killed Jesse James, Sr., and had exhibited extreme cruelty when he did so. The court found no mitigating factors to be present. While noting that defendant’s viciousness may have been originally a tactic motivated by defendant’s need to protect himself, it concluded that defendant was now inherently “vicious.” The court refused to find that defendant’s artistic talent was a mitigating factor; rather it found that talent aggravated his offense because it indicated that he had possessed an alternative to a life of crime. Finally the court considered whether defendant’s aid to the wounded inmate was mitigating, but concluded that defendant’s letter asking for good-time credit indicated that defendant’s aid had been selfishly motivated. The court found “no mitigating factors within the evidence,” and sentenced defendant to death. The court also sentenced defendant to 30 years’ imprisonment for attempted murder and 15 years’ on each conviction for attempted armed robbery, the attempted murder conviction term to run consecutively to the two attempted armed robbery conviction terms. POST-TRIAL HEARING At a post-trial hearing in which defendant was represented by new counsel, defendant sought to demonstrate that he was entitled to a new trial because of the alleged incompetence of his original attorneys, the State’s alleged concealment of a witness, and the State’s alleged alteration of the testimony of certain other witnesses. At this hearing Jamison Kunz and Russell Born, defendant’s attorneys at trial, testified on his behalf. Kunz testified that he had received through discovery police reports which stated that defendant’s apprehension had “cleared up” 30 previously unsolved armed robberies, as well as several shootings. Kunz testified that he had been told by a police officer that this information was false, and that the police officer would have been available to so testify. Kunz testified that, while defendant asked him to use this evidence as impeachment, Kunz did not do so. Kunz also testified that Assistant State’s Attorney Daniel Franks had informed Kunz during the trial that the State would not call as a witness Dr. Marion Chung, the physician who had treated Theresa Woods. On April 26, 1984, the second day of trial, when Kunz, keeping a “poker face,” casually inquired about Dr. Chung’s whereabouts, the State’s Attorney told Kunz that Dr. Chung was on vacation and “out of town.” Kunz testified that he did not pursue the matter further because he believed that he could adequately impeach Theresa Woods’ testimony by calling Officer Daniels and Detective Perry, and that further impeachment would only tend to confuse the jury. Russell Born, an attorney who assisted Kunz during the trial, also testified to the State’s Attorney’s statement about Dr. Chung’s whereabouts. Kunz further testified that although he was aware that defendant suffers from a missing lower front tooth and resulting slight speech impediment, he did not cross-examine Theresa Woods about whether she noticed the missing tooth or the speech impediment. Finally, Kunz testified that he never cross-examined Theresa Woods about defendant’s moustache. Dr. Marion Chung testified that she had in fact received a subpoena from the State’s Attorney’s office to testify against defendant. She then told an assistant State’s Attorney, Timothy McKay, that she would return from her vacation on Wednesday, April 25, 1984. She in fact returned from her vacation on that day. On the following day, April 26, she went to an office of the State’s Attorney. She was taken into a small conference room. Two other witnesses, police officers, were also in the room. After a while, Assistant State’s Attorney Daniel Franks entered the conference room and began talking to the police officers. The conversation involved the position of the two officers’ car when they saw defendant running across the intersection. Both officers stated that their car was not parked immediately next to the intersection, but instead was parked one car length away. Franks disagreed with the officers, stating that the car was probably closer to the corner — a position from which they would have had a better view of defendant as he ran across the intersection. The conversation continued for an hour, and the two officers eventually agreed that the car must have been parked closer to the intersection than they had remembered. Dr. Chung also testified that she had a conversation with Franks. Franks had Chung review the medical records she had written concerning Theresa Woods, which included a record of what Woods had told Chung about the shooting. Franks then asked Chung several times if she was absolutely sure that what she had written was an accurate record of what Woods had told her. Franks conversed with Chung for 15 to 20 minutes, and finally informed Chung that the medical record was “totally the opposite” of Woods’ trial testimony. At the post-trial hearing the court denied defense counsel’s motion to dismiss and supplemental motion for a new trial. It found no ineffective assistance of counsel, no attempt by the State to hide a witness, and no attempt to alter witness testimony. We now consider the issues raised by defendant. THE CONVICTIONS Prosecutorial Nondisclosure Defendant first claims that the prosecutor’s apparent misrepresentation of Dr. Chung’s whereabouts and failure to disclose that she would impeach Theresa Woods violated the prosecution’s obligation to disclose relevant exculpatory material to the defense. Even assuming that the prosecution in fact misrepresented Dr. Chung’s whereabouts or failed to disclose her impeachment evidence, we do not agree that these acts, under these circumstances, constitute error. The defendant concedes that neither of his trial attorneys specifically requested that the prosecution produce Dr. Chung as a witness, or otherwise provide any information about her. Under Brady v. Maryland (1963), 373 U.S. 83, 87, 10 L. Ed. 2d 215, 218, 83 S. Ct. 1194, 1196-97, the prosecution has a duty to disclose exculpatory material to the accused upon specific request. In the absence of a specific request, Brady does not apply to this case. However, the United States Supreme Court has also recognized that the prosecution has a duty to provide certain exculpatory material to the defense even absent a specific request. (United States v. Agurs (1976), 427 U.S. 97, 111-12, 49 L. Ed. 2d 342, 354, 96 S. Ct. 2392, 2401.) Under Agurs, the prosecution’s duty to disclose absent request extends only to evidence “so clearly supportive of a claim of innocence that it gives the prosecution notice of a duty to produce” (427 U.S. at 107, 49 L. Ed. 2d at 351, 96 S. Ct. at 2399) and which “creates a reasonable doubt that did not otherwise exist” (427 U.S. at 112, 49 L. Ed. 2d at 355, 96 S. Ct. at 2402). Stated in another way, the undisclosed evidence will be considered material only if its “suppression undermines confidence in the outcome of the trial” (United States v. Bagley (1985), 473 U.S. at 678, 87 L. Ed. 2d at 491, 105 S. Ct. at 3381), and if there is a “reasonable probability that, had the evidence been disclosed to the defense, the result of the proceeding would have been different” (473 U.S. at 682, 87 L. Ed. 2d at 494, 105 S. Ct. at 3384). We are unable to agree with the defendant’s contention that the appearance of Dr. Chung as a witness for either the prosecution or the defense would have changed the outcome of the trial. The crucial fact is that Dr. Chung could only have testified to the same statements, contained in the medical records as recorded by Dr. Chung, that were already available to the defense and which the defense in fact used to cross-examine Theresa Woods. The defense may have achieved some marginal benefit from having Dr. Chung testify to the impeaching statement, particularly since Dr. Chung appeared to agree with the defense position that this statement was actually inconsistent with Theresa Woods’ testimony at trial. The defense might also have benefited, as it may have intended, if the prosecution had carried out its original plan to call Dr. Chung as its own witness — presumably for the purpose of describing Theresa Woods’ wounds. In that case, the defense might have achieved the minor tactical advantage which would flow from eliciting the impeaching statement from the mouth of the prosecution’s own witness. Presumably it was these considerations of tactical advantage which led defense attorney Kunz to casually inquire, keeping a “poker face,” as to the whereabouts of Dr. Chung. But these minor tactical advantages cannot compare to the solid evidence of defendant’s guilt— particularly his presence near the scene of the crime in possession of the murder weapon, and the positive identification by the surviving victim. Moreover, it is far from clear that Dr. Chung’s testimony would have been truly exculpatory. Theresa Woods’ statement to her was extremely brief. Dr. Chung’s interest in the statement, as she herself admitted during the hearing, was medical, not legal. She did not care about the details of the crime but only about the location and cause of Theresa Woods’ wounds. While a police investigator might have inquired further into exactly who did what, when, where, and how, Dr. Chung was satisfied once she knew that the bullet had struck Theresa Woods in her right back shoulder. Moreover, the statement itself, as recorded by Dr. Chung, is susceptible of an interpretation consistent with Woods’ trial testimony. The statement does not directly assert that Jesse James was shot in the tavern but that “a gentleman had come into her working place and shot the owner.” (Emphasis added.) While the defense might have nevertheless made some capital out of the remaining inconsistencies between the statement and the trial testimony, these inconsistencies are not so severe as to undermine confidence in the outcome of the trial. The same reasoning applies, a fortiori, to the possibility that Dr. Chung could have testified to the prosecutor’s coaching of the two Conrail officers. We should say at the outset that had Dr. Chung witnessed an attempt to suborn perjury we might resolve this issue differently. But she did not. The prosecutor did not tell the two police officers to say that they had seen the defendant with a gun. They were already convinced that they had seen the defendant with a gun. However, they also apparently believed that they were slightly farther from the curb than the prosecutor thought was consistent with their view of the gun. Thus the prosecutor sought to convince them that they must have been parked in a position consistent with their observation. Such an effort is permissible, and the impeaching effect of this testimony would have been diminished by the instruction to the jury that an attorney has the right to interview witnesses (Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions (IPI), Criminal, No. 3.10 (2d ed. 1981)). It would also not have gone so far as to enable defendant to refute the Conrail officers’ testimony that they had found him in possession of the gun. At best it would have raised a minor doubt as to their ability to recall the precise details of events which had occurred over a year before. Again, we cannot conclude that the disclosure of this evidence would have created a reasonable probability of a different outcome. Moreover, were we to hold otherwise, the prosecution would be saddled with an impossible burden. It would be forced to give the defense a running commentary upon all of its interviews with its own witnesses. Any prosecutor confronted with such a rule would be forced to “allow complete discovery of his files as a matter of routine practice.” (United States v. Agurs (1976), 427 U.S. 97, 109, 49 L. Ed. 2d 342, 353, 96 S. Ct. 2392, 2400.) Such a rule would, in fact, give the defense discovery of much greater scope than is enjoyed by the typical civil litigant, whose ability to discover the other side’s case is limited by the attorney-client privilege and by the work-product rule. Whatever the intrinsic merits of providing criminal defendants with such massive disclosure, we decline to hold that it is constitutionally required. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel Defendant also argues that his attorneys’ failure to subpoena Dr. Chung or to use the medical record to impeach Theresa Woods denied him his sixth amendment right to effective assistance of counsel. It should also be noted that, at the post-trial hearing, although not in his brief here, defendant claimed ineffective assistance of counsel based upon a number of other grounds, such as defense counsel’s alleged failure to use available information to impeach some of the State’s witnesses. All of these claims are without merit. In Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 104 S. Ct. 2052, the United States Supreme Court clarified the standards governing ineffective assistance of counsel claims. To prove ineffective assistance the defendant must first demonstrate that his counsel’s performance failed to meet reasonable professional standards. Second, the defendant must demonstrate a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceedings would have been different. (Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 693, 104 S. Ct. at 2064.) In this case we are unable to conclude that counsel’s performance failed to meet reasonable professional standards. Even were we to so conclude, we find that any defects in counsel’s performance were not so severe as to demonstrate a reasonable probability of a different result absent the defects. First, we do not find that counsel’s decision not to call Dr. Chung was a failure to meet reasonable professional standards. The United States Supreme Court has made clear that the proper standard for attorney performance is that of “reasonably effective assistance” (Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 687, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 693, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 2064), which is “ ‘within the range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases’ ” (466 U.S. at 687, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 693, 104 S. Ct. at 2064, quoting McMann v. Richardson (1970), 397 U.S. 759, 771, 25 L. Ed. 2d 763, 773, 90 S. Ct. 1441, 1449). Given the variety of circumstances faced by defense counsel and the range of legitimate decisions regarding how best to represent a defendant, "[jjudicial scrutiny of counsel’s performance must be highly deferential.” (Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 689, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 694, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 2065.) In fact, the defendant claiming ineffective assistance must overcome a strong presumption that the challenged action of counsel was the product of sound trial strategy and not of incompetence. (466 U.S. at 689, 80 L. Ed. 2d at 694-95, 104 S. Ct. at 2065.) The defendant has failed to overcome this presumption. Defense counsel’s decision not to call Dr. Chung is a good example of the kind of on-the-spot, seat-of-the-pants attorney judgment which deserves judicial deference. Defense counsel’s decision as to whether to call Dr. Chung had to be made relatively quickly, and under fairly trying circumstances. While the medical reports containing Dr. Chung’s statement were available to counsel before trial, counsel was not aware until the prosecutor’s opening statement of the content of Theresa Woods’ testimony. Thus counsel had no way of ascertaining the value of the medical report up until that point. Once aware of the possible discrepancy between the testimony and the statement in the medical report, counsel prepared for eventual impeachment by cross-examining Woods about the discrepancy, as well as about other allegedly inconsistent statements she had made to Officer Daniels and Detective Perry. Presumably, at that point counsel was still acting on the assumption that the prosecution would call Dr. Chung as its own witness, and that he could complete the impeachment of Woods by cross-examining Chung. Only on the day after Woods testified did defense counsel learn that the prosecution did not intend to call Dr. Chung. At that point, defense counsel was forced to decide whether to subpoena Dr. Chung as a defense witness, and perhaps whether to seek a continuance if necessary. As counsel testified, he was aware that the decision turned upon the value of Dr. Chung’s testimony. While he believed that Dr. Chung’s testimony might be valuable, he also believed that Woods’ testimony could also be substantially impeached by the testimony of the two police officers. As he testified at the hearing, he felt that further impeachment might only have confused the jury. Apparently the prosecutor’s statement that Dr. Chung was out of town, thus necessitating a continuance, tipped the balance against calling Dr. Chung as a witness. Given the marginal value of Dr. Chung’s testimony, we are unable to say that this decision violated reasonable professional standards. Counsel was unaware of Dr. Chung’s own belief as to the meaning of Woods’ statement. He believed that the other inconsistent statements given by Woods to the two police officers adequately established impeachment. And while further investigation of the matter, such as a call to Dr. Chung herself, might have changed his assessment, we cannot conclude that his decision not to investigate further was in itself an unreasonable professional judgment. Counsel only has a duty to make reasonable investigations or to make a reasonable decision which makes particular investigations unnecessary; and the reasonableness of a decision not to investigate is assessed applying a heavy measure of deference to counsel’s judgment. (Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. 668, 689, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 694, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 2065.) Giving such deference, we find that counsel’s decisions regarding Dr. Chung were not unreasonable. Even assuming that counsel’s decision regarding Dr. Chung was unprofessional, we cannot agree with defendant that there is a reasonable probability of a different outcome had counsel made a different, and a better, decision. We have already described above, in discussing the prosecutor’s failure to disclose Dr. Chung’s whereabouts, why we believe that Dr. Chung’s testimony would not have had any appreciable effect on the jury. For the same reasons we conclude that defense counsel’s decision not to call Dr. Chung did not deprive defendant of a fair trial. Finally, as to the other claims of ineffective assistance which defendant raised at the hearing but which he failed to renew in his brief here, we find that defendant has also failed to demonstrate either a departure from professional standards or a reasonable probability that different decisions would have changed the outcome of the trial. As the trial court noted below, the extent to which an attorney should attempt to impeach a witness is often a matter of very fine tactical judgment, which should be given great deference by a reviewing court. We cannot say, on this record, that defense counsel’s decision not to impeach the police witnesses by use of the false claim in the police report was unprofessional. Defense counsel may well have believed that the jury would have believed that defendant’s arrest really had “cleared up” 30 prior crimes. Similarly, defense counsel’s decision not to cross-examine Theresa Woods about defendant’s missing tooth, speech impediment, and moustache may have been motivated by fear that Theresa Woods might state that she did not remember these details, or by the belief that the details were too minor to cast a significant doubt upon her credibility. In any event, it cannot be said, to a reasonable probability, that the use of this impeachment evidence would have changed the outcome of the trial. Prosecutorial Comments in Summation Defendant also claims that several different comments made by the prosecutors in closing arguments were so prejudicial as to deprive defendant of a fair trial. In the first set of challenged remarks, the prosecutors argued that the jurors enjoyed “a unique opportunity *** to do something about crime.” Whereas in daily life “We listen to it on the news, in the newspaper ***. Everybody hears about crime. Nobody does anything about it. You have a unique opportunity to actually do something about crime on your streets.” Embellishing upon this theme, the prosecutor concluded, “You are the only ones that sit between this man, this ticking bomb, and that door.” The remarks in this series were apparently intended to persuade the jurors to convict because by convicting they would prevent both crime in general, and further crime by this defendant. As such, they were proper. It is entirely proper for the prosecutor to dwell upon the evil results of crime and to urge the fearless administration of the law. (E.g., People v. Owens (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 88, 105-06; People v. Jackson (1981), 84 Ill. 2d 350, 360; People v. Wright (1963), 27 Ill. 2d 497, 500-01.) Moreover, this court has previously held nonprejudicial remarks which were nearly identical to the remarks complained of here, and equally harsh. For example, in People v. Benedik (1974), 56 Ill. 2d 306, 310-11, the prosecutor stated that he only wanted to “ ‘leave you with this, if this is a crime of violence, if a week from today or a month from today you may be seated at your breakfast table and you may be reading the newspapers and you may be saying to yourself, what, shaking your head in the negative, why isn’t something being done about the violence in society today?’ ” In People v. Owens (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 88, 105, the prosecutor stated that “ ‘[i]t’s a sad commentary on modern America that people all too often become prisoners in their homes at night. They are afraid to walk the streets because they fear that exactly what happened to George Kallai would happen to them.’ ” (102 Ill. 2d at 105.) Finally, in People v. Wright (1963), 27 Ill. 2d 497, 500, the prosecutor rhetorically asked the jury if they were going to let murderers walk the streets so they could kill someone else. Under these precedents, the prosecutorial comments in this case cannot be considered so prejudicial as to deprive defendant of a fair trial. A second remark that defendant claims was so prejudicial as to deprive him of a fair trial was the prosecutor’s admonition to the jury: “Don’t be confused as the defense wishes you to be.” An objection to this comment was sustained. Defendant argues, correctly, that it is error for a prosecutor to accuse defense counsel of attempting to create confusion (see People v. Weathers (1975), 62 Ill. 2d 114, 120), or of fabricating a defense (see People v. Emerson (1983), 97 Ill. 2d 487, 498-99). However, the trial court’s act of sustaining an objection to such a comment, taken together with the trial court’s general admonition to the jury that it should disregard any comments to which the court has sustained an objection, may serve to alleviate any prejudice caused by a particular objectionable comment. (See People v. Clark (1972), 52 Ill. 2d 374, 390.) This is particularly true where, as here, the comment objected to was relatively innocuous. In both Weathers and Emerson, the two cases cited by the defendant, the challenged remarks were far more prejudicial. In Weathers, the prosecutor accused the defense attorneys of lying and of attempting to create a reasonable doubt by “ ‘confusion, indecision, and misrepresentation.’ ” (Weathers, 62 Ill. 2d at 120.) In Emerson, the prosecutor speculated that the defense attorneys knew that they had to “make something up,” and that they therefore concocted a spurious attack on the credibility of the chief witness for the prosecution. (Emerson, 97 Ill. 2d at 498.) In contrast, the comment here challenged did not go so far as to accuse defense counsel of deliberately misleading the jury. Under these circumstances the sustained objection and curative instruction served to dissipate any prejudice this statement may have caused. Defendant also argues that he was prejudiced by the prosecutor’s statement that the standard of reasonable doubt is the “same standard that’s been used in this court room, in all the court rooms in this country, throughout the county, throughout the State, throughout the country, through our entire history. It’s nothing new. There is nothing different about that standard of proof. That standard of proof does not require perfection.” The quoted statement about the standard of reasonable doubt is nearly identical to the statements held proper in People v. Collins (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 237, 277. Since defendant has not attempted to distinguish Collins or to argue that it should be overruled, we perceive no merit in defendant’s argument. Finally, defendant argues that he was prejudiced by the prosecutor’s comment that paraffin tests were no longer considered a reliable means of determining whether a person had fired a gun. The prosecutor’s comments were in response to defendant’s argument that the police should have administered a paraffin test to defendant, and were fairly based upon the testimony of an expert witness who stated that paraffin tests are no longer considered reliable because they can yield both falsely positive and falsely negative results. Therefore, defendant’s argument lacks merit. THE SENTENCE Defendant’s attack on his death sentence may be divided into two parts. In the first part defendant makes a number of claims of error relating to the court’s consideration of evidence that defendant killed Gary Green in 1969. In the second part, defendant launches a facial attack against the validity of the Illinois death penalty statute, alleging several different constitutional defects. We consider each part of defendant’s arguments in turn. The 1969 Killing As to the 1969 killing, defendant first claims that the State should have been barred from introducing evidence about the 1969 killing on the grounds of delay in prosecution, double jeopardy, res judicata, and collateral estoppel. In response, the prosecution claims that these arguments have been waived by defendant’s failure to include them in any of his post-trial motions. Because we believe that defendant’s sentence must be vacated on other grounds, we need not consider any of these arguments, or whether they have been waived. Defendant next claims that evidence of the 1969 killing should have been excluded because it was neither relevant nor reliable, in contravention of our statute and case law (see Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(e); People v. Perez (1985), 108 Ill. 2d 70, 86). The State has not argued that this claim has been waived. Because we agree that the 1969 killing should have been excluded, we now vacate defendant’s murder sentence. Defendant first argues, and we agree, that the trial court erred by considering the 1969 killing a “murder,” particularly in view of the fact that defendant has never been convicted of that crime, and has certainly never been proved guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Thus, the trial court erred, at a minimum, in attributing to the 1969 killing far greater weight than it could possibly deserve. And while we normally presume that a sentencing judge only considers admissible evidence, we cannot say that the court here excluded the 1969 killing from consideration, given its own heavy emphasis upon the killing during its summary of the evidence. Moreover, defendant argues, and we agree, that the trial court erred by excluding evidence of the prosecution’s reasons for moving to nol-pros the prior murder charge against defendant. Given the broad range of evidence traditionally considered probative in sentencing, it was surely error to conclude that the 1972 prosecutor's reasons for believing that defendant did not kill Gary Green in 1969 were irrelevant. The prosecutor stated, on the record, that the victim’s mother and brother had independently investigated the crime and had discovered that defendant was not the killer. The prosecutor’s statements were buttressed by the 1972 testimony of the victim’s brother. Moreover, the judge at the nolle prosequi hearing went out of his way to commend the prosecutor’s decision to nol-pros the case. Given these facts, the trial court’s decision to consider the 1969 killing “the murder of Mr. Green,” stating that “the evidence is positive and credible that the defendant did kill Mr. Green in 1969,” and at the same time to refuse to consider why the previous case against this defendant had been dropped, was in error. We therefore hold that the evidence of the 1969 killing should have been excluded as irrelevant, both because of the 1972 decision to nol-pros the case based on evidence that defendant had not committed the crime, and because the trial court’s reliance upon the 1969 killing as an aggravating factor was misplaced. We further find that the evidence concerning the 1969 killing was unreliable. The evidence admitted at a death penalty hearing must be both reliable and relevant. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(e); People v. Perez (1985), 108 Ill. 2d 70, 86.) In this case the evidence admitted was not reliable. This aggravating factor was a 15-year-old killing. As the trial court admitted in its summary of the evidence, the testimony of one of the prosecution witnesses, Rochester Green, was severely impeached by his prior inconsistent testimony at the 1972 hearing. While he attempted to explain the inconsistency by stating that he had simply “heard” in 1972 that a person named “Rat” had killed his brother, this explanation contradicts his testimony at the sentencing hearing that he was present when his brother was killed. As for the testimony of Lynn McDonald, it is impeached both by his statement that defendant shot Gary Green with a rifle, a statement flatly contradicted by the ballistics evidence, and by his membership in a rival gang. Therefore, the evidence concerning the 1969 killing was unreliable and should not have been considered by the trial judge. While we normally indulge a presumption that a sentencing court only considers relevant and admissible evidence, that presumption is rebutted in this case by the court’s own summary of the evidence. That summary, and particularly the court’s characterization of the 1969 killing as a “murder,” makes clear that the court gave the evidence of that killing great weight in its decision. To do so was error and necessitates vacation of defendant’s death sentence and remand for a new sentencing hearing at which evidence of the 1969 killing will not be admitted. We turn now to defendant’s arguments for the unconstitutionality of the death penalty act. Constitutional Challenges to the Death Penalty Act The second part of defendant’s attack on his sentence consists of various arguments that the Illinois death penalty statute is unconstitutional. Defendant first argues that the statute is unconstitutional because the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, pars. 104 — 22, 104 — 26) improperly exempts from subjection to the death penalty those who need special assistance to stand trial. In our initial opinion in this case, we held that defendant waived this claim by failing to raise it in any of his post-trial motions. Defendant subsequently filed a petition for rehearing in which he cites People v. Bryant (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 448, as authority for the proposition that his claim should not have been deemed waived. We need not address the question raised in defendant’s petition for rehearing, however, because even if we assume without deciding that defendant’s claim has not been waived, defendant would not prevail on the merits of his claim. This court has previously rejected the argument that the statute is unconstitutional in exempting persons in need of special assistance from the death penalty (see People v. Ashford (1988), 121 Ill. 2d 55, 90; People v. Perez (1985), 108 Ill. 2d 70, 94-95), and we decline to reconsider these prior decisions. Defendant next argues that this court should reconsider its holdings in those cases in which it has upheld the constitutionality of the Illinois death penalty statute against claims that the statute violates the eighth-amendment prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment because it does not contain adequate safeguards to prevent arbitrary and capricious imposition of death sentences. Defendant acknowledges that this court has rejected claims of unconstitutionality based upon: overly broad prosecutorial discretion (People ex rel. Carey v. Cousins (1979), 77 Ill. 2d 531), inadequate comparative proportionality review (People v. Brownell (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 508), absence of written findings by the sentencer (People v. Gaines (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 342), inadequate pretrial notice of aggravating factors (People v. Davies (1983), 95 Ill. 2d 1), absence of a requirement to find that death is the appropriate sentence (People v. Free (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 378), and language in the statute allegedly allowing the sentencer to place the burden of proof upon the defendant (People v. Del Vecchio (1985), 105 Ill. 2d 414). The defendant’s sole ground for reconsideration appears to be that a single justice of the United States Supreme Court, with whom a second justice concurs, has dissented from denials of certiorari in a number of our cases, and has stated in these dissents that the Illinois statute is unconstitutional. (See Albanese v. Illinois (1985), 471 U.S. 1044, 1045, 85 L. Ed. 2d 335, 335-36, 105 S. Ct. 2061, 2062 (Marshall, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari); Gacy v. Illinois (1985), 470 U.S. 1037, 1038, 84 L. Ed. 2d 799, 799, 105 S. Ct. 1410, 1410-11 (Marshall, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari); Eddmonds v. Illinois (1984), 469 U.S. 894, 895-98, 83 L. Ed. 2d 207, 207-10, 105 S. Ct. 271, 271-74 (Marshall, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari); Jones v. Illinois (1983), 464 U.S. 920, 920-21, 78 L. Ed. 2d 264, 264-65, 104 S. Ct. 287, 288 (Marshall, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari).) While opinions joined in by two Supreme Court justices may have some persuasive value, they are not, without more, adequate ground for reconsideration of binding precedent. Therefore, we decline to reconsider our prior holdings. The final ground upon which defendant urges us to hold the death penalty statute unconstitutional is that the statutory aggravating factors used to qualify persons convicted of murder for the death penalty under the Illinois death penalty act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, pars. 9 — 1(a), (b)) are the same aggravating factors, with one exception, as those used to qualify persons convicted of murder for sentences of life imprisonment under the Illinois Unified Code of Corrections (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 1005 — 8 — 1(a)(1)). Therefore, defendant argues, the statutory aggravating factors do not adequately circumscribe the class of persons eligible for the death penalty and thus do not prevent death sentences from being imposed in an unconstitutionally arbitrary and capricious manner. However, while defendant’s appeal was pending, this court rejected this same argument in People v. Shum (1987), 117 Ill. 2d 317, 373-74, People v. Lego (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 323, 352-53, and People v. Whitehead (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 425, 463-65. For the reasons stated in those cases, we similarly reject defendant’s argument here. We are aware of the opinion of the United States District Court for the Central District of Illinois, filed April 29, 1989, in the case of the United States ex rel. Silagy v. Peters, No. 88 — 2390. In that case the court held the Illinois death penalty statute (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1) unconstitutional. In passing on Federal constitutional questions, State courts and lower Federal courts have the same responsibility and occupy the same position. Until the Supreme Court of the United States has spoken, State courts are not precluded from exercising their own judgments on Federal constitutional questions. Because lower Federal courts exercise no appellate jurisdiction over State courts, decisions of lower Federal courts are not conclusive on State courts, except insofar as the decision of the lower Federal court may become the law of the case. United States ex rel. Lawrence v. Woods (7th Cir. 1979), 432 F.2d 1072; see also City of Chicago v. Groffman (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 112; People v. Stransberry (1971), 47 Ill. 2d 541. THE BATSON HEARING Having disposed of the matters originally raised by the defendant prior to our remand of the case to the trial court, we turn now to defendant’s contentions regarding the State’s use of peremptory challenges on black venirepersons. Defendant argues that the trial court’s finding at the Batson hearing should be reversed because the trial court erred in (1) not requiring the prosecutor at the original trial to testify at the Batson hearing under oath and subject to cross-examination, and (2) finding that the State’s explanations rebutted defendant’s prima facie case. The jury in this case was selected in three different panels of four jurors each. The first panel was sworn when it was selected on April 23, 1984. The second and third panels were each separately chosen and sworn on April 24, 1984. On April 25, 1984, the jury was sworn as a whole and the trial began. Before the jury had been sworn as a whole, but after each of the three panels had been separately chosen and sworn, defendant moved that a mistrial be declared on the grounds that the State exercised its peremptory challenges to systematically exclude blacks from the jury. The State’s only reply to the motion was the prosecutor’s statement that the State would: “stand on the record *** that there was [sic] a number of things on a number of [the black venirepersons excluded by the State] that made them unacceptable. The State made no concerted attempt to exclude any race or nationality during the course of voir dire." The trial court then denied defendant’s motion. After the trial, defendant appealed directly to this court, arguing inter alia that his convictions should be reversed because the State had used its peremptory challenges to systematically exclude blacks from serving on the jury. In light of the Supreme Court’s decisions in Batson v. Kentucky (1986), 476 U.S. 79, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69, 106 S. Ct. 1712, and Griffith v. Kentucky (1987), 479 U.S. 314, 93 L. Ed. 2d 649, 107 S. Ct. 708, this court issued a supervisory order remanding the case to the trial court for a hearing on defendant’s claim that the State unconstitutionally exercised its peremptory challenges on black venirepersons. The order directed the trial court to allow defendant to present evidence in support of his claim. The order further stated that if the trial court found that defendant established a prima facie case of discrimination, the trial court should allow the State to present evidence that the black venirepersons were excluded for nonracial reasons. The order finally instructed that at the conclusion of the hearing, the trial court “shall make appropriate findings of fact and conclusions of law and file those findings and conclusions with the clerk of this court within 63 days of this order, together with the record of the proceedings.” At the hearing it was established that 2 of the 12 jurors were black. It was also undisputed that the State had exercised 15 of its 20 peremptory challenges on blacks. The record was not clear as to the race of two other members of the venire who had been peremptorily challenged by the State, but the trial court concluded that they were black. Based upon its finding that the State exercised 17 out of its 20 peremptory challenges on blacks, the trial court concluded that defendant established a prima facie case of discrimination. In rebuttal, the State offered the testimony of one of the prosecutors in the case, who testified that the State exercised each of its peremptory challenges for race-neutral reasons. The prosecutor explained that he generally looked for jurors who had strong ties to their community. In particular, he sought jurors who were homeowners and had been employed at the same job for a number of years. He also looked for jurors who had families and whose families had roots in the community. He then explained his specific reasons for excluding each of the 17 black venirepersons. After hearing argument from both the State and defendant, the trial court orally stated its findings of fact regarding the State’s explanations for excluding 16 of the 17 venirepersons. The court failed to make a specific finding in regard to the seventeenth venireperson. The court concluded by stating that it found that the State’s peremptory challenges were based upon neutral reasons, thereby rebutting defendant’s prima facie case. The transcript of the hearing was subsequently filed with the clerk of this court. Defendant argues that the trial court should have required the prosecutor to testify at the Batson hearing under oath and subject to cross-examination. Defendant further claims that the trial court should not have found that the State’s explanations rebutted defendant’s prima facie case of discrimination. The State, on the other hand, asserts that defendant waived his Batson argument by failing to raise it until after the jury had been sworn; failing to preserve a record of the black venirepersons stricken by the State; and failing to "raise the Batson issue in his motions for a new trial. The State also argues that even if defendant did not waive the issue, the trial court’s determinations in the Batson hearing should be upheld. We first address the State’s waiver arguments. The State argues that defendants failure to object to the State’s peremptory challenges until after the last panel was sworn constituted a waiver. The State’s argument is based upon the well-established rule that challenges to the composition of a jury must be brought before the jury is sworn. (See People v. Evans (1988), 125 Ill. 2d 50, 61-62; People v. Gaines (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 342, 359.) However, it is equally true that the principle of waiver applies to the State as well as to the defendant. People v. O’Neal (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 399, 407. In this case, the State did not raise the issue of the timeliness of defendant’s objection to the State’s use of peremptory challenges when defendant initially filed its pretrial motion for a mistrial, but instead challenged the motion solely on its factual merits. The State also failed to raise the issue in either its initial briefs with this court or at the Batson hearing conducted by the trial court on remand. It was not until its supplemental brief, filed with this court after the Batson hearing had been conducted, that the State first raised the issue. We therefore conclude that the State has waived its argument that defendant’s objection to the State’s exercise of peremptory challenges was untimely. (See State v. Lee (Tex. App. 1988), 747 S.W.2d 57, 58 (State waived its objection on appeal to untimeliness of defendant’s Batson motion by failing to so object at trial); see also People v. Colley (1988), 173 Ill. App. 3d 798, 806 (State is estopped from arguing untimeliness of defendant’s Bat-son motion where it failed to raise issue at trial).) We also find that the State has waived its argument pertaining to defendant’s failure to include the issue of the jury’s composition in its post-trial motion for a new trial since the State similarly failed to raise this argument until its supplemental brief with this court. The State did, however, raise in its initial brief with this court the argument that defendant failed to preserve an adequate record as to the race of the venirepersons excluded by the State. This argument is based upon the principle that a defendant may not challenge a State’s peremptory challenge as being racially motivated unless there is evidence in the record that establishes the race of the excluded juror. (People v. Evans (1988), 125 Ill. 2d 50, 62.) In Evans, the parties had stipulated that five venirepersons stricken by the State had been black. The defendant in Evans also claimed on appeal that a sixth excluded juror had been black. This court held that defendant’s challenge to the exclusion of the sixth juror was waived because there had been no evidence in the record that established the juror’s race. (Evans, 125 Ill. 2d at 62.) However, there was no waiver because of a failure to make a record in Evans with respect to the venirepersons that the parties had agreed were black. Our review of the record in this case indicates that both defendant and the State agreed at the Batson hearing that 15 of the 20 venirepersons stricken by the State were black. Thus, as was the case in Evans, defendant has not waived his right to challenge the State’s exclusion of these 15 jurors. There was a dispute, however, concerning the race of two other venirepersons excluded by the State. Although nothing in the record established the race of these venirepersons, the trial court at the Batson hearing, based upon defendant’s representations, found that they had been black. In light of our decision in Evans (which, we note, was decided after the Batson hearing in this case had been conducted), we conclude that it was error for the trial court to have gone beyond the record to determine the race of the two disputed venirepersons. Accordingly, the trial court should only have considered the State’s exclusion of the 15 venirepersons that the parties agreed were black in determining whether defendant established a prima facie case of discrimination. See Evans, 125 Ill. 2d at 62. Our conclusion that the trial court erred in considering the two additional venirepersons in assessing defendant’s prima facie case, however, does not require us to reverse the trial court’s finding that defendant established a prima facie case. In People v. McDonald (1988), 125 Ill. 2d 182, 196, this court explained that a prima facie case may be established where a prosecutor has exercised “a ‘pattern’ of strikes against black” veniremen (quoting Batson, 476 U.S. at 97, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88, 106 S. Ct. at 1723), or where a prosecutor has exercised “his peremptory challenges against a group of veniremen being otherwise ‘as heterogeneous as the community as a whole,’ sharing race as their only common characteristic” (quoting People v. Wheeler (1978), 22 Cal. 3d 258, 280, 583 P.2d 748, 764, 148 Cal. Rptr. 890, 905). In McDonald, this court rejected an argument that the trial court should have only considered the eight black venirepersons who had testified at the Batson hearing in that case, rather than all 16 blacks who had been stricken by the State, in assessing defendant’s prima facie case. (McDonald, 125 Ill. 2d at 197-98.) This court went on to state, however, that: “Even assuming that our review were limited to the veniremen who actually testified at the Batson hearing, we would still be compelled to find that defendants established a prima facie case of discrimination. Our review of the record indicates that the heterogeneity of the stricken veniremen does not change by merely reducing their number by eight. Again, the pattern of strikes the prosecutor exercised, against these eight veniremen, along with the fact that they share race as their only common characteristic, compels us to conclude that defendants established a prima facie case of discrimination.” McDonald, 125 Ill. 2d at 198. In the present case, the 15 black venirepersons stricken by the State ranged in age from 19 to 59 and consisted of 12 women and 3 men. Their occupations, which were also diverse, included the following: steelworker, hostess, therapist, housekeeper, forklift operator, nurse, secretary, and personnel manager. Thus, the record demonstrates a pattern of strikes by the State against 15 venirepersons whose only common characteristic was that they were black. Accordingly, we agree with the trial court that defendant established a prima facie case of discrimination by the State in its use of peremptory challenges. We turn now to defendant’s arguments. Defendant first argues that the prosecutor in the case, who testified as the State’s witness at the Batson hearing, should have been required to testify under oath and be subject to cross-examination. We recently rejected this same argument in People v. Young (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 1, 24-26, a case decided while this appeal was pending, and, for the reasons stated in Young, we similarly reject it here. Defendant’s second argument is that the trial court erred in finding that the State rebutted defendant’s prima facie case of discrimination. Under Batson, once a prima facie case of discrimination has been established, the State has the burden of coming forward with a neutral explanation for excluding each black venireperson which is “related to the particular case to be tried.” (Batson, 476 U.S. at 98, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88, 106 S. Ct. at 1723.) Although the State’s explanations need not rise to the level justifying a challenge for cause, a mere assertion that the prosecutor acted in good faith or without a discriminatory motive will not suffice. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 97-98, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88, 106 S. Ct. at 1723.) Furthermore, the State cannot meet its burden by stating that the challenges were based upon an assumption that the venirepersons would be sympathetic toward defendant because of their shared race. Batson, 476 U.S. at 97, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88, 106 S. Ct. at 1723. Once the State has come forward with its reasons for striking the venirepersons, the trial court must then determine whether the explanations are sufficient to rebut defendant’s prima facie case. To do so, the trial court must make “a sincere and reasoned attempt to evaluate the prosecutor’s explanation in light of the circumstances of the case.” (People v. Hall (1983), 35 Cal. 3d 161, 167, 672 P.2d 854, 858, 197 Cal. Rptr. 71, 75.) Because this determination is a matter of fact, turning largely on questions of credibility, the trial court’s findings must be afforded great deference (Batson, 476 U.S. at 98 n.21, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 89 n.21, 106 S. Ct. at 1724 n.21) and will only be reversed if against the manifest weight of the evidence (People v. McDonald (1988), 125 Ill. 2d 182, 199). We are also mindful, however, that the exclusion of even just one minority venireperson on account of race is unconstitutional and would require reversal of the conviction below. (McDonald, 125 Ill. 2d at 200.) We therefore must examine the explanations offered by the State for excluding each of the 15 black venirepersons from serving on the jury. We note initially that the trial court found that four venirepersons were stricken from the jury because they had relatives who had been defendants in criminal cases. A fifth member of the venire was excluded because she was “sickly and disabled” and therefore would not be able to pay attention throughout the trial. A sixth venireperson was excluded because her job involved interpreting court procedures and policies, and the prosecutor thought she would try to do the same for the other jurors. Finally, two other venirepersons were excluded from the jury because they were single and unemployed and lacked ties to the community. One was a 19-year-old man who lived with his parents, and the other was a 47-year-old woman who lived in an apartment with her two adult sons, one of whom was also unemployed. Defendant does not argue, and our review of the record does not indicate, that any of these explanations were pretextual or not supported by the evidence. The ninth member of the venire excused from serving on the jury was described by the prosecutor as being a “meek and sleepy” juror who did not answer questions in a forthright manner. The prosecutor also felt uncomfortable with her demeanor. Defendant argues, and we agree, that explanations which focus upon a venireperson’s body language or demeanor must be closely scrutinized because they are subjective and can be easily used by a prosecutor as a pretext for excluding persons on the basis of race. (See People v. Charron (1987), 193 Cal. App. 3d 981, 991, 238 Cal. Rptr. 660, 666-67.) However, the trial court in this case stated that it was aware of the problems posed by subjective, demeanor-based explanations for excluding venirepersons. As a result, the court closely scrutinized the State’s explanations and nothing in the record here indicates to us that the trial court’s finding was erroneous. A tenth venireperson was stricken from the jury for three reasons. The first was that she lived in Hyde Park, a neighborhood in Chicago whose residents, the prosecutor felt, were more scholarly and open to new ideas than other Chicagoans. The prosecutor believed that these traits made Hyde Park residents unsuitable for jury duty because they would be less likely to base their findings of fact on the evidence in the case than other Chicago-ans. The venireperson was also excused because her husband worked in the mental health field and because the way she described her job struck the prosecutor as being pretentious. Defendant argues that the explanation based upon the venireperson’s Hyde Park residence was insufficient to meet the State’s burden of proof. Citing State v. Slappy (Fla. App. 1987), 503 So. 2d 350, defendant claims that the State cannot rely upon assumptions concerning traits allegedly possessed by a broad group of persons unless the State can show that (1) there is some element of truth supporting those assumptions and (2) those particular traits are possessed by the venireperson being excluded. Thus, defendant argues that the State must show that Hyde Park residents actually do tend to be scholarly, open to new ideas and not likely to base their findings of fact on evidence, and that Alexander shared these traits. We disagree. The Supreme Court in Batson instructed that the procedure to be followed in a hearing on the issue of a prosecutor’s discriminatory use of peremptory challenges should be similar to the one utilized in Federal Title VII employment discrimination cases. (See Batson, 476 U.S. at 94-98 nn.18-21, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 86-89 nn.18-21, 106 S. Ct. at 1721-24 nn.18-21 (citing Title VII cases).) Under Title VII, once the plaintiff has made out a prima facie case of discrimination, the burden shifts to the defendant to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for his action. (Texas Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine (1981), 450 U.S. 248, 257-58, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207, 217-18, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 1096.) The plaintiff may then attempt to demonstrate that the proffered explanation is merely pretextual, hiding the defendant’s true discriminatory motive. (Burdine, 450 U.S. at 257, 67 L. Ed. 2d at 218, 101 S. Ct. at 1096.) Similarly, in Batson the Court stated that once a defendant makes out a prima facie case of discrimination, the prosecutor need only “articulate a neutral explanation related to the particular case to be tried.” (Batson, 476 U.S. at 98, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88, 106 S. Ct. at 1723.) The defendant may then attempt to rebut the prosecution’s explanation as being pretextual. (See People v. Young (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 1, 27.) At the conclusion of the hearing, the trial court has the duty to weigh the evidence and “determine if the defendant has established purposeful discrimination.” Batson, 476 U.S. at 98, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88-89, 106 S. Ct. at 1724. The two elements that defendant argues the State is required to show with regard to peremptory challenges based on a venireperson’s membership in a group — (1) that the group possesses the undesirable traits and (2) that the venireperson also possesses those traits — are merely important factors that the trial court should consider in evaluating the legitimacy of the explanation articulated by the State. For example, if the State excluded an accountant from the jury solely because of the State’s belief that accountants tend to be politically liberal and sympathetic to individuals, and it was demonstrated that there was no basis for this assumption about accountants, then the trial court might conclude that the State’s explanation was pretextual. Similarly, if the accountant in the above scenario were excused, and the evidence during voir dire clearly demonstrated that the accountant-venireperson did not share the traits of liberalism and sympathy toward individuals, the trial court again might find that the State’s explanation was pretextual. In the present case, the trial court judge, who stated that he was familiar with the Hyde Park neighborhood, having attended law school and worked there for a number of years, concluded that there was some basis for the State’s assumptions about Hyde Park residents and so accepted the State’s explanation for striking Alexander. Although we might not agree, we do not find that the court’s conclusion was contrary to the evidence. The eleventh person excluded from the jury was stricken because he was a steelworker who had previously been a schoolteacher and had done graduate work in education. This job change from teacher to steelworker struck the prosecutor as strange and something which raised questions as to what the venireperson’s feelings or prejudices might be. Furthermore, the venireperson had been a music major in college and was married to a schoolteacher. The prosecutor explained that he generally excused schoolteachers and spouses of schoolteachers because they tend to be sympathetic toward individuals and give them the benefit of the doubt. The prosecutor also felt that teachers tend to go beyond the law and the restrictions placed upon them by trial judges when they serve as jurors. The prosecutor also stated that he generally excluded musicians because they tend to be creative and willing to move beyond the strictures of the law. Defendant argues that the State’s reasons for excluding the eleventh venireperson should be rejected for several reasons. First, defendant asserts that the venireperson met all of the general criteria that the State itself said it used for selecting jurors. He was a 53-year-old married man with seven children. He owned the home that he had lived in for 15 years and he worked at the same job for the past 14 years. Thus, according to defendant, the venireperson clearly had strong ties to his community. Second, defendant asserts that the State’s concern about teachers serving on the jury is without merit because the State allowed a white teacher to serve on the jury. Finally, defendant, in an argument we have already rejected, claims that the State was required to • show that teachers and musicians in general, and this venireperson in particular, possess the traits which were the basis for the peremptory challenge. In People v. Young (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 1, 23, we observed that if a prosecutor rejected a minority venireperson for possessing certain characteristics, but did not reject a white venireperson sharing those same characteristics, “it does not follow that this in itself shows that the prosecutor’s explanations were pretextual.” We explained that: “Though a part of the prosecutor’s explanations may have been applicable to white jurors who were not challenged, the white jurors may have, in some other respect, exhibited a trait which the prosecutor reasonably could have believed would make him or her desirable as a juror.” (Young, 128 Ill. 2d at 23-24.) Likewise, the converse is true as well. Though a minority venireperson may otherwise possess all of the traits which the State is looking for in a juror, he may possess an additional trait which makes him undesirable. On the other hand, although it is not conclusive, evidence that a stricken minority venireperson possessed the same characteristics as a nonminority juror on whom the State chose not to exercise a peremptory challenge should certainly be given great weight by the trial court in evaluating the State’s explanations. See People v. McDonald (1988), 125 Ill. 2d 182,199-200. In the present case, there is little merit to defendant’s contention that, since the State allowed a white teacher onto the jury, the State’s explanation was pretextual. Our conclusion is based upon the fact that by the time the white teacher was questioned during voir dire, the State had exercised all of its peremptory challenges. As a result, the State had no choice as to whether or not it should exercise a peremptory challenge. Consequently, no inference of discrimination arises in this case from the fact that a white teacher served on the jury. The trial court agreed that there may have been something suspicious about a person who was a teacher, and who had even done graduate work in education, leaving the teaching profession to take a job as a steelworker, an occupation described by the trial court as being a “job of conceivably a lesser status.” We cannot say that this finding of fact by the trial court is against the manifest weight of the evidence. The twelfth venireperson excluded by the State was the second to last venireperson examined on April 23. At the end of the day, the first panel of four jurors was selected. All of the other members of the venire who had been questioned that day, with the exception of this twelfth venireperson, were excused. The next day, 11 more venirepersons were examined before any further challenges were allowed. The prosecution explained that by this time he could recall little about the twelfth venireperson. On the other hand, he had a fresh recollection of the 11 jurors that had been questioned that day. Due to this lack of recollection and therefore lack of information concerning the twelfth venireperson, the prosecutor exercised a peremptory challenge. The trial court found that this explanation rebutted defendant’s prima facie case. Citing Batson, defendant argues that the State’s explanation was insufficient to rebut defendant’s prima facie case because it was not “ ‘clear and reasonably specific.’ ” (Batson, 476 U.S. at 98 n.20, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88 n.20, 106 S. Ct. at 1723 n.20, quoting Texas Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine (1981), 450 U.S. 248, 258, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207, 218, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 1096.) According to defendant, the State’s explanation essentially amounted to an admission that it had no explanation. Defendant misconstrues the State’s explanation. While it is certainly true that the State cannot rebut a prima facie case of discrimination by stating that it does not know why it exercised its peremptory challenges (see Batson, 476 U.S. at 98, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88, 106 S. Ct. at 1723 (“prosecutor [may not] rebut the defendant’s case merely by denying that he had a discriminatory motive”)), that is not what the State is attempting here. Instead, the State in this case knew precisely why it exercised its challenge: the State exercised its challenge because due to the timing and order of questioning during voir dire, the prosecutor had lost his recollection of the twelfth venireperson. As a result, the prosecutor did not have enough information about the venireperson to feel comfortable with having her on the jury. This explanation is race-neutral, clear and reasonably specific. Nevertheless, defendant argues that such an explanation should not be allowed because otherwise the State could always justify its use of peremptory challenges by claiming that it lacked sufficient recollection; thus making a mockery of Batson. We do not share defendant’s fears, however, because such an explanation will usually only be credible where a unique set of facts, such as those that occurred in this case, is present. Unless such facts are present, we are confident that defendants will be able to prove, and trial courts will find, that explanations based upon a lack of recollection are pretextual. The thirteenth person excused by the State worked as a barber and as a forklift operator. The prosecutor stated that he thought that the venireperson would probably have a loss of income if he had to serve on the jury. The prosecutor also stated that he excluded the venireperson because the venireperson’s wife was a schoolteacher. However, the prosecutor testified that the “main reason” he exercised a peremptory challenge “was not because he [the venireperson] was married to a teacher.” Rather, it was because the venireperson had a friend who was a politician who also happened to be a lawyer. That the prosecutor was concerned about the fact that the venireperson’s friend was a politician, rather than the fact that he was a lawyer, is demonstrated by the following colloquy from the Batson hearing: “[PROSECUTOR]: When asked about whether [the venireperson] knew any lawyers, he responded that he knew one. He was a friend by the name of Fred ***. Your Honor indicated in the record that you seemed to know that individual and asked, wasn’t he a city councilman, and— THE COURT: Actually, this juror lived in Evanston. I think the lawyer’s name was ***. I don’t know how the name Fred got in the record. [PROSECUTOR]: I recall there was a discussion about, you know, the lawyer that he mentioned and the fact he was a city councilman, and there was some smiling between the two of you, and the fact that he was impressed or whatever, that you recognized or knew that person that he had mentioned. That left me with the thought about, who is this [friend]. He’s obviously a political person in Evanston. I did not know him. I didn’t know if he was a candidate or a politician that was interested in one specific issue or no issues; if he was a person that was a pro-abortion or ban-the-bomb or whatever. I did not know this man, I did not know his politics. The contact between [the venireperson] was left very up in the air between [the venireperson and the friend] who is a friend or an associate. I believe he used the words, both friend and associate. So again, I had a situation where I did not know the importance of [the friend] in [the venireperson’s] life, and I thought it best, and I thought it best, because of that lack of knowledge, to exercise a peremptory challenge.” The trial court, in its oral findings of fact, stated that the venireperson “related that [the friend] was his friend and I think that is a justification for using a peremptory challenge; the same reason that the Defense could, if a person said they had a friend who was a state’s attorney.” The trial court thus apparently found that the State was justified in its use of a peremptory challenge because the venireperson had a friend who was a criminal defense attorney. This reading of the court’s finding is underscored by the fact that the court, during defense counsel’s closing argument at the Batson hearing, responded to defendant’s claim that the State’s explanation was pretextual, by asking “[w]hat about his friendship or association with a Criminal Defense attorney?” We find the trial court’s reliance upon the fact that the venireper son’s friend was a criminal defense attorney to have been improper. Under Batson, it is the State’s burden to “articulate” “a ‘clear and reasonably specific’ explanation” for its use of peremptory challenges on minority venirepersons. (Batson, 476 U.S. at 98 & n.20, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88-89 & n.20, 106 S. Ct. at 1723-24 & n.20, quoting Texas Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 258, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207, 218, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 1096.) This burden, which the Court in Batson borrowed from Federal Title VII employment discrimination cases, “is not a heavy one.” (Uviedo v. Steves Sash & Door Co. (5th Cir. 1984), 738 F.2d 1425, 1430.) However, the State is required to do more than merely list a series of facts. (See Uviedo, 738 F.2d at 1429-30.) The State must also articulate which facts were in fact the basis for the allegedly discriminatory act. (See Uviedo, 738 F.2d at 1429.) Furthermore, a court should not presume, or infer from the facts of the case, that an unarticulated neutral explanation exists. (See Uviedo, 738 F.2d at 1430.) Rather, a court must focus its inquiry on the reasons actually articulated by the State. The problem with the court’s finding is that although the prosecutor mentioned as a matter of fact that the venireper son’s friend was an attorney, the State never clearly and specifically articulated that this fact was the reason that the State exercised a peremptory challenge. (We also note that nothing in the record from either voir dire or the Batson hearing, with the exception of the trial court’s question of defense counsel, which was apparently based upon the trial court’s personal knowledge of the friend, indicated that the friend was a criminal defense attorney.) Instead, as the colloquy from the Batson hearing demonstrates, the only “clear and reasonably specific” explanation for the peremptory challenge articulated by the State regarding the venireperson’s friend was the fact that the friend was a politician, and that this fact somehow reflected upon the venireperson’s political beliefs. As a result, it was improper for the trial court to have based its conclusion that the State rebutted defendant’s prima facie case upon the fact that the venireperson had a friendship with a lawyer. See Uviedo, 738 F.2d at 1430 (In Title VII cases, “[i]t is beyond the province of a trial or a reviewing court to determine— after the fact — that certain facts in the record might have served as the basis for an employer’s [discriminatory act]”). Although we find that the court’s ruling was erroneous, we cannot at this point hold that the State used its peremptory challenges in a racially discriminatory manner. This is because there has not been a finding of fact regarding the explanations which the State did indeed proffer for excluding the thirteenth member of the venire. However, this court is in no position to make such a finding since such findings “largely will turn on evaluation of credibility” (Batson, 476 U.S. at 98 n.21, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 89 n.21, 106 S. Ct. at 1724 n.21), and credibility determinations are more appropriately left to the trial court (People v. Cheek (1982), 93 Ill. 2d 82, 94; see also People v. Hooper (1987), 118 Ill. 2d 244, 257-58 (Clark, C.J., dissenting, joined by Simon, J.)). Accordingly, we must reverse the trial court’s finding and remand to the trial court to reassess the evidence in the record and issue new findings of fact and conclusions of law in regard to the State’s explanations for excluding the thirteenth venireperson. The fourteenth venireperson was excluded, according to the prosecutor’s testimony, because “she lived relatively close [within 3V2 miles] to the area where this incident had occurred.” The prosecutor further testified that: “it was because of a lack of information and lack of knowledge [in particular, a lack of information about the venireperson’s husband] that I did not feel I had a good handle on [the venireperson]. I did not find her to be the kind of a juror that I was going to exercise automatically in any way, a peremptory challenge, but it was because of other jurors that I wanted on my jury that I believe [she] was excused.” The trial court found that the State rebutted defendant’s prima facie case because the court concluded that the venireperson lived within one mile of where defendant lived. According to the trial court, “in this case, [the distance between the venireperson’s and defendant’s residences would have to have been] within at least a mile, in order to use a peremptory challenge.” We hold that this finding was erroneous. In this case, the prosecutor testified that the venireperson lived near the scene of the crime; he never mentioned the fact that she lived near defendant. Nor was this fact raised by the State’s Attorney arguing the case for the State at the Batson hearing. The only reference to defendant’s address were general statements during the State’s Attorney’s opening and closing arguments that two addresses were important in the case: defendant’s address and the scene of the crime. The State did not, however, specify that the venireperson in particular lived near defendant. The court’s finding that her address was within one mile of defendant’s address was not based upon the record. Instead, it may have been based upon the court’s personal knowledge. Thus, the State never articulated that the reason the venireperson was excluded was the fact that she lived near defendant. Accordingly, the trial court should not have considered this fact in assessing the State's explanation for its peremptory challenge. We therefore must remand to the trial court to issue new findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding the fourteenth venireperson. The final venireperson who was excluded by the State had a husband who was unemployed. The prosecutor also explained that the venireperson’s son had testified in court as a victim of an armed robbery and the venireperson was not asked during voir dire what the result of the case had been. As a result, the prosecutor did not know the disposition of the case or whether the venireperson had been satisfied with the treatment her son had received. The prosecutor concluded his testimony about the venireperson by stating that he excluded her because “I did not feel I had a great amount of knowledge regarding [her]. Her ties to the community seemed to be tenuous, and in comparison to the other jurors I was considering at that time, I did exercise a peremptory challenge.” The trial court failed to make a specific finding regarding the State’s exclusion of this final venireperson. In the supervisory order remanding this case for a Bat-son hearing, this court instructed the trial court “to make appropriate findings of fact and conclusions of law.” One of the purposes of requiring a trial court to make findings of fact is “to provide appellate courts with a clear understanding of the basis of the trial court’s decision” (Bartsh v. Northwest Airlines, Inc. (7th Cir. 1987), 831 F.2d 1297, 1304) so as to allow for “meaningful” appellate review (Gupta v. East Texas State University (5th Cir. 1981), 654 F.2d 411, 415). This court recently held in People v. Mack (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 231, 245-46, that the trial court’s explicit finding in that case that the facts in the Batson hearing were not in dispute, and that all of the State’s explanations for exercising peremptory challenges were legitimate, was sufficiently specific to allow for adequate appellate review. In the present case, however, the trial court made no explicit finding that the facts were not in dispute. Moreover, unlike in Mack, where the trial court found that all of the State’s explanations were legitimate, the trial court here was silent on the question of the State’s explanations for excluding the final venireperson. Accordingly, the trial court’s findings here are not sufficiently specific to provide us with an adequate basis to review the court’s decision. We therefore remand to the trial court to make specific findings of fact and conclusions of law for this final venireperson. We note in closing that many of the State’s explanations for excluding these last three venirepersons are based upon the fact that the State lacked certain information about them. In general, such explanations should be closely scrutinized since they can be easily utilized as a pretext for discriminatory challenges. (See People v. Turner (1986), 42 Cal. 3d 711, 727, 726 P.2d 102, 111-12, 230 Cal. Rptr. 656, 665-66.) Courts, in evaluating such explanations, should consider whether the State made any attempt at discovering the unknown information (see Turner, 42 Cal. 3d at 727, 726 P.2d at 111-12, 230 Cal. Rptr. at 665-66) by, for example, requesting that supplemental questions be asked during voir dire (see 107 Ill. 2d R. 234). Similarly, the State’s explanation that two of the venirepersons were challenged because they were less desirable than other potential jurors should also be closely scrutinized since (1) both met the very criteria which the State itself stated it looked for in potential jurors: both were married with children and had been employed at the same job for a number of years (and one was a homeowner), and (2) the State failed to explain what characteristics made other potential jurors more attractive. In assessing this second explanation, the trial court should attempt to ascertain who the other venirepersons were who were being considered at the time the State exercised its challenges and compare their characteristics with those of the excluded venirepersons. In conclusion, therefore, we agree with the trial court that defendant established a prima facie case of discrimination. We also agree that the State rebutted defendant’s prima facie case for 12 of the 15 black venirepersons challenged by the State. We reverse, however, the trial court’s conclusion that the State rebutted defendant’s prima facie case regarding the State’s exclusion of the three venirepersons described above. We retain jurisdiction and remand the case to the trial court to issue and file with the clerk of this court, in writing, new findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding the State’s explanations for excluding the three venirepersons described above. The trial court shall make its findings based upon the views expressed in this opinion and upon the evidence and arguments that were already presented at the Batson hearing. Neither the State nor defendant shall be allowed to present any further evidence or argument on this issue in the trial court below. CONCLUSION This opinion holds, therefore, that defendant’s death sentence is vacated, his convictions and nondeath sentences are conditionally vacated subject to reinstatement, and the cause is remanded to the circuit court of Cook County for the trial court to issue new findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding the State’s explanations for excluding the three black venirepersons described in this opinion. If, after reconsidering the evidence in light of this opinion, the trial court finds that the State has failed to rebut defendant’s prima facie case, a new trial shall be ordered. If retrial is not required, defendant’s convictions and nondeath sentences will be reinstated and the trial court will be directed to conduct a new sentencing hearing on the murder conviction, in accordance with this opinion. Death sentence vacated; convictions and nondeath sentences conditionally vacated subject to reinstatement; cause remanded, with directions.