=== CASE 2227261 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:30.479887+00 ===

129 Wis.2d 1 (1986)
383 N.W.2d 876
STATE of Wisconsin, Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
Keith S. BETTS, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 84-745-CR.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
Filed March 31, 1986.
PER CURIAM.
On December 5, 1984, this court granted a petition for review filed on behalf of the defendant-appellant which raised the issue of whether *2 this court should adopt a procedure requiring that trial courts, upon accepting a negotiated plea of guilty, must inform the defendant before sentencing whether the court intends to reject the agreed upon sentence recommendation, and if so, to then give the defendant an opportunity to withdraw his or her plea. Thereafter, the respondent filed a motion to dismiss this petition as having been improvidently granted because the issue raised in this case was also presented in a petition for a rule change filed by the Judicial Council pursuant to sec. 751.12, Stats. The motion to dismiss as improvidently granted was held in abeyance pending disposition of the Judicial Council's petition for a rule change. By order and opinion filed March 21, 1986, this court has denied the Judicial Council's petition for a rule change. Because we have declined to adopt the proposed rule change pursuant to our rule-making procedures set forth in sec. 751.12, Stats., we would also decline to act pursuant to our superintending authority over all courts, see Wis. Const. art. VII, sec. 3, and adopt for this case and all future cases, the guilty plea procedure the defendant advocates. Accordingly, we unanimously conclude that the petition for review previously granted in this case, should be and hereby is dismissed as improvidently granted. See, Wisconsin Supreme Court Internal Operating Procedures, II B(1), p. 5.
Dismissal of this petition for review as improvidently granted requires that this court dismiss, as moot, the defendant-petitioner's motion to restore the briefing schedule in this case.

=== CASE 9741444 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:55:47.258779+00 ===

Shepherd, J.
Defendants appeal as of right from *563a judgment of foreclosure on a land contract. The court granted acceleration of the payments remaining on the contract. Defendants have filed a separate claim of appeal from the trial court’s subsequent order confirming the foreclosure sale and from a deficiency judgment against defendants of $88,559.34. We affirm.
The deceased, Henry Lang, sold defendants certain real estate in Genesee County. The land contract shows a price of $88,000, with a $30,000 down payment and monthly installments of $500. Lang also sold his bar business (conducted on the same property) and equipment to defendant J. D. Smith for $80,000, with a $20,000 down payment. Lang accepted a promissory note of $60,000, payable in $600 monthly installments.
Later, the bar building and equipment burned. There was a fire insurance policy with coverage up to $120,000. The parties agreed that Lang would receive $44,000 from the insurance proceeds, to be credited against the balance on the promissory note. The note was cancelled and the remaining balance added to the balance under the land contract. Defendants agreed to an increase of the monthly payments to $800. They also agreed to reconstruct the bar building in a manner equivalent to its former condition. Defendants received $76,000 from the insurance proceeds.
Before trial, defendants stipulated that they had no intention of fulfilling any of their obligations under the agreement written after the fire. They had made no payments on the land contract and no repairs to the building. They also failed to pay the property taxes as required by the land contract. Defendants had stripped the property of valuable fixtures. The local authorities condemned the building. In addition, defendants entered into a contract to sell the liquor license.
*564Though the land contract contained no acceleration clause, the trial court granted acceleration of the remaining payments. The court concluded that, since defendants had evinced an intention to renounce the contract, "the doctrine of anticipatory breach [was] clearly applicable”.
The court entered the judgment of foreclosure on April 9, 1984, and fixed April 13 as the time for payment. The sheriff posted notice of the foreclosure sale on April 10. Publication began on April 20 and continued once each week until May 25. The estate of Henry Lang purchased the property at the foreclosure sale on May 29, 1984, Mr. Lang having died. On June 18, 1984, the trial court entered the deficiency judgment against defendants, "jointly and severally”.
Defendants raise four issues.
I. Acceleration of Payments in Absence of Acceleration Clause.
Defendants argue that the trial court erred by granting acceleration of the payments in the absence of an acceleration clause. We conclude that the court properly applied the doctrine of anticipatory repudiation to this matter.
Ordinarily, the court lacks authority "to decree the entire amount due in the absence of an acceleration clause in the contract”. Lutz v Dutmer, 286 Mich 467, 488; 282 NW 431 (1938), Benincasa v Mihailovich, 31 Mich App 473, 478; 188 NW2d 136 (1971). But "where there has been an anticipatory breach of a contract by one party * * * the other party may treat the entire contract as broken and may sue immediately for the breach”. 17 Am Jur 2d, Contracts, § 448, p 910 (citations omitted). An unqualified refusal to perform enables the other party to sue immediately for future pay-*565merits. Mott v Penoyar, 153 Mich 273, 276; 116 NW 1110 (1908); Obenauer v Solomon, 151 Mich 570, 576; 115 NW 696 (1908); Hosmer v Wilson, 7 Mich 294, 304; 74 Am Dec 716 (1859). "In ascertaining whether an anticipatory breach of a contract has been committed by a party, it is the intention manifested by his acts and words which controls, and not his secret intention.” 17 Am Jur 2d, supra, p 911.
In this case, defendants’ conduct shows an intention not to perform their contractual obligations. They made no payments and did not begin to reconstruct the building. They paid no property taxes and arranged to sell the liquor license. These actions amount to a complete renunciation of the contract. In addition, defendants stipulated that they had no intention to perform at any time in the future and chose to rely solely on the absence of an acceleration clause in the land contract.
In their reply brief, defendants cite Restatement Contracts, 2d, § 243 for the proposition that the doctrine of anticipatory repudiation does not apply where the only remaining obligation is payment of money in installments. This rule may also be found in Jackson v American Can Co, 485 F Supp 370 (WD Mich, 1980). Defendants cannot find refuge there, however, since their contractual obligations include restoration of the building in addition to the monthly payments.
II. Adequacy of Notice and Publication
Defendants argue that the notice of foreclosure sale was inadequate under MCL 600.6052; MSA 27A.6052:
"Prior to the sale of any real estate taken on execution, notice of the time and place of holding the sale, *566the notice to describe the real estate with common certainty by setting forth the name or number of the township in which it is located, and the number of the lot, or by other appropriate description of the premises shall be given as follows:
"(1) A written or printed notice shall be displayed in 3 public places in the township or city where the real estate is to be sold at least 6 weeks prior to the sale, and if the sale is in a township or city other than that wherein the premises are located, notice shall also be displayed in 3 public places in the township or city in which the premises are located.
"(2) A copy of the notice shall be published once each week for the 6 successive weeks prior to the sale in a newspaper printed in the county in which the premises are located * * *.” (Emphasis added.)
Also noteworthy is GCR 1963, 745.3:
"Sales under judgments of foreclosure shall not be ordered on less than 6 full weeks or 42 days’ notice, and publication shall not commence until the time fixed by the judgment for payment has expired * *
See, also, MCR 3.410(C).
Each of these provisions requires a full 42 days notice of some sort. Plaintiff contends that notice was sufficient because the sheriff posted a written notice on April 10, 49 days before the sale, and a copy was published once during each of the six weeks in advance of the sale. Defendants argue that publication, as well as posting, must begin at least six full weeks before the sale.
We hold that publication was sufficient in this case because it was made once in each of the six weeks prior to the sale and there were more than 42 days notice by posting. The statute and court rule each allow for a distinction between posting and publication. The statute clearly requires a full six weeks notice by posting, but does not clearly *567require the same of publication. MCL 600.6052. The Legislature could have easily used the same language with respect to publication as with the posting requirement, but it did not. The court rule is no clearer. It requires "6 full weeks” notice, but discloses nothing as to the method.
The courts of other jurisdictions are split in their resolutions of this precise issue:
"The statutes regarding foreclosure sales usually specify the length of time for which a notice thereof must be given or published. Where notice of a mortgage sale is required to be given for a certain number of weeks successively, there is a difference of judicial opinion as to whether or not 7 days must be given as a week’s notice. In some jurisdictions such a provision is considered to be complied with if notice is published once in each week for that number of weeks, although the number of days from the first publication to the day of sale is not equal to the number of days in that number of weeks. But other authorities take the view that a publication for a certain number of weeks must be made for as many days before the day of sale as there are days in the number of weeks required.” 55 Am Jur 2d, Mortgages, § 638, p 599 (citations omitted).
A statement in 16 Michigan Law & Practice, Mortgages, § 313, p 543, supports defendants’ interpretation of the statute, but is itself supported only by reference to a single, ancient circuit court opinion. Goodwin v Burns, 1 Mich NP 228 (1870), aff'd 21 Mich 211 (1870). In Wesbrook Lane Realty Corp v Pokorny, 250 Mich 548, 550; 231 NW 66 (1930), the Supreme Court held that, in calculating the number of days of notice given, the first day of publication does not count but the date of sale should be counted. The Court appeared to assume that the first publication must be made at least 42 days before the sale. However, the Court’s opinion does not disclose whether in that case, as here, *568notice was posted well in advance of the initial publication. We are satisfied that a reasonable interpretation of the statute makes publication sufficient if it occurs one time in each of the six weeks prior to sale even if 42 days do not elapse between the first publication and the date of sale— provided that the 42 day notice requirement has been met.
Although we hold that there was sufficient notice in this case, we would not grant defendants relief even if we held the opposite view. Defendants did not challenge the adequacy of the notice in the trial court. Where, for the first time on appeal, the defendant challenges the foreclosure sale "based upon mere technical irregularities”, the sale will not be set aside. Madill v Michigan National Bank, 302 Mich 251, 255; 4 NW2d 538 (1942). For example, in Goodwin, supra, the Supreme Court acknowledged that the foreclosure sale "had not been sufficiently noticed”, but affirmed the trial court’s refusal to reopen the matter because the defendant did not make a timely objection on that ground in circuit court. 21 Mich 212-213. In this case, defendants objected only on the ground that the judgment did not fix a time for payment, an objection which was properly denied because the judgment specifically set April 13, 1984, as the payment date. Defendants have waited too long to raise the notice issue.
III. Joint and Several Liability of Husband and Wife
Next, defendants assert that defendant Ina Smith’s assets may not be used to satisfy the joint debt which she entered into with her husband. In City Finance Co v Kloostra, 47 Mich App 276; 209 NW2d 498 (1973), one panel of this Court held that the Married Women’s Property Act, MCL 557.52 et *569seq.; MSA 26.182 et seq., was not superseded by Const 1963, art 10, § 1. The Court held that execution was limited to the personal assets of a woman who co-signed a promissory note with her husband, "unless consideration for the note passed directly to her separate estate”. 47 Mich App 284-285. We agree with the panels which have more recently reached the opposite conclusion. Manufacturers National Bank of Detroit v Pink, 128 Mich App 696, 699-700; 341 NW2d 181 (1983); Schenck v Seamon, 124 Mich App 438, 441-442; 335 NW2d 63 (1983); Michigan National Leasing Corp v Cardillo, 103 Mich App 427; 302 NW2d 888 (1981). We also note that the above-cited statute has been repealed.1 Defendants may be held jointly and severally liable.
IV. Adequacy of Foreclosure Sale Price
Defendants challenge the adequacy of the foreclosure sale price, which was $14,200. According to defendants, this was grossly inadequate, given the state equalized value of more than $15,000 and the location of the property on a main thoroughfare.
"[T]he court may fix and determine the minimum price at which the real property covered by the mortgage or land contract may be sold” at the foreclosure sale. MCL 600.3155; MSA 27A.3155, Kramer v Davis, 371 Mich 464, 471; 124 NW2d 292 (1963). The court may exercise its discretion to decline confirmation of a foreclosure sale if the amount bid is so inadequate as to shock the conscience of the court. Detroit Trust Co v Hart, 274 Mich 144, 146; 264 NW 321 (1936).
We find no abuse of discretion in this case. Mr. Lang, the land contract vendor, was the only bidder. His bid was based on an appraisal by a *570local realtor. Defendants submitted no real evidence of the property’s value. The state equalized value does not reflect the forced nature of the foreclosure sale. "[T]he element of compulsion reduces the value of property.” United Growth Corp v Kelly Mortgage & Investment Co, 86 Mich App 82, 86; 272 NW2d 340 (1978), lv den 406 Mich 855 (1979). "Reality requires that the court make some concession to the forced nature of the sale.” Id.
Affirmed.
R. B. Burns, P.J., concurred.
1981 PA 216. See, MCL 557.29(c); MSA 26.165(9)(c).

=== CASE 9741445 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:55:47.263132+00 ===

B. A. Jasper, J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent. Today, the lead opinion applies the doctrine of anticipatory breach to a land contract foreclosure proceeding and thus permits the circuit court to accelerate the installment payments not yet due under the parties’ contract to purchase real estate in Genesee County.
The foreclosure of land contracts is governed by statute. See MCL 600.3103 et seq.; MSA 27A.3101 et seq. Under Chapter 31 of the Revised Judicature Act, there is no provision for the doctrine of anticipatory breach. On the contrary, the act provides that a complaint in foreclosure "shall be dismissed upon the defendant’s bringing into court, at any time before the judgment of sale, the principal and interest due, with costs”. See MCL 600.3110; MSA 27A.3110. It follows, therefore, that although there is a breach, or even an anticipatory breach, of a land contract, the defendant may cure this breach at any time by paying the principal, interest, and costs into court before judgment is finally entered.
The long-standing rule in Michigan has been that absent an acceleration clause in the parties’ land contract, the circuit court lacks the authority *571to decree the entire contract price due. See Lutz v Dutmer, 286 Mich 467, 488; 282 NW 431 (1938); Brown v Mudge, 242 Mich 324; 218 NW 687 (1928); Cady v Taggart, 223 Mich 191, 195; 193 NW 848 (1923); Benincasa v Mihailovich, 31 Mich App 473, 478; 188 NW2d 136 (1971). The reason for this rule is that "[t]o require a sale to satisfy payments to become due in the future would be to declare a forfeiture, which under repeated decisions of [the Supreme] [C]ourt a court of equity may not do”. Cady v Taggart, supra, p 195.1 To date, actions under Chapter 31 of the Revised Judicature Act are still "equitable in nature”. MCL 600.3180; MSA 27A.3180.
The anticipatory-breach exception now advanced by the lead opinion has never before existed in either law or equity in land contract foreclosure proceedings in Michigan.2 Therefore, unless or until the Supreme Court or Legislature decide to carve out such an exception in land contract foreclosure proceedings, I cannot follow the lead opinion’s view. See and compare Dumas v Helm, 15 Mich App 148, 151-152; 166 NW2d 306 (1968), lv den 382 Mich 759 (1969), where this Court held that, notwithstanding a plaintiff’s investment in property, a defendant has a right to declare the *572total unpaid balance due if the contract contains an acceleration clause because a court of equity can neither enlarge nor abridge legal rights created by statute.
Accordingly, I would hold that the circuit court erred in accelerating the installments not yet due under the parties’ land contract.
Forfeiture proceedings are also governed by statute. See MCL 600.5726 et seq.; MSA 27A.5726 et seq. However, an executory contract, which must provide for such forfeiture, "shall not include any accelerated indebtedness by reason of breach of the contract”. MCL 600.5726; MSA 27A.5726. Plaintiffs action is not one to forfeit the land contract.
The lead opinion cites three Supreme Court cases to support the proposed anticipatory-breach exception to the rule that the circuit court lacks authority to accelerate future installment payments under a land contract which does not have an acceleration clause. However, none of these three cases involved the foreclosure of a land contract. See Mott v Penoyar, 153 Mich 273; 116 NW 1110 (1908) (breach of timber contract); Obenauer v Solomon, 151 Mich 570; 115 NW 696 (1908) (breach of timber sale contract); Hosmer v Wilson, 7 Mich 294; 74 Am Dec 716 (1859) (breach of labor and materials contract).

=== CASE 9741514 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:07.983829+00 ===

JUSTICE CLARK delivered the opinion of the court: The issue in the instant case is whether the trial court abused its discretion in granting appellees’ motion for a voluntary dismissal (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 1009) when a motion for involuntary dismissal (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2 — 619) was pending before the court. We hold that it did not. On July 27, 1984, appellees Theresa and Matthew Bochantin filed a medical malpractice action in the Madison County circuit court. Appellees named Dr. Petroff and Illinois Health Facilities, Inc., d/b/a Oliver Anderson Hospital, as defendants in the action. The hospital was subsequently dismissed from the action upon appellees’ motion and is not a party to this appeal. The record reveals that throughout the early history of the litigation, appellant filed numerous discovery motions with the trial court in an effort to have appellees comply with the applicable discovery rules. These included a motion to compel answers to interrogatories, a motion for pretrial conference seeking court supervision of discovery, a motion to set discovery deposition of appellees’ expert and, finally, a motion to dismiss the action. On October 24, 1986, the trial court granted the appellant’s motion to dismiss. However, on November 10, appellees filed a motion for the trial court to reinstate the action, which motion was granted on November 21. Appellant filed another motion to dismiss on January 23, 1987, arguing that appellees’ continuing failure to comply with discovery was a violation of this court’s Rule 219(c) (134 Ill. 2d R. 219(c)). In its order, the trial court conceded that there had been “substantial delay” by appellees, but denied the motion because compliance was completed prior to the hearing and because the matter was not yet set for trial. Thereafter, appellant attempted to set the discovery deposition of one of appellees’ experts but appellees failed to produce the expert for this or any subsequently scheduled depositions. Appellant filed another motion for a pretrial conference, and in its ruling on the motion on March 31, the trial court ordered the expert produced for deposition within 45 days. Trial was also set for November 1988, in the court’s order. The appellees failed to produce the experts by the court-imposed deadline; therefore, on October 17, appellant filed a third motion to dismiss with the trial court. At a hearing on appellant’s motion on January 3, 1989, appellees told the court that the expert had not been produced because his employer requested that he not testify in the matter. Appellees indicated to the court that they became aware of their expert’s withdrawal from the case in November 1988. The court gave appellees 30 days to replace their expert and to identify the new expert to appellant. The order did not include a ruling on appellant’s motion. On January 19, prior to the expiration of the court’s deadline, the court entered an order granting appellees 30 additional days to obtain and disclose their expert. On February 3, appellant filed a motion to strike the court’s January 19 order, but before arguments were heard on appellant’s motion, appellees sought and were granted a voluntary dismissal without prejudice. The appellate court affirmed the order of the trial court. (198 Ill. App. 3d 369.) Thereafter, this court granted appellant’s petition for leave to appeal (134 Ill. 2d R. 315). The Illinois State Medical Society filed briefs as amicus curiae in the matter in support of appellant’s position. In this court appellant argues that the trial court should have considered the October 17, 1988, motion to dismiss before ruling on appellees’ motion for voluntary dismissal. Appellant believes that the extent of this court’s opinion in Gibellina v. Handley (1989), 127 Ill. 2d 122, includes the requirement that a trial court consider pending defense motions to dismiss before a section 2—1009 motion where the record reveals a history of procedural and discovery violations. Alternatively, appellant argues that the trial court’s ruling on appellees’ motion was an abuse of discretion. In Gibellina v. Handley, this court stated that a trial court “may hear and decide a motion which has been filed prior to a section 2—1009 motion when that motion, if favorably ruled on by the court, could result in a final disposition of the case.” (Emphasis in original.) (Gibellina, 127 Ill. 2d at 137-38.) The Gibellina opinion represented a significant change in a plaintiff’s absolute right to voluntarily dismiss his action without prejudice prior to trial. Prior to Gibellina, this right was considered absolute in all but limited circumstances. In O’Connell v. St. Francis Hospital (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 273, 283, this court held that if a plaintiff files a motion to voluntarily dismiss and then refiles pursuant to section 13— 217 in response to a Rule 103(b) motion filed by the defendant, “the Rule 103(b) motion must be heard on its merits prior to a ruling on plaintiff’s motion to dismiss under section 2—1009.” (Emphasis added.) This court’s decisions in both O’Connell and Gibellina were grounded in our constitutional authority to regulate and manage the courts. (Gibellina, 127 Ill. 2d at 137; O’Connell, 112 Ill. 2d at 281.) Despite this clear mandate, however, only in O’Connell did the court clearly restrict the plaintiff’s rights under section 2—1009 and hold that a trial court “must” consider a pending Rule 103(b) motion. The opinion in that matter was based on the conflict between the legislatively enacted Code of Civil Procedure and this court’s rules. “ ‘[W]here a rule of this court on a matter within the court’s authority and a statute on the same subject conflict, the rule will prevail.’ (Emphasis added.) [Citations.]” (O’Connell, 112 Ill. 2d at 281.) There was no comparable conflict in Gibellina. Rather, that opinion, necessitated by the “abusive use of the voluntary dismissal statute” (Gibellina, 127 Ill. 2d at 138; see O’Connell, 112 Ill. 2d at 281-82), clearly left within the trial court the discretion to consider the previously filed, potentially dispositive motion. Appellant argues before this court that the proper interpretation of this court’s opinion in Gibellina is that a trial court must consider the previously filed motion when the record reveals a history of procedural and discovery abuses by the plaintiff. Appellant is incorrect in his interpretation of the extent of the Gibellina holding. What appellant proposes is revision of the Gibellina rule to require determination of the defense motion rather than making the court’s authority to do so discretionary. (198 Ill. App. 3d at 374.) As the opinion below observed, “[w]hile we acknowledge [appellant’s] concerns, we decline to adopt this proposed interpretation because it would further limit plaintiffs’] statutory right of voluntary dismissal and because [this court] intended to afford discretion to the court, not a mandate.” (198 Ill. App. 3d at 374.) The appellate court’s interpretation of Gibellina is correct. Application of the rationale underlying the Gibellina opinion has not been limited to a civil context. In People v. Woolsey (1990), 139 Ill. 2d 157, the trial court allowed the State to enter a nolle prosequi where the defendant had two motions pending before the court, one of which was a motion to dismiss for violation of the speedy-trial act. (Woolsey, 139 Ill. 2d at 165.) The defendant challenged the State’s dismissal of his indictment through a nolle prosequi, arguing, inter alia, that the trial court erred in failing to conduct a hearing on his motion for discharge before allowing the State to enter a nolle prosequi. (Woolsey, 139 Ill. 2d at 161.) This court concluded, inter alia, that “[i]n the interests of judicial economy and fairness to the defendant, the trial court should have disposed of the defendant’s speedy-trial motion before allowing the State to nol-pros the indictment.” Woolsey, 139 Ill. 2d at 170. In reaching its conclusion in Woolsey, this court observed that it was guided by its decision in Gibellina, where this court held that where there is a potentially dispositive defense motion before the court, “the trial court should consider and decide that motion before allowing the motion to voluntarily dismiss an action.” (Emphasis added.) Woolsey, 139 Ill. 2d at 170. Contrary to this court’s statement in Woolsey, which we recognize as merely dicta, we emphasize herein that the GibeUina opinion left within the discretion of the trial court the decision to consider a potentially dispositive defense motion before granting a plaintiff’s section 2—1009 motion. Moreover, although the Woolsey opinion relied on Gibellina for support in reaching its conclusion, the facts of that matter are readily distinguishable from this court’s opinion in Gibellina as well as the instant case. Our only other concern then is whether the trial court abused its discretion in choosing not to consider the defense motion. The trial court’s decision will not be reversed unless there was an abuse of discretion. The standard of review on appeal is whether the trial court’s ruling was a reasonable exercise of sound discretion. (Hernandez v. Power Construction Co. (1978), 73 Ill. 2d 90, 95.) As we observed above, appellees told the trial court during arguments on appellant’s October 17, 1988, motion to dismiss that they had only recently been informed of their expert’s withdrawal from the case. Granted, this delay on the part of appellees was another in a case replete with postponements and extensions that succeeded in freezing the litigation at the discovery stage. However, the trial court was familiar with the history of the litigation when it ruled on the appellees’ motion to voluntarily dismiss the action. We cannot conclude that the trial court’s decision to grant appellees additional time to prepare their case for trial rather than dismiss the action was not a reasonable exercise of sound discretion. Accordingly, we hold that the trial court’s decision to do so was not an abuse of discretion. For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment of the appellate court. Judgment affirmed. JUSTICES HEIPLE and CUNNINGHAM took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 9741515 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:57:07.989717+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE MILLER, dissenting: The trial judge in the present case granted the plaintiffs’ request for voluntary dismissal of their action without first considering a pending and potentially dispositive defense motion for involuntary dismissal. I do not agree with the majority’s conclusion that the trial judge’s ruling may now be sustained on the ground that it did not constitute an abuse of discretion. Accordingly, I dissent. A brief review of the 4V2-year history of this litigation in the circuit court will demonstrate the merits of the defendant’s position. The plaintiffs filed the present medical malpractice action in 1984. In October 1986, the trial judge dismissed the suit because the plaintiffs had failed to disclose the identity of any expert witness. The action was later reinstated when the plaintiffs submitted the names of two expert witnesses. In January 1987, the defendant filed a second motion for dismissal of the action, contending that the plaintiffs had failed to respond to supplemental requests for production and supplemental interrogatories propounded some six months earlier. The plaintiffs submitted answers to the discovery requests at a subsequent hearing, and the trial judge then denied the dismissal motion, though he noted that the plaintiffs had been responsible for substantial delay in the proceedings. In October 1988, the defendant filed a third motion for dismissal, this time on the ground that the plaintiffs had failed to set the discovery deposition of Dr. Allan J. Jacobs, one of the expert witnesses previously identified by the plaintiffs. In November 1988, the plaintiffs learned that Dr. Jacobs’ employer would not permit him to appear as a witness in the present case. Following a hearing on January 3, 1989, the trial court entered an order granting the plaintiffs 30 days in which to disclose the identity of a new expert witness. The order also declared that no further extensions would be allowed. On January 19, 1989, the trial court granted the plaintiffs an additional 30 days’ time in which to name a new expert witness. Apparently there had been no request by the plaintiffs for a further extension of time, however, and on February 3 the defendant filed a motion to strike the latest order and to reinstate the previously imposed deadline. On February 15, 1989, the plaintiffs filed a motion for voluntary dismissal of their action pursuant to section 2—1009 of the Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 2—1009). The trial judge granted the plaintiffs’ request on February 23, 1989. In Gibellina v. Handley (1989), 127 Ill. 2d 122, this court held that “the trial court may hear and decide a motion which has been filed prior to a section 2—1009 motion when that motion, if favorably ruled on by the court, could result in a final disposition of the case.” (Emphasis in original.) (Gibellina, 127 Ill. 2d at 138.) The holding was applicable to all potentially dispositive defense motions, and not just to those grounded in a specific rule of this court (see O’Connell v. St. Francis Hospital (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 273). The novelty of Gibellina is indicated by its purely prospective operation: the court declined to apply the new holding even to the cases consolidated in that appeal, electing instead to limit the effect of the decision to trial court proceedings conducted on or after February 22, 1989, the date on which the opinion was filed. Applying Gibellina to the present case, the majority concludes that the trial judge did not abuse his discretion in granting the plaintiffs’ request for voluntary dismissal without first considering the defendant’s prior motion. In support of this conclusion, the majority opinion notes that the trial judge was aware of the history of the litigation when he granted the plaintiffs’ motion. In my view, the majority’s holding is subject to two major defects. First, it is not at all clear that the trial judge realized that he had any discretion to exercise; the trial judge might have believed instead that he was compelled to grant the plaintiffs’ request for voluntary dismissál, as he would have been required to do prior to Gibellina. Nothing in the record indicates what circumstances, if any, were considered by the trial judge in allowing the plaintiffs’ request for dismissal. The record on appeal does not contain a transcript of the February 23 hearing, and the order entered that day stated only that the motion was being allowed, without specifying any reasons for that ruling. Though applicable to the present action, Gibellina apparently was not considered by the court or the parties during the hearing on the plaintiffs’ request for voluntary dismissal. Indeed, it seems that Gibellina was first brought to the court’s attention in the defendant’s subsequent motion for reconsideration; the wording of the motion suggests that, at the time of the February 23 hearing, the trial judge and the parties were not aware of the decision in that case, which had been filed only the previous day. Second, even if we are to assume that the trial judge and the parties believed that the present case was governed by Gibellina, I do not agree with the majority’s conclusion that granting the plaintiffs’ request for voluntary dismissal was not an abuse of discretion. In deferring to the lower court’s ruling, the majority merely cites the trial judge’s familiarity with the course of the present litigation. That circumstance will be present in virtually every case, however, and I do not believe that our reliance on it can afford adequate guidance concerning proper practice under section 2—1009. Discussing the growing abuse of the voluntary dismissal statute, this court noted in Gibellina that “an ever increasing number of plaintiffs are using a section 2—1009 motion to avoid a potential decision on the ‘merits’ or to avoid an adverse ruling as opposed to using it to correct a procedural or technical defect. [Citations.]” (Gibellina, 127 Ill. 2d at 137.) The consequences of that abuse are readily apparent. As this court explained, “It has become clear that the allowance of an unrestricted right to dismiss and refile an action in the face of a potentially dis-positive motion is not only increasing the burden on the already crowded dockets of our courts, but is also infringing on the authority of the judiciary to discharge its duties fairly and expeditiously.” Gibellina, 127 Ill. 2d at 137. The case at bar illustrates well the frequent abuse of the voluntary dismissal statute and the resulting burdens that are being imposed on litigants and courts in this State. In requesting dismissal of their action under section 2 — 1009, the present plaintiffs were not seeking to correct a mere procedural or technical defect in the proceedings but instead were attempting to avoid an adverse ruling on the defendant’s pending motion. This is the type of problem highlighted in Gibellina. Short of adopting a bright-line rule that would in every case require a trial judge to consider the merits of a potentially dispositive defense motion that has been filed prior to a plaintiff’s request for voluntary dismissal, this court should provide meaningful standards by which the priority of those competing motions may be readily determined. The majority’s decision in the present appeal can only lead to confusion among bench and bar regarding proper practice under section 2 — 1009. Justice Frankfurter’s observation is apt here: “Litigation . is the pursuit of practical ends, not a game of chess.” (City of Indianapolis v. Chase National Bank (1941), 314 U.S. 63, 69, 86 L. Ed. 47, 50, 62 S. Ct. 15, 17.) Faced both with crowded dockets and with diverse demands on scarce resources, the judicial system should be curbing, rather than encouraging, dilatory trial tactics. Today’s decision simply holds in check the eventual resolution of this much-delayed action and deprives practitioners and the lower courts of any guidance with respect to these recurring problems.

=== CASE 2227474 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:36.887632+00 ===

617 N.W.2d 23 (2000)
IOWA WASTE SYSTEMS, INC., an Iowa Corporation, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
BUCHANAN COUNTY, Iowa, a Municipal Corporation and Governmental Subdivision of the State of Iowa, and Buchanan County Sanitary Landfill Commission, a Statutorily Created Governmental Entity, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 99-751.
Court of Appeals of Iowa.
May 31, 2000.
*26 Sean P. Conboy, Douglas E. Gross, and James L. Pray of Brown, Winick, Graves, Gross, Baskerville and Schoenbaum, P.L.C., Des Moines, for appellant.
James E. Brick of Brick, Gentry, Bowers, Swartz, Stoltze, Schuling & Levis, P.C., Des Moines, for appellee-Buchanan County Sanitary Landfill Commission.
Allen W. Vanderhart, County Attorney, for appellee-Buchanan County.
Heard by STREIT, P.J., and ZIMMER and HECHT, JJ.
STREIT, P.J.
English Jurist, John Selden, best expresses Iowa Waste Systems' dissatisfaction with the trial court's ruling regarding its numerous equitable claims in writing,
Equity is a rougish thing. For Law we have to measure, know what to trust to; Equity is according to the conscience of him that is Chancellor, and as that is larger or narrower, so is Equity. `Tis all one as if they should make the standard for the measure we call a "foot" a Chancellor's foot; what an uncertain measure would this be! One Chancellor has a long foot, another a short foot, a third an indifferent foot. `Tis the same thing in the Chancellor's conscience.
Richard Milward, Equity, in Table Talk of John Selden (Frederick Pollock ed.1927) (1689). However, as we find our feet to be roughly the same size as the trial court's, we affirm the trial court and deny all claims of error.
I. Background Facts.
In 1980 Buchanan County leased to Nishna Sanitary Service, Inc. a large plot of land in order to operate what was to be the Buchanan County Landfill. The lease was to continue on a year-to-year basis, unless notice was given on or before September 1 on any given year, whereupon the lease would terminate on March 1 of the following year. In 1994 the Buchanan County Sanitary Landfill Commission entered into an operating agreement with Nishna that delineated the responsibilities and expectations of both parties concerning the operation of the landfill. The operating agreement was effective for a three-year term and was to be extended automatically for an additional three years, unless notice was given on or before January 1 of the final year, whereupon the operating agreement would terminate on July 1 of that year. The operating agreement placed the day-to-day operational costs on Nishna and required the Landfill Commission to pay for leachate[1] control and other closure costs.
In 1996 Nishna sold its landfill operations to Iowa Waste Systems, Inc. As part of that sale, Iowa Waste signed an "Acknowledgment *27 of Transfer" whereby Iowa Waste would be substituted as the party of interest under both the lease and the operating agreement. After it had been operating the landfill for a few months, the Landfill Commission informed Iowa Waste it would be terminating their operating agreement effective July 1, 1997. Iowa Waste expected the notice of termination, but believed a new long-term operating agreement would be agreed upon.
Three months after receiving the notice of termination, Iowa Waste and the Landfill Commission began negotiating for (1) the sale of the landfill to Iowa Waste, (2) a new twenty-five-year operating agreement between the parties, and (3) Iowa Waste to reimburse the Landfill Commission the $200,000 it spent on implementation of the leachate control plan. A few weeks later, the Landfill Commission voted to enter into a letter of intent with Iowa Waste in preparation for the final agreement, but also cautioned that the final agreement was subject to ultimate approval by both the Landfill Commission and the Buchanan County Board of Supervisors. Shortly thereafter, the Landfill Commission rescinded its letter of intent and voted to close the landfill. The County then exercised its right to terminate the lease and notified Iowa Waste.
The termination of the operation agreement became effective July 1, 1997, but the lease for the land did not expire until March 1, 1998. Iowa Waste could not accept additional waste after June 30, 1997, but did have the right to remain on the property for an additional eight months. Immediately following the termination date of the operating agreement, the Landfill Commission, on numerous occasions, requested access to the landfill in order to take over the leachate control measures and begin closure of the landfill. The Landfill Commission also notified Iowa Waste that in the event it failed to grant the Landfill Commission access, it would be solely responsible for the costs of continuing to perform leachate control activities. Iowa Waste refused to allow the Landfill Commission access to the site, continued to simply recirculate the leachate back through the landfill as a temporary measure[2], and continued to bill the Landfill Commission for the costs of those measures. The Landfill Commission refused to pay these bills.
Iowa Waste barred the Landfill Commission from the land for nearly seven months, during which time the Landfill Commission continued to reiterate its desires to gain access to the property and take over the leachate control measures. Finally on January 26, 1998, Iowa Waste granted the Landfill Commission access to the site in order to initiate permanent leachate control measures.
II. Procedure.
Iowa Waste filed suit against the County and the Landfill Commission in May of 1997, alleging: (1) the Landfill Commission breached the operating agreement when it refused to pay for the implementation of the approved leachate control measures, (2) it was entitled to declaratory judgment regarding its continued possession of the land until the expiration of the lease, the Landfill Commission's obligation to pay for the leachate control measures, and attorney fees (3) it was entitled to indemnification, under the terms of the operating agreement, for costs of implementing the leachate control plan and the attorney fees generated in litigating this claim, (4) the Landfill Commission should be made to specifically perform on the operating agreement, (5) the Landfill Commission should be estopped from revoking the letter of intent under a theory of promissory *28 estoppel, and (6) the Landfill Commission's termination of the operating agreement constituted an unconstitutional taking as it rendered Iowa Waste's disposal permit worthless. The Landfill Commission answered the petition and counterclaimed alleging among other things, (1) Iowa Waste breached the operating agreement by not following all applicable Iowa Department of Natural Resources regulations, (2) Iowa Waste operated the landfill negligently, and (3) Iowa Waste breached the lease by failing to restore the land used to farmland. The County also answered the petition and filed a series of counterclaims.
On summary judgment, the district court: (1) ordered on the declaratory judgment claim that the Landfill Commission was, under the agreement, only responsible for all leachate control costs prior to the termination of the operating agreement, but permitted the claim for attorney fees to proceed to trial; (2) permitted Iowa Waste's indemnification claim to proceed only as to future claims of contamination; and (3) dismissed Iowa Waste's claims of promissory estoppel and unconstitutional taking. Based on the court's handling of the declaratory judgment claim, Iowa Waste amended its petition to include a claim of "quantum meruit/unjust enrichment" for services provided after the termination of the operating agreement. The surviving claims of both parties proceeded to a bench trial. The court ruled, relevant to the present appeal, (1) Iowa Waste was not entitled to recovery on its claim of quantum meruit/unjust enrichment, (2) Iowa Waste could not recover its attorney fees under the contract, (3) the Landfill Commission could recover under breach of contract and negligence for Iowa Waste's operation of the landfill, and (4) Iowa Waste breached the lease by not restoring the land subject to the lease to farmland.
Iowa Waste appeals claiming the trial court erred in: (1) denying recovery on the basis of quantum meruit/unjust enrichment, (2) finding it both negligent and in breach for its operation of the landfill, (3) awarding the County damages for restoration of the land, (4) ushering out its claims of indemnification, promissory estoppel, and unconstitutional taking on summary judgment, and (5) denying recovery of attorney fees.
III. Continued Leachate Recirculation.
Iowa Waste first claims it was denied equitable relief from the costs it incurred in continuing to perform certain leachate measures after the termination of the operating agreement. Iowa Waste blurs two distinct theories of recovery, quantum meruit and unjust enrichment, as its basis for recovery. However despite the years of inseparably connecting these two terms, the two terms are not only markedly different, but not even rooted in the same legal genre. See Bloomgarden v. Coyer, 479 F.2d 201, 208 (D.C.Cir.1973); H. Hugh McConnell, Distinguishing Quantum Meruit and Unjust Enrichment in the Construction Setting, 71 Fla. B.J. 88, 88 n. 2 (1997) [hereinafter Distinguishing Quantum Meruit]. In order to appropriately address both theories we must delve into their respective historical underpinnings and pinpoint where the two theories diverge.
The antiquated term quantum meruit literally means "as much as he deserved" and was historically employed in seeking compensation for agreed upon services under the common law writ of assumpsit (meaning "he undertook or promised"). Drake v. Block, 247 Iowa 517, 522, 74 N.W.2d 577, 580 (1956); Distinguishing Quantum Meruit, 71 Fla.B.J. at 88 n. 3. The common writ of assumpsit was not grounded in modern contract law but was simply a remedy designed to hold persons liable for promises not made under the King's sealwhether expressly stated, implied by their actions, or where no promise existed but justice required the at-law imposition of a judicially-created fictional promise. 1 Arthur Linton Corbin, Corbin *29 on Contracts § 1.18, at 51 (rev.ed.1993) [hereinafter Corbin on Contracts]. The term quantum meruit was pled under the common writ of assumpsit in those situations where services were performed based upon actions implying mutual assent and the party receiving the services refused to pay for them, whereas unjust enrichment, although still pled under the common writ of assumpsit, was utilized in those situations where there was no assent but a promise was equitably imputed to serve justice. Id.; Distinguishing Quantum Meruit, 71 Fla.B.J. at 88, n. 1. The likely historical source of confusion between the two terms lies in their mutual employment under the general writ of assumpsit. See Paffhausen v. Balano, 708 A.2d 269, 271 n. 3 (Me.1998). However, with the advent of modern contract law, the two terms diverged and no longer fell under the same general cause of action. Rather, quantum meruit became grounded in the realm of pure contract, whereas unjust enrichment was placed in the equitable sphere of quasi contract.
In modern contract law, there have traditionally been two types of contractsexpress and implied. Irons v. Community State Bank, 461 N.W.2d 849, 855 (Iowa App.1990). "When the parties manifest their agreement by words, the contract is said to be express." Id. When there "is merely a tacit promise, one that is inferred in whole or in part from expressions other than words on the part of the promisor" it is said to be implied in fact. Corbin on Contracts § 1.18, at 51. Thus, the antiquated term quantum meruit is actually used to denote a particular subclass of implied-in-fact contractsan implied-in-fact contract to pay for services rendered.[3]See Bloomgarden v. Coyer, 479 F.2d at 208. Recovery, therefore, on a claim of quantum meruit is guided by all present notions of contract law.[4]United States ex rel. Modern Elec., Inc. v. Ideal Elec. Sec. Co., 81 F.3d 240, 246 (D.C.Cir. 1996); Carvel Co. v. Spencer Press, Inc., 708 A.2d 1033, 1036 (Me.1998). True to its contractual roots, one may recover under a claim of quantum meruit, or more accurately a breach of an implied-in-fact contract, for the reasonable value of the services provided and the market value of the materials furnished. See Paffhausen v. Balano, 708 A.2d at 271; Distinguishing Quantum Meruit, 71 Fla.B.J. at 88.
Unjust enrichment on the other hand is not grounded in contract law but rather is a remedy of restitution. Irons v. Community State Bank, 461 N.W.2d at 855. As it is not grounded in pure contract law such remedies are often referred to as quasi contracts or implied-in-law contracts. Id.
A quasi-contractual obligation is one that is created by law for reasons of justice, without any expression of assent and sometimes even against a clear expression of dissent. If this is true, it would be better not to use the word "contract" at all. Contracts are formed by expressions of assent. Quasi contracts quite otherwise. The legal relations *30 between contractors are dependent upon the interpretation of their expressions of assent. In quasi contract the relations of the parties are not dependent on such interpretations.
Corbin on Contracts § 1.20, at 64. Unjust enrichment is the modern designation for the doctrine of quasi contracts or contracts implied in law. Smith v. Stowell, 256 Iowa 165, 173, 125 N.W.2d 795, 799 (Iowa 1964). Damages under a claim of unjust enrichment are limited to the value of what was inequitably retained. See Paffhausen v. Balano, 708 A.2d at 271.
We now turn to the substance of Iowa Waste's respective claims.
A. Implied-in-Fact Contract for Services (Quantum Meruit).
1. Standard of Review. Quantum meruit recovery based on an implied-in-fact contract is normally reviewed for correction of errors at law. See Frontier Properties Corp. v. Swanberg, 488 N.W.2d 146, 147 (Iowa 1992). However, because the parties agreed to try the case in equity our review is not at law but de novo. Weinhold v. Wolff, 555 N.W.2d 454, 458 (Iowa 1996).
2. The Merits. In order to establish an implied-in-fact contract to pay for services, the party seeking recovery must show:
(1) the services were carried out under such circumstances as to give the recipient reason to understand:
(a) they were performed for him and not some other person, and
(b) they were not rendered gratuitously, but with the expectation of compensation from the recipient; and
(2) the services were beneficial to the recipient.
Bloomgarden v. Coyer, 479 F.2d at 208-09 (footnote omitted). In the present case, the actions of Iowa Waste were not carried out in a manner that would reasonably indicate the Landfill Commission assented to its actions and simply failed to address the cost of these services. Three days after the termination of the operating agreement, the Landfill Commission not only requested the right to take over the site and perform the requisite leachate measures, but additionally informed Iowa Waste if it did not wish to grant access to the property, it would be solely obligated to protect the environmental integrity of the site. Such a direct declaration of dissent flies squarely in the face of an implied-in-fact contract for provided services. It clearly was not reasonable on the part of Iowa Waste to believe the Landfill Commission recognized any obligation to pay for these services. Given this overt failure of mutual assent, we cannot find the existence of an implied-in-fact contract for services performed after the expiration of the operating agreement. The trial court is affirmed as to this issue.
B. Unjust Enrichment.
1. Standard of Review. As a claim for unjust enrichment is rooted solely in equitable principles, our review is de novo. Iowa R.App.P. 4.
2. The Merits. To recover on the basis of unjust enrichment, Iowa Waste must show: (1) it conferred a benefit upon the Landfill Commission to its own detriment, (2) the Landfill Commission had an appreciation of receiving the benefit, (3) the Landfill Commission accepted and retained the benefit under circumstances making it inequitable for there to be no return payment for its value, and (4) there is no at-law remedy that can appropriately address the claim. See Irons v. Community State Bank, 461 N.W.2d at 855; Britvar v. Schainuck, 791 P.2d 1183, 1184 (Colo.App.1989). The only elements of contention in this case concern whether Iowa Waste conferred a benefit on the Landfill Commission and whether the circumstances surrounding that alleged conferment ring of inequity or injustice if return payment for the value of those services was not ordered.
*31 Whether Iowa Waste's recirculation efforts constituted a benefit to the Landfill Commission is as murky as the leachate itself. The record is void of evidence regarding the responsibility of the parties, given their respective legal statuses, if leachate was permitted to migrate off site. It is further unclear whether merely recirulating the leachate amounted to a benefit, when: (1) the volume of the leachate remained constant and the Landfill Commission would still bear ultimate responsibility for removing and treating all leachate; (2) the Landfill Commission could perform the same tasks as Iowa Waste, but in a more cost-efficient manner; and (3) the ultimate costs in removing and treating the leachate actually increased due to Iowa Waste's delay in permitting the Landfill Commission access to the site. Given this murkiness, we cannot find Iowa Waste met its burden of proof in establishing a conferment of an actual benefit upon the Landfill Commission.
Regardless of whether the actions of Iowa Waste can be construed as a benefit, we find the equities do not support a claim for unjust enrichment. The underlying policy issue surrounding a recognizable claim for unjust enrichment is, regardless of the legal position of the parties, a situation has arisen making it inequitable or unjust not to order restitution. The series of events surrounding Iowa Waste's claim, however, simply do not appeal to this underlying sense of justice. Immediately after the termination of the operating agreement, the Landfill Commission not only informed Iowa Waste it would not pay for any further leachate control measures, but repeatedly offered to perform the control measures itself and hold Iowa Waste completely harmless. Iowa Waste, however, refused to grant the Landfill Commission access to the land and even sought to enjoin it from coming onto the property. Such a situation does not conjure notions of justice. That being the case, we cannot find the Landfill Commission was unjustly enriched. The trial court properly denied Iowa Waste restitution.
IV. The Cost of Intermediate Cover.
Iowa Waste next claims the trial court erred in granting the Landfill Commission damages for Iowa Waste's alleged failure to provide the proper depth of soil cover on the refuse as required by law. It claims there was insufficient evidence to support a breach of contract or that it was negligent.
A. Standard of Review. Although claims of breach of contract and negligence are usually tried at law, our review here is de novo as the parties agreed to try the case in equity. Weinhold v. Wolff, 555 N.W.2d at 458.
B. The Merits. The operating agreement between the parties required, among other things, that Iowa Waste comply with all applicable DNR regulations. Among those regulations is a requirement that: (1) all solid waste be covered with six inches of compacted soil at the end of each day, (2) an additional six inches of compacted soil be added within a week, and (3) an additional foot of compacted soil be added within sixty daysa grand total of two feet. Iowa Admin.Code r. 567-103.3(2)(b)-(d). The Landfill Commission, in support of its contention that Iowa Waste failed to provide sufficient adequate intermediate cover and therefore not only breached the contract but was negligent, offered the undisputed evidence of an expert who measured the amount of cover on the site and determined an additional 19,700 cubic yards of soil were needed to bring the site to statutory compliance. Iowa Waste attempts to refute this concrete physical evidence by arguing the DNR never cited the landfill for having inadequate cover. Simply because it was never caught by a governing authority does not make the existence of concrete evidence to the contrary moot. We find there was ample evidence of both a material breach of contract and an act of negligence *32 on the part of Iowa Waste. The damages awarded on this specific count of the counterclaim is affirmed.
V. Restoration of the Borrow Area.
Iowa Waste next claims the trial court erred in awarding the County damages for Iowa Waste's failure to restore to farmland the area from which soil was borrowed to cover the refuse (the borrow area). Iowa Waste claims the language of the lease does not mandate such restoration, the County's entrance on the site constituted a surrender of the lease, and the provision requiring restoration became impossible due to legislation.
A. Standard of Review. We generally review the interpretation and construction of a contract as a matter of law. Hartig Drug Co. v. Hartig, 602 N.W.2d 794, 797 (Iowa 1999). However, our review here is de novo as the parties agreed to try the case in equity. Weinhold v. Wolff, 555 N.W.2d at 458.
B. The Lease Language. The lease between the parties included the following provision: "All land used for sanitary landfill shall be restored to farmland upon expiration of the landfill operation." Iowa Waste claims the provision should be so narrowly construed as to include only that land actually filled with refuse, and had the parties intended to include all land involved in the sanitary landfill operation the contract should have so stated.
When interpreting contractual terms, we must ascertain the meaning and intention of the parties as expressed by the language used. Pathology Consultants v. Gratton, 343 N.W.2d 428, 434 (Iowa 1984). The terms of the document, however, must also be read in light of the surrounding circumstances and given their practical meaning. Kroblin v. RDR Motels, Inc., 347 N.W.2d 430, 433 (Iowa 1984).
We cannot give the phrase "land used in sanitary landfill" such a narrow construction as to include only that land expressly used for the deposit of refuse. The synergy between the actual landfill and the area where soil is taken to cover the landfill cannot be denied. The soil taken from this land was utilized to provide the needed cover on the landfill itself. The reasonable and practical interpretation of the phrase includes the borrow area.
C. Surrender of the Lease. Iowa Waste next claims its grant of permission to the Landfill Commission to enter the land constituted a surrender of the lease and it was therefore released from any covenants contained in that lease. See Parris-West Maytag Hotel Corp. v. Continental Amusement Co., 168 N.W.2d 735, 738 (Iowa 1969). The surrender of a lease is the yielding up of "the estate to the landlord, so that the leasehold interest becomes extinct by mutual agreement between the parties." Beall v. White, 94 U.S.(4 Otto) 382, 389, 24 L. Ed. 173 (1876). A landlord's acceptance of surrender may be express or implied. Parris-West Maytag Hotel Corp. v. Continental Amusement Co., 168 N.W.2d at 738. Factors significant in determining whether surrender has occurred include, the changing of locks by the landlord, whether the tenant still had property on the premises, whether the tenant could still access the property, and if the tenant continued to pay rent or utilities. See English v. Standard Optical Co., 814 P.2d 613, 618 (Utah Ct.App.1991). Iowa Waste failed to present evidence the actions of the parties constituted a surrender. There was no evidence regarding who controlled the property, whether rent was paid, or whether Iowa Waste continued to have property on the site. Furthermore, the agreement of the parties specifically grants the County access to the site through the end of the lease term. The language of the agreement only provides the County access to the site. There is simply no evidence of an express or implied mutual agreement to surrender the land.
D. Impossibility. Iowa Waste additionally claims the term of the contract *33 which called for restoration became objectively impossible and it was therefore under no obligation to perform that portion of the lease agreement. However, the trial court never ruled on the applicability of the impossibility doctrine to the borrow area. The issue was raised in the pretrial pleadings and motions, but there is no mention of impossibility in the trial court's findings of fact and conclusions of law. Under Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 179(b), a party must alert the trial court of its failure to resolve an issue, claim, or other theory properly submitted to preserve error. Iowa R.Civ.P. 179(b); Ritz v. Wapello County Bd. of Supervisors, 595 N.W.2d 786, 789 (Iowa 1999). The purpose of a rule 179(b) motion is "to advise counsel and the appellate court of the basis of the trial court's decision in order that counsel may direct his attack upon specific adverse findings or rulings in the event of an appeal." Berger v. Amana Society, 254 Iowa 1036, 1040, 120 N.W.2d 465, 467 (1963). As Iowa Waste did not move under Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 179(b) for an enlargement or modification of its conclusions, it is procedurally barred from review. The trial court is affirmed.
VI. Conclusion.
We have carefully considered all claims urged by Iowa Waste, whether directly addressed herein or not, and find them to be without merit. The trial court is affirmed not only in regard to its trial findings but in its rulings on summary judgment as well.
AFFIRMED.
NOTES
[1]  Leachate is the liquid produced as a result of rain and surface water filtering through the various layers of garbage.
[2]  The act of simply recirculating the leachate by way of pumps was only a temporary remedy. More permanent leachate control measures were required by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and had to implemented on a specific timetable. These permanent measures included collecting the leachate into large storage containers, and then transporting the leachate by way of truck to a water treatment plant.
[3]  The other sub specie of an implied-in-fact contract was called quantum valebant and was pled in the situation where goods were delivered upon actions implying mutual assent but were not paid for. See Corbin on Contracts § 1.18(b).
[4]  As the term quantum meruit is not only antiquated but inevitably breeds confusion, the preferred phrase for asserting such a cause of action is an implied-in-fact contract. In fact, even the distinction between an express contract and one implied in fact is viewed as somewhat superfluous. All contracts rest on some overt communication of assent between the parties, whether written, oral, in sign language, or expressed by actions. Corbin on Contracts § 1.19, at 55-57. Thus, all contracts must be expressly communicated in some form or another. Furthermore, all contracts rest on the implications and inferences connoted by a particular choice of words, signs, or actions. Id. Thus, some implied meaning must be attributed to any communication of assent. Therefore, "the distinction between an express and an [implied-in-fact] contract ... is of little importance, if it can be said to exist at all." Id. § 1.19, at 57.

=== CASE 3027453 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:17.670744+00 ===

United States Court of Appeals
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
___________
No. 00-3575
___________
Bohumir Marik,                        *
*
Appellant,                 * Appeal from the United States
* District Court for the Western
v.                               * District of Missouri.
*
Buckeye Retirement Co., L.L.C., Ltd., * [UNPUBLISHED]
*
Appellee.                  *
___________
Submitted:    July 27, 2001
Filed:    August 2, 2001
___________
Before WOLLMAN, Chief Judge, MORRIS SHEPPARD ARNOLD, and BYE, Circuit
Judges.
___________
PER CURIAM.
Bohumir Marik appeals the district court’s1 dismissal of his claims against the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the court’s subsequent dismissal
of his claims against MNSB Properties, Inc. (“MNSB”), in Marik’s quiet title action
1
The Honorable Nanette K. Laughrey, United States District Judge for the
Western District of Missouri.
removed from state court.2 He also moves for judicial notice of certain court orders in
a prior related action.
Having thoroughly reviewed the record, we agree with the district court that
Marik’s claims are subject to 12 U.S.C. § 1821(d), a provision of the Financial
Institutions Reform, Recovery & Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA), which provides
mandatory administrative remedies against subject failed financial institutions and bars
courts from considering unexhausted claims. Marik’s suit is grounded in the pre-
receivership conduct of Metro North State Bank, a failed financial institution within the
meaning of 12 U.S.C. § 1821(d)(13)(D)(ii), for which FDIC was appointed receiver.
It is undisputed that Marik did not exhaust his administrative remedies. We agree with
the district court, therefore, that dismissal of FDIC without prejudice was required. See
Resolution Trust Corp. Mortgage Trust 1994-N2 v. Haith, 133 F.3d 574, 578-80 (8th
Cir. 1998).
We also conclude that the district court did not abuse its discretion in dismissing
defendant MNSB: after this lawsuit was filed, MNSB assigned to FDIC all of MNSB’s
interests in the property that is the subject of this suit. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 25 (c). We
clarify that MNSB’s dismissal also is without prejudice.
Accordingly, we grant Marik’s motion on appeal, but we affirm the district
court’s orders and judgment. See 8th Cir. R. 47B.
2
While this appeal was pending, Buckeye Retirement Co., L.L.C., Ltd., was
granted leave to be substituted as appellee for FDIC and MNSB.
-2-
A true copy.
Attest:
CLERK, U.S. COURT OF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT.
-3-

=== CASE 3027455 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:17.918219+00 ===

Opinions of the United
2007 Decisions                                                                                                             States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit
6-29-2007
EEOC v. Hora Inc
Precedential or Non-Precedential: Non-Precedential
Docket No. 05-5393
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007
Recommended Citation
"EEOC v. Hora Inc" (2007). 2007 Decisions. Paper 861.
http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007/861
This decision is brought to you for free and open access by the Opinions of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit at Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in 2007 Decisions by an authorized administrator of Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. For more information, please contact Benjamin.Carlson@law.villanova.edu.
NOT PRECEDENTIAL
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 05-5393
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION;
MANESSTA BEVERLY,
Plaintiff/Intervenor in District Court
v.
HORA, INC. d/b/a DAYS INN; MARSHALL MANAGEMENT, INC.
JANA R. BARNETT,
Appellant pursuant to F.R.A.P. 12(a)
APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA
(D.C. No. 03-cv-01429)
District Judge: The Honorable Gene E.K. Pratter
Argued: May 21, 2007
Before: BARRY, CHAGARES and TASHIMA*, Circuit Judges.
(Filed June 29, 2007)
OPINION OF THE COURT
TASHIMA, Circuit Judge:
*Honorable A. Wallace Tashima, U.S. Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit, sitting by
designation.
Jana R. Barnett, Esq., appeals an order of the district court finding her in violation of
the Pennsylvania Rules of Professional Conduct (“PRPC” or “Rules”) and therefore
disqualifying her from representing Manessta Beverly in a lawsuit against Beverly’s former
employer, HORA, Inc., d/b/a Days Inn, and Marshall Management (together “Defendants”),
the management company for Days Inn. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(“EEOC”) filed suit against Defendants, alleging that Beverly’s supervisor, Nelson Garcia,
created a sexually-hostile working environment by harassing Beverly and other female
employees, and that Defendants retaliated against Beverly by firing her when she complained
about Garcia’s conduct. The district court disqualified Barnett from representing Beverly
in the EEOC action, based on Barnett’s allegedly improper contact with another HORA
employee, Debbie Richardson.1 We have jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291, and we
reverse.
I.
In reviewing an attorney disqualification issue, this court first exercises “plenary
review to determine whether the district court's disqualification was arbitrary – ‘the product
of a failure to balance proper considerations of judicial administration against the right to
counsel.’” United States v. Stewart, 185 F.3d 112, 120 (3d Cir. 1999) (quoting United States
v. Voigt, 89 F.3d 1050, 1074 (3d Cir. 1996)). If we conclude that the district court's decision
1
We assume without deciding that Richardson was neither a client of Barnett nor
consulted Barnett for the purpose of deciding whether to then become a client of hers.
2
was not arbitrary, we then determine whether the district court abused its discretion in
disqualifying the attorney. Id.
II.
The district court relied primarily on Rule 4.2 of the PRPC in deciding to disqualify
Barnett.2 Rule 4.2 provides:
In representing a client, a lawyer shall not communicate about the subject of the
representation with a person the lawyer knows to be represented by another lawyer in
the matter, unless the lawyer has the consent of the other lawyer or is authorized to
do so by law or a court order.
PRPC 4.2. “The rationale behind Rule 4.2 is ‘to prevent . . . a represented party . . . [from]
be[ing] taken advantage of by adverse counsel; the presence of the party's attorney
theoretically neutralizes the contact.’” Inorganic Coatings, Inc. v. Falberg, 926 F. Supp. 517,
519 (E.D. Pa. 1995) (quoting Univ. Patents, Inc. v. Kligman, 737 F. Supp. 325, 327 (E.D. Pa.
1990)) (alterations in original); see also Carter-Herman v. City of Phila., 897 F. Supp. 899,
901 (E.D. Pa. 1995) (“The purpose of Rule 4.2 is to prevent lawyers from taking advantage
of uncounselled lay persons and to preserve the efficacy and sanctity of the lawyer-client
relationship.”). The explanatory comment provides that,
[i]n the case of a represented organization, this Rule prohibits communications with
2
We write only for the parties and therefore do not state the facts separately.
3
a constituent of the organization who supervises, directs or regularly consults with the
organization's lawyer concerning the matter or has authority to obligate the
organization with respect to the matter or whose act or omission in connection with
the matter may be imputed to the organization for purposes of civil or criminal
liability.
Id., cmt. 7. Rule 4.2, therefore, would have prohibited communication between Barnett and
Richardson if Richardson were an employee who regularly consulted with Defendants’
lawyer regarding the matter, or if she had authority to obligate Defendants with respect to the
matter, or if her acts in connection with the harassment claim could be imputed to Defendants
for liability purposes.
We conclude that Richardson’s role at Days Inn did not bring her within the scope of
Rule 4.2. “The underlying policy and Official Comment to the Rule [4.2] make clear that it
was intended to forbid ex parte communications with all institutional employees whose acts
or omissions could bind or impute liability to the organization or whose statements could be
used as admissions against the organization, presumably pursuant to Federal Rule of
Evidence 801(d)(2)(D).” Univ. Patents, 737 F. Supp. at 328; see also McCarthy v. Se. Pa.
Transp. Auth., 772 A.2d 987, 993 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2001) (“The key information needed by the
trial court to determine if an employee qualifies for protection from ex parte communication
with opposing counsel is what status that employee has within the employee's organization,
4
i.e., whether, by virtue of the employee's status, a statement made by this employee could
impute liability to the company.”). There is no evidence in the record to support the
conclusion that Richardson regularly consulted with Defendants’ lawyer regarding the matter
or that her acts or omissions could obligate or impute liability to Defendants with respect to
the matter.
Richardson’s role as an administrative assistant is different from that of the employees
in cases in which Rule 4.2 has been found to apply. For example, in Weeks v. Indep. Sch.
Dist. No. I-89, 230 F.3d 1201 (10th Cir. 2000), counsel for the plaintiff, a former bus driver
for a school district, engaged in ex parte communications, on matters relevant to the case,
with an operations supervisor for the school district and with the plaintiff’s immediate
supervisor. Both employees had managerial authority over issues in the underlying litigation
and could have made statements that would bind the school district and therefore came
within the scope of Rule 4.2 of the Oklahoma Rules of Professional Conduct.3 Id. at 1210-
11; see also Carter-Herman, 897 F. Supp. at 903 (examining “the written job descriptions of
the various ranks of the Philadelphia Police Department for the purpose of determining who
has managerial responsibility”); McCarthy, 772 A.2d at 993-94 (concluding that the trial
court erred in removing counsel where “the trial court did not make a finding of fact or even
state on the record that the witnesses were employees whose statements may constitute
admissions for the purposes of [Rule 4.2]”). Defendants, in fact, did not rely on Rule 4.2 in
3
Oklahoma Rule 4.2 is essentially the same as Pennsylvania’s.
5
their motion to disqualify Barnett because they conceded that Richardson had no managerial
authority in the company.4
Moreover, even if Richardson were covered by Rule 4.2, the district court did not
indicate how Defendants were prejudiced by Barnett’s communications with Richardson.
See Univ. Patents, 737 F. Supp. at 329 (stating that, “[i]n determining the proper sanction or
remedy [in the case of a Rule 4.2 violation], the court must consider the client’s right to be
represented by the counsel of his choice, as well as the opposing party’s right to prepare and
try its case without prejudice,” and concluding that there was “not sufficient evidence . . . to
conclude that plaintiff has been so severely prejudiced that the draconian measure of
disqualification of counsel” was warranted) (internal quotations omitted). Defendants
conceded at the hearing on the motion to disqualify Barnett that all of the information that
Barnett received from Richardson was disclosed during discovery. Because Defendants
accordingly were not prejudiced by Barnett’s communications with Richardson, the
draconian measure of disqualification was not warranted.
The district court’s reliance on Rule 4.4, which prohibits a lawyer from using methods
of obtaining evidence that violate the legal rights of a third person, similarly suffers from a
lack of evidence of prejudice to Defendants. To repeat, all of the evidence that Barnett
received from Richardson was produced during discovery, and there is no indication that
4
The EEOC also took the position that Rule 4.2 did not apply in these
circumstances.
6
Defendants were prejudiced by Barnett’s receipt of the evidence.         Moreover, Barnett
specifically stated in her verified statement that she did not rely on information she had
received from Richardson regarding a conversation between Defendants and their counsel,
because Barnett knew that the information was privileged. There is no evidence to the
contrary. Nor is there evidence to support the district court’s conclusion that Barnett
encouraged Richardson to disclose to her all the information she learned through her
employment.5
The district court also relied on Rule 3.7, which forbids a lawyer from “act[ing] as
advocate at a trial in which the lawyer is likely to be a necessary witness.” PRPC 3.7(a).
The district court reasoned that Barnett’s testimony might be necessary to Defendants’ theory
of the case that the information provided to the EEOC resulted from Barnett’s “fueling” a
personal vendetta by a disgruntled Richardson, who was angry with management and did not
get along with her supervisor. If this was Defendants’ defense – that they did nothing wrong,
and that the EEOC claim was nothing more than a personal vendetta by Richardson – it is
possible that Barnett would be a necessary witness. However, it is highly unlikely that this
would be their defense, in light of the fact that Beverly and several other women named
numerous specific incidents of sexual harassment by Garcia and of management doing
nothing in response. Moreover, Rule 3.7 provides an exception if the disqualification of the
5
For substantially the same reasons, we conclude that Barnett’s conduct also did not
violate Rule 8.4.
7
lawyer would work substantial hardship on the client, an issue that the court barely discussed.
Because of the highly speculative nature of the theory that Barnett manipulated Richardson
into acting, and the hardship to Beverly of disqualifying her attorney, Rule 3.7 does not
provide a sufficient basis on which to disqualify Barnett.
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that the district court abused its discretion in
imposing the severe sanction of disqualification.6
6
Because we reverse on the grounds set forth above, we need not reach Barnett’s
argument that Rule 4.2 is unconstitutionally vague.

=== CASE 3027457 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:18.25566+00 ===

United States Court of Appeals
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
___________
No. 00-3413
___________
United States of America,                *
*
Appellee,                   *
* Appeal from the United States
v.                                 * District Court for the
* Western District of Missouri.
Michael Bentley Russell,                 *      [UNPUBLISHED]
*
Appellant.                  *
___________
Submitted: July 25, 2001
Filed: August 1, 2001
___________
Before WOLLMAN, Chief Judge, MORRIS SHEPPARD ARNOLD, and BYE,
Circuit Judges.
___________
PER CURIAM.
Michael Bentley Russell pleaded guilty to being a felon in possession of a
firearm, a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g). At sentencing, the district court1 overruled
Russell’s objection to the assignment of 3 criminal history points for a 1991 Kansas
burglary sentence of 2-5 years imprisonment. In addition, the district court permitted
a psychologist who had examined Russell to testify on matters that would help the court
1
The Honorable Nanette K. Laughrey, United States District Judge for the
Western District of Missouri.
recommend an appropriate facility for treatment, but did not allow testimony as to why
Russell committed his crime. The court then sentenced Russell to 78 months’
imprisonment and 3 years’ supervised release. On appeal, Russell challenges the
criminal-history calculation and the exclusion of evidence pertaining to his state of mind
at the time he committed his crime.
Having carefully reviewed the record, we conclude that the district court did not
err in assigning 3 points for the prior burglary sentence, see U.S.S.G. § 4A1.1(a) (add
3 points for prior sentence of imprisonment exceeding 1 year and 1 month): the Kansas
court--upon revoking Russell’s probation--ordered execution of the originally
suspended sentence of 2-5 years, and Russell in fact served some jail time on that
sentence, see U.S.S.G. § 4A1.2, comment. (n.2) (criminal history points are based on
sentence pronounced, not length of time actually served; prior sentence is considered
sentence of imprisonment if defendant actually served a period of imprisonment on such
sentence). We further conclude that the district court did not abuse its discretion in
excluding the state-of-mind evidence, especially in light of Russell’s insistence that he
did not seek to present the evidence in support of a diminished-capacity departure. See
United States v. Granados, 202 F.3d 1025, 1027-28 (8th Cir. 2000) (district court has
discretion to determine whether to allow testimony or receive additional evidence at
sentencing).
The judgment is affirmed.
A true copy.
Attest:
CLERK, U.S. COURT OF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT.
-2-

=== CASE 2227269 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:30.788871+00 ===

383 N.W.2d 578 (1986)
STATE of Iowa, Appellant,
v.
Jeanne JACKSON, Appellee.
No. 85-237.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
March 19, 1986.
Rehearing Denied April 15, 1986.
*579 Thomas J. Miller, Atty. Gen., Ann E. Brenden, Asst. Atty. Gen., William E. Davis, Co. Atty., and Mary E. Howes, Asst. Co. Atty., for appellant.
Jack E. Dusthimer, of Goebel & Koury Law Offices, Davenport, for appellee.
Thomas J. Miller, Atty. Gen., Gordon E. Allen, Sp. Asst. Atty. Gen., and Charles K. Phillips, Asst. Atty. Gen., for Iowa Dept. of Human Services, amicus curiae.
Considered by UHLENHOPP, P.J., and McGIVERIN, SCHULTZ, WOLLE, and LAVORATO, JJ.
UHLENHOPP, Justice.
This appeal involves the confidentiality provision applicable to data in the state child abuse registry. Iowa Code § 235A.15(1) (1985).
I. Chapters 217, 232, and 235A of the Code contain the principal statutes relative to child abuse reporting, investigating, rehabilitating, and registering. Section 217.1 establishes the department of human services, and section 235A.15 creates within the department a central registry for child abuse information. Section 232.69 requires and permits reports of child abuse.
Section 232.70 of the Code prescribes the procedure for reporting. Oral or written reports are made to the department; the department makes oral reports to the registry of oral reports to it, forwards copies to the registry of written reports to it, and notifies "the appropriate county attorney of any report." § 232.70(4).
Section 232.71 requires the department, upon receipt of a report, to conduct an investigation and make its own report. Under subsections 6 and 7, the department must transmit a copy of its report to the registry. Subsection 8 then provides:
The department of human services shall also transmit a copy of the report of its investigation to the county attorney. The county attorney shall notify the registry of any actions or contemplated actions with respect to a suspected case of child abuse so that the registry is kept up-to-date and fully informed concerning the handling of such a case.
Subsection 11 further provides:
The department of human services shall assist the juvenile court or district court during all stages of court proceedings involving a suspected child abuse case in accordance with the purposes of this chapter.
Section 232.74 provides:
Section 622.9 and 622.10 and any other statute or rule of evidence which excludes or makes privileged the testimony of a husband or wife against the other or the testimony of a health practitioner as to confidential communications, do not apply to evidence regarding a child's injuries or the cause of the injuries in any judicial proceeding, civil or criminal, resulting from a report pursuant to this chapter or relating to the subject matter of such a report.
(Emphasis added.)
Turning to chapter 235A, creating the registry, section 235A.13(1) contains this definition:
*580 "Child abuse information" means any or all of the following data maintained by the registry in a manual or automated data storage system and individually identified:
a. Report data.
b. Investigation data.
c. Disposition data.
Finally, section 235A.15 provides in subsection 1 that confidentiality of all "child abuse information" shall be maintained except for situations expressly listed in eleven paragraphs of subsection 2. Paragraph d of the exceptions, at the core of this case, authorizes access
[t]o a juvenile court or district court upon a finding that information is necessary for the resolution of an issue arising in any phase of a case involving child abuse, except that information obtained through the registry shall not be utilized in any aspect of any criminal prosecution.
(Emphasis added.)
II. Defendant Jeanne Jackson operates children's achievement centers in Scott County, Iowa. The county department of human services received a report relating to suspected child abuse of a two-year old girl in one of the centers. James Carnahan, a social worker, was assigned to the case, and conducted an in-depth investigation of the circumstances including interviews of a number of individuals at the center. Carnahan concluded that Jackson abused the child. He prepared a comprehensive report of the case, including minutes of the interviews. Pursuant to the statute, the department transmitted the report to the registry and a copy to the county attorney.
Based mainly on the information in the report, the county attorney charged Jackson with assault with injury in violation of section 708.2(2) of the Code.
Jackson moved, inter alia, to suppress, and alleged that the criminal charge was based on the information in the department's report to the registry and that "[u]nder Section 235A.15(2)(d) [previously quoted in this opinion], it is clear the child abuse information is not admissible evidence in the pending criminal case. As such, the State's entire case would be inadmissible."
After hearing, the district court ruled:
Since this is a criminal action, not a child abuse action, Section 235A.15(2)(d) appears quite persuasive when it states that access to child abuse information is authorized "to a juvenile court or a district court upon a finding that information is necessary for the resolution of an issue arising in any phase of a case involving child abuse, except that information obtained through the registry shall not be utilized in any aspect of any criminal prosecution."
Child abuse information is defined in Section 235A.13 as "any or all of the following data maintained by the registry in a manual or automated data storage system and individually identified:
a. Report data.
b. Investigation data.
c. Disposition data.
Since a child abuse case and a criminal prosecution are two separate and distinct actions, information which comes to the attention of the County Attorney by virtue of a child abuse investigation would be confidential and therefore not admissible in a subsequent criminal prosecution. Accordingly, any such testimony should be suppressed in this criminal proceeding.
....
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED BY THE Court that any evidence or testimony in this case which has come to the attention of the County Attorney's Office by virtue of a child abuse investigation shall be suppressed at the trial of this criminal prosecution.
We granted discretionary review.
To pinpoint the department's contention, we note that the question presented is not whether the county attorney's copy of the report is itself admissible evidence in the criminal prosecution. Nor is a question *581 presented of inadmissibility of testimony under some rule of evidence other than the statute on confidentiality of registry data. The question is whether otherwise admissible evidence, such as the testimony of the witnesses at the achievement center, is not usable by the prosecutor and is inadmissible on behalf of the prosecution because it came to the prosecutor's attention from his copy of the department's report to the registry.
III. We hold that the district court's ruling must be reversed both on precedent and on the language of the statutes. We recently decided a somewhat analogous problem in Board of Directors v. Quad City Times, 382 N.W.2d 80 (Iowa 1986). In that case a proceeding before a hearing officer was open to the public. A subsequent proceeding before a board of directors, however, upon the record before the hearing officer, was private. We held that the hearing officer's record did not become confidential because it was subsequently used in the private hearing of the board. In doing so we referred to our cardinal rule of construction favoring openness.
In the present case the department was required by law to provide the county attorney with a copy of its report on child abuse. The General Assembly must have had a purpose in laying down this requirement. The Assembly did not provide that the county attorney's copy is confidential. Jackson argues that notwithstanding, the county attorney could not use in a criminal prosecution the information to which he was thus alerted. We do not think, however, that the county attorney had to close his eyes to that information because another copy went to the registry and could not be divulged by that agency.
The statutes support this view. Section 232.71(8) provides that the department shall transmit a copy of the report to the county attorney and states in the next sentence that the county attorney shall notify the registry "of any actions or contemplated actions with respect to a suspected case of child abuse so that the registry is kept up-to-date...." Certainly this language indicates that the county attorney may act on the information obtained from his copy of the report. This provision envinces legislative intent that the two offices act in cooperation, not in isolation. Section 232.74 provides that the testimonial privileges of spouses and health practitioners do not apply in "any judicial proceeding, civil or criminal, resulting from a report pursuant to this chapter...." (Emphasis added.) This section indicates that a criminal prosecution may result from a child abuse report.
Jackson leans heavily upon the wording we have emphasized in the exception to confidentiality in section 235A.15(2)(d): "Access to child abuse information is authorized... to a ... district court upon a finding that information is necessary for the resolution of an issue arising in any phase of a case involving child abuse, except that information obtained through the registry shall not be utilized in any aspect of any criminal prosecution." This limitation, however, expressly applies to information obtained through the registry. Moreover, the introductory words state that access to "child abuse information" is authorized.... "Child abuse information" is data maintained by the registry, in manual or automated form. § 235A.13(1). The county attorney in the present case did not obtain the information from the registry; he obtained it from the department.
The district court should have overruled the motion.
REVERSED.

=== CASE 2227270 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:30.827405+00 ===

147 Mich. App. 254 (1985)
383 N.W.2d 176
DUNDEE
v.
PUERTO RICO MARINE MANAGEMENT, INC.
Docket Nos. 76804, 83677.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided November 19, 1985.
The Jaques Admiralty Law Firm, P.C. (by Leonard C. Jaques), for plaintiff.
Hill, Lewis, Adams, Goodrich & Tait (by Timothy R. Sinclair), for defendant.
Before: HOOD, P.J., and V.J. BRENNAN and R.M. MAHER, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Defendant appeals as of right from a jury verdict of $350,000, reduced by ten percent for comparative negligence, which was awarded to plaintiff in his action for damages for injuries sustained because of the unseaworthiness of a ship operated by defendant. Thereafter, plaintiff filed a motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict regarding the jury verdict finding plaintiff comparatively negligent. However, before that motion was decided, defendant filed its claim of appeal. Subsequently, the trial court granted plaintiff's motion and set aside the verdict of comparative negligence. Thereafter, pursuant to MCR 7.205(F), defendant *257 filed an application for delayed appeal as of right from that order. Pursuant to MCR 7.250(D), we peremptorily resolve the issue on the merits in conjunction with the issues raised in defendant's initial appeal as of right.
Defendant first argues that the trial court erred by denying defendant's motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction because defendant did not have sufficient contacts with Michigan to establish either general or limited personal jurisdiction over the corporation under MCL 600.711; MSA 27A.711 or MCL 600.715; MSA 27A.715. We disagree with this contention. The defense of lack of personal jurisdiction is waived unless it is properly raised in a party's first responsive pleading. GCR 1963, 116.2. In this case, defendant asserted only that "plaintiff's complaint fails to state a cause of action against its answering defendant for the reason that this Court lacks jurisdiction in the premises" in its answer. Defendant did not indicate in any way whether this bald assertion attacked the court's subject matter jurisdiction, its jurisdiction over the property, or its jurisdiction over defendant. Nothing further was alleged or argued by defendant until four years later, immediately before trial. At that time, defendant asserted the court's lack of jurisdiction, arguing not that the court did not have jurisdiction over the party or parties, but rather that, although the court did have such jurisdiction, the Michigan court was an inconvenient forum, i.e., forum non conveniens. Under these circumstances, we find that defendant waived its right to assert its jurisdictional defense.
Defendant next argues that the trial court improperly awarded prejudgment interest on the jury verdict in accordance with MCL 600.6013; MSA 27A.6013. The jury verdict did not include such interest and the interest was awarded by the court *258 in its judgment. Defendant subsequently moved for relief from the judgment, but the motion was denied.[1]
We find that the trial court did err by awarding plaintiff prejudgment interest on the judgment. An action in admiralty, such as plaintiff's claim of the unseaworthiness of defendant's vessel, should be tried under the applicable rules of admiralty even when brought in a state court. Sullivan v Pittsburgh Steamship Co, 230 Mich 414, 419; 203 NW 126 (1925). Unfortunately, the federal courts, charged with interpreting those rules, have reached different conclusions on the question of whether a court may award prejudgment interest on damages sustained as the result of a maritime tort. See Canova v Travelers Ins Co, 406 F2d 410 (CA 5, 1969), cert den 396 US 832; 90 S Ct 88; 24 L Ed 2d 84 (1969), Petition of the City of New York, 332 F2d 1006 (CA 2, 1964), cert den 379 US 922; 85 S Ct 277; 13 L Ed 2d 335 (1964), and Peterson v Chesapeake & O R Co, 582 F Supp 1581 (WD Mich, 1984). In this case, because this is a matter of federal law, we follow the direction of the Sixth Circuit. Ogletree v Local 79, Service Employees International Union, 141 Mich App 738; 368 NW2d 882 (1985). On this issue, the Sixth Circuit has held that interest may not be awarded on personal injury and death claims in admiralty until the amount of damages has been fixed by judicial determination. Peterson, supra, 582 F Supp 1582, and cases cited therein. We also note that the United States District Court for the Western *259 District of Michigan has held, in Peterson, supra, that where the admiralty cause of action is tried solely to a jury, as it was in this case, prejudgment interest may only be granted by the jury. 582 F Supp 1583. Under either of these analyses, the trial court should not have awarded plaintiff prejudgment interest. We, therefore, vacate that portion of the judgment.
Defendant next argues that the trial court erred by instructing the jury on the issue of seaworthiness when plaintiff did not present any expert testimony to support its theory. We disagree. Plaintiff's theory was supported by his testimony and that of a fellow crewman. Together, they presented testimony which established that plaintiff was struck with tremendous force by a cut line which came over a bitt as the capstan winch was activated and that plaintiff was in the position to be struck because of a dangerous oil slick which permeated the working area. This evidence was sufficient to establish that the vessel was not reasonably fit for its intended use. Shemman v American Steamship Co, 89 Mich App 656, 665; 280 NW2d 852 (1979), lv den 407 Mich 875 (1979). We also note that defendant did not object at trial to the giving of the instruction now complained of and that defendant has not cited any authority for the proposition defendant now asserts on appeal.
Defendant next argues that the trial court erred by denying defendant's motion for remittitur. After reviewing the record, we conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion by denying the motion for remittitur. Jones v Sanilac County Road Comm, 128 Mich App 569, 592; 342 NW2d 532 (1983), lv den 419 Mich 936 (1984).
Defendant's final claim is that the trial court erred by setting aside the jury's verdict finding plaintiff comparatively negligent. We agree. A *260 motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict should be denied if, viewing the facts in a light most favorable to the motion's opponent, reasonable persons could differ. Wilson v Chesapeake & O R Co, 118 Mich App 123; 324 NW2d 552 (1982), lv den 417 Mich 1044 (1983). The defense of comparative negligence requires evidence of some negligent act or omission by the plaintiff. Kingston v Markward & Karafilis, Inc, 134 Mich App 164, 175-176; 350 NW2d 842 (1984).
In the instant case, the ship's captain testified that a seaman of ordinary experience would be aware of the dangers of stepping inside a bight of rope. The fellow crewman testified that in order for plaintiff to perform the task to which he was assigned at the time of the injury, it was necessary for him to work next to or amidst the bights of the lines. Plaintiff, however, testified that the first mate ordered him to stand inside the bight of the rope. The trial court described plaintiff's testimony as "unrefuted".
There was a question of fact as to whether plaintiff, in order to perform the assigned task, had to stand inside the bight of the rope, exposing himself to the injury which he suffered, or whether, albeit with some difficulty, he could have performed the task without stepping inside the bight of the rope. The finding of only ten percent comparative negligence suggests that the jury found that plaintiff could have avoided the injury, but only by being extremely careful and by constantly observing his position with respect to the bights of the lines and that accordingly, defendant was far more negligent for assigning plaintiff to the task without appropriate safeguards, supervision, or assistance.
Furthermore, the fact that plaintiff's description of the first mate's order is unrefuted means nothing; *261 the jury was still free to disregard this testimony as not credible, or, if credible, to give it no weight. People v Jackson, 390 Mich 621, 625, fn 2; 212 NW2d 918 (1973). The issue was whether defendant carried its burden of coming forward with some evidence of plaintiff's negligence. The captain's testimony is precisely such evidence, for it suggests that a competent seaman would not step inside a bight of a rope to perform any task. The trial court erred in granting plaintiff's motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict because there was evidence from which reasonable persons could disagree as to whether plaintiff was negligent.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part. The judgment is modified to the extent provided by this opinion.
NOTES
[1]  We reject plaintiff's argument that this Court should not address the merits of defendant's claims on this issue because the proceedings on the motion were not transcribed and forwarded to this Court. Defendant is appealing from the underlying judgment, and this Court is not disadvantaged in any way by the omission of the motion transcript because the trial court reached a purely legal conclusion on the issue of whether or not to award prejudgment interest.

=== CASE 3028200 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:40:01.010805+00 ===

United States Court of Appeals
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
___________
No. 01-1881
___________
Michael C. Hollen; Joan L. Hollen,   *
*
Petitioners,               * Appeal from the United States
* Tax Court.
v.                               *    [UNPUBLISHED]
*
Commissioner of Internal Revenue,    *
*
Respondent.                *
___________
Submitted: December 13, 2001
Filed: January 16, 2002
___________
Before WOLLMAN, Chief Judge, JOHN R. GIBSON, and MAGILL, Circuit Judges.
___________
PER CURIAM.
Michael and Joan Hollen appeal from the tax court’s1 decision upholding their
liability for taxes and additions to tax. We affirm.
Michael and Joan Hollen, husband and wife, filed joint tax returns for 1988.
Michael Hollen is a dentist who operates his business through a professional
corporation, Michael C. Hollen, D.D.S., Professional Corporation (Hollen, P.C.). In
1982, the Hollens and two other couples purchased a fruit and flower farm in San
1
The Honorable L. Paige Marvel, United States Tax Court.
Diego County, California, known as the Blue Bird Ranch (the ranch). Michael
Hollen and the two other husbands formed a partnership to operate and manage the
ranch. All of the couples orally agreed to transfer their interests in the ranch to the
partnership. The transfer was never reduced to writing, and thus it was invalid under
California law. Nevertheless, the partnership and the Hollens acted as if the
partnership owned the ranch. The partnership claimed the expenses of operating the
ranch, as well as depreciation of ranch assets, on its partnership tax returns. Michael
Hollen signed all the partnership’s tax returns. The IRS did not question the
ownership of the ranch, even when it audited the partnership’s tax returns. Michael
Hollen never informed the IRS that the transfer to the partnership was invalid.
In October 1988, the Hollens and the other couples sold the ranch. Each couple
received $10,000 directly as a result of the sale, with the purchasers assuming the
remaining debt on the ranch. The partnership dissolved following the sale.
On March 15, 1989, the partnership filed a 1988 partnership tax return in which
it recognized gain of $631,507 from sale of the ranch. The partnership issued to
Michael Hollen a Schedule K-1, Partner’s Share of Income, Credits, Deductions, Etc.,
which included a one-third share of the gain from the sale of the ranch.
The Hollens filed for an extension for filing their 1988 income tax return, and
with this request paid an estimated tax liability of $80,000 based on information from
Michael Hollen’s Schedule K-1. In July 1989, Michael Hollen filed Hollen, P.C.’s
1988 federal income tax return, which did not reflect any income from the sale of the
ranch or income from the partnership. In October 1989, Michael Hollen filed an
amended return for Hollen, P.C., claiming that, prior to the sale of the ranch, he
intended to transfer his personal interest in the partnership to Hollen, P.C. The
amended return did not report any gain from the sale of the ranch. The Hollens also
filed their 1998 income tax return, which did not report any gain from the sale of the
ranch or any partnership income, in October 1989. On Schedule D of the return, the
-2-
Hollens listed the sale of Michael Hollen’s partnership interest to Hollen, P.C. for a
price equal to their adjusted basis in the property, thus resulting in no gain or loss.
The Hollens claimed an overpayment of $78,946.
In 1992 or 1993, the IRS audited both the partnership’s 1988 tax return and the
Hollens’ 1988 individual income tax return. The IRS assessed a deficiency against
the Hollens in which it ignored the purported transfer of Michael Hollen’s partnership
interest to Hollen, P.C. The IRS also made additions to tax under I.R.C. §§ 6653(a)
and 6661 (1988). The Hollens appealed the assessment to the tax court, which upheld
the IRS’s decision. Hollen v. C.I.R., No. 5586-97 (T.C. filed Jan. 9, 2001) (adopting
opinion of the special trial judge, 79 T.C.M. 1719 (March 24, 2000)). After
adjusting the total tax due in the light of various concessions made by the IRS and the
Hollens, the tax court entered a judgment against the Hollens for $55,550 in tax and
$16,655 in additions to tax.
Before the tax court, the Hollens argued that because the transfer to the
partnership was invalid, they owned the ranch individually and therefore were liable
for tax on the sale to the extent the gain exceeds their original basis in the farm, with
no adjustments for the depreciation taken by the partnership. The tax court held that
this argument was barred by the doctrine of the duty of consistency, which prohibits
taxpayers from taking one position on a tax return and a contrary position on a
subsequent return after the limitations period has run for the earlier year. As set forth
in Beltzer v. United States, 495 F.2d 211, 212 (8th Cir. 1974), the taxpayer is placed
under a duty of consistency when:
(1) the taxpayer has made a representation or reported an item for tax
purposes in one year,
(2) the Commissioner has acquiesced in or relied on that fact for that
year, and
-3-
(3) the taxpayer desires to change the representation, previously made,
in a later year after the statute of limitations on assessments bars
adjustments for the initial tax year.
The Hollens argue that their error in thinking the partnership owned the ranch
was one of law, to which the duty of consistency does not apply, citing Herrington
v. C.I.R., 854 F.2d 755, 758 (5th Cir. 1988). Although the Hollens may have made
a legal error in the attempted transfer, the question of who owned the property was,
at best, a mixed question of fact and law, to which the duty of consistency applied.
See id. at 758; LeFever v. C.I.R., 100 F.3d 778, 786 (10th Cir. 1996).
Our affirmance of the tax court’s ruling that the Hollens do owe taxes
forecloses their argument is that because they owe no tax, no additions should have
been assessed. Their contention that Hollen, P.C. reported the gain on its return for
fiscal year November 1, 1988-October 31, 1989, fails for want of proof, for, as the tax
court noted, that return was not placed in evidence.
The judgment is affirmed. See 8th Cir. R. 47B.
A true copy.
Attest:
CLERK, U.S. COURT OF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT.
-4-

=== CASE 2227273 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:30.936867+00 ===

383 N.W.2d 742 (1986)
222 Neb. 310
Fern E. RIEDY, Appellant,
v.
Harold E. RIEDY, Appellee.
No. 84-838.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
March 28, 1986.
*743 Patrick J. Nelson of Jacobsen, Orr & Nelson, P.C., Kearney, for appellant.
David W. Jorgensen of Nye, Hervert, Jorgensen & Watson, P.C., Kearney, for appellee.
KRIVOSHA, C.J., and BOSLAUGH, WHITE, HASTINGS, CAPORALE, SHANAHAN, and GRANT, JJ.
CAPORALE, Justice.
Upon the application of the appellee husband, Harold E. Riedy, the trial court reduced the amount of alimony he was obligated to pay under the terms of an Iowa decree of dissolution previously registered by the appellant wife, Fern E. Riedy, pursuant to the Uniform Enforcement of Foreign Judgments Act, Neb.Rev.Stat. §§ 25-1587 through 25-15, 104 (Reissue 1979). We reverse and dismiss for lack of jurisdiction.
It is clear that money obligations accrued under a foreign alimony decree registered in this state pursuant to the provisions of the act may be enforced by the courts of this state. Sullivan v. Sullivan, 168 Neb. 850, 97 N.W.2d 348 (1959).
The present case, however, does not seek to have the Nebraska courts enforce money obligations which have accrued under a foreign alimony decree but, rather, seeks to have the courts of this state modify money obligations which had not yet accrued under the decree as registered.
The question which must be answered, then, is whether the act contemplates the registration of such a decree with a view toward enforcing unaccrued money obligations.
Some courts have permitted enforcement of foreign judgments with respect to unaccrued money obligations. Schroeder v. Schroeder, 271 Or. 582, 533 P.2d 350 (1975); Salmeri v. Salmeri, 554 P.2d 1244 (Wyo.1976). Indeed, the court in the latter case, as did the trial court in this case, modified unaccrued money obligations arising under a foreign decree registered under the act. At least one court, however, has held that a foreign child support decree is not entitled to registration under the act to enforce money obligations which had not accrued. Siegel v. Mosier, 632 S.W.2d 76 (Mo.App.1982).
An analysis of the act itself convinces us that it does not contemplate the enforcement of a foreign alimony decree with respect to unaccrued money obligations. But cf. Johnson v. Johnson, 215 Neb. 689, 340 N.W.2d 393 (1983) (which entertained but refused to modify a foreign child support decree registered under the act).
Section 25-1589 requires that the petition for registration "set forth a copy of the judgment to be registered, the date of its entry and the record of any subsequent entries affecting it...." (Emphasis supplied.) While it is true that a judgment debtor may, by appearing, adducing evidence, and failing to file a bill of exceptions, waive that requirement, Snyder v. Nelson, 213 Neb. 605, 331 N.W.2d 252 (1983), the language of that section nonetheless manifests that only accrued money obligations come within the purview of the act, for there could be no entries affecting unaccrued money obligations.
Section 25-1592 of the act provides that at any time after registration a levy may be made under the registered judgment. Obviously, a levy cannot be made upon an unaccrued money obligation, for no judgment could yet have been entered upon it.
Section 25-1593 provides that if the judgment debtor over whom personal jurisdiction has been obtained fails to plead, or if, after hearing, the registering court fails to set the registration aside, the registered judgment shall become a final personal judgment of the registering court. Section 25-1598 provides a means for the registered judgment to become a final judgment quasi in rem of the registering court where personal service has not been obtained upon the judgment debtor and a levy has been made. Again, unaccrued money obligations cannot become final judgments.
*744 It is clear to us, therefore, that the act provides a means of enforcing accrued judgments and does not permit the enforcement of unaccrued money obligations. Having no jurisdiction to enforce the unaccrued money obligations, the trial court had no jurisdiction to modify those obligations.
We recognize that in this instance the parties agreed that the district court could consider and adjudicate the matter. It is axiomatic, however, that the parties cannot confer subject matter jurisdiction upon a judicial tribunal by either acquiescence or consent. Whitehouse Energy Savers v. Hanlon, 214 Neb. 572, 334 N.W.2d 802 (1983).
Since the trial court lacked jurisdiction, this court also lacks jurisdiction. Moell v. Mennonite Deaconess Home & Hosp., 221 Neb. 168, 375 N.W.2d 618 (1985).
The judgment of the district court is reversed and the cause dismissed.
REVERSED AND DISMISSED.

=== CASE 9741450 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:55:51.127605+00 ===

Cynar, J.
Defendants Bill Cody’s Ranch Inn and Best Western International, Inc., appeal by leave granted from Wayne County Circuit Court Judge Marvin R. Stempien’s denial of a motion for accelerated judgment and a motion to decline jurisdiction brought by Bill Cody’s Ranch and Best Western, respectively.
This cause of action arises from a personal injury accident that occurred on or near the premises of Bill Cody’s Ranch, located in the State of Wyoming. Plaintiff, a resident of Michigan, filed suit in Wayne County Circuit Court against Bill Cody’s Ranch, Best Western, the American Automobile Association, and the Automobile Club of *590Michigan seeking damages for the injuries sustained as a result of the accident.
Defendant Bill Cody’s Ranch filed a motion for accelerated judgment averring that it was a Wyoming corporation, doing business exclusively in the State of Wyoming, with no business office or agents located in Michigan, and that the Wayne County Circuit Court therefore lacked personal jurisdiction over it. Defendant Best Western filed a motion to decline jurisdiction based on the doctrine of forum non conveniens. The circuit court found that Michigan had in personam jurisdiction over Bill Cody’s Ranch and that Michigan was a convenient forum in which to bring this action. The circuit court consequently denied the motion for accelerated judgment and the motion to decline jurisdiction by order dated June 12, 1984.
The underlying facts of this case are as follows. On or about August 28, 1983, plaintiff, Michelle Witbeck, a minor and novice rider, was allegedly placed on a horse selected for her by William Cody, an agent and officer of Bill Cody’s Ranch. Plaintiff was allegedly thrown from the horse, and was placed back on the horse by Ken White, also an agent of Bill Cody’s Ranch, despite her objections. She was then thrown from the horse a second time. Plaintiff was allegedly injured as a result of being thrown from the horse.
Plaintiff subsequently filed suit in Wayne County Circuit Court against Bill Cody’s Ranch, Best Western, the American Automobile Association, and the Automobile Club of Michigan. The basis of plaintiff’s complaint and allegations against Bill Cody’s Ranch was that the agents of the ranch had been negligent in selecting a horse for a novice rider and in insisting that plaintiff remount the same horse from which plaintiff had been thrown.
*591The basis of the complaint against Best Western was that Best Western was negligent in recommending Bill Cody’s Ranch to plaintiff and her family.
Two issues are presented for oür review: I, Does Michigan have limited personal jurisdiction over Bill Cody’s Ranch? and II, Did the trial court err in finding that Michigan was not an inconvenient forum?
Issue I: Does Michigan have long-arm jurisdiction over Bill Cody’s Ranch?
MCL 600.715; MSA 27A.715 authorizes Michigan courts to exercise limited personal jurisdiction over a nonresident corporation and enter judgments against the corporation as a result of an act which creates or consists of the following relationships:
"(1) The transaction of any business within the state.
"(2) The doing or causing any act to be done, or consequences to occur, in the state resulting in an action for tort.
"(3) The ownership, use, or possession of any real or tangible personal property situated within the state.
"(4) Contracting to insure any person, property, or risk located within this state at the time of contracting.
"(5) Entering into a contract for services to be performed or for materials to be furnished in the state by the defendant.”
The above-quoted statute was intended to give Michigan courts the full extent of power possible to gain personal jurisdiction over nonresident defendants as is consistent with the principles of due process. Kriko v Allstate Ins Co, 137 Mich App 528; 357 NW2d 882 (1984); Kircos v Lola Cars, Ltd, 97 Mich App 379; 296 NW2d 32 (1980). The United States Supreme Court first set forth the modern *592constitutional test for the assertion of personal jurisdiction over a nonresident defendant by a state court in International Shoe Co v Washington, 326 US 310, 316; 66 S Ct 154; 90 L Ed 95 (1945). That case established the due process "minimum contacts” test. Under this test a state may not exercise in personam jurisdiction over a nonresident defendant unless the defendant has certain "minimum contacts” with the forum state such that the maintenance of the suit "does not offend 'traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice’ ”. This test was reaffirmed by the Supreme Court in World-Wide Volkswagen Corp v Woodson, 444 US 286; 100 S Ct 559; 62 L Ed 2d 490 (1980).
In deciding if Michigan is the proper forum for the maintenance of plaintiff’s action, an essential consideration is whether defendant Bill Cody’s Ranch "purposefully availed” itself of the privilege of conducting activities within Michigan, thus invoking the benefits and protections of Michigan’s laws. Khalaf v Bankers & Shippers Ins Co, 404 Mich 134, 148; 273 NW2d 811 (1978). The following facts are presented for our consideration.
Defendant Bill Cody’s Ranch is in the business of providing services to resort vacationers in Wyoming. The ranch is incorporated and located in Wyoming and has no business offices or registered agents located in Michigan for the purpose of accepting service. However, in an effort to promote its ranch resort, defendant directly advertised in Michigan’s American Automobile Association (AAA) Tour Guide and paid for the display ad. AAA allegedly recommended Bill Cody’s Ranch to its Michigan club members. Also, agents of the ranch allegedly sent direct mail advertisements into Michigan and accepted telephone reservations from Michigan.
We find that Bill Cody’s Ranch purposefully *593availed itself of the privilege of transacting business in Michigan, thus invoking the benefits and protections of Michigan’s laws when it solicited business in Michigan by directly advertising its resort in a magazine reasonably calculated to reach consumers in Michigan, sent direct mail advertisements into Michigan and accepted telephone reservations from Michigan. We also find that plaintiffs cause of action relates to the advertisement since plaintiff, who relied upon the ad, vacationed at Bill Cody’s Ranch where the injury resulted. Based on the above factors, we conclude that the requirements for long-arm jurisdiction under MCL 600.715(1); MSA 27A.715(1) are satisfied.
Defendant Bill Cody’s Ranch cites and relies on the United States Supreme Court’s holding in Woodson, supra, and argues that Michigan lacks sufficient minimum contacts with the ranch to exercise personal jurisdiction over defendant. We disagree. Here, unlike in Woodson, Bill Cody’s Ranch did solicit business for its resort through advertising reasonably calculated to reach Michigan. By advertising in the Michigan AAA Tour Guide, Bill Cody’s Ranch did seek to serve the Michigan market. These factors distinguish this case from the Woodson case. See Woodson, supra, p 500.
Issue II: Did the trial court err in finding that Michigan was not an inconvenient forum?
The decision to decline jurisdiction based upon the doctrine of forum non conveniens is within the discretion of the trial court. Cray v General Motors Corp, 389 Mich 382, 396; 207 NW2d 393 (1975). In Cray, the Supreme Court listed the following factors to be considered and weighed in deciding a motion for dismissal based on forum non conveniens:
*594"1. The private interest of the litigant.
"a. Availability of compulsory process for attendance of unwilling and the cost of obtaining attendance of willing witnesses;
"b. Ease of access to sources of proof;
"c. Distance from the situs of the accident or incident which gave rise to the litigation;
"d. Enforcibility [sic ] of any judgment obtained;
"e. Possible harassment of either party;
"f. Other practical problems which contribute to the ease, expense and expedition of the trial;
"g. Possibility of viewing the premises.
"2. Matters of public interest.
"a. Administrative difficulties which may arise in an area which may not be present in the area of origin;
"b. Consideration of the state law which must govern the case;
"c. People who are concerned by the proceeding.
”3. Reasonable promptness in raising the plea of forum non conveniens.”
Application of the foregoing factors is left to the trial court’s discretion.
In Anderson v Great Lakes Dredge & Dock Co, 411 Mich 619, 628-629; 309 NW2d 539 (1981), the Supreme Court stated that a plaintiff’s selection of a forum is ordinarily accorded deference. Quoting Gulf Oil Corp v Gilbert, 330 US 501, 508; 67 S Ct 839; 91 L Ed 1055 (1947), the Court stated that " 'unless the balance is strongly in favor of the defendant, the plaintiff’s choice of forum should rarely be disturbed’ ”. The court must consider the plaintiff’s choice of forum, and weigh the relative advantages and disadvantages of jurisdiction, and the ease of and obstacles to a fair trial in this state, in determining whether the balance strongly favors the defendant.
In the present case, the trial court considered the fact that plaintiff and several other witnesses *595were school-age children and concluded that since defendants were commercial enterprises it would be more convenient for defendants to travel to Michigan than for plaintiff and the other minor witnesses to travel to Wyoming, especially if it would be disruptive of their school life. The trial court stated that it considered the Cray factors and that there was no reason to disturb the plaintiff’s choice of forum. We find no abuse of discretion.
Affirmed.
H. E. Deming, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9741451 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:55:51.131853+00 ===

MacKenzie, P.J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I disagree with the majority’s disposition of Issue 1.1 fail to see in what material respect Bill Cody’s Ranch invoked the benefits and protections of Michigan law merely by having American Automobile Association (AAA) endorsement and negotiating with plaintiff’s father through the mails and by telephone.
MCL 600.175(1); MSA 27A.715(1) subjects any person who engages in "[t]he transaction of any business within the state” to the jurisdiction of our courts. By enacting this statute, the Legislature intended to extend the jurisdiction of our courts to the fullest extent permitted by the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Kriko v Allstate Ins Co, 137 Mich App 528; 357 NW2d 882 (1984).
Due process requires that in order to subject a nonresident defendant to a judgment in personam, the defendant must have certain minimum contacts with the forum state, such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice. World-Wide Volkswagen Corp v Woodson, 444 US 286; *596100 S Ct 559; 62 L Ed 2d 490 (1980); International Shoe Co v Washington, 326 US 310, 316; 66 S Ct 154; 90 L Ed 2d 95 (1945). The unilateral activity of those who claim some relationship with a nonresident defendant cannot satisfy the requirement of contact with a forum state. "[I]t is essential in each case that there be some act by which the defendant purposefully avails itself of the privilege of conducting business activities within the forum State, thus invoking the benefits and protections of its laws”. Hanson v Denckla, 357 US 235, 253; 78 S Ct 1228; 2 L Ed 2d 1283 (1958). Jurisdiction may be invoked where a defendant engages in continuous and substantial activities within the forum state or where the suit arises out of an act or transaction having a substantial connection with the forum. See Helicopteros Nacionales de Colombia v Hall, — US —; 104 S Ct 1868; 80 L Ed 2d 404 (1984). However, the mere foreseeability that the conduct of a defendant would have some business effects in the forum state is not sufficient to support jurisdiction. Rather, a defendant’s connection with the state must be such that it "should reasonably anticipate being haled into court” there in the event of a dispute. World-Wide Volkswagen Corp v Woodson, supra.
In the instant case, Bill Cody’s Ranch is a Wyoming corporation which has no other place of business, has never registered with the Secretary of State to do business in Michigan, and has no employees in Michigan. The record before us discloses that Bill Cody’s Ranch advertised in a AAA Tour Book and paid to AAA, in its nationwide capacity, an "Official Appointment Service” fee. There is no evidence that Bill Cody’s Ranch ever particularly sought as customers Michigan residents rather than residents of any other state. Responding to an advertisement in a Tour Book *597which they received from an Automobile Club of Michigan employee, plaintiffs parents telephoned Bill Cody’s Ranch in Wyoming to make further inquiries and arrangements. Bill Cody’s Ranch followed up the conversation by mailing a brochure to plaintiff’s parents. There is no other evidence of any communications between plaintiff and Bill Cody’s Ranch until plaintiff and her family arrived at defendant’s Wyoming establishment. Following their vacation, the family received a direct mail advertisement from Bill Cody’s Ranch.
Tour Books are produced by AAA, and not the Automobile Club of Michigan, for distribution to AAA members across the country. According to the explanatory material in the Tour Book, AAA field representatives search nationwide for accommodations which meet the association’s requirements for recommendation to its membership. Accommodations which are found to be satisfactory are then listed in the Tour Book with a rating. Once selected by AAA for listing, an establishment becomes eligible for the association’s "Official Appointment Service”, which, for "a modest annual fee”, entitles it to display the AAA emblem on the premises and to use it in advertising. Additionally, any establishment selected by AAA for listing in a Tour Book may elect to purchase advertising space in the book. It is thus clear that inclusion in a Tour Book is at the will of AAA and not the featured establishment.
The majority predicates its holding on the following transactions: (1) Bill Cody’s Ranch’s advertisement in a publication distributed nationwide, (2) Bill Cody’s Ranch’s participation in AAA’s nationwide "Official Appointment Service”, (3) Bill Cody’s Ranch’s interstate telephone negotiations with plaintiff’s parents, followed up with the mailing of a brochure, and (4) Bill Cody’s Ranch’s *598posting to plaintiffs family of a direct mail advertisement over three months after plaintiffs injuries were sustained. In my view, the last transaction is irrelevant to this case. Moreover, advertising in national publications distributed within the forum state does not constitute a transaction of business within that state. See, e.g., Bolger v Dial-A-Style Leasing Corp, 159 Colo 44; 409 P2d 517 (1966). If the rule were to the contrary, advertisers in any nationally distributed publication would be subject to the jurisdiction of each of the states in which the publication is distributed. Insull v New York, World-Telegram Corp, 273 F2d 166 (CA 7, 1959). Such a contact is simply too tenuous upon which to found a claim of jurisdiction. See Erlanger Mills, Inc v Cohoes Fibre Mills, Inc, 239 F2d 502 (CA 4, 1956). By analogy, the same is true of AAA’s nationwide "Official Appointment Service” program.
Nor does the interstate posting of a brochure in response to plaintiff’s family’s phone call constitute an act by which defendant purposefully availed itself of the privilege of conducting business activities within Michigan, thus invoking the benefits of our laws. See, e.g, Agrashall, Inc v Bernard Sirotta Co, 344 F2d 583 (CA 2, 1965); Old Westbury Golf & Country Club, Inc v Mitchell, 44 Misc 2d 687; 254 NYS2d 679 (1964); Grobark v Addo Machine Co, 16 Ill 2d 426; 158 NE2d 73 (1959). Thus, I conclude that the transactions upon which the majority relies do not amount to a substantial connection with this state.
Additionally, in my opinion it is important to consider that plaintiff is contending Bill Cody’s Ranch employees, represented to be experts in working with novice riders, were negligent in their exercise of such expertise. A basic question for the trier of fact in this case will be whether the *599employees fell below the standard of care expected of Rocky Mountain horseback riding instructors. The subject is dude ranches and the community is Wyoming. A Wayne County jury lacks the knowledge and the experience to fairly consider the question. In this situation, I do not believe either plaintiff or Bill Cody’s Ranch will be afforded a fair trial in Wayne County.
In my view, the thread purporting to link Bill Cody’s Ranch to Michigan is too tenuous to support jurisdiction in this state. Jurisdiction over Bill Cody’s Ranch properly belongs to the courts of Wyoming. Accordingly, I would reverse the denial of Bill Cody’s motion for accelerated judgment.

=== CASE 2227276 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:31.050762+00 ===

147 Mich. App. 499 (1985)
383 N.W.2d 235
BIERMAN
v.
TOWNSHIP OF TAYMOUTH
Docket No. 82097.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided December 3, 1985.
Dwan & Schmidt, P.C. (by H. Michael Dwan), for plaintiff.
Jack E. Kerr, for defendants.
*502 Before: J.H. GILLIS, P.J., and CYNAR and R.L. EVANS,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Defendants appeal as of right from a November 28, 1984, order through which portions of the defendants' zoning ordinance were held unconstitutional as applied to plaintiffs' property.
Plaintiffs, who live on Elms Road in Birch Run, Michigan, desired to use a portion of their property as a junkyard. In the spring of 1979, they requested a special use permit from the Taymouth Township Zoning Board. The request was denied on the ground that plaintiffs did not have a 200-foot set-back as required by the local zoning ordinance.
In the fall of 1979, after having acquired 20 acres of adjacent land, plaintiffs filed a request with the zoning board to have the property rezoned from A-1, agricultural, to M-2, intensive industrial, with a special use permit for junkyards, pursuant to the Taymouth Township Rural Zoning Ordinance. The request was denied.
In June 1980, plaintiffs filed another request for a zoning change, this time requesting that the land be rezoned from A-1, agricultural, to M-1, industrial, again with a special use permit for junkyards. After a hearing on the matter, the request was denied in December 1980. The Township Board based its denial of the request upon the following factors: 1) the use was not compatible with adjacent agricultural land use and was not in compliance with the future township land-use plans; 2) there were already adequate junkyard facilities in the township and in surrounding areas; and 3) there was a need to avoid increased *503 traffic on the unimproved secondary road on which the property was located.
On December 11, 1980, plaintiffs filed a complaint against defendants in the Saginaw County Circuit Court, requesting, among other relief, that the court enjoin defendants from enforcing the zoning ordinance against plaintiffs and order defendants to change plaintiffs' zoning designation to allow use of the property as an auto salvage yard. After trial, the trial court issued an opinion declaring the ordinance unconstitutional as applied to the plaintiffs. The court based this conclusion upon its findings that the land could not be used effectively in any manner permitted under the ordinance, thus rendering any development economically unfeasible. Further, the trial court held that use of the land as a junkyard could not adversely affect the township's morals, health or safety. Defendants appeal as of right from the trial court's order.
Our review of zoning cases, although de novo, is conducted with the following guidelines in mind:
"This Court, however, is inclined to give considerable weight to the findings of the trial judge in equity cases. This is primarily because the trial judge is in a better position to test the credibility of the witnesses by observing them in court and hearing them testify than is an appellate court which has no such opportunity. We do not ordinarily disturb the findings of the trial judge in an equity case, unless, after examination of the entire record, we reach the conclusion we would have arrived at a different result had we been in the position of the trial judge." Kropf v City of Sterling Heights, 391 Mich. 139, 163; 215 NW2d 179 (1974), quoting Christine Building Co v City of Troy, 367 Mich. 508, 518; 116 NW2d 816 (1962).
The appropriate standard for determining the constitutional validity of a zoning ordinance set forth *504 in Kropf, supra, was outlined concisely in Kirk v Tyrone Twp, 398 Mich. 429, 439-440; 247 NW2d 848 (1976), as follows:
"The principles and tests to use to determine whether the present zoning of plaintiffs' property is valid was detailed in Kropf.
"The important principles require that for an ordinance to be successfully challenged plaintiffs prove:
"`[F]irst, that there is no reasonable governmental interest being advanced by the present zoning classification itself * * * or
"`[S]econdly, that an ordinance may be unreasonable because of the purely arbitrary, capricious and unfounded exclusion of other types of legitimate land use from the area in question.' 391 Mich. 139, 158.
"The four rules for applying these principles were also outlined in Kropf. They are:
"1. `"[T]he ordinance comes to us clothed with every presumption of validity."' 391 Mich. 139, 162, quoting from Brae Burn, Inc v Bloomfield Hills, 350 Mich. 425; 86 NW2d 166 (1957).
"2. `"[I]t is the burden of the party attacking to prove affirmatively that the ordinance is an arbitrary and unreasonable restriction upon the owner's use of his property * * *. It must appear that the clause attacked is an arbitrary fiat, a whimsical ipse dixit, and that there is no room for a legitimate difference of opinion concerning its reasonableness."' 391 Mich. 139, 162, quoting Brae Burn, Inc.
"3. `"Michigan has adopted the view that to sustain an attack on a zoning ordinance, an aggrieved property owner must show that if the ordinance is enforced the consequent restrictions on his property preclude its use for any purposes to which it is reasonably adapted."' 391 Mich. 139, 162-163.
"4. `"This Court, however, is inclined to give considerable weight to findings of the trial judge in equity cases."' 391 Mich. 139, 163, quoting Christine Building Co v City of Troy, 367 Mich. 508, 518; 116 NW2d 816 (1962)."
*505 Applying these standards to the case before us, we conclude that the trial court erred in finding the defendants' zoning ordinance unconstitutional as applied to plaintiffs. The ordinance permitted the following uses of the property as of right: 1) single-family dwellings; 2) general farming and forestry; 3) specialized farming; and 4) public and private conservation areas and structures. The physical characteristics of the land, as testified to by plaintiff Johanna Bierman, were as follows. As a result of sand-mining operations conducted by Mrs. Bierman's grandfather, who was a predecessor in title to the land, approximately one-half of the land is a swamp which presently sustains only weeds and quack grass. However, plaintiffs' home is located on the other half of the land and, at the time of trial, the land was being utilized for farming purposes. Further, Mrs. Bierman testified that the land was suitable for building additional houses. Moreover, although the property was located near the I-75 expressway and the noise from semi-tractor trailers shifting gears could be heard from plaintiffs' home, Mrs. Bierman admitted that, notwithstanding the existence of the expressway, several substantial homes had been built in the area within the past ten years. Further, plaintiffs chose to build their home on the property in the early 1970's even though the expressway had been there since 1956. Based upon this evidence, we believe that the portions of the land which did not consist of swamp area were fully adapted to the uses authorized by the ordinance, especially residential dwellings and farming. We therefore cannot conclude that the ordinance is "an arbitrary and unreasonable restriction on the owner's use of his property". Kropf, supra, p 162.
The testimony describing the swamp area, on the other hand, reveals it to be much less susceptible *506 to development than the remainder of the land. However, we note from the record that the swamp-like condition of the land was caused not by nature, but rather by the actions of Mrs. Bierman's grandfather, the predecessor in title, when he conducted a sand-mining operation on the property. We are therefore not presented with a situation where a zoning ordinance renders the land, in its natural condition, unadaptable to any reasonable use permitted by the ordinance. Rather, the affirmative actions of the previous owners have changed the basic nature of the property from that capable of agricultural adaptation to a swamp which, in its present form, is useless to the plaintiffs. Thus, this case is similar to Johnson v Robinson Twp, 420 Mich. 115; 359 NW2d 526 (1984), where the plaintiffs sought a variance from the defendant's zoning ordinance in order to permit construction of a residence on their undersized lot. However, the lot was originally combined with two others to form a much larger parcel of land which was owned by the plaintiff's grandfather. This larger lot was intentionally split into three smaller parcels by the plaintiff's family. 420 Mich. 117. Based upon these facts, the Supreme Court concluded that the local zoning board of appeals properly denied the requested variance since "the only practical difficulty or hardship is one that was produced by the plaintiff's family". 420 Mich. 126. The Court concluded:
"The zoning ordinance preceded the division of this property. Thus the plaintiffs' problems were not caused by the township, but were caused by the division. Since, prior to the split, this land was being properly used in conformance with the zoning ordinance, we can see no sense in which the township can be said to have unconstitutionally deprived the plaintiffs of their property rights." 420 Mich. 126.
*507 We believe the same result is mandated here. If, as plaintiffs claim, there land cannot be utilized in its present condition for any of the uses permitted under the ordinance, they have no one to blame but their grandfather. A properly adopted zoning ordinance does not become an arbitrary and unreasonable restriction upon an owner's use of his or her land simply because they or their predecessors in title have voluntarily disrupted the natural condition of the land so as to make it useless in its resulting state. We conclude that the defendants have not unconstitutionally deprived plaintiffs of the use of their property through the restrictions imposed by the ordinance at issue.
Plaintiffs also argue that the ordinance has "no reasonable basis for its very existence", Robinson Twp v Kroll, 410 Mich. 293, 312; 302 NW2d 146 (1981), quoting Kropf, supra, and supports this claim with the fact that junkyards are excluded, while sanitary landfills and incinerators are allowed by special use permit. In fact, the zoning ordinance permits the following uses of land by special use permit in addition to those cited by plaintiffs: public parks and recreation areas, institutions for human care, religious institutions, sand, gravel, and clay pits, greenhouses and nurseries, production of furbearing animals for profit, seasonable labor housing associated with agricultural enterprises, grain and seed elevators and sales, education and social institutions, public buildings, riding stables and livestock auction yards, and veterinary hospitals, clinics and kennels. However, we are of the opinion that the ordinance is not unreasonable due to the allowance of these special uses and the exclusion of junkyards, since a distinction exists between the latter and those uses listed. The permitted uses can be characterized either as a form of government *508 service provided to citizens out of necessity or as commercial enterprises closely related to the agricultural and forestry industries. In contrast, a junkyard is simply a general commercial business established for profit having no connection to agriculture or forestry. Junkyards thus fall into the general commercial enterprise category which the zoning ordinance was designed to exclude from A-1 districts in order to protect, enhance and stabilize food and fiber production areas. We conclude that a reasonable basis exists for excluding commercial enterprises such as junkyards from agricultural districts while at the same time allowing limited public services such as landfills and incinerators.
Finally, plaintiffs claim that the zoning ordinance as enacted in 1972 failed to include any guidelines for the zoning board's use in deciding whether to grant or deny a special use permit request and is thus invalid pursuant to Osius v St Clair Shores, 344 Mich. 693; 75 NW2d 25 (1956). See also Bruni v Farmington Hills, 96 Mich. App. 664; 293 NW2d 609 (1980). We find the argument to be without merit since the plaintiffs did not request a special use permit until July of 1979, subsequent to an amendment of the ordinance enacted April 1, 1979, which delineated specific standards to be used by the zoning board. It cannot be said, then, that the Zoning Board of Appeals was permitted through this ordinance to exercise, by delegation, a legislative function without guidelines or standards. Osius, supra, p 697; Bruni, supra, p 668. The order of the trial court finding the ordinance unconstitutional as applied to the plaintiffs is reversed.
Reversed.
NOTES
[*]  Recorder's court judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 9741452 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:55:52.464472+00 ===

M. R. Stempien, J.
Travelers Insurance Company appeals as of right from the trial court’s denial of its motion to intervene in Mary Lou Mason’s third-party tort action under MCL 418.827; MSA 17.237(827). We reverse.
On August 17, 1979, Mary Lou Mason (plaintiff) was injured in an automobile accident during the course of her employment with American Airlines. She was a passenger in an automobile owned by Martell Realty Corporation and Ann Arbor Inn Management Corporation and operated by James R. Scarpuzza. On November 9, 1981, plaintiff commenced a tort action against Scarpuzza, Martell, and Ann Arbor Inn alleging that the vehicle was being operated in a reckless and negligent manner and that, as a result, plaintiff "sustained and incurred hospital and medical expenses and will continue to incur same and she has incurred a great deal [of] pain and suffering and will continue to incur pain and suffering in the future and that her injuries are permanent in nature; [and that] * * * she sustained serious impairment of bodily function”.
Plaintiff received no-fault benefits for three years following the accident. On August 17, 1982, Travelers, as the workers’ compensation insurance carrier for American Airlines, began to pay plaintiff $175 a week in workers’ compensation bene*183fits. Through mid-April of 1984, Travelers paid $23,335 in weekly compensation benefits and $6,-456 in medical costs. On May 17, 1982, Travelers filed a notice of lien against any settlement or judgment plaintiff might secure in her lawsuit against Scarpuzza, Martell, and Ann Arbor Inn.
On July 8, 1983, Travelers filed a motion to intervene in the lawsuit pursuant to § 827(1) of the Worker’s Disability Compensation Act (wdca), MCL 418.827(1); MSA 17.237(827X1). The trial court ruled from the bench that it would grant Travelers’s intervention request provided that the parties could agree on a cost-sharing plan. Evidently no cost-sharing agreement was entered into because on August 26, 1983, the trial court issued an order denying Travelers’s request to intervene. On October 13, 1983, the trial court denied Travelers’s request for a rehearing on its intervention motion and this appeal followed.
The sole issue on appeal is whether Travelers had an unconditional right to intervene in plaintiff’s action against Scarpuzza, Martell, and Ann Arbor Inn under § 827 of the wdca.1_
*184Travelers argues that its statutory right to intervene in this lawsuit is unrestricted and not subject to the trial court’s discretion. It maintains that the wdca provides that the apportionment of costs occurs after recovery and, therefore, that the trial court’s condition was contrary to the wdca.
As of the date of this appeal, plaintiff has not recovered a settlement or judgment in her cause against Scarpuzza, Martell, and Ann Arbor Inn.
The basis of the trial court’s decision not to allow intervention was that it believed that plaintiff was entitled to recover her costs expended thus far in the case and, if no agreement to that effect could be reached, Travelers would not be permitted to intervene in the action.
GCR 1963, 209.1 provides in relevant part as follows:
"Intervention of Right. Anyone shall be permitted to intervene in an action
"(1) when a statute of this state or a court rule confers an unconditional right to intervene * *
Section 827(1) provides that "[a]ny party in interest shall have a right to join in the action”. Because the statute grants a carrier who has paid compensation a substantive right to recover against a third-party tortfeasor, there is no question but that the insurance carrier is a real party in interest. See, e.g., Muskegon Hardware & Supply Co v Green, 343 Mich 340, 346; 72 NW2d 52 (1955); Detroit v Spivey, 68 Mich App 295, 299-300; 242 NW2d 561 (1976). Therefore, Travelers had the statutory right to intervene in plaintiff’s action against Scarpuzza, Martell, and Ann Arbor Inn.
*185Neither the court rule nor the wdca provides for a conditional right to intervene as proposed by plaintiff. The apportionment of expenses is not made by the court until after there has been a recover. MCL 418.827(6); MSA 17.237(827X6); Glavin v Baker Material Handling Corp, 132 Mich App 318, 324-326; 347 NW2d 222 (1984), remanded on other grounds 422 Mich 882 (1985). Therefore, the trial court incorrectly conditioned the grant of Travelers’s intervention request upon an apportionment of plaintiffs prerecovery expenses.
Plaintiffs reliance upon Harrison v Ford Motor Co, 370 Mich 683; 122 NW2d 680 (1963), is misplaced. Unlike the situation here, Harrison involved an insurance carrier which represented both sides to the controversy. The Court held that under those circumstances, because "[o]ne may not sue himself’, the insurance carrier could not intervene but, rather, had to await reimbursement from the plaintiffs recovery in the action. Harrison, supra, p 687.
For the reasons stated, we hold that Travelers had the right to intervene in the present action.2
Reversed and remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
M. J. Kelly, P. J., concurred.
There has been no claim on appeal that the workers’ compensation insurance carrier would not be entitled to share in the plaintiffs recovery because of the application of the no-fault act to the present controversy. In Great American Ins Co v Queen, 410 Mich 73; 300 NW2d 895 (1980), the Supreme Court discussed the interplay between the Worker’s Disability Compensation Act and the no-fault act with respect to the issue of reimbursement for benefits paid. Given the present posture of the case, it is unknown whether the workers’ compensation carrier will in fact be seeking reimbursement for payments which substitute for no-fault benefits "otherwise payable”. Thus, there would be no reason to deny Travelers’s request to intervene in this action on this ground. In fact, Queen permits a workers’ compensation carrier to receive reimbursement from third-party tort recoveries in the same manner as the payment of workers’ compensation benefits for non-motor vehicle related injuries when the workers’ compensation benefits do not substitute for no-fault benefits otherwise payable. 410 Mich 73, 97. In this case, plaintiff is suing for pain and suffering damages based upon her alleged serious impairment of bodily function. These are not the kind of damages "otherwise payable” under the no-fault act. See MCL 500.3135(1); MSA 24.13135(1). *184Therefore, the pleadings indicate that Travelers is not seeking reimbursement for payments which substituted for no-fault benefits otherwise payable. See and compare Bialochowski v Cross Concrete Pumping Co, Inc, 141 Mich App 315; 367 NW2d 381 (1985).
GCR 1963, 209.1 did not make provision for inquiring into the timeliness of an intervention request. On remand, subject to MCR 1.102, the lower court may determine whether, under MCR 2.209(A)(1), Travelers’s aplication to intervene was timely filed.

=== CASE 9741453 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:55:52.468562+00 ===

Beasley, J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent.
It is clear that once the workers’ compensation carrier is allowed to intervene under GCR 1963, 209, the apportionment of expenses cannot be made by the trial court until after there has been *186a recovery.1 But, prior to allowing the carrier to intervene, the trial court can exercise its discretion and condition intervention on the sharing of the costs and risks of litigation. In this case, the trial court properly did not permit intervening appellant, Travelers Insurance Company, to sit back and wait for plaintiff to prepare the case for trial and then to intervene and reap the benefits of plaintiffs preparation expenses.
Plaintiff, Mary Lou Mason, was required to expend over $4,000 in costs of preparation for trial. In addition, plaintiff is obligated to her counsel under a contingent fee agreement. Travelers waited for over a year from the time plaintiff filed the suit before seeking to intervene. Under these circumstances, the trial court had discretion to spell out equitable conditions under which Travelers could intervene into plaintiffs case.
There are two sources that justify the exercise of discretion by the trial court in this case. First, the right to intervene under MCL 418.827(1); MSA 17.237(827X1) is not unconditional. In Harrison v Ford Motor Co,2 the Michigan Supreme Court expressly held that the right of the insurer to intervene as a party plaintiff was not absolute. While this case could be limited to its unique facts where the insurer had an interest in both sides of the litigation, it should not be so narrowly limited. A United States District Court, in applying Michigan law, used the Harrison decision to limit an insurer’s right to intervene with full participatory rights as a party plaintiff where the insurer did not have an interest in both sides of the litigation.3
*187Thus, a trial court can properly limit, or condition, the intervention of an insurer exercising its "right to join” provided in MCL 418.827(1); MSA 17.237(827)(1). Therefore, the proper court rule to apply is GCR 1963, 209.2, now MCR 2.209(B), since the statutory right to intervene involved in this case is conditional, not unconditional, as required by GCR 1963, 209.1(1), now MCR 2.209(A)(1). Under GCR 1963, 209.2, intervention is permissive, and the trial court has a great deal of discretion in granting or denying such intervention. The trial judge in the within case did not abuse his discretion or violate Travelers’s statutory right to intervention by imposing equitable conditions upon its exercise.
But even if Travelers’s right to intervene is "unconditional” for purposes of the court rules and GCR 1963, 209.1(1) applies, the second source of trial court discretion would allow the court to place conditions on Travelers’s right to intervene. This second source of court discretion is based on the lack of timeliness in Travelers’s assertion of its right to intervene. GCR 1963, 209.1(1) was modeled after the Federal Rule of Civil Procedure on intervention,4 except that it did not, in so many words, include the federal rule requirement of timely application. In addition, the new MCR 2.209(A)(1), which replaces GCR 1963, 209.1(1), now includes a requirement of timely application. Consequently, it has been contended that GCR 1963, 209.1 did not require timely application. However, for consideration of pragmatism and equity, there must be some point at which a prospective intervenor, even under GCR 1963, 209.1, will have lost his right of intervention if he has delayed unreasonably.
There are no cases squarely addressing this *188issue of trial court discretion when the application for intervention under GCR 1963, 209.1(1) is substantially untimely and tardy. Many cases in this Court have held that the trial court does have discretion on whether to allow a late intervenor as of right to enter a case under GCR 1963, 209.1(3), which expressly requires timely application.5 Although GCR 1963, 209.1(1) does not expressly require timely application, the trial court must be allowed, at some point, to limit intervention which would unfairly allow an insurer to sit back for a period of over a year while the plaintiff incurs substantial time and expense in preparation for litigation. The trial judge is not required to allow an insurer to intervene at the last minute and share in all the gains of the plaintiff’s expenses and efforts or walk away completely free if the plaintiff fails to recover.
In fact, the possibility of unfair, risk-free intervention a year down the road from the start of costly litigation justifies a trial court’s application of equitable conditions to the intervention. Cases such as this, in which the statutory right to intervene is exercised, will necessarily vary greatly. The time of the attempt to intervene, promptness of investigation, the nature of damages, and other factors will enter into the question of whether conditions need to be attached to intervention. Such matters are best reviewed within the factual context of a particular case by exercise of the trial judge’s discretion.
The right to intervene under GCR 1963, 290.1 or 209.2 is not unconditional. In this case, I do not consider that the trial court has violated Travelers’s statutory right to intervene by imposing con*189ditions upon its exercise. No abuse of discretion occurred here.
MCL418.827(6); MSA 17.237(827X6); Glavin v Baker Material Handling Corp, 132 Mich App 318; 347 NW2d 222 (1984), remanded on other grounds 422 Mich 882 (1985).
370 Mich 683; 122 NW2d 680 (1963).
Harris v General Coach Works, 37 FRD 343 (ED Mich, 1964).
FR Civ P, 24(a).
See Dudkin v Civil Service Comm, 127 Mich App 397, 404; 339 NW2d 190 (1983); American States Ins Co v Albin, 118 Mich Appp 201, 209; 324 NW2d 574 (1982), lv den 417 Mich 955 (1983).

=== CASE 2227282 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:31.405048+00 ===

148 Mich. App. 285 (1986)
383 N.W.2d 631
PEOPLE
v.
GRIHM
Docket No. 83090.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided January 7, 1986.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Louis J. Caruso, Solicitor General, John D. O'Hair, Prosecuting Attorney, Timothy A. Baughman, Deputy Chief, Civil and Appeals, and Brian Marzec, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Parzen & Parzen (by George C. Parzen), for defendant on appeal.
Before: SHEPHERD, P.J., and J.H. GILLIS and P.J. CLULO,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
The defendant was charged with armed robbery, MCL 750.529; MSA 28.797. At the end of the preliminary examination the magistrate bound the defendant over to Detroit Recorder's Court on the reduced charge of unarmed robbery, MCL 750.530; MSA 28.798. The prosecution made a motion for reinstatement of the original charge *287 of armed robbery. After a hearing on that motion, the court upheld the decision of the magistrate and found that the magistrate had not abused his discretion in reducing the charge to unarmed robbery. Leave to appeal and a stay of proceedings were granted by this Court on March 11, 1985.
The issue in this case arises out of the specific language of Michigan's armed robbery statute which provides as follows:
"Any person who shall assault another, and shall feloniously rob, steal and take from his person, or in his presence, any money or other property, which may be the subject of larceny, such robber being armed with a dangerous weapon, or any article used or fashioned in a manner to lead the person so assaulted to reasonably believe it to be a dangerous weapon, shall be guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment in the state prison for life or for any term of years. If an aggravated assault or serious injury is inflicted by any person while committing an armed robbery as defined in this section, the sentence shall be not less than 2 years' imprisonment in the state prison." MCL 750.529; MSA 28.797.
At the preliminary examination the complaining witness testified that the defendant had approached her and demanded her purse. His right hand was underneath his cut-off shirt, and he moved it in such a way that she noticed it. She further testified that she believed that the defendant had a gun or a knife. Both lower courts ruled that a concealed hand held in such a manner as to resemble a weapon does not satisfy the "armed" element and that the only way the element can be satisfied is with the use of some "article".
The prosecutor argues that both the magistrate and the trial judge have misconstrued the rule of People v Parker, 417 Mich. 556; 339 NW2d 455 (1983), and its application to the facts of this case. *288 Both the magistrate and the trial court held that the Parker decision stands for the proposition that armed robbery cannot be made out unless some "article" is in fact used by the robber in such fashion or manner as to induce the reasonable belief that the article is a dangerous weapon. We agree with the position of the prosecutor that the magistrate and the trial court have misread the rule of Parker. In Parker, the complainant was assaulted as she was getting out of a car in a Detroit parking lot. Her assailant told her that he would stab her with a knife if she did not keep quiet. That is the only evidence in the Parker record that would suggest any weapon. In addressing these facts, the Supreme Court stated, p 565:
"It is not enough that the person assaulted is put in fear; a person who is subjected to an unarmed robbery may be put in fear.
"To constitute armed robbery the robber must be armed with an article which is in fact a dangerous weapon  a gun, knife, bludgeon, etc., or some article harmless in itself, but used or fashioned in a manner to induce the reasonable belief that the article is a dangerous weapon.
"Words or threats alone can never be dangerous weapons because the statute is concerned with weapons, not words."
In People v Tullie, 141 Mich. App. 156; 366 NW2d 224 (1985), the complainant testified that the assailant "held his hand in his pocket indicating he had a gun". The Court in Tullie stated, p 157:
"A defendant may be convicted for armed robbery even if the weapon was not actually seen by the complainant. People v Hayden, 132 Mich. App. 273, 293; 348 NW2d 672 (1984); People v McCadney, 111 Mich. App. 545; 315 NW2d 175 (1981); People v Krist, 93 Mich. App. 425; 287 NW2d 251 (1979), lv den 407 Mich. 963 (1980). *289 This case is unlike People v Parker, 417 Mich. 556; 339 NW2d 455 (1983), cert den ___ US ___; 104 S. Ct. 2180; 80 L. Ed. 2d 561 (1984), where no evidence of the presence of a weapon was adduced at trial."
Also, in People v Burden, 141 Mich. App. 160; 366 NW2d 23 (1985), the complainant testified that the defendant had "held his hand in his pocket in such a way that it was believed that he had a gun". The Court went on to state, p 165:
"A number of cases have held that a concealed hand, held in such a manner as to resemble a pistol, may satisfy the `armed' element of armed robbery. People v Jury, 3 Mich. App. 427; 142 NW2d 910 (1966); People v Washington, 4 Mich. App. 453, 455-456; 145 NW2d 292 (1966), lv den 379 Mich. 783 (1967). Defendant claims, however, that People v Saenz, 411 Mich. 454; 307 NW2d 675 (1981), and People v Parker, 417 Mich. 556; 339 NW2d 455 (1983), cert den ___ US ___; 104 S. Ct. 2180; 80 L. Ed. 2d 561 (1984), preclude conviction based on a reasonable belief that defendant was armed. In both of those cases there was no evidence that the victims saw a weapon or another item fashioned to simulate a weapon. The Court ruled that it was error to instruct the jury that it could convict merely on the victims' reasonable belief that the defendant was armed. Parker, supra, and Saenz, supra, require more than a belief that the defendant was armed in order to convict."
It is well established that a reviewing court may not properly substitute its judgment for that of the magistrate, but may reverse only if it appears on the record that there has been an abuse of discretion. People v Talley, 410 Mich. 378, 385; 301 NW2d 809 (1981). People v Shipp, 141 Mich. App. 610, 612; 367 NW2d 430 (1985). However, the "judgment" of the magistrate in this context is directed to findings of fact. Talley, supra, p 386. It is the duty of the magistrate to bind the defendant over for trial if it appears at the conclusion of the *290 preliminary examination that a crime has been committed and there is probable cause to believe that the defendant committed it. MCL 766.13; MSA 28.931. See also People v Doss, 406 Mich. 90, 100; 276 NW2d 9 (1979). If evidence conflicts or raises a reasonable doubt of a defendant's guilt, such questions should be left for the jury upon trial. Doss, supra, p 103; Shipp, supra, p 613.
Under this Court's holdings in Tullie and Burden, supra, the evidence establishes that the crime of armed robbery was committed and there was probable cause to establish the defendant's guilt. The decision of the magistrate is reversed and the defendant will be bound over to the Detroit Recorder's Court to stand trial on the charge of armed robbery.
Reversed.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 9741456 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:55:54.730845+00 ===

FOSHEIM, Chief Justice.
Plaintiffs Reed, Peterson, Luei, and Deyo appeal1 from a dismissal of their complaint due to inaction for over one year as authorized by SDCL § 15-11-11.2 We affirm.
On May 18, 1982, Plaintiffs served and filed a Summons and Complaint in an action alleging fraud. On June 7, 1982, John C. Farrar of the Gunderson, Farrar, Aid-rich, Warder and DeMersseman law firm of Rapid City filed an answer for Defendant Heath. On June 11, 1982, Farrar filed an *874answer for Defendants Stenberg and Schal-lenkamp.
According to the record, the next activity was a request by letter from Plaintiffs’ counsel, David Stanton, to the circuit court judge that the action not be dismissed. This letter was filed on November 16, 1983. In it Stanton said “It [this case] had been handled by John Farrar, and during his illness, hospitalization, and death, I set it aside. So far as I know it has not been reassigned in the office.... ” Stanton further stated that he would be prepared to go forward with the case in about a week. According to a note in the record made by the secretary to the court administrator, letters were mailed on November 16, 1984, which informed all counsel that the action would be dismissed due to inaction for a period of one year pursuant to SDCL § 15-11-11. Apparently in response to that letter, Plaintiffs’ counsel filed a notice of hearing on the court’s letter of intent to dismiss. This notice was filed on November 28,1984, but was not accompanied by a motion or showing in resistance to dismissal. On November 28, 1984, copies of the letter from the circuit court administrator’s secretary to the Gunderson firm and the one-year dismissal letter were filed and the Gunderson firm informed the court that the case had been turned over to another Rapid City attorney. On November 28, 1984, the court filed an order of dismissal.
In response to that order, Plaintiffs filed another Notice of Hearing on January 2, 1985, with the hearing to be held on January 18, 1985. The hearing was held as scheduled and a motion to set-aside the order of dismissal was filed. The circuit court judge responded with a letter and again stated the case would be dismissed. A formal order was filed on February 5, 1985. This appeal followed.
The single issue on appeal is whether the circuit court abused its discretion in dismissing the action. Plaintiffs’ contend the delay was caused by the illness and death of Defendants’ original counsel, and further inaction by his firm. In their brief, Plaintiffs set forth claimed facts regarding their counsel’s contacts with the original counsel for Defendants and other members of his firm relating to this case. Defendants respond that since there was no activity in this case, except that prompted by the judge, the action was properly dismissed under the one-year provision of SDCL § 15-11-11. They note that defective notice, if any, has not been complained of by Plaintiffs.
This court may review all matters appearing on the record relevant to whether the order appealed from is erroneous. SDCL § 15-26A-10. However, the record contains no transcript of the hearing on the dismissal order. Failure to timely order a transcript constitutes a waiver of a right to a transcript. SDCL § 15-26A-49. Accordingly, the record on this appeal is confined to those pleadings and papers transmitted from the circuit court. Pearson v. Adams, 279 N.W.2d 674, 676 (S.D.1979); see also Caneva v. Miners & Merchants Bank, 335 N.W.2d 339, 342 (S.D.1983).
There is nothing probative in the record to support Plaintiffs’ claims. The only mention of the consequences of Mr. Farrar’s illness and death is in a letter to the judge from Plaintiffs’ counsel and in the judge’s memorandum opinion. Consequently, there is nothing but argument before us on appeal.
While all parties are expected to protect themselves and be diligent in insuring that the settled record contains everything necessary for disposition, on appeal, the ultimate responsibility for presenting an adequate record falls on the appellant. Pearson, 279 N.W.2d at 676. Since the settled record is incomplete and wanting of any showing that the trial court ruled improperly, we must assume the order was correct. State v. Hall, 272 N.W.2d 308, 311 (S.D.1978). The order of dismissal is affirmed.
MORGAN and WUEST, JJ., and HERTZ, Circuit Judge acting as a Supreme Court Justice, concur.
HENDERSON, J., dissents.
*875SABERS, J., not having been a member of the Court at the time this action was submitted to the Court, did not participate.
. SDCL § 15-26A-3(2) authorizes an appeal from an order affecting a substantial right and which, in effect, determines the action and precludes a judgment from which an appeal may be taken.
. SDCL § 15-11-11 provides:
The court may dismiss any civil case for want of prosecution upon written notice to counsel of record where there has been no activity for one year, unless good cause is shown to the contrary.

=== CASE 9741457 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:55:54.734408+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(dissenting).
SDCL 15-11-11 provides that the circuit courts of this state “may dismiss any civil case for want of prosecution upon written notice to counsel of record where there has been no activity for one year, unless good cause is shown to the contrary.” (Emphasis supplied mine.) Because good cause is shown to the contrary, I believe the circuit court abused its discretion in dismissing this action. Therefore, I dissent.
Appellees’ original counsel, Mr. Farrar, became seriously ill and discovery proceedings had to be delayed. Appellants’ attorney, Mr. Stanton, contacted the Gunderson law firm and was informed that Mr. Farrar was keeping the case and was expected to recover and actively represent appellees. Although Mr. Farrar returned to the Gun-derson law firm, his health never recovered to the point of permitting his attendance at discovery proceedings to be conducted in California. After Mr. Farrar’s unfortunate death, Mr. Stanton again contacted the Gunderson law firm and was informed that the case had not been reassigned and that he would be contacted when it was reassigned.
Thereafter, and while Mr. Stanton was awaiting the Gunderson law firm’s internal reassignment of the case, Attorney John Potter took over the case and had the file thereon for one year. However, Attorney Potter never put in an appearance in the case, and the Gunderson law firm never made a formal withdrawal as required by SDCL 16-18-31. Finck v. Finck, 354 N.W.2d 198, 201 (S.D.1984). See also, SDCL ch. 16-18, Appx. DR 2-110 and EC 2-32. If the Gunderson law firm had complied with SDCL 16-18-31 and obtained an order to withdraw, and if Attorney Potter had sought leave for substitution of counsel, this case would have properly proceeded and the present situation would not be before this Court. Instead, because Mr. Stanton accommodated the difficulties experienced at the Gunderson law firm due to Mr. Farrar’s death, Mr. Stanton’s professional kindness will be punished as will his clients herein.
This case is unlike the circumstances recently addressed in Duncan v. Pennington County Housing Authority, 382 N.W.2d 425 (S.D.1986), as it is under the purview of different statutory provisions. Good cause existed for the minor period of inactivity and the circuit court abused its discretion by dismissing the action.

=== CASE 9741458 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:55:58.335659+00 ===

OPINION
ROBB, Judge.
Aberdeen Apartments and ninety-five other apartment communities 1 in Hamilton, Hancock, Hendricks, Johnson, Marion, and Shelby counties (collectively "the Apartments"), appeal the trial court's denial of their motion for a preliminary injunction against Cary Campbell Realty Alliance, Inc. ("Campbell Realty"). reverse and remand. We
Issues
The Apartments raise four issues for our review, which we consolidate and restate as follows:
1. Whether the trial court properly denied the Apartments' motion for a preliminary injunction because the Apartments failed to show that they were reasonably likely to succeed at trial on their trespass claim and because they failed to show irreparable harm; and
2. Whether the trial court properly denied the Apartments' motion for a preliminary injunction because the preliminary injunction sought by the Apartments is an impermissible pri- or restraint under the United States and Indiana Constitutions.
Facts and Procedural History
Campbell Realty is an Indiana corporation with its principal office in Hamilton County. It is a for-profit business that seeks to sell new homes to first-time home buyers. In order to find new buyers, Campbell Realty publishes the Renter's Gazette. The Renter's Gazette is a free publication that Campbell Realty has distributed to numerous apartment communities throughout central Indiana for the last two to three years. In City of Indianapolis v. Campbell, 792 N.E.2d 620, 626 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), we held that the Renter's Gazette qualified as a newspaper under a City of Indianapolis and Marion County ordinance. The Renter's Gazette has the appearance of a newspaper. It is printed on newsprint and is folded down the mid*162dle. It is usually between eight and ten pages in length. The content of the Renter's Gazette varies. It often contains articles that are appealing to renters, such as how to keep one's apartment secure. It also usually contains the schedule of one of the local sports teams. Some of the articles in the Renter's Gazette are designed to cast apartment communities, their management, and landlords in a negative light. These articles have suggested that landlords were not concerned about their tenants' security, that landlords were thieves, and that landlords are somehow like the mafia. A large portion of the Renter's Gazette is devoted to advertisements. The majority of these ads offer for sale new homes with low monthly payments. Each of these ads lists a telephone number that prospective buyers can call. This telephone number connects the caller with Campbell Realty's answering service located in the state of Arizona. The answering service takes the name and telephone number of the caller and forwards this information to Campbell Realty's real estate agents in Indiana. The real estate agents then contact the caller and attempt to sell them a new house. In 2003, Campbell Realty located about five hundred new home buyers, and in 2002 they located between seven hundred and eight hundred new buyers.
The distribution of the Renter's Gazette is of critical importance here. Anywhere between twenty-five thousand and fifty thousand copies of the Renter's Gazette are published each week. Campbell Realty then hires individuals, who work in teams of three to four, to deliver the Renter's Gazette to numerous apartment communities located throughout central Indiana. The Renter's Gazette is delivered once each week between Sunday and Thursday. The delivery teams are only supposed to deliver the Renter's Gazette between 6 p.m. and 10 pm., but tenants have reported that the Renter's Gazette has been delivered after 10 p.m. Individuals do not subscribe to the Renter's Gazette, instead delivery teams leave one copy of the Renter's Gazette at the doorstep of each apartment in the apartment community.
The Apartments brought suit against Campbell Realty alleging that the distribution of the Renter's Gazette constituted a trespass and interference with a business relationship.2 Each of the apartment communities involved here have signs posted on their property stating that no solicitation or trespassing is permitted, and these rules are strictly enforced. The Apartments indicated that on several occasions they have contacted Campbell Realty and told them to stop entering their properties to deliver the Renter's Gazette. Despite these requests, Campbell Realty's delivery teams have continued to enter the properties. Security personnel at some of the apartment communities have asked the delivery teams to leave the property. Sometimes the delivery teams leave, but sometimes they do not.
Unclaimed issues of the Renter's Gazette create litter on the grounds of the apartment communities. Many of the apartment communities must use all of their maintenance personnel to insure that the litter caused by the Renter's Gazettes is picked up. This often causes the maintenance personnel to neglect their other responsibilities. The litter caused by the unclaimed Renter's Gazettes detracts from an apartment community's "curb appeal." "Curb appeal" apparently relates to the appearance of an apartment community as a prospective tenant drives by the community. The cleaner and more tidy an apart*163ment community appears, the more "curb appeal" it has. Due to their decreased curb appeal, the Apartments contend that prospective tenants are discouraged from renting there.
The information in the Renter's Gazette has caused some of the Apartments' tenants to purchase new homes rather than renew their leases. The Apartments have received complaints from their tenants regarding the Renter's Gazette. Some tenants have complained about the mess caused by issues of the Renter's Gazette. Others have complained that they have been awakened by the delivery of the Renter's Gazette late at night. The Apartments have been unable to quantify their losses attributable to the Renter's Gazette.
The Apartments moved for a preliminary injunction to bar Campbell Realty's delivery teams from entering onto their properties. The trial court denied the Apartments' motion for a preliminary injunction and this appeal ensued.
Discussion and Decision
I. Preliminary Injunction
The Apartments first contend that the trial court abused its discretion in denying their motion for a preliminary injunction. We agree.
A. Standard of Review
The decision whether to grant or deny a preliminary injunction rests within the discretion of the trial court, and the seope of appellate review is limited to deciding whether the trial court has clearly abused its discretion. Dicen v. New Sesco, Inc., 806 N.E.2d 833, 841 (Ind.Ct.App.2004). "An abuse of discretion occurs when the trial court's decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances or if the trial court misinterprets the law." Indiana High Sch. Athletic Ass'n Inc., v. Martin, 731 N.E.2d 1, 5 (Ind.Ct.App.2000), trans. denied. When determining whether or not to grant a preliminary injunction, the trial court is required to make special findings of fact and conclusions of law. Barlow v. Sipes, 744 N.E.2d 1, 5 (Ind.Ct.App.2001), trams. denied (citing Ind. Trial Rule 52(A)). When findings and conclusions of law are made, the reviewing court must determine if the trial court's findings support the judgment. Id. We will reverse the trial court's judgment only when it is clearly erroneous. Id. Findings of fact are clearly erroneous when the record lacks evidence or reasonable inferences from the evidence to support them. Id. We will consider the evidence only in the light most favorable to the judgment and construe findings together liberally in favor of the judgment. Id.
The trial court's discretion to grant or deny a preliminary injunction is measured by several factors:
(1) whether the plaintiffs remedies at law are inadequate, thus causing irreparable harm pending the resolution of the substantive action if the injunction does not issue; 2) whether the plaintiff has demonstrated at least a reasonable likelihood of success at trial by establishing a prima facie case; 3) whether the threatened injury to the plaintiff outweighs the threatened harm the grant of the injunction may inflict on the defendant; and 4) whether, by the grant of the preliminary injunction, the public interest would be disserved.
Id. The moving party has the burden of showing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the facts and cireumstances entitle him or her to injunctive relief. Id. The power to issue a preliminary injunetion should be used sparingly, and such relief should not be granted except in rare instances where the law and facts are clearly in the moving party's favor. Id.
*164B. Reasonable Likelihood of Success at Trial
The trial court found several grounds for denying the Apartments' motion for a preliminary injunction. One of those grounds was its conclusion that the Apartments were not likely to succeed at trial in their trespass claim against Campbell Realty. The trial court made the following relevant conclusions of law:
M. Pursuant to Indiana law, a tenant holds a leasehold in the rented premises. The estate of the landlord during the term of the lease is limited to his rever-sionary interest, which ripens into perfect title at the expiration of the lease. Mendenhall et al. v. First New Church Society of Indianapolis, 177 Ind. 336, 98 N.E. 57, 60 (1912).
N. In accordance with Indiana law, unless otherwise agreed to or specifically reserved, everything which belongs to the demised premises or is used with and is appurtenant to the leased premises, and which is reasonably necessary to the beneficial use and enjoyment thereof, will be considered as incidental to the leased premises and thus a right belonging to the tenant. Caito v. Indianapolis Produce Terminal, Inc., 162 Ind.App. 590, 320 N.E.2d 821, 825 (1974). Receiving information in the form of free newspapers and accepting deliveries at the tenant's leased premises are all reasonably necessary to the beneficial use and enjoyment of leased premises. Absent any provision in the plaintiffs' leases or rules to the contrary, Campbell Realty's activity cannot be prohibited by plaintiffs.
O. The fundament [sic]} element of trespass to realty is injury to possession, and right to possession is necessary for the maintenance of the action. State v. Gibson Circuit Court, 246 Ind. 446, 206 N.E.2d 135 (1965); Sigsbee v. Swath wood, 419 N.E.2d 789 (Ind.Ct.App.1981). [The Apartments] thus cannot maintain an action for trespass because a party cannot assert an action for trespass unless the party has exclusive dominion and control over the property alleged to be trespassed upon by [Campbell Realty]. [The Apartments] do not have the common areas of their communities within their exclusive control.
Appellant's Brief at tab 1 pg. 9-10 (emphasis added). The trial court found that the Apartments did not have exclusive control over the common areas because the tenants were allowed to use these areas.
The question of whether a landlord must have exelusive possession of the common areas of an apartment community before he or she may sue for trespass to those areas has not been addressed in this state; therefore, we will consider how courts in other states have resolved this or similar issues. Initially, we note that in a trespass claim a plaintiff must prove that "he was in possession of the land and that 'the defendant entered the land without right'" Indiana Michigan Power Co. v. Runge, 717 N.E.2d 216, 227 (Ind.Ct.App.1999) (quoting Lever Bros. Co. v. Langdoc, 655 N.E.2d 577, 581-82 (Ind.Ct.App.1995)). By our own enunciation of the elements of a trespass claim, a plaintiff need only prove that he or she is in possession, rather than exclusive possession, of the land in question to succeed. But we have also abided by the "traditional rule that an action for trespass to real estate 'cannot be maintained for an invasion of a right of way or easement.'" Runge, 717 N.E.2d at 227 (quoting State ex rel. Green v. Gibson Circuit Court, 246 Ind. 446, 449, 206 N.E.2d 135, 137 (1965)). This traditional rule " 'is based upon the principle that trespass actions are possessory actions and that the right interfered with is the plaintiff's right to the exclusive possession of a *165chattel or land."" Id. The traditional rule then seems to muddy the waters by suggesting that for a plaintiff to prevail in a trespass claim he or she must prove exclusive possession of the land in question.
We do not need to resolve this ambiguity in the case law as we conclude that the Apartments are in exclusive possession of the common areas. As the Michigan Court of Appeals has explained:
[tlhe landlord grants to tenants rights of exclusive possession to designated portions of the property, but the landlord retains exelusive possession of the common areas. The landlord grants to tenants a license to use the common areas of the property. Tenants pay for this license as part of their rent. Therefore, tenants are invitees of the landlord while in the common areas, because the landlord has received a pecuniary benefit for licensing their presence.
Stanley v. Town Square Coop., 203 Mich.App. 143, 512 N.W.2d 51, 54 (1994).
However, the Washington Supreme Court has taken a position contrary to that of the Michigan Court of Appeals. They have stated:
Contrary to appellants' assertion, landlords do not have exclusive authority over the common areas. In order to admit visitors to an apartment, the tenant must necessarily possess the authority to permit guests to pass through the common areas leading to that apartment. The tenant must therefore possess the authority to consent to the visitor's entry into the building itself. For that reason, the authority over common areas is more properly characterized as common to both tenant and landlord, rather than exclusive to the landlord alone.
City of Seattle v. McCready, 124 Wash.2d 300, 307, 877 P.2d 686, 690 (1994).
Although we agree that tenants must have the right to permit visitors to pass through the common areas in order to enter their apartment, we believe the Michigan Court of Appeals has satisfactorily dealt with this by giving tenants a license to use the common areas. The Washington Supreme Court's position that landlords and tenants share authority over common areas also leaves us with the same problem caused by the trial court's decision here. If neither the landlord nor the tenant has exclusive control over common areas then no one would be able to maintain an action for trespass to those areas. We believe that for each piece of property there should be at least one individual with a sufficient interest in that property to maintain an action for trespass to it. This would help to protect the property from such things as waste, and also protect the interests of any individuals who happen to be tenants on the property. We therefore hold that a landlord retains exclusive possession of the common areas of an apartment complex and that the trial court has abused its discretion to the extent that it has held otherwise.3
Regardless of whether or not a landlord has exclusive possession over *166common areas, we he or she has a sufficient possessory interest in the common areas of an apartment complex to bring an action for trespass. The Apartments correctly note that a landlord has a duty to maintain the common areas or areas under his or her control in a safe condition. City of Indianapolis Hous. Auth. v. Pippin, 726 N.E.2d 341, 345 (Ind.Ct.App.2000). Should a landlord breach this duty, he or she could be liable in an action for negligence. The Apart ments argue that because a landlord is burdened with this duty and the threat of potential liability, he or she must retain a sufficient possessory interest in the property to maintain an action for trespass.
The Missouri Court of Appeals has reached a similar conclusion. In Motchan v. STL Cablevision, Inc., 796 S.W.2d 896 (Mo.Ct.App.1990), the landlords owned a four-faraily dwelling that they rented out to tenants. The defendants installed video transmission cables across the property and into the building at the request of one of the tenants. In order to install the cable, the defendants had to drive nails and drill holes into the building. The landlords brought a suit against the defendants for trespass. The defendants moved for summary judgment, arguing that the landlords could not maintain a trespass action because they were not in possession of the property. The trial court granted the defendants' motion for summary judgment. On appeal, the landlords argued that they retained a possessory interest in the common areas that was sufficient to permit them to maintain an action for trespass. The landlords argued that their possessory interest in the common areas was derived from their retention of control over those areas and their duty to repair and keep those areas safe. The Missouri Court of Appeals noted that "[the landlord retains, as to the tenants, possession and control of the common areas." Id. at 899. The court also stated that "[wlhen a tenant is in full possession of the premises, the landlord will have no liability for injuries occurring therein, but when the landlord reserves some area for common use, he may be liable." Id. The court ultimately held that because landlords retain control over and could be subject to lability for injuries occurring in the common areas, they retain sufficient possession of the common areas to support an action for trespass. Id. at 900. We agree with the Missouri Court of Appeals. Because Indiana landlords have a duty to maintain common areas in a safe condition and can be held liable for injuries occurring in those areas, we hold that landlords retain sufficient possession over common areas to maintain an action for trespass. See Colonial Properties, Inc. v. Vogue Cleaners, Inc., 86 F.3d 210, 211 (11th Cir.1996) (concluding that Alabama law is the same as that enunciated by the Missouri Court of Appeals in Motchan ).
We further conclude that public policy supports allowing landlords to maintain an action for trespass to the common areas of their properties. The United States Supreme Court has stated that "one of the essential sticks in the bundle of property rights is the right to exelude others." PruneYard Shopping Ctr. v. Robins, 447 U.S. 74, 82, 100 S.Ct. 2035, 2041, 64 L.Ed.2d 741, 752 (1980). The trial court's denial of the Apartments' motion for a preliminary injunction denies the Apartments their right to exclude trespassers from their property. As with all rights afforded to citizens, our property rights must be closely safeguarded from unwarranted infringements. Here, the denial of the Apartments' property rights is unwarranted.
The Apartments also persuasively argue that the trial court's conclusion will lead to illogical and unjust results. The trial court concluded that the Apartments could *167not maintain an action for trespass against Campbell Realty because they were not in exclusive possession of the common areas of their properties. The Apartments, however, note that by their very nature the common areas are used by both the tenants and the landlord in common. Under the trial court's reasoning, neither the landlord nor the tenant would have exclusive possession of the common areas. If no one has exclusive possession, then no one would have the ability to maintain an action for trespass to the common areas. Such a result would mean that businesses like Campbell Realty would have "unfettered access to all apartment communities in Central Indiana." Appellant's Brief at 20. Perhaps of even greater concern, if landlords cannot maintain an action for trespass to the common areas of their properties, then those common areas, like parking lots, sidewalks, laundry rooms, tennis courts, playgrounds, and swimming pools, "would be open to public use without limit or restriction." Id. This result is not in the public's best interest, as it would have a deleterious effect on the landlord's business and would interfere with the privacy and repose that tenants expect from what is their home.
We therefore hold that landlords do have a sufficient possessory interest in the common areas of their properties to maintain an action for trespass to those areas. The trial court abused its discretion in concluding that the Apartments did not demonstrate a reasonable likelihood of success at trial on their trespass claim because the Apartments have made a prima facie showing that they are in possession of the common areas of their properties and because Campbell Realty has indisputably entered the Apartments' land without right.4
C. Irreparable Harm
The trial court also denied the Apartments' motion for a preliminary injunction because it found that they had failed to establish an irreparable injury. The trial court found that the Apartments had only shown they would suffer a mere economic injury, which it concluded did not constitute irreparable harm.
At the hearing on the Apartments' motion for a preliminary injunction, the Apartments introduced several pieces of evidence regarding the harm they suffered. The Apartments established that on a weekly basis agents of Campbell Realty were entering their property uninvited to deliver the Renter's Gazette. Evidence was introduced that the Apartments had to use all of their grounds personnel and maintenance staff to clean up the mess caused by unclaimed issues of the Renter's Gazette. The Apartments testified that the litter caused by the Renter's Gazettes diminished their "curb appeal" and, thus, discouraged potential future tenants from living there. Evidence was also presented that some tenants were not renewing their leases and had instead decided to buy a *168new home due to information they had received in the Renter's Gazette.
The Apartments have presented sufficient evidence of irreparable harm. Campbell Realty's delivery teams enter the Apartments' properties on a weekly basis. This constitutes a continuing trespass. "A trial court may issue an injunetion in order to prevent a continued trespass." Ballard v. Harman, 737 N.E.2d 411, 417 (Ind.Ct.App.2000). The Apartments have also introduced evidence that they have suffered economic losses. The trial court and Campbell Realty make much of the fact that the Apartments cannot quantify these losses, but this is not required at this stage of the proceedings. See Robert's Hair Designers, Inc. v. Pearson, 780 N.E.2d 858, 865 (Ind.Ct.App.2002). If the Apartments "could point to a specific dollar amount of losses, then a remedy at law would be sufficient." Id. The trial court abused its discretion by denying the Apartments motion for a preliminary injunction because they had failed to establish irreparable harm.5, 6
II. Prior Restraint
The Apartments next argue that the trial court abused its discretion in denying their motion for a preliminary injunction by finding the injunction sought by the Apartments would constitute an impermissible prior restraint. We agree.
We begin by considering whether the injunction sought by the Apartments would violate either the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or Article I, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution. The First Amendment, made applicable to the States through the Fourteenth Amendment, provides that "Congress shall make no law ... abridging the freedom of speech...." Article I, Seetion 9 of the Indiana Constitution states that "[nlo law shall be passed, restraining the free interchange of thought and opinion, or restricting the right to speak, write, or print, freely, on any subject whatever." One of the chief purposes of the First Amendment is " 'to prevent previous restraints upon publication.'" Barlow, 744 N.E.2d at 9 (quoting Near v. Minnesota, 283 U.S. 697, 713, 51 S.Ct. 625, 75 L.Ed. 1357 (1931)). Thus if the injunction sought *169by the Apartments is a prior restraint, we will not consider it a per se violation of the First Amendment, but it will come before us with a heavy presumption that it is constitutionally invalid. Barlow, 744 N.E.2d at 9.
A prior restraint "describes orders forbidding certain communications that are issued before the communications occur." Id. "Restraining orders and injunctions that forbid future speech activities are classic examples of prior restraints." Mishler v. MAC Sys., Inc., 771 N.E.2d 92, 95 (Ind.Ct.App.2002). "The special vice of a prior restraint is that communication is suppressed, either directly or by inducing excessive caution in the speaker, before an adequate determination that it is unprotected by the First Amendment." Barlow, 744 N.E.2d at 9. However, the protections that the First Amendment and Article I, Section 9 afford against prior restraints are not triggered unless there is a state action. As Campbell Realty points out, the issuance of a preliminary injunction by the trial court would constitute a state action triggering the protections of both the First Amendment and Article I, Section 9. Id. at 10; Mishler, 771 N.E.2d at 97.7
Although both the First Amendment and Article I, Section 9 are implicated here, we do not believe that the preliminary injunction sought by the Apartments is an impermissible prior restraint. The Apartments have only asked the trial court to enjoin Campbell Realty's agents from trespassing on their private properties. The injunction sought by the Apartments would not bar Campbell Realty from publishing or distributing the Renter's Gazette. Campbell Realty would be free to distribute the Renter's Gazette to all of the Apartments' tenants through the mail. They could also distribute the Renter's Gazette as a free publication at the various news racks located at grocery stores, drug stores, gas stations, restaurants, and along some city streets. Some of the apartment communities indicated that they allow distributors of free publications to leave copies of their publications in the complex's management office where tenants could pick them up if they so desired. With proper approval, copies of the Renter's Gazette could be left here as well. Therefore, we hold that the preliminary injunetion sought by the Apartments is not an impermissible prior restraint under either the First Amendment or Article 1, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution.8
*170The trial court also denied the Apartments' motion for a preliminary injunction because the injunction would interfere with the tenants' right to receive the Renter's Gazette.: We agree with the trial court that the tenants have a First Amendment right to receive information and ideas. Virginia State Bd. of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, Inc., 425 U.S. 748, 757, 96 S.Ct. 1817, 1823, 48 L.Ed.2d 346, 355 (1976) (quoting Kleindienst v. Mandel, 408 U.S. 753, 762-63, 92 S.Ct. 2576, 2581, 33 L.Ed.2d 683, 691-92 (1972)). However, we do not believe that the preliminary injunction sought by the Apartments interferes with the tenants' First Amendment rights. Although the preliminary injunction would bar Campbell Realty's delivery teams from trespassing on the Apartments' properties, it would not bar Campbell Realty from publishing and distributing the Renter's Gazette. Tenants would be free to obtain a copy of the Renter's Gazette at any location where Campbell Realty chooses, and is permitted, to distribute it.
We therefore hold that the injunction would not constitute an impermissible pri- or restraint, and the trial court abused its discretion by denying the Apartments' motion for a preliminary injunction.
Conclusion
The trial court abused its discretion in denying the Apartments' motion for a preliminary injunction because landlords do have a sufficient possessory interest in the common areas of their properties to maintain an action for trespass to those areas and because the Apartments have presented sufficient evidence that they will suffer irreparable harm if a preliminary injunetion is not granted. We also hold that the preliminary injunction sought by the Apartments will not constitute an impermissible prior restraint under either the First Amendment or Article I, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution. The trial court's denial of the Apartments' motion for a preliminary injunction is therefore reversed, and we remand the case to the trial court.
Reversed and remanded.
KIRSCH, C.J., concurs.
BAKER, J., dissents with opinion.
. Campbell Realty states in their brief that ninety-seven apartment communities are involved in this case, whereas the Apartments indicate that only ninety-six communities are involved. We will use the fumber ninety-six, in the hope that counsel for the Apartments knows the exact number of clients that he or she represents.
. The Apartmenis' claim of interference with a business relationship is not at issue here.
. In his dissent, Judge Baker expresses his concern that by giving landlords the right to exclusive possession of the common areas of an apartment building we are giving landlords the right to bar anyone of their choosing, not just solicitors, from the premises. We disagree. We believe that by giving tenants a license to use the common areas of an apartment building, tenants are sufficiently protected from this sort of behavior by a landlord. Furthermore, we believe that such behavior by a landlord is not in the landlord's best interest. If landlords suddenly decided to start excluding both invited and uninvited guests from their property, many potential tenants would choose not to live in such a complex and current tenants might choose not to renew their leases.
. We believe it is indisputable that Campbell Realty's delivery teams have entered the Apartments' properties without right and are therefore trespassers. They did not enter any of the apartment communities pursuant to an invitation because no one has subscribed to the Renter's Gazette, and the managers of the apartment communities have repeatedly told them not to enter the property. The trial court seems to compare Campbell Realty's delivery teams to other delivery persons like Indianapolis Star carriers, pizza delivery persons, or Federal Express drivers. We believe that this is a faulty comparison. Tenants either expressly or impliedly invite onto an apartment community's grounds Indianapolis Star carriers, pizza delivery persons, and Federal Express drivers. There is no indication that a tenant has either expressly or impliedly invited Campbell Realty's delivery teams onto the grounds of any of the apartment communities involved here.
. Judge Baker in his dissent argues that the Apartments have not shown that they have suffered irreparable harm from the distribution of the Renter's Gazette. He contends that the liter caused by unclaimed issues of the Renter's Gazette, and the loss of business suffered by the Apartments is not sufficient evidence of an irreparable harm. However, Judge Baker ignores the fact the Campbell Realty's agents have been entering the Apartments' properties on a weekly basis for several years. This constitutes a continuing trespass, which alone permits a trial court to to issue an injunction. See Ballard, 737 N.E.2d at 417.
. We have yet to analyze two of the factors that the Apartments must prove to be entitled to a preliminary injunction. One factor concerns whether the grant of a preliminary injunction would be beneficial to the public interest. We briefly touched upon this in section I.B. above. We conclude that the preliminary injunction sought here would be beneficial to the public interest as it would protect property rights and maintain the serenity and privacy of tenants' homes. We also conclude that the threatened injury to the Apartments outweighs the potential injury to Campbell Realty caused by the injunction. The Apartments are injured by Campbell Realty's continued trespasses onto their property. The mess caused by the Renter's Gazettes reduces the value and attractiveness of the Apartments' properties and discourages prospective tenants from wanting to live there. The Renters Gazette has also caused current tenants to not renew their leases. The preliminary injunction would only bar Campbell Realty from entering onto the Apartments' properties and would not bar them from continuing to publish and distribute the Renter's Gazette.
. Campbell Realty also argues that the Apartments' employment of off-duty police officers as security personnel to enforce their no trespassing rules constitutes a state action. We do not reach this argument as we find that the trial court's issuance of a preliminary injunction would constitute a state action.
. Judge Baker argues that Mishler indicates that the issuance of an injunction here would be a prior restraint under both the federal Constitution and the Indiana Constitution. We find Mishler distinguishable. In Mishler, the plaintiffs were exercising their right to speak on their own private property. Here, Campbell Realty wishes to trespass onto private property to exercise its speech rights. Furthermore, in Lloyd Corp., Ltd. v. Tanner, 407 U.S. 551, 568, 92 S.Ct. 2219, 2228, 33 L.Ed.2d 131, 142 (1972), the United States Supreme Court stated that "this Court has never held that a trespasser or an uninvited guest may exercise general rights of free speech on property privately owned and used nondiscriminatorily for private purposes only." The Court further stated that "[it would be an unwarranted infringement of property rights to require [the owners of a shopping mall] to yield to the exercise of First Amendment rights under circumstances where adequate alternative avenues of communication exist. Such an accommodation would diminish property rights without significantly enhancing the asserted right of free speech." 407 U.S. at 566, 92 S.Ct. at 2228, 33 L.Ed.2d at 141-42. Here, we find that there is no prior restraint because Campbell *170Realty has ample adequate alternative avenues for it to distribute the Renter's Gazette.

=== CASE 9741459 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:55:58.341351+00 ===

BAKER, Judge,
dissenting.
I understand that the Apartments find themselves in an aggravating situation-having to dedicate extra employee time to cleaning up the Renter's Gazette from its properties, losing tenants who buy a home as a result of information contained in the Renter's Gazette, and fearing a loss of prospective tenants who see the littered properties and choose not to rent an apartment. But I believe that granting the requested preliminary injunction gives landlords an unprecedented right to bar whomever they choose from their properties, and I also believe that the injunction violates Campbell Realty's and the tenants' rights under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution. Therefore, I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion.
I. Trespass
The majority concludes that a landlord has the right to exclusive possession of the common areas of its apartment building such that it may bring an action for trespass. It further concludes that while a tenant has the right to exclusive possession of her apartment, she has only a license to use the common areas of her apartment building, and is an invitee of the landlord while in the common areas. I *171agree that a landlord has a possessory interest in common areas to the extent that needs to repair and maintain them, see City of Indianapolis Hous. Auth. v. Pippin, 726 N.E.2d 341, 345 (Ind.Ct.App.2000), but I respectfully disagree that its interest goes any farther than that.
To hold that a landlord has the right to exclusive possession of the common areas of an apartment building is tantamount to the notion that a landlord has the right to bar anyone of its choosing-not just solicitors-from the premises. While a tenant may agree to such a condition if it is included in her lease, I believe it is unwise for the judiciary to read that condition into a contract-especially where, as here, the already-executed lease governing the landlord-tenant relationship contains no such provision.
Although the Apartments and the majority opinion attempt to distinguish between invited guests-such as The Indianapolis Star and food delivery people- and non-invited guests-such as the Renter's Gazette delivery people-giving landlords the right to exclusive possession of common areas means that they may bar whomever they choose from the premises-including friends and other guests of tenants. Moreover, even if I accept the distinction between invitees and non-invitees for argument's sake, there is evidence in the record that not only did some tenants have no objection to the delivery of the Renter's Gazette, they even decided to purchase a new home based on the information contained therein. Appellant's App. p. 17. Indeed, this loss of business is inarguably a significant-and troublingly content-based-component of the Apartments' problem with the newspaper. I respectfully disagree with the majority's holding that landlords have the right to exclusive possession of common areas, therefore, because I believe that this holding will have far-reaching and unintended implications for the landlord-tenant relationship.
II. Irreparable Harm
I also disagree with the conclusion that the Apartments have shown irreparable harm as a result of the distribution of the Renter's Gazette: There are two ways in which the Apartments attempt to show irreparable harm. The first, concerning litter from the Renter's Gazette blowing around the Apartments' properties, does not qualify for a preliminary injunction because money damages would suffice to remedy this harm. The second, involving a loss of business as a result of the decision of certain tenants to buy a home after reading the Renter's Gazette, is a content-based argument that causes the injunction to violate the United States and Indiana Constitutions.
A. Litter
The Apartments introduced evidence of added clean-up costs, unsightly appearance, and security concerns caused by unclaimed issues of the Renter's Gazette. I agree that this evidence shows that the Apartments have been harmed by the distribution of the Renter's Gazette, but I disagree that it shows irreparable harm such that an injunction is appropriate relief. Initially, the record does not appear to reveal whether the Renter's Gazette is the only printed material that blows around and leaves litter on the premises. It may be that the Apartments have similar problems with other printed material, such as The Indianapolis Star and USA Today. Moreover, it would not be difficult to quantify the number of employees, the number of hours, and the salary per hour of each employee, which is regularly required to clean up the Renter's Gazette litter. Because it is quantifiable, money damages are adequate, and an injunction is inappropriate.
*172B. First Amendment
The Apartments also argue that they may keep the Renter's Gazette from their tenants because it has damaged the Apartments' business. To wit, the Apartments point to the loss of long-time tenants who decided to buy a home after reading the Renter's Gazette, Appellant's Br. p. 7, and to some of the content in the Renter's Gazette that is "calculated to cause residents to look unfavorably on the apartment communities and their management." Id. p. 4. The majority agrees, highlighting evidence that "some tenants were not renewing their leases and had instead decided to buy a new home due to information they had received in the Renter's Gazette." Slip op. p. 14. Based on this argument, I believe that the injunction violates the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 9 of the Indiana Constitution. See Mishler v. MAC Sys., Inc., 771 N.E.2d 92, 97 (Ind.Ct.App.2002) (holding that trial court's issuance of an injunction is state action sufficient to implicate Article I, Section 9); Barlow v. Sipes, 744 N.E.2d 1, 10 (Ind.Ct.App.2001) (same, with respect to First Amendment of U.S. Constitution).
In my opinion, enjoining the distribution of the Renter's Gazette is an impermissible prior restraint. While the Apartments point to Mishler as support for their argument that because Campbell Realty could have distributed the Renter's Gazeilte in other ways and in other places an injuncetion would not be a prior restraint, in fact Mishier stands for the opposite conclusion. The Mishler court noted that the injunetion in that case was an impermissible prior restraint because the plaintiffs were "prevented from exercising their state constitutional right to speak 'on any subject whatever' by the means they deemed most appropriate ...." TTL N.E.2d at 98 (emphasis added). The Mishlers could have shared their opinion by writing a letter to the editor, creating and mailing a newsletter to people in the community, or organizing a protest, but because the injunction prevented them from sharing their opinion by the means they deemed most appropriate-via a sign in their yard-it was an impermissible prior restraint.
Similarly, while it is true, as pointed out by the majority, that Campbell Realty would be free to distribute the Renter's Gazette in other venues such as "grocery stores, drug stores, gas stations, restaurants, and along some city streets," slip op. p. 16, that does not change the fact that Campbell Realty has the right to express itself by the means it deems most appropriate, which appears to be distribution directly to the Apartments' tenants. An injunction preventing Campbell Realty from doing so amounts to an impermissible prior restraint.
Moreover, as acknowledged by the majority, the tenants have a right, pursuant to the First Amendment, to receive information and ideas. Op. at p. 170. I disagree with the majority's conclusion that because Campbell Realty could still publish and distribute the Renter's Gazette in other locations, the preliminary injunction would not interfere with this right. Indeed, a preliminary injunction barring the distribution of the Renter's Gazette directly to the tenants because the Apartments are troubled by its content is a fundamental and impermissible violation of the tenants' right to receive that information, and I believe that it violates the First Amendment and Article I, Section 9.
Therefore, I would affirm the trial court's denial of the preliminary injunction.

=== CASE 9741460 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:56:00.454491+00 ===

JUSTICE THEIS delivered the opinion of the court: ■ Following a bench trial, defendant Paul Borash was convicted of child pornography and sentenced to six years in prison. On appeal, he contends that (1) he was not proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt where the statute requires proof of an exhibition of the “unclothed” genitals (720 ILCS 5/11 — 20.1(a)(l)(vii) (West 2000)), and the evidence submitted demonstrated the victim was clothed; (2) the statute violates the proportionate penalties clause of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 11); (3) he was denied his right to a fair and impartial judge; and (4) the trial court erred in requiring him to forfeit his camera. For the following reasons, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court in part and vacate in part. BACKGROUND The victim, K.N., an 11-year-old girl, testified that she was born on September 8, 1990, that she was going into the sixth grade and lived with her mother in Chicago. Her mother, M.K., had been dating defendant for five years. During that time, defendant had attended the victim’s birthday parties and was familiar with the victim and was aware of her age. On June 9, 2000, M.K. asked defendant to watch the victim overnight. Prior to that time, the victim had never spent the night alone with defendant. While at defendant’s home, defendant asked the victim to put on some nude-colored stockings and her mother’s polka-dot skirt. When the victim asked defendant if she should put on underwear, he told her “no.” Defendant then told the victim to sit on a chair with one leg over the arm of the chair. The victim testified that her “privates” were showing. He then told the victim to sit there while he took pictures of her. The victim further testified that defendant asked her to get on the floor on her hands and knees and he photographed her from behind. He also photographed her while on the couch. The victim identified People’s Exhibits 1 through 18 as the photographs defendant took of her. After taking the photographs, defendant brought the film to a Chicago drugstore at Clark and Belmont Street to be developed. Defendant identified himself on the film envelope as “Franklin.” After the film was sent to the development laboratory for processing, Penny McCarthy, a customer service representative for the lab, found the photographs to be sexually explicit and turned them over to the Illinois State Police, who turned them over to the Chicago police department. Officer Carol Mroczkowski reviewed the photographs with Assistant State’s Attorney Patti Ehsaei, and Ehsaei determined that they constituted child pornography. Officer Mroczkowski subsequently contacted Janet Chattin, the supervisor of the drugstore’s camera department, and informed her that film that had been dropped off at her store contained child pornography. Chattin testified that she informed Officer Mroczkowski that while the name on the envelope was “Franklin,” she had been receiving telephone calls from a regular customer that she knew by defendant’s name. He had been calling every day looking for the photographs. Officer Mroczkowski told Chat-tin that if defendant called again, inform him that the pictures were lost and that she would contact him once they were located. On June 21, 2000, Officer Mroczkowski and other members of her unit set up a surveillance at the drugstore. On June 23, 2000, defendant entered the drugstore and went directly to the camera counter. Officer Mroczkowski observed defendant sign a piece of paper, receive the photographs and walk away from the counter. Defendant was then arrested and the photographs were seized. After he was advised of his rights and after he signed a waiver of rights form, he acknowledged that he took the photographs and identified the victim depicted in the photographs. Defendant then gave consent to search his home and vehicle. Officers recovered the polka-dot skirt that the victim wore in the photographs, a pair of nude-colored stockings, and boxes of developed photographs from defendant’s home. The officers also recovered a camera, a camera case, and two rolls of undeveloped film in defendant’s vehicle. Defendant subsequently gave a handwritten statement to ASA Ehsaei. Therein, defendant stated that he was giving his statement freely and voluntarily and that no threats or promises were made to him. Defendant further stated that he was 40 years old, that he lived in Chicago and completed two years of college and could read and write English. He dated the victim’s mother for four years and during that time he also spent time with the victim. On June 9, 2000, while at his home, he asked the victim to change into nude-colored stockings and a black and white polka-dot skirt. The victim kept her own shirt on. Defendant then told the victim not to put on her underwear because they were going to go swimming after he took pictures of her. He told the victim to sit on a chair and pose with her legs open in order for him to see her vagina. He asked and physically helped the victim to pose in numerous other positions all exposing her vagina and anus. He took photographs of the victim in each of these positions exposing her vagina and anus so that he could become aroused and masturbate. Defendant further stated that on June 24, 2000, he took the roll of film to the drugstore located at Clark and Belmont, and used the false name of “Franklin” when he dropped off the film. He further stated that he knew the victim was only nine years old, that it was wrong for him to take the pictures of her exposed vagina and anus, and that he had no intention of performing any sexual act with the victim. Defendant then identified all of the pictures that he took of the victim on June 9, 2000. The photographs taken by defendant were admitted into evidence. It is undisputed that the photographs depict the victim in close-up shots of her vagina or buttocks, some with her legs spread open or on her hands and knees or lying on her back. In these photographs, the victim is wearing a T-shirt, her mother’s skirt, and a pair of nude-colored stockings that are completely sheer in the crotch area and do not have any type of panel. The victim’s vagina and buttocks are clearly visible through the nude stockings. The trial judge noted that she could clearly see through the stockings. The trial judge found defendant guilty of child pornography. His motion for a new trial was denied and he was sentenced to six years in prison. Defendant’s motion for reconsideration of sentence and motion for return of his camera were also denied. He filed a timely appeal. ANALYSIS Defendant contends that he was not proven guilty of child pornography beyond a reasonable doubt because the statute requires proof of an “exhibition of the unclothed genitals” (720 ILCS 5/11— 20.1(a)(l)(vii) (West 2000)), and the victim was fully clothed in all of the photographs submitted at trial as evidence of the offense. Specifically, defendant argues that the statute makes no provision for depictions of a child dressed in garments that are transparent, and here the victim was wearing nude-colored stockings. In addressing the sufficiency of the evidence to support a criminal conviction, the reviewing court determines whether, after viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, any rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. People v. Lamborn, 185 Ill. 2d 585, 590, 708 N.E.2d 350, 353-54 (1999). Here, however, to the extent we are asked to interpret the meaning of the statutory term “unclothed” (720 ILCS 5/11 — 20.1(a)(l)(vii) (West 2000)), we apply the de novo standard of review to that determination. Lamborn, 185 Ill. 2d at 590, 708 N.E.2d at 354.  A person commits the offense of child pornography in Illinois by photographing any child whom the person knows or reasonably should know to be under the age of 18 where such child is “depicted or portrayed in any pose, posture or setting involving a lewd exhibition of the unclothed, genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or *** breast of the child or other person[.]” (Emphasis added.) 720 ILCS 5/11 — 20.1(a)(l)(vii) (West 2000). The term “unclothed” is not defined by the statute. When a statute does not define a term, the court will assume that the word has its ordinary and popularly understood meaning. People v. Bailey, 167 Ill. 2d 210, 229, 657 N.E.2d 953, 962 (1995). The court should also consider the legislative intent and the context in which the language is used. In re Detention of Lieberman, 201 Ill. 2d 300, 308, 776 N.E.2d 218, 223 (2002). In determining the intent of the legislature, the court may properly consider not only the language of the statute, but also the reason and necessity for the law, the evils sought to be remedied, and the purpose to be achieved. Lieberman, 201 Ill. 2d at 308, 776 N.E.2d at 223. Webster’s dictionary defines the term “unclothed” to mean “not clothed” or “naked.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 2485 (1986). The word “clothe” is further defined as “to cover,” which includes the meaning to “conceal (one’s body or a part of it) from view.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 428, 524 (1986). We also consider that the word “unclothed” as utilized in the statute is an adjective modifying the words “genitals” and “buttocks.” Thus, the question for our review is not whether the victim was unclothed generally, but whether the photographs depict the victim with her genitals or buttocks concealed from view.  Here, it is undisputed that while the victim is wearing stockings, they are completely transparent and the vagina is clearly visible and exposed. Thus, despite the stockings, where the photographs do not conceal the vagina from view, a rational trier of fact could have found beyond a reasonable doubt that the photographs depict the “unclothed genitals.” (Emphasis added.) 720 ILCS 5/11 — 20.1(a)(l)(vii) (West 2000). Furthermore, we find that this definition fits within the child protection purpose of the statute and gives the word “unclothed” an appropriate meaning when placed in the context of the statutory requirement of a “lewd exhibition.” To hold that the term “unclothed” as applied here must require proof that the victim was completely without clothes would negate the import of the statute and could not have been what the legislature intended. Nevertheless, even applying defendant’s chosen definition of “unclothed,” as meaning “naked,” we reach the same conclusion. “Naked” may be defined as “inadequately or partially clothed especially] so as to be socially unacceptable.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1500 (1986). This definition of “naked” has been applied in similar contexts as a proper definition given the purpose of the particular statute at issue. See, e.g., People v. Foster, 838 S.W.2d 60, 68 (Mo. App. 1992) (in context of child abuse statute, court held “this definition fits comfortably within the purpose of the statute, and thus, although not necessarily the complete statutory definition, it is a proper and acceptable definition”). As applied here, a rational trier of fact could have found that the photographs reveal that the victim’s genitals were inadequately clothed so as to be socially unacceptable. Defendant next contends that the sentence imposed for child pornography violates the proportionate penalties clause when compared to the sentence imposed for aggravated criminal sexual abuse. A statute is presumed to be constitutional, and the party challenging a statute bears the burden of establishing its invalidity. People v. Graves, 207 Ill. 2d 478, 482, 800 N.E.2d 790, 792 (2003). This court has an obligation to construe a statute in such a manner as to uphold its constitutionality if it is reasonable to do so. Whether the statute is constitutional will be reviewed de novo. Graves, 207 Ill. 2d at 482, 800 N.E.2d at 792.  Article I, section 11, of the Illinois Constitution, commonly referred to as the proportionate penalties clause, provides in pertinent part that “[a]ll penalties shall be determined *** according to the seriousness of the offense.” Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 11. Our supreme court has held that the proportionate penalties clause can be violated in one of three instances, namely, where (1) the penalty for an offense is cruel, degrading, or so completely disproportionate to the offense for which it is imposed as to shock the moral sense of the community; (2) similar offenses are compared and conduct that creates a less serious threat to public health and safety is punished more severely; and (3) the penalties imposed for identical offenses differ. People v. Moss, 206 Ill. 2d 503, 522, 795 N.E.2d 208, 220 (2003).  In the present case, defendant asserts a violation of the second type. When a defendant raises a challenge of this type, the court must apply a two-step cross-comparison analysis of the two statutes. See People v. Hill, 199 Ill. 2d 440, 455, 771 N.E.2d 374, 383 (2002). First, the court must compare the offenses and determine whether they are sufficiently distinct such that proportionality review is inappropriate. If the offenses do not have common or related purposes, a comparative proportionality review is inappropriate; when legislation defining criminal offenses is enacted for different purposes, we will presume that the legislature considered different factors in determining the appropriate penalties for the offenses and will defer to its judgment in this regard. If, however, the purposes of the two offenses are related, the court must then determine whether the offense with the harsher penalty is more serious than the offense with the lesser penalty. Moss, 206 Ill. 2d at 523, 795 N.E.2d at 221; Hill, 199 Ill. 2d at 454, 771 N.E.2d at 383. Accordingly, we must first determine whether the legislature had a common or related purpose when enacting the child pornography and aggravated criminal sexual abuse statutes. Pursuant to subsection (a)(4) of the child pornography statute, a person commits the crime of child pornography if he or she entices or solicits a child under the age of 18 to appear in any photograph in which the child is depicted or portrayed in any setting involving a lewd exhibition of the unclothed genitals. 720 ILCS 5/11 — 20.1(a)(4) (West 2000). The penalty imposed for such an offense is a Class 1 felony with a mandatory minimum fine of $2,000 and is subject to a sentence of 4 to 15 years in prison. 720 ILCS 5/11 — 20.1(c) (West 2000); 730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—1(a)(4) (West 2000). A person commits the crime of aggravated criminal sexual abuse if the defendant is over the age of 17 and (1) commits an act of sexual conduct with a child under the age of 13; or (2) uses or threatens force to commit an act of sexual conduct with a child between 13 and 17 years old; or (3) if five or more years older than the victim, commits either an act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct with a child between 13 and 17 years old. 720 ILCS 5/12 — 16(c)(1), 12 — 16(d) (West 2000). “Sexual conduct” is defined as “any intentional or knowing touching or fondling by the victim or the accused, either directly or through clothing, of *** any part of the body of a child under 13 years of age *** for the purpose of sexual gratification or arousal of the victim or the accused.” 720 ILCS 5/12 — 12(e) (West 2000). The penalty imposed for such an offense is a Class 2 felony, subject to a sentence of three to seven years in prison. 720 ILCS 5/12 — 16(g) (West 2000); 730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—1(a)(5) (West 2000). Defendant argues that subsection (a)(4) of the child pornography statute shares a common statutory purpose with subsections (c)(1) and (d) of the aggravated criminal sexual abuse statute because all three provisions aim to protect children from sexual exploitation. The legislature has not explicitly stated its purpose in enacting these statutes; however, the plain language of the statute is the best indicator of legislative intent. People v. Koppa, 184 Ill. 2d 159, 169, 703 N.E.2d 91, 97 (1998). It is apparent on the face of the statute that the legislature’s purpose in enacting subsection (a)(4) was to ultimately prevent the production, dissemination and possession of sexually explicit materials that depict and exploit children. See People v. Geever, 122 Ill. 2d 313, 326 (1988) (purpose of the statute is to prevent the exploitation of children by “drying up” the market for child pornography).  Whereas, essential to the aggravated criminal sexual abuse statute is the act of sexual conduct or sexual penetration. People v. Novak, 163 Ill. 2d 93, 115, 643 N.E.2d 762, 773 (1994). Thus, the focus of subsections (c)(1) and (d) is to “proscribe sexual contact between the unwary minor and the unscrupulous elder.” People v. Gann, 141 Ill. App. 3d 34, 35, 489 N.E.2d 924, 925 (1986). See also People v. Reed, 148 Ill. 2d 1, 9, 591 N.E.2d 455, 458 (1992) (purpose of section 12— 16(d) of the aggravated criminal sexual abuse statute is to protect children “from the consequences of premature sexual experiences”). While both statutes seek to protect children from sexual exploitation, the focus of subsection (a)(4) of the child pornography statute is on eradicating the materials that record the sexual exploitation rather than on prohibiting the inappropriate contact by sex offenders. Accordingly, because the statutes have distinct purposes, we must presume that the legislature considered different factors in establishing the penalties for these offenses and defer to its judgment. People v. Lombardi, 184 Ill. 2d 462, 480, 705 N.E.2d 91, 101 (1998). Therefore, a comparative proportionality analysis is not appropriate. Nevertheless, even if we were to construe the statutes as having a common statutory purpose, we find that defendant has not met his burden of establishing that the offense with the harsher penalty is less serious than the offense with the lesser penalty. In New York v. Ferber, 458 U.S. 747, 73 L. Ed. 2d 1113, 102 S. Ct. 3348 (1982), the United States Supreme Court specifically noted that child pornography is a more serious crime than sexual abuse: “ ‘[P]ornography poses an even greater threat to the child victim than does sexual abuse or prostitution. Because the child’s actions are reduced to a recording, the pornography may haunt him in future years, long after the original misdeed took place. A child who has posed for a camera must go through life knowing that the recording is circulating within the mass distribution system for child pornography.’ ” New York v. Ferber, 458 U.S. at 759 n.10, 73 L. Ed. 2d at 1124 n.10, 102 S. Ct. at 3355 n.10, quoting D. Shouvlin, Preventing the Sexual Exploitation of Children: A Model Act, 17 Wake Forest L. Rev. 535, 545 (1981). The Court in Ferber also observed “[i]n recent years, the exploitive use of children in the production of pornography has become a serious national problem” (Ferber, 458 U.S. at 749, 73 L. Ed. 2d at 1117, 102 S. Ct. at 3350) and that child pornography has become a highly organized, multimillion dollar industry operating on a nationwide scale (Ferber, 458 U.S. at 749 n.1, 73 L. Ed. 2d at 1117. n.l, 102 S. Ct. at 3350 n.1). Additionally, the Supreme Court has noted that child pornography is often used as a tool to seduce children who are otherwise reluctant to engage in sexual conduct. Osborne v. Ohio, 495 U.S. 103, 112 n.7, 109 L. Ed. 2d 98, 110 n.7, 110 S. Ct. 1691, 1697 n.7 (1990). Thus, the legislature has perceived a need to enact a more stringent penalty provision under subsection (a)(4) of the child pornography statute to halt the increase in the commission of the offense and to deter the long-term effects of child pornography on the child victims. Accordingly, where it cannot be said that subsections (c)(1) and (d) of the aggravated criminal sexual abuse statute (720 ILCS 5/12 — 16(c)(1), (d) (West 2000)) are more serious offenses than subsection (a)(4) of the child pornography statute (720 ILCS 5/11— 20.1(a)(4) (West 2000)), there is no violation of the proportionate penalties clause of the Illinois Constitution.  Defendant next contends that he was denied his right to trial before a fair and impartial judge where, in ruling on his motion for a directed finding of not guilty, the trial judge improperly prejudged defendant’s guilt. While defendant failed to raise this issue at trial or in a posttrial motion, when the claimed error involves judicial conduct, “the practical difficulties involved in objecting to the trial court’s conduct compel a less rigid application of the waiver rule.” People v. Stevens, 338 Ill. App. 3d 806, 810, 790 N.E.2d 52, 55 (2003). Accordingly, we will address the merits of defendant’s claim. After the State rested its case, defendant made a motion for a directed finding and the trial court denied that motion without comment on the record. Defendant then rested without presenting any evidence and the parties proceeded to closing arguments. Defendant stated that his closing argument would not be “directed toward the evidence. I think we can pretty much agree to the evidence that was presented. My argument goes to the statutory consequence of the charges here ***.” After closing arguments, the trial court stated in pertinent part: “Certainly at the time the State rested their case in chief when counsel made a motion for directed verdict I had made a decision the State had proved their case beyond a reasonable doubt, otherwise I would have directed them out. At the close of all of the evidence, again my position has not changed. The charge is child pornography. The State has proven the charge ***.” Defendant cites People v. Connolly, 322 Ill. App. 3d 905, 915-16, 751 N.E.2d 1219, 1227 (2001), in support of his argument that the trial judge prejudged his guilt. In Connolly, the defendant argued that, upon a motion for a finding of not guilty at the close of the State’s case in a bench trial, the State should have a higher burden of proof than in a jury trial. Defendant argued that the trial court should enter a finding of not guilty when the evidence does not establish defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt without considering the evidence in a light most favorable to the State. Connolly, 322 Ill. App. 3d at 914, 751 N.E.2d at 1226-27. The court rejected defendant’s argument and instead reaffirmed the standard to be applied by the trial court in ruling on a defendant’s motion for a directed finding in a bench trial or jury trial. The court held that a motion for a directed verdict of not guilty asks “whether the State’s evidence could support a verdict of guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, not whether the evidence does in fact support that verdict.” (Emphasis in original.) Connolly, 322 Ill. App. 3d at 915, 751 N.E.2d at 1227. In essence, defendant now makes the opposite argument from the defendant in Connolly, maintaining that it was error for the trial judge to apply a higher burden of proof on the State than is required under Connolly. The record in the present case reveals that, in testing the constitutional sufficiency of the evidence as a matter of law, the trial judge found that there was more than enough evidence to support a guilty verdict. After closing arguments, she rendered her findings as a trier of fact, detailing her observations and conclusions about the content of the photographs under an objective standard. Merely finding at the close of the State’s case that the State had more than met its burden of proof, as a matter of law, did not strip defendant of his presumption of innocence and does not alone constitute evidence of an unfair and partial fact finder. We further find defendant’s cited case of People v. Stevens, 338 Ill. App. 3d 806, 790 N.E.2d 52 (2003), distinguishable where the court held that the defendant was denied his fundamental right to make a proper closing argument. Here, defendant was given a full opportunity to make an extensive closing argument without interruption. Indeed, defendant stated that his closing argument would not be “directed toward the evidence. I think we can pretty much agree to the evidence that was presented. My argument goes to the statutory consequence of the charges here ***.” Accordingly, where defense counsel did not raise any disputed issues of fact in closing, there is no evidence that the trial court ultimately prejudged defendant before all of the disputed issues of fact were presented. For all of the foregoing reasons, we find no error.  We next consider defendant’s argument that he was deprived of his right to a fair and impartial sentence because the trial judge considered improper factors in aggravation, including the offensiveness of defense counsel’s strategy. Defendant takes issue with the trial judge’s statements during the sentencing hearing in which she indicated that she had not heard an apology from defendant, was offended by his horrendous attitude in painting himself as the victim, and declared that he “should be taken out and beaten.” It has long been held by our supreme court that before reversing a sentence imposed by the trial court, it must be clearly evident that the sentence was improperly imposed. People v. Ward, 113 Ill. 2d 516, 526, 499 N.E.2d 422, 425-26 (1986). The imposition of a sentence is a matter of judicial discretion, and absent an abuse of that discretion, the sentence imposed by the trial court will not be altered on review. People v. Perruquet, 68 Ill. 2d 149, 368 N.E.2d 882 (1977). The trial judge must consider all matters reflecting upon the defendant’s personality, propensities, purposes, tendencies, and indeed every aspect of his life relevant to the sentencing proceeding. Ward, 113 Ill. 2d at 527, 499 N.E.2d at 426. In rendering an appropriate sentence, the trial court may consider defendant’s credibility, demeanor and character. People v. Streit, 142 Ill. 2d 13, 19, 566 N.E.2d 1351, 1353 (1991). Here, the trial judge was offended by both defense counsel and defendant’s attitude during sentencing. Defense counsel repeatedly argued that defendant was the victim, stating that defendant was going to lose his business and his home and that the punishment in prison would be “demonstratively far worse them anything we could or the court could indicate that’s happened to the victim.” Defendant argues that during allocution, he distanced himself from defense counsel’s “poor judgment.” Initially, we note that he was represented by counsel and it was not inappropriate for the trial judge to consider counsel’s argument in mitigation in fashioning an appropriate sentence. Furthermore, during allocution, defendant himself made several comments construing himself as the victim. He stated: “I don’t know what the hell is going to happen to me. I have no idea. It scares the hell out of me, believe me, I’m terrified. I did my best to move on. This will always be with me for the rest of my life. I will never, ever live this down.” Additionally, he stated that his actions “cost [him] in terms of friendship and everything [he had] ever worked so hard for.” He also stated: “These past two years have been devastating to me. I’ve never done anything like what I did to [the victim] before. It’s never happened. It has never happened in the two and a half years since.” It was appropriate for the trial court to consider both counsel’s comments and defendant’s own attitude in focusing on the impact that the offense had on him rather than the impact it had on the victim. Nor do we find that the trial court misapprehended the record. While defendant made an apology, admitted that he had a problem and admitted that he violated the victim’s trust, the quality and extent of a defendant’s remorse is a proper subject for consideration. People v. McDade, 219 Ill. App. 3d 317, 332, 579 N.E.2d 1173, 1184 (1991). Here, while defendant stated that he apologized, the trial court questioned his sincerity and credibility in light of his painting himself as the victim, stating, “Your expressions of remorse are insufficient. That is the way I feel. Totally and completely insincere.” It is not for this court to reweigh the trial judge’s observations regarding defendant’s credibility and demeanor. Moreover, while defendant argues that the trial judge’s other comments were hostile and impacted his sentence, the reviewing court should not focus on a few words or statements of the trial court. Rather, the court must consider the entire record as a whole. Ward, 113 Ill. 2d at 526-27, 499 N.E.2d at 426. Based upon the totality of the court’s comments, the judge considered appropriate factors in aggravation and mitigation. The judge noted that “[sjociety demands and our legislators recognize this is a tremendous problem of child pornography and what it can do.” She also considered that defendant had “absolutely no record whatsoever” and sentenced defendant to only two years above the minimum sentence. Accordingly, the record reflects that the trial court did not abuse its considerable discretion in imposing a statutorily authorized six-year sentence.  Lastly, defendant argues that the trial court erred in ordering the forfeiture of his camera where the State failed to comply with the forfeiture proceedings set forth in section 36 — 2 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (the Code) (720 ILCS 5/36 — 2 (West 2000)). Following defendant’s conviction and sentencing for child pornography, defense counsel presented a motion for the return of the camera that was seized from defendant’s vehicle in order to allow his parents to sell the camera to recoup some of the expenses incurred for the defense of his case. After a hearing on the motion, and after reviewing the forfeiture provisions of the child pornography statute, the trial court ordered the camera to be confiscated and denied defendant’s motion for return of the property. Section 11 — 20.1(e) of the child pornography statute specifically authorizes the seizure and forfeiture of materials and equipment used in committing child pornography and provides that such property “shall be seized and forfeited in the manner, method and procedure provided by Section 36 — 1 of this Code for the seizure and forfeiture of vessels, vehicles and aircraft.” 720 ILCS 5/11 — 20.1(e) (West 2000). Section 36 — 1 addresses the seizure of the property and incorporates by reference the forfeiture procedures set forth in section 36 — 2. People v. Wade, 326 Ill. App. 3d 396, 402, 760 N.E.2d 491, 495 (2001). Section 36 — 2 of the Code provides that the State’s Attorney shall file a complaint in the circuit court, give notice to the owner of the property of the proceedings and establish at a hearing by a preponderance of the evidence that the property was “used in the commission of an offense described in Section 36 — 1.”.720 ILCS 5/36 — 2 (West 2000). In construing the statutes, we note the general rule that forfeitures are not favored and that the law is to be narrowly construed to avoid injustice. Wade, 326 Ill. App. 3d at 402, 760 N.E.2d at 495. Here, the proceedings did not comply with the article 36 requirements. The State never instituted a forfeiture proceeding by filing the appropriate complaint. More importantly, the State never established by a preponderance of the evidence that the camera was used in the commission of the offense. As Justice Thomas stated in People ex rel. Waller v. 1996 Saturn, VIN 1G82H5282TZ113572, 298 Ill. App. 3d 464, 699 N.E.2d 223 (1998), “in order to show that the State is entitled to the forfeiture of [the property], it must show by a preponderance of the evidence that the [property] was an integral part of and was connected to the underlying offense.” Waller, 298 Ill. App. 3d at 470, 699 N.E.2d at 226. At the hearing on the motion to return the camera, the trial judge recalled that there were photographs presented in aggravation that had been taken of the victim. These photographs had been developed from film found in the camera that was seized from defendant’s vehicle. Nevertheless, the record reveals that there was no evidence that the photographs presented in aggravation were an integral part of the underlying offense for which defendant was convicted. Additionally, no evidence was ever presented that the photographs entered into evidence at trial, and used to convict defendant of child pornography, were taken using the camera seized by police. Accordingly, where the State did not institute a forfeiture proceeding and failed to set forth by a preponderance of the evidence that the camera seized by police was an integral part of the underlying offense, the order of forfeiture must be vacated. Wade, 326 Ill. App. 3d at 402, 760 N.E.2d at 496. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court is affirmed in part and vacated in part. Affirmed in part; vacated in part. QUINN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2227478 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:36.980116+00 ===

617 N.W.2d 301 (2000)
463 Mich. 368
Luella BROWN, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
MICHIGAN HEALTH CARE CORPORATION, Defendant-Appellant, and
Second Injury Fund/Vocationally Handicapped Provisions, Defendant-Appellee.
Docket No. 115775.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
September 19, 2000.
Lacey & Jones (by Gerald M. Marcinkoski), Birmingham, MI, for defendant-appellant.
Jennifer M. Granholm, Attorney General, Thomas L. Casey, Solicitor General, and Morrison Zack, Assistant Attorney General, Detroit, MI, for the defendant-appellee.
PER CURIAM
This is a worker's compensation case in which the employer sought to take advantage of the limitation on its liability provided by the certification of plaintiff as vocationally handicapped under M.C.L. § 418.921; MSA 17.237(921). The Worker's Compensation Appellate Commission and the Court of Appeals have concluded that the employer is not entitled to the *302 benefit of that provision because the injured employee was not eligible for a vocationally handicapped certificate. We conclude that for the purposes of an employer's liability, the issuance of the vocationally handicapped certificate is controlling. We therefore reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals.
I
Chapter 9 of the Worker's Compensation Disability Act contains the vocationally handicapped certification provisions. At the time applicable to this case, it defines a vocationally handicapped[1] person as follows:
"Vocationally handicapped" means a person who has a medically certifiable impairment of the back or heart, or who is subject to epilepsy, or who has diabetes, and whose impairment is a substantial obstacle to employment, considering such factors as the person's age, education, training, experience, and employment rejection. [MCL 418.901(a); MSA 17.237(901)(a).]
The statute makes the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation of the Department of Education responsible for the certification process. Section 905 governs the application for such a certificate:
An unemployed person who wishes to be certified as vocationally handicapped for purposes of this chapter shall apply to the certifying agency on forms furnished by the agency. The certifying agency shall conduct an investigation and shall issue a certificate to a person who meets the requirements for vocationally handicapped certification. The certificate is valid for 2 calendar years after the date of issuance. After expiration of a certificate an unemployed person may apply for a new certificate. A certificate is not valid with an employer by whom the person has been employed within 52 weeks before issuance of the certificate. [MCL 418.905; MSA 17.237(905).]
Section 921 specifies the liability of the employer and the Second Injury Fund for benefits as a result of an injury to a person holding a vocationally handicapped certificate:
A person certified as vocationally handicapped who receives a personal injury arising out of and in the course of his employment and resulting in death or disability, shall be paid compensation in the manner and to the extent provided in this act, or in case of his death resulting from such injury, the compensation shall be paid to his dependents. The liability of the employer for payment of compensation, for furnishing medical care or for payment of expenses of the employee's last illness and burial as provided in this act shall be limited to those benefits accruing during the period of 52 weeks after the date of injury. Thereafter, all compensation and the cost of all medical care and expenses of the employee's last sickness and burial shall be the liability of the fund. The fund shall be liable, from the date of injury, for those vocational rehabilitation benefits provided in section 319. [MCL 418.921; MSA 17.237(921).]
II
Plaintiff Luella Brown had suffered a work-related injury in 1978 while working for another employer, and received worker's compensation benefits until 1985. She then began doing volunteer work for defendant Michigan Health Care Corporation (MHCC), while also working as a housekeeper for two individuals. In April 1989, she applied for a housekeeping job with MHCC. Her application mentioned her current work as a housekeeper for one individual. MHCC suggested that she obtain vocationally handicapped certification *303 under chapter 9.[2] The plaintiff did so, and was hired by MHCC in the spring of 1989. On April 8, 1992, she felt a "pop" in her back while picking up some trash. She filed a petition for worker's compensation benefits. MHCC brought the Second Injury Fund into the litigation under M.C.L. § 418.931; MSA 17.237(931).
Following a hearing, the magistrate concluded that the plaintiff was disabled by her April 1992 injury. Regarding the respective liability of MHCC and the Second Injury Fund, the magistrate concluded that MHCC was liable for continuing benefits and absolved the fund from liability. She pointed out that under M.C.L. § 418.905; MSA 17.237(905) an applicant for a vocationally handicapped certificate must be unemployed at the time of the application. In this case, the plaintiff was working as a housekeeper at the time she applied. Thus, she was not unemployed and was ineligible for the certificate.[3]
MHCC appealed, but the Worker's Compensation Appellate Commission affirmed. Relying on Tracer v. Southgate, 184 Mich.App. 811, 459 N.W.2d 321 (1990), and an unpublished opinion following Tracer,[4] the WCAC said:
The Court of Appeals has told us unequivocally that employment is an absolute bar to valid certification, and, since we agree with the Magistrate that plaintiff's part-time employment as a housekeeper is "employment" within the meaning of the Act, we affirm her on this issue. [1998 Mich. ACO 1028, 1034.]
III
MHCC filed an application for leave to appeal, which the Court of Appeals granted. However, the Court affirmed the WCAC finding that the fund was not liable for benefits.[5] Like the WCAC, the Court of Appeals relied on Tracer v. Southgate. It explained:
Under § 905, a person must be unemployed at the time of application to the certifying agency. Tracer, supra at 816, 459 N.W.2d 321. Tracer involved a plaintiff who began his employment and was subsequently certified as vocationally handicapped. The Court affirmed the WCAB's finding that he was never properly certified under § 905, so the defendant-employer was not protected from continuing liability under § 921:
"Not only was plaintiff employed by the city within fifty-two weeks prior to the issuance of the certificate to him, he was also employed at the time he applied for the certificate on August 16, 1977. Both of these factors render the certificate invalid as to the city and, therefore, the city is not entitled to the limited liability provided for in § 921. [Id. (emphasis added).]"
Under Tracer, either factorthe plaintiff's previous employment with the defendant-employer, or the fact that the plaintiff was employedrenders the vocationally handicapped certification invalid. While plaintiff was not employed by defendant MHCC at the time she sought her vocational handicap certification, she was employed at that time, and this fact was known to MHCC. Nor does this result appear unfair; the MHCC should not be allowed to assert that it *304 relied upon the certification when plaintiff applied for the certification at defendant-employer's urging and there was no evidence presented indicating that plaintiff suffered from an actual disability at the time she applied for the job.
IV
This case presents an issue of statutory construction, which we review de novo as a question of law. Herald Co v. Bay City, 463 Mich. 111, 117, 614 N.W.2d 873 (2000).
V
In Tracer v. Southgate, supra, the plaintiff, who had a previous injury, was hired by the defendant city under a court order that he be given a 120-day trial period to determine if he was physically able to perform the job in question. He thereafter applied for a vocationally handicapped certificate, which was issued. The city submitted to the rehabilitation office the forms furnished by that agency indicating information such as the date the plaintiff's employment began.[6] Several years later, Tracer filed a petition for benefits, and the employer joined the Second Injury Fund. The referee granted benefits and held that the fund was liable for benefits beyond the then-applicable 104-week period provided by the statute. The Worker's Compensation Appeal Board affirmed in part, but found that the plaintiff was not validly certified as vocationally handicapped. The Court of Appeals affirmed, stating:
As can be seen from the statute, a person must be unemployed at the time of application to the certifying agency, and a certificate is not valid with an employer by whom a person has been employed within fifty-two weeks before issuance of the certificate.
We agree with the findings of the appeal board. Here, plaintiff was hired and commenced his employment with the city in July, 1977, and was not certified as vocationally handicapped until September 9, 1977. Not only was plaintiff employed by the city within fifty-two weeks prior to the issuance of the certificate to him, he was also employed at the time he applied for the certificate on August 16, 1977. Both of these factors render the certificate invalid as to the city and, therefore, the city is not entitled to the limited liability provided for in § 921. [184 Mich.App. at 816, 459 N.W.2d 321.]
The result reached in Tracer was appropriate under the statute. At the time the plaintiff obtained the vocationally handicapped certificate, he was employed by the city. Under § 905, that made the certificate invalid with regard to that employer.
However, the Court of Appeals statement that Tracer was not entitled to the certificate because he was employed at the time is dicta not affecting the result in the case. While it is true that the statute provides that an "unemployed" person may apply for a certificate, it is the Department of Education that is directed to investigate the application. The statute grants the Department of Education the authority to Certify a person as vocationally handicapped. MCL 418.901(b); MSA 17.237(901)(b), M.C.L. § 418.905; MSA 17.237(905). When an employee was "certified as vocationally handicapped" before commencing employment with the employer, the employer's liability is limited to benefits for fifty-two weeks. MCL 418.921; MSA 17.237(921). The only exception is set forth in M.C.L. § 418.905; MSA 17.237(905), which provides that "[a] certificate is not valid with an employer by whom the person has been employed within 52 weeks before issuance of the certificate." The statute does not contain an exception for circumstances where the Department of Education issues a certificate to a person who does not meet the requirements of M.C.L. § 418.901(a); MSA *305 17.237(901)(a) and M.C.L. § 418.905; MSA 17.237(905).
The WCAC and the Court of Appeals thus erred in extending the principles of Tracer to allow the Second Injury Fund to challenge the validity of the certificate on the ground that the plaintiff was employed at the time she applied for it.[7] Accordingly, we reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals and remand this case to the Worker's Compensation Appellate Commission for entry of an appropriate order in accordance with this decision. In light of our disposition of this issue, it is unnecessary to reach the other issues raised by the employer.
WEAVER, C.J., and TAYLOR, CORRIGAN, YOUNG, and MARKMAN, JJ., concurred.
MICHAEL F. CAVANAGH and MARILYN J. KELLY, JJ., would grant leave to appeal.
NOTES
[1]  Vocationally handicapped was the terminology used in the statute at the time applicable to this case. 1998 PA 74 changed the term to "vocationally disabled."
[2]  MCL 418.901 et seq.; MSA 17.237(901) etseq.
[3]  The magistrate also found that plaintiff was ineligible for the certificate on medical grounds. She noted that plaintiff did not claim any back disability on her employment application and denied any back problems or treatments for several years before April 1992. Thus, the magistrate concluded that the plaintiff
had no medical certifiable back impairment as an obstacle to her employment when she obtained certification. Rather, the obstacle was her prior worker's compensation claim for a long since resolved back injury.
[4]  Shannon v. Muskegon Co., unpublished opinion per curiam, issued February 7, 1997 (Docket No. 182973).
[5]  Unpublished opinion per curiam, issued October 19, 1999 (Docket No. 211631).
[6]  Under M.C.L. § 418.911; MSA 17.237(911), when a person holding a vocationally handicapped certificate obtains a job, the employer is to submit to the agency a form providing that information.
[7]  We also believe that the worker's compensation magistrate erred in invalidating the vocationally handicapped certificate after it had been issued by the Department of Education's Division of Vocational Rehabilitation. Although M.C.L. § 418.931(5); MSA 17.237(931)(5) grants authority to the magistrate to determine "the respective liability of the employer and the fund" regarding a certified vocationally handicapped person, the Worker's Compensation Disability Act confers no authority upon the magistrate to secondguess the Department of Education once it has conducted its investigation, as required under § 905, and has determined that the applicant meets the requirements for vocationally handicapped certification.

=== CASE 2227479 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:36.990898+00 ===

582 N.E.2d 882 (1991)
Ronald DEATON, et al., Appellants-Plaintiffs,
v.
CITY OF GREENWOOD, et al., Appellees-Defendants.
No. 41A01-9106-CV-182.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
December 17, 1991.
*883 John P. Wilson, Wilson & Tandy, Greenwood, for appellants-plaintiffs.
Virginia B. Fischer, City of Greenwood, Greenwood, for appellees-defendants.
BAKER, Judge.
This case concerns an Indiana city's annexation of land. Plaintiff-appellants Ronald Deaton, Clifford Wartman, Helen Walden, and Harold Rainey (collectively, appellants) appeal a grant of summary judgment in favor of defendant-appellees City of Greenwood, Jeanette Surina, Greenwood's mayor, the Greenwood Common Council, the individual members of the Greenwood Common Council, and Linley Pearson, Indiana's Attorney General (collectively, the City). Appellants raises two issues for our consideration, which we restate as:
I) Whether the trial court erred in determining that Ordinances 88-12, 89-5, and 89-57 were not invalid as a matter of law because they did not contain a legal description of the corporate boundaries of Greenwood, as required by IND. CODE 36-4-3-3.
II) Whether the trial court erred in finding that Ordinances 88-12 and 89-5 unconstitutionally deprived appellants and others similarly situated of representation in local government by failing to assign the annexed areas to councilmanic districts.
We affirm.
FACTS
In March 1988, by means of Ordinance No. 88-12, the City annexed a parcel of contiguous land. We shall refer to both this action and the parcel of land annexed as "Phase I." In February 1989, using Ordinance No. 89-5, it annexed a parcel of land contiguous to the land annexed in Phase I. This was "Phase II." On December 21, 1989, it enacted Ordinance No. 89-57 to annex a parcel of land contiguous to the land annexed in Phase II. This was "Phase III."
Two of the appellants, Ronald Deaton and Clifford Wartman, are Phase III landowners. Helen Walden and Harold Rainey, the remaining two appellants, are citizens residing within Greenwood's city limits. On March 2, 1990, the four filed suit, alleging the three annexation ordinances were invalid. Count I of their complaint sounded in remonstration,[1] and Counts II, III, and IV sought declaratory relief.[2] On January *884 22, 1991, the trial court granted the City's motion for summary judgment, and this appeal ensued. Other facts will be supplied as necessary.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Appellants appeal the grant of summary judgment entered against them. Disposition by summary judgment is appropriate only when no genuine issues of material fact exist and the proponent is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Ind. Trial Rule 56(C); Lewis v. City of Indianapolis (1990), Ind. App., 554 N.E.2d 13, 15, trans. denied. Both the trial court and the reviewing court must examine pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, admissions, and affidavits filed with the court in the light most favorable to the non-movant. Id. Both remonstrances and declaratory judgment actions may be subject to summary judgment motions. See American States Insurance Co. v. Adair Industries, Inc. (1991), Ind. App., 576 N.E.2d 1272; City of Fort Wayne v. Certain Northeast Annexation Area Landowners (1990), Ind. App., 564 N.E.2d 297, trans. denied. Here, appellants and the City both agree there are no facts in dispute, and our review is therefore limited to determining whether the trial court correctly applied the law to the undisputed facts. State, ex rel. Bd. of Dental Examiners v. Judd (1990), Ind. App., 554 N.E.2d 829.
I
Appellants argue the three ordinances are invalid because they do not provide a definition of Greenwood's corporate boundaries as required by IND. CODE 36-4-3-3. The trial court agreed with appellants that "Ordinance No. 89-57 does not include a legal description defining the corporate boundaries of the City of Greenwood," Record at 27, and further agreed that Ordinances 88-12 and 89-5 also lack the requisite description. The trial court held, however, that the absence was not fatal, because the ordinances could be based on IND. CODE 36-4-3-4 instead.
IND. CODE 36-4-3-3 reads, in pertinent part, as follows:
Sec. 3. (a) The legislative body of a municipality may, by an ordinance defining the corporate boundaries of the municipality, annex territory that it contiguous to the municipality... .
* * * * * *
(d) An ordinance described by subsection (a) must assign the territory annexed by the ordinance to at least one (1) municipal legislative body district.[3]
IND. CODE 36-4-3-4 reads, in pertinent part, as follows:
Sec. 4. (a) The legislative body of a municipality may, by ordinance, annex any of the following:
(1) Territory that is contiguous to the municipality.
(2) Territory that is not contiguous to the municipality and is occupied by a municipally owned or operated airport or landing field.
(3) Territory that is not contiguous to the municipality but is found by the legislative body to be occupied by a municipally owned or regulated sanitary landfill, golf course, or hospital... .
* * * * * *
(f) An ordinance adopted under this subsection must assign the territory annexed by the ordinance to at least one (1) municipal legislative body district.
It is true the City may not rely on IND. CODE 36-4-3-3 to annex the land in question without defining the corporate boundaries of the municipality. But IND. CODE 36-4-3-3 is not the only statute authorizing and regulating annexation. IND. CODE 36-4-3-4 also permits annexation, and it does not require a definition of the municipality's corporate boundaries, although there are other requirements.
When interpreting statutes, our primary objective is to determine and give effect to legislative intent. To do this, we must, of *885 course, consider the reasons and policies underlying the statute, and the goals sought to be achieved by the legislation. We will give words and phrases their plain, ordinary meaning, unless a contrary purpose is clearly revealed by the statute itself. IND. CODE 1-1-4-1(1); Eakin v. Reed (1991), Ind. App., 567 N.E.2d 148, 149.
Statutory provisions cannot be read standing alone; instead, they must be construed in light of the entire act of which they are a part. Edward Rose of Indiana v. Fountain (1982), Ind. App., 431 N.E.2d 543. Our holding that sections 3 and 4 of IND. CODE 36-4-3 are alternative methods of annexation is based on our reading of the entire chapter. IND. CODE 36-4-3-2 provides that territories may be annexed by sections 3 or 4. Section 7, which lists publication requirements, applies to ordinances adopted by sections 3, 4, or 5. Section 8 allows the imposition of equitable terms and conditions upon annexation ordinances adopted under section 3 or 4. There is no indication the legislature meant to restrict annexation procedures solely to those prescribed in section 3. It is apparent that IND. CODE 36-4-3-3 is not meant to be the exclusive provision authorizing annexation.
The trial court was correct in determining the City may permissibly annex land pursuant to IND. CODE 36-4-3-4. Because that section does not require a definition of the annexing municipality's corporate boundaries, the failure of the challenged ordinances to include a definition is irrelevant.
II
As the second contention on appeal, appellants assert Ordinances 88-12 and 89-5 deprived Phase I and II residents of representation in local government by failing to designate a legislative district for the annexed territory.
A preliminary word about remonstrances and declaratory judgments is in order. Remonstrance is the exclusive manner for landowners to obtain relief from annexation proceedings. City of Ft. Wayne, supra, at 298. IND. CODE 36-4-3-11 sets out strict guidelines successful remonstrators must meet. Declaratory judgment suits, however, which are the only other method of challenging a city's annexation, are available only to taxpayers of the annexing city. Id. In this case, then, appellants Deaton and Wartman, as Phase III residents, may bring only an action in remonstrance; because they are not Greenwood residents, declaratory relief is unavailable to them. Appellants Walden and Rainey, on the other hand, may challenge only the annexation by means of a declaratory action, because they are Greenwood residents, and not Phase III residents.
In addition to the rule set out in City of Ft. Wayne, supra, a party seeking relief from annexation must have the proper standing. The issue of standing focuses on whether the complaining party is the proper person to invoke the court's power, and is designed to assure active and vigorous litigation. Vandiver v. Marion County (1990), Ind. App., 555 N.E.2d 839, 841. To have standing, a party must demonstrate a personal stake in the outcome of the lawsuit and must show, at a minimum, he was in immediate danger of sustaining some direct injury as a result of the conduct at issue. Id. at 842. Further, one may not assert a cause of action based solely on the infringement of the rights of others. City of Indpls., et al. v. State Tax Comm'rs (1974), 261 Ind. 635, 308 N.E.2d 868.
Deaton's and Wartman's representational challenge fails. First, Deaton and Wartman have no standing to raise the issue of lack of representation. Both are Phase III residents, and Ordinance No. 89-57 assigns Phase III residents to a councilmanic district. Therefore Deaton and Wartman, as Phase III residents, have suffered no injury, because they have not been deprived representation.
Neither can they successfully challenge the validity of Ordinances 88-12 and 89-5. IND. CODE 36-4-3-11(a) requires remonstrances to be filed within 60 days after the publication of the annexation ordinance. *886 Were this time period not observed, "a municipality could be endlessly delayed by disgruntled property owners in annexation proceedings." In re Annexation Proposed By Annexation Ordinance No. X01-74 (1978), 178 Ind. App. 645, 648, 383 N.E.2d 481, 484. Deaton and Wartman concede no remonstrance objecting to Ordinances 88-12 and 89-5 was filed within 60 days of those ordinances' publication. Reply Brief of Appellants-Plaintiff at 7. For these reasons, they may not successfully challenge the validity of the ordinances on the basis of a lack of representation.
Appellants Walden and Rainey are residents within the original city limits and therefore may challenge the ordinances only by declaratory action, but they encounter the same problems as the remonstrators Deaton and Wartman. Neither Walden nor Rainey is a Phase I or II resident, so it cannot be said that Walden or Rainey was deprived of representation. Without this injury, both lack standing. Vandiver, supra. Moreover, the 60 day limitation period applies to declaratory judgment actions as well as remonstrances, "since the same need to facilitate and lend finality to an ordinance exists." In re Annexation, supra, 383 N.E.2d at 484. There is no dispute that both Walden and Rainey failed to protest the Phase I and II ordinances within the 60 day time period.
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
RATLIFF, C.J. and GARRARD, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  IND. CODE 36-4-3-11.
[2]  IND. CODE 34-4-10-1 et seq.
[3]  Both this subsection and subsection IND. CODE 36-4-3-4(f) were added by 1989 Ind. Pub.L. No. 5-1989, effective July 1, 1989.

=== CASE 2228337 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:58.288584+00 ===

715 N.E.2d 708 (1999)
306 Ill. App. 3d 960
240 Ill. Dec. 21
Danny D. LANG and Linda K. Lang, Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
Carlos SILVA, Crown's Way Farm, Inc., a corporation, Ronald A. Dicicilia, and Gene Cilio, Defendants-Appellees (Regal Five, an unincorporated association, Dean Anderson, Jeff Stran, and Steve Villwock, individually and doing business as Regal Five, Defendants).
No. 1-98-1927.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Fourth Division.
July 29, 1999.
*710 Robert B. Patterson, of counsel, Chicago, for Appellants.
Arthur E. Engelland & Angela M. Riccio, Chicago, for Carlos Silva.
Hinshaw & Culbertson, Chicago (Bruce Carmen & Steven Bonanno, of counsel), for Crown's Way Farm, Inc.
Wesley Kennedy, Allison, Slutsky & Kennedy, Chicago; Kennedy, Schwartz & Cure, New York City (Lauren Esposito, of counsel), for Jockey's Guild.
*711 Justice HOFFMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
The instant litigation revolves around an accident which occurred on February 19, 1992, during the seventh race at Sportsman's Park racetrack. During that race, the number one horse, ridden by jockey Danny Lang (Lang), fell, resulting in internal and external injuries to Lang. Following the race, Carlos Silva, the jockey of the number two horse, was cited for careless riding, disqualified from the race in question, and suspended from racing for five days. On February 18, 1994, Lang and his wife, Linda Lang, filed an amended complaint against Silva, Crown's Way Farm, Inc. (Crown's Way), Ronald Dicicilia, Gene Cilio, and other parties not relevant to this appeal. The plaintiffs alleged that the fall resulting in Lang's injury occurred when Lang's horse came into contact with the horse ridden by Silva, owned by Crown's Way and Dicicilia, and trained by Cilio. The complaint alleged, in relevant part, theories of negligence, willful and wanton conduct, negligent and/or willful and wanton entrustment, and loss of consortium.
On September 6, 1994, Silva filed a motion to dismiss counts I through IV of the plaintiffs' amended complaint pursuant to section 2-615 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2-615 (West 1996)). The trial court granted the motion in part, dismissing count I (negligence) and count III (willful and wanton conduct), but allowing the plaintiffs leave to replead those counts. On August 7, 1995, the plaintiffs filed their "Second Amended Counts I-IV" (hereinafter referred to as the second amended complaint). Each of the four counts in the second amended complaint were directed against Silva, Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio. Count I alleged that Silva's negligence had resulted in the collision during the seventh race and that Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio were vicariously liable for Silva's negligence. Count III alleged that Silva's willful and wanton conduct caused the collision. Count III also sought recovery against Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio on theories of vicarious liability and negligent and/or willful and wanton entrustment. Counts II and IV mirrored the theories of liability in counts I and III and asserted claims for loss of consortium on behalf of Linda Lang.
Silva filed a section 2-615 motion to dismiss the plaintiffs' second amended complaint. Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio also filed a joint section 2-615 motion. The two motions contained essentially the same arguments in support of dismissal, namely that: 1) count I should be dismissed because Lang had voluntarily assumed the risk of injury and because, as a voluntary participant in a contact sport, he was unable to recover damages caused by Silva's negligence; 2) count III should be dismissed because, stripped of its conclusory language, it was insufficient to allege a cause of action for willful and wanton misconduct; and 3) counts II and IV, asserting causes of action for loss of consortium, should be dismissed because they were contingent on findings of liability under counts I and III.
On August 28, 1996, the trial court denied both section 2-615 motions to dismiss, apparently suggesting that a motion to dismiss pursuant to section 2-619 of the Code (735 ILCS 5/2-619 (West 1996)) would be more appropriate as it would allow the parties to submit factual material about the sport of horse racing in order to enable the court to make a determination as to whether it was a contact sport. Thereafter, Silva, Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio filed a joint section 2-619 motion to dismiss counts I and II of the second amended complaint, repeating the arguments directed toward those counts in their respective section 2-615 motions.
In support of their motion to dismiss, the defendants submitted a number of affidavits and depositions, a report regarding the number of horse racing related injuries reported in 1995, newspaper articles regarding the dangers of horse racing, and videotapes of the race in which Lang was injured as well as of several days worth of races. Among the affidavits were those of John Giovanni and Heriberto Arroyo, who had been jockeys for periods of 20 and 12 years respectively and ridden in 18,000 and 10,000 races respectively. Giovanni and Arroyo each averred that they had viewed tens of thousands of races. Giovanni estimated that contact between horses occurred in about 95% of the races in *712 which he rode and further stated that he saw contact between horses, including the touching, bumping, and brushing of various parts of the horses' bodies and "clipping of the heels and the like", in nearly every race he viewed. Arroyo averred that he had viewed contact between horses in nearly every race.
The defendants also submitted Silva's deposition, in which he testified that, since beginning his career in the United States in 1978, he had participated in approximately 10,000 races. Asked about the frequency of contact that actually occurs during a race, Silva answered: "Oh, I don't want to say every race; but they have contacts a lot." Silva averred that horses clip heels "all the time" and that "[t]here is a lot of contact in the race." The defendants also submitted the depositions of Juvenal Diaz, Curt Bourque, Eddie Baird, Cilio, and Eric Viox. At the time of their depositions, Diaz, Bourque, and Baird had been jockeys for periods of 26, 13, and 12 years, respectively. Diaz and Baird testified that contact occurs during almost every race, and Bourque testified that it is a common occurrence. Cilio, who had been a trainer since 1987, testified that contact between horses occurs in almost every race. Eric Viox testified that he rode as a jockey in 1975-76 and had been a racing steward in Illinois from 1985 to 1993. Viox testified that there is "some bumping or contact" in "just about every race."
The plaintiffs filed a response to the defendants' motion to dismiss, to which they attached Lang's affidavit. Lang averred that, between 1970 and 1992, he had ridden in approximately 10,000 races, quarterhorse or thoroughbred. According to Lang, "physical contact between horses and riders during a race rarely occurs unless the rider fails to control the horse." He estimated that, during his 22 years of racing, he experienced contact during a race no more than 10 to 20 times per year and that "[c]ontact between riders was not inherent or inevitable, but was rare."
On November 5, 1997, the trial court held a hearing on the defendants' section 2-619 motion. It granted the motion and dismissed counts I and II of the second amended complaint as to all defendants, finding that horse racing is a contact sport falling within the contact sport exception to liability for negligence as defined by our courts. On December 12, 1997, the plaintiffs filed a motion requesting that the trial court enter an order finding that no just reason existed to delay enforcement or appeal of its November 5 order.
On January 23, 1998, Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio filed a motion for summary judgment as to counts III and IV of the second amended complaint. They argued that they were entitled to entry of summary judgment in their favor for two reasons: 1) they could not be held vicariously liable for Silva's conduct because he was an independent contractor; and 2) the plaintiffs claims of negligent or willful and wanton entrustment of the horse to Silva were not supported by Silva's racing record. In support of their motion for summary judgment, these defendants submitted the depositions of Lang, Silva, Dicicilia, Cilio, Diaz, Baird, Bourque, and Viox; the videotapes of several days worth of racing; and a transcript of Silva's racing history.
In his deposition, Silva testified that he was self-employed. The races he rode in were arranged through his agent. At the time of the race in question, about 30% of the races he rode were for Crown's Way. Crown's Way provided the horse and the silks, but Silva was required to provide his own saddle. Silva testified he was paid 10% of the horse's purse for a first place finish, 5% for a second or third place finish, and $50 per race for anything else. The racetrack bookkeeper would deduct the money due him from the horse's guarantee and pay him. Silva testified that, in general, he would meet with a horse's trainer in the paddock prior to the race. The trainer tells him "how they think the horse is going to run better." Silva further testified, though, that when the gates open, the jockey has to "hold [his] own" and that, despite the trainer's suggestions, he exercises his own best judgment as to how to run the race. The only thing he recalled Cilio saying to him prior to the race in question is "You ride the race and try to do the best." Silva testified that he had been cited for riding violations 11 times in the *713 preceding 15 years. Each of the violations was for careless riding. He also testified that a typical jockey would have more than a few racing violations per year.
In his deposition, Dicicilia testified that one of the reasons he chose Silva to ride his horses was that "throughout the industry Carlos Silva has the reputation of being a careful and serious minded rider who doesn't take chances." Dicicilia further testified that Silva was paid out of the race track account, not Crown's Way's account, and that Crown's Way did not provide any insurance coverage for the jockeys it used.
Cilio testified that prior to a race the jockey and trainer evaluate the field to try to decide how to run the race. As the trainer, he has the authority to tell the jockey how he wants him to run the race. His standard instructions are "if they're not familiar to tell them some of the peculiarities of the horse". Once the jockey leaves the gate, though, he has control and may do as the race dictates. On the date in question, Cilio told Silva that "when she breaks just do the best you can." Cilio testified that he was not aware of the exact number of violations Silva had, but he knew it was "very few." He testified that, considering the number of races in which Silva had ridden, Silva had "far less" violations than most jockeys and that his record was much better than the average jockey's record.
Viox testified that Silva was a very careful rider and that 12 violations during a 10 to 15 year period including 10,000 to 15,000 races is a better than average record. Baird testified that, in February 1992, Silva had the reputation of being an excellent jockey.
On April 23, 1998, the trial court conducted a hearing on the motion for summary judgment. The trial court granted the motion for summary judgment, finding that: 1) Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio could not be held vicariously liable for Silva's allegedly willful and wanton conduct because Silva was an independent contractor as a matter of law; and 2) the evidence presented regarding Silva's racing history was not sufficient to support the cause of action for negligent and/or willful and wanton entrustment. In its order, the trial court made a finding, pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 304(a), that no just reason existed to delay enforcement or appeal of its ruling on the motion for summary judgment or its November 5, 1997, order dismissing counts I and II of the plaintiffs' second amended complaint. This appeal followed.
The plaintiffs first argue that the trial court erred in dismissing counts I and II of their second amended complaint. They contend that horse racing is not a contact sport and that the defendants should not, therefore, be allowed to escape liability for negligence based upon the contact sports exception. The Jockeys' Guild, Inc., has submitted a brief as amicus curiae in which it urges us to find that thoroughbred racing is, indeed, a contact sport.
Illinois courts have created an exception to the standard of ordinary care, whereby voluntary participants in contact sports are not liable to co-participants for injuries caused by negligent conduct but are liable only for injuries caused by willful and wanton or intentional misconduct. Pfister v. Shusta, 167 Ill. 2d 417, 420, 212 Ill. Dec. 668, 657 N.E.2d 1013 (1995). In determining what constitutes a contact sport, our courts have focused on whether physical contact is inevitable and inherent in the activity. See Pfister, 167 Ill.2d at 425, 212 Ill. Dec. 668, 657 N.E.2d 1013 (participants in sports where physical contact is "inherent and virtually inevitable" assume greater risk of injury than participants in noncontact sports); Landrum v. Gonzalez, 257 Ill.App.3d 942, 948, 196 Ill. Dec. 165, 629 N.E.2d 710 (1994)(softball a contact sport where "physical contact is part of the game"). This court noted in Zurla v. Hydel, 289 Ill.App.3d 215, 221, 224 Ill. Dec. 166, 681 N.E.2d 148 (1997), that, in each case where Illinois courts have applied the contact sports exception, physical contact with co-participants or with "some physical component of the game" has been "part and parcel of the sport" involved.
In support of their contention that physical contact between the horses and riders is not an inherent or inevitable part of a professional horse race, the plaintiffs point to the Rules of the Race promulgated by the *714 Illinois Racing Board in accordance with authority granted them by the Illinois Horse Racing Act (230 ILCS 5/9(b) (West 1996)). The Rules of the Race provide that a jockey may be disciplined for: crossing and weaving in front of any horse in such a manner as to constitute interference or intimidation; crossing in front of another horse in such a manner as to actually impede that horse; jostling another horse; willfully striking another horse; or riding willfully or carelessly so as to injure another horse. 11 Ill. Adm. Code § 1416.5 (1996). The rules further make reference to three different types of sanctionable conduct: careless riding, rough riding, and foul riding. 11 Adm.Code § 1411.160, § 1416.10 (1996).
The plaintiffs' argue that, because contact is prohibited by the Rules of the Race, thoroughbred horse racing is not a contact sport. This argument is flawed. First, while the plaintiffs correctly state that the defendants cannot point to any rule that says contact is allowed in the sport, neither have the plaintiffs pointed to any rule which states that all contact is prohibited or subject to sanction. Rather, the rules provide that certain types of conduct, such as crossing over in front of another horse or weaving, conduct which may or may not involve contact between horses, is prohibited. In Pfister v. Shusta, our supreme court discussed and rejected a five-part factual analysis which this court had applied in that case in lieu of the contact sports exception and which focused in part on whether the injury-causing conduct was prohibited by the rules of the game rather than on whether that conduct was negligent or willful and wanton. Pfister, 167 Ill.2d at 422-24, 212 Ill. Dec. 668, 657 N.E.2d 1013. The Pfister court noted that, even in sports where there are rules governing the permissible degree of physical contact, rule infractions are inevitable and justify a lower standard of care than ordinary negligence. Pfister, 167 Ill.2d at 424, 212 Ill. Dec. 668, 657 N.E.2d 1013. We see no reason to deviate from this holding simply because the rules of this particular sport are contained in the Illinois Administrative Code and have, as the plaintiffs contend, the force of law.
In support of their contention that horse racing is a contact sport, the defendants rely on the affidavits and depositions submitted in support of their motion and upon cases from other jurisdictions where courts have barred negligence actions between fellow competitors in the sport of horse racing. See Santiago v. Clark, 444 F. Supp. 1077 (N.D.W.Va. 1978); Ordway v. Superior Court, 198 Cal. App. 3d 98, 243 Cal. Rptr. 536 (1988); and Turcotte v. Fell, 68 N.Y.2d 432, 510 N.Y.S.2d 49, 502 N.E.2d 964 (1986). The defendants admit that these cases were decided on the theory of implied assumption of risk but argue that they, nonetheless, support a finding that horse racing is a contact sport.
We do not quarrel with the plaintiffs' assertion that "the underlying philosophy of this sport is to avoid contact between the animals and riders." Our review of the affidavits and depositions of those involved in the horse racing profession reveals that contact is, indeed, to be avoided and that it can sometimes result in sanctions and/or injuries. In Zurla, we stated that the fact that there existed "an inherent risk that players may accidentally touch one another" was not relevant to the inquiry of whether a contact sport existed. Zurla, 289 Ill.App.3d at 221, 224 Ill. Dec. 166, 681 N.E.2d 148. Conversely, we find it irrelevant that it is possible, or even preferable, that a horse race can be run without any contact occurring between the horses and their riders. Rather, our focus is on whether, in reality, physical contact occurs on a regular basis, i.e. whether it is "part and parcel" of the sport. Zurla, 289 Ill.App.3d at 221, 224 Ill. Dec. 166, 681 N.E.2d 148.
When the defendants initially moved for dismissal under section 2-615 on the basis that horse racing was a contact sport, the trial court denied the motion, suggesting to the parties that, in order to determine whether horse racing was a contact sport, it would need the assistance of evidentiary material not allowed by a section 2-615 motion. We must now consider whether dismissal under section 2-619 was appropriate in light of the evidentiary material submitted.
A section 2-619 motion to dismiss provides a means for disposing of issues of law or *715 easily proved issues of fact at the outset of the case. Zedella v. Gibson, 165 Ill. 2d 181, 185, 650 N.E.2d 1000, 209 Ill. Dec. 27 (1995). When ruling on a section 2-619 motion, the court may consider pleadings, depositions, and affidavits. Zedella, 165 Ill.2d at 185, 209 Ill. Dec. 27, 650 N.E.2d 1000. If evidentiary facts asserted in affidavits filed in support of the motion to dismiss are not refuted by a counteraffidavit, those facts will be deemed admitted. Kedzie & 103rd Currency Exchange, Inc. v. Hodge, 156 Ill. 2d 112, 116, 189 Ill. Dec. 31, 619 N.E.2d 732 (1993). When considering an appeal from a dismissal pursuant to section 2-619, we must determine whether a genuine issue of material fact exists which should have precluded dismissal and, if no such issue exists, whether dismissal was proper as a matter of law. Kedzie & 103rd Currency Exchange, 156 Ill.2d at 116-17, 189 Ill. Dec. 31, 619 N.E.2d 732. Our review is de novo. Spiegel v. Hollywood Towers Condominium Ass'n, 283 Ill.App.3d 992, 998, 219 Ill. Dec. 436, 671 N.E.2d 350 (1996).
The existence of a duty is a question of law (Ward v. K mart Corp., 136 Ill. 2d 132, 140, 143 Ill. Dec. 288, 554 N.E.2d 223 (1990)), and the lack of a duty is an appropriate basis for a section 2-619 motion (Milz v. M.J. Meadows, Inc., 234 Ill.App.3d 281, 287, 175 Ill. Dec. 276, 599 N.E.2d 1290 (1992)). Under the contact sports exception, a participant in a contact sport does not owe a duty of ordinary care to his fellow participants. The question of whether a particular sport is a contact sport, though, is a question of fact. Therefore, the question of whether Silva owed Lang a duty of ordinary care in this case is a mixed question of law and fact. See Whittaker v. Honegger, 284 Ill.App.3d 739, 745, 221 Ill. Dec. 169, 674 N.E.2d 1274 (1996). Where mixed questions of law and fact are involved, "a proper allocation of function between the trier of law and the trier of fact" is necessary. Kujbida v. Horizon Insurance Agency, Inc., 260 Ill.App.3d 1001, 1004, 198 Ill. Dec. 92, 632 N.E.2d 151 (1994). When presented with a mixed question of law and fact on review, the appellate court must review the questions of fact under a manifest weight standard and the questions of law under a de novo standard. Indiana Insurance Co. v. Liaskos, 297 Ill.App.3d 569, 574, 231 Ill. Dec. 844, 697 N.E.2d 398 (1998); Board of Education v. State Board of Education, 292 Ill.App.3d 101, 110, 226 Ill. Dec. 309, 685 N.E.2d 412 (1997); but see Virden v. Board of Trustees, 304 Ill.App.3d 330, 237 Ill. Dec. 517, 709 N.E.2d 986 (1999) (clearly erroneous standard of review); Zeitz v. Village of Glenview, 304 Ill.App.3d 586, 238 Ill. Dec. 52, 710 N.E.2d 849 (1999)(clearly erroneous standard of review).
We acknowledge that this court has previously affirmed the trial court's dismissal of complaints or entry of summary judgment in favor of the defendants in cases involving the contact sports exception. See Pfister, 167 Ill. 2d 417, 212 Ill. Dec. 668, 657 N.E.2d 1013; Novak v. Virene, 224 Ill.App.3d 317, 166 Ill. Dec. 620, 586 N.E.2d 578 (1991); Ramos v. City of Countryside, 137 Ill.App.3d 1028, 92 Ill. Dec. 607, 485 N.E.2d 418 (1985); Oswald v. Township High School District No. 214, 84 Ill.App.3d 723, 40 Ill. Dec. 456, 406 N.E.2d 157 (1980). From our review of these cases, though, it does not appear that the evidentiary materials submitted in support of and in opposition to the motions involved therein created a factual dispute as to the frequency of contact occurring during the sports involved. The defendants in this case submitted affidavits and depositions from a number of current and former jockeys, all of whom averred that some form of physical contact occurs in nearly every horse race. Lang, however, submitted his own affidavit, in which he averred that physical contact in horse racing is "rare." Lang's affidavit might well be deemed conclusory in this regard. However, since the defendants failed to attack the sufficiency of the plaintiffs affidavit before the trial court, all issues with respect thereto are waived for purposes of this appeal. Kolakowski v. Voris, 83 Ill. 2d 388, 398, 47 Ill. Dec. 392, 415 N.E.2d 397 (1980). Lang's affidavit, when viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiffs, is sufficient to create a disputed issue of fact on the question of the frequency of contact in professional horse racing. As the plaintiffs have filed a jury demand in this case, it was inappropriate for the trial court to decide this disputed factual issue. 735 ILCS 5/2-619(c) *716 (West 1996); Hertel v. Sullivan, 261 Ill.App.3d 156, 160, 198 Ill. Dec. 574, 633 N.E.2d 36 (1994).
While we recognize that the great weight of the evidence submitted to the trial court supports a finding that horse racing is a contact sport, we cannot ignore the fact that such a finding involves a credibility determination which the trial court was not allowed to make in the context of this section 2-619 motion. Therefore, we have no choice but to reverse the trial court's dismissal of counts I and II and remand for further proceedings.
We now turn to the plaintiffs' contention that the trial court erred in entering summary judgment in favor of Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio as to counts III and IV of the plaintiffs' second amended complaint. Count III alleged that Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio were vicariously liable for Silva's allegedly willful and wanton conduct and that they negligently or willfully and wantonly entrusted a horse to Silva.
Summary judgment should be granted only if the pleadings, depositions, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue of material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 735 ILCS 5/2-1005(c) (West 1996). In determining whether summary judgment is appropriate, the court must construe the pleadings, depositions, admissions, and affidavits strictly against the party seeking summary judgment and liberally in favor of the party opposing it. In re Estate of Whittington, 107 Ill. 2d 169, 177, 90 Ill. Dec. 892, 483 N.E.2d 210 (1985). We review entry of a summary judgment de novo. Majca v. Beekil, 183 Ill. 2d 407, 416, 233 Ill. Dec. 810, 701 N.E.2d 1084 (1998).
We will first consider whether the trial court erred in determining that Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio could not be vicariously liable for Silva's allegedly willful and wanton conduct because Silva was an independent contractor. The plaintiffs assert that Silva was an employee or agent of Crown's Way and that, at the least, Silva's status is a question of fact which cannot be decided by way of summary judgment.
"Although the terms `principal' and `agent' and `employer' and `employee' may have separate connotations for purposes of contract authority, such distinctions are immaterial for tort purposes." Moy v. County of Cook, 159 Ill. 2d 519, 532, 203 Ill. Dec. 776, 640 N.E.2d 926 (1994). The doctrine of respondeat superior can be invoked where either relationship exists, allowing for a principal or employer to be held liable for acts committed by an agent or employee acting within the scope of his agency or employment. Moy, 159 Ill.2d at 532, 203 Ill. Dec. 776, 640 N.E.2d 926; Lewis v. Mount Greenwood Bank, 91 Ill.App.3d 481, 487, 46 Ill. Dec. 926, 414 N.E.2d 1079 (1980); Marco v. County of McHenry, 218 Ill.App.3d 503, 505, 161 Ill. Dec. 221, 578 N.E.2d 579 (1991). One who hires an independent contractor, though, is generally not liable for the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the contractor. Gomien v. Wear-Ever Aluminum, Inc., 50 Ill. 2d 19, 21, 276 N.E.2d 336 (1971); Kouba v. East Joliet Bank, 135 Ill.App.3d 264, 89 Ill. Dec. 774, 481 N.E.2d 325 (1985).
An independent contractor undertakes to produce a certain result but is not controlled as to the method in which he obtains that result. Spivey v. Brown, 150 Ill.App.3d 139, 143, 103 Ill. Dec. 876, 502 N.E.2d 23 (1986). A principal-agent relationship is said to exist where the principal has the right to control the manner and method in which the agent performs his work and the agent has the ability to subject the principal to personal liability. Knapp v. Hill, 276 Ill.App.3d 376, 380, 212 Ill. Dec. 723, 657 N.E.2d 1068 (1995). There is no rigid rule for determining whether a person is an agent or employee or an independent contractor. Davis v. Industrial Comm'n, 261 Ill.App.3d 849, 852, 199 Ill. Dec. 763, 634 N.E.2d 1117 (1994). Among the factors to be considered when making the determination are: the right to control the manner in which the work is performed; the right to discharge; the method of payment; whether taxes are deducted from the payment; the level of skill required to perform the work; and the furnishing of the necessary tools, materials, or equipment. Davis, 261 Ill.App.3d at 852, 199 Ill. Dec. 763, 634 N.E.2d 1117; Shoemaker v. *717 Elmhurst-Chicago Stone Co. Inc., 273 Ill. App. 3d 916, 920, 210 Ill. Dec. 61, 652 N.E.2d 1037 (1995). No single factor is determinative but the right to control the manner in which the work is performed is considered to be the predominant factor. McConnell v. Freeman United Coal Co., 198 Ill.App.3d 322, 325-26, 144 Ill. Dec. 474, 555 N.E.2d 993 (1990); Walker v. Midwest Emery Freight Systems, 119 Ill.App.3d 640, 645-46, 78 Ill. Dec. 266, 461 N.E.2d 1373 (1983).
The question of whether one is an agent or employee or an independent contractor is generally a question of fact. Shoemaker, 273 Ill.App.3d at 920, 210 Ill. Dec. 61, 652 N.E.2d 1037; DeRosa v. Albert F. Amling Co., 84 Ill.App.3d 64, 66-67, 39 Ill. Dec. 180, 404 N.E.2d 564 (1980). The question may be decided as a matter of law, though, when the relationship is so clear as to be indisputable. Shoemaker, 273 Ill.App.3d at 920-21, 210 Ill. Dec. 61, 652 N.E.2d 1037. Manahan v. Daily News-Tribune, 50 Ill. App. 3d 9, 16, 8 Ill. Dec. 659, 365 N.E.2d 1045 (1977).
In Clark v. Industrial Comm'n, 54 Ill. 2d 311, 297 N.E.2d 154 (1973), a jockey filed a claim for workmen's compensation benefits against the owner and trainer of a horse he was riding when injured. The Industrial Commission affirmed the trial court's denial of the claim on the grounds that the jockey was an independent contractor. The Clark court stated:
"It is evident that there are many factors in this case which point toward the conclusion that the claimant was an independent contractor, such as the nature of the work he did and the special skills required, the fact that he provided his own equipment and hired a valet to maintain it, his free-lance status in which he rode on a race-by-race basis for many different owners throughout the course of the year, his hiring of an agent to obtain mounts for him, the nature of payment for each race through the track office without deduction for income, social security, and unemployment compensation taxes, and the evidence that he considered himself a `self-employed' jockey." Clark, 54 Ill.2d at 315, 297 N.E.2d 154.
As to the element of control, the Clark court stated that: "Insofar as the record before us discloses, the so-called pre-race `instructions' or `orders' were of a general and informative nature and were not calculated to supersede the jockey's professional skills as to the specific details of riding the horse in an attempt to bring home a winner." Clark, 54 Ill.2d at 316, 297 N.E.2d 154.
The plaintiffs correctly note that the Clark court merely concluded that the Industrial Commission's determination that the jockey was an independent contractor was not against the manifest weight of the evidence and did not rule that, as a matter of law, all jockeys are independent contractors. Nonetheless, we believe the Clark decision supports a finding that Silva was, in fact, an independent contractor of Crown's Way as a matter of law rather than an employee or agent. The evidence in the record established that Silva had retained an agent to obtain and schedule races for him, that he rode on a per race basis for various owners, that Crown's Way did not pay Silva directly but rather the racetrack withdrew money from the horse's guarantee and paid Silva, that Crown's Way did not provide any type of insurance for Silva, and that Silva provided his own saddle. Furthermore, there was evidence that jockeys are required to be licensed in Illinois, and it is apparent to us that riding a thoroughbred horse in a professional horse race requires specialized skill. As to the element of control, the key element in the tests for employer-employee and principal-agent relationships, we find the evidence here establishes, as it did in Clark, that the pre-race discussions between Silva and Cilio were designed to familiarize Silva with the peculiarities and characteristics of the horse he was going to ride and were not intended to override Silva's professional judgment. Based on the record before us, we have no difficulty in finding that Silva was an independent contractor as a matter of law.
Exceptions to the general rule of non-liability for the acts or omissions of an independent contractor do exist where the employing party fails to use reasonable care in selecting the contractor or directs the contractor to commit the act in question. *718 Jones v. Beker, 260 Ill.App.3d 481, 485, 198 Ill. Dec. 214, 632 N.E.2d 273 (1994). Neither of these exceptions applies in the instant case. The plaintiffs did not allege that Dicicilia or Cilio instructed Silva to interfere with Lang's horse, nor did they present any evidentiary material supporting such a proposition. The plaintiffs correctly note that the employer of an independent contractor can be held liable where the work he hires the contractor to perform is an inherently dangerous activity. See Jones, 260 Ill.App.3d at 487, 198 Ill. Dec. 214, 632 N.E.2d 273. The plaintiffs baldly assert that "[t]he facts concerning the Silva/Owners relationship adduced through deposition testimony would fully support a jury finding" that this exception to the general rule of nonliability applies. We decline to address this argument as the plaintiffs supply no further reasoning for or discussion of this contention as required by Supreme Court Rule 341(e)(7). 177 Ill.2d R. 341(e)(7). We find that the trial court properly granted summary judgment in favor of Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio as to the portion of count III alleging vicarious liability for Silva's allegedly willful and wanton conduct and that portion of count IV (loss of consortium) predicated upon that theory. We note that our finding that Silva was an independent contractor as a matter of law has now become the law of the case. Wade v. City of Chicago Heights, 295 Ill.App.3d 873, 880-81, 230 Ill. Dec. 297, 693 N.E.2d 426 (1998). Consequently, Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio cannot be held vicariously liable for Silva's negligence, if any, and, therefore, the plaintiffs cannot succeed against those defendants on counts I (negligence) and II (loss of consortium predicated on negligence) of their amended complaint. Therefore, we instruct the trial court on remand to dismiss counts I and II of the second amended complaint as to Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio.
We now turn to the remaining allegations contained in count III, the plaintiffs' claim that Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio are liable for damages caused by Silva's allegedly willful and wanton conduct under a theory of negligent and/or willful and wanton entrustment. In their second amended complaint, the plaintiffs alleged that, prior to February 1992, Silva had committed 12 racing violations. The plaintiffs further alleged that Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio had actual or constructive knowledge of these racing violations and that they "deliberately or with a conscious indifference and reckless disregard for the safety of the plaintiff, wilfully and wantonly" allowed Silva to ride their horse in "a knowingly foul and reckless manner in violation of the rules" and failed to instruct Silva to refrain from riding the horse "in a foul and reckless manner which violated the rules." While the parties have apparently treated this count as asserting liability only on the theory of negligent entrustment, the language of the count clearly alleges willful and wanton entrustment. We will address both theories.
In order to prevail in a negligent entrustment theory, the plaintiff must show that the defendants entrusted a dangerous article to another whom they knew or should have known was likely to use the article in a manner causing an unreasonable risk of harm to others. Barth v. Massa, 201 Ill. App. 3d 19, 27, 146 Ill. Dec. 565, 558 N.E.2d 528 (1990). There is also a cause of action for willful and wanton entrustment, but this cause of action requires proof that the defendant's act of entrusting the article to another is "`a course of action which shows actual or deliberate intention to harm, or which, if not intentional, shows an utter indifference to or conscious disregard for the safety of others.' Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Civil, No. 14.01 (2d ed. Supp. 1981)." Richards v. Checker Taxi Co., Inc., 168 Ill.App.3d 154, 156, 118 Ill. Dec. 980, 522 N.E.2d 650 (1988). The questions of whether a defendant is guilty of negligence or willful and wanton conduct are generally ones of fact but may be decided as a matter of law where reasonable minds could not differ. Hampton v. Cashmore, 265 Ill.App.3d 23, 30-31, 202 Ill. Dec. 237, 637 N.E.2d 776 (1994); Giers v. Anten, 68 Ill.App.3d 535, 539, 24 Ill. Dec. 878, 386 N.E.2d 82 (1978).
The plaintiffs presented evidence that between 1978 and February 1992 Silva had 12 racing violations which had resulted in disqualification and suspensions varying from five to seven days. They also submitted *719 records establishing that, as of the date of the race, Silva had more racing violations than any other jockey involved in the race. The defendants, however, submitted records establishing the number of races run by each of the eight jockeys in question. Under a violations per race basis, five of the other eight jockeys had a higher ratio of violations than Silva. Dicicilia testified at his deposition that one of the reasons he chose Silva to ride his horses was that Silva had a reputation of being a careful rider who did not take chances. Cilio testified that Silva had far less violations than most jockeys and a much better record. Viox, who had previously worked as a jockey and as a racing steward in Illinois, testified that Silva was a very careful rider and that 12 violations occurring over a 10 to 15 year period during which a jockey had ridden in 10,000 to 15,000 races was a better than average record. Furthermore, jockey Baird testified that, in February 1992, Silva had the reputation of being an excellent jockey. The plaintiff presented no testimony, either his own or that of another jockey or person otherwise associated with the horse racing industry, to establish that Silva's record should have raised a question as to his suitability as a jockey.
Based on the undisputed facts, we do not believe that reasonable minds could differ as to whether, when Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio entrusted the horse to Silva, they knew or should have known that Silva was likely to ride the horse "in a manner causing an unreasonable risk of harm to others." Therefore, we affirm the trial court's entry of summary judgment in favor of Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio as to the portion of count III alleging negligent and/or willful and wanton entrustment and as to the portion of count IV (loss of consortium) predicated upon those theories.
For the foregoing reasons, we: reverse the trial court's implicit finding of the absence of a disputed factual issue on the question of whether professional horse racing is a contact sport and its dismissal of counts I and II of the second amended complaint against all defendants based thereon; affirm the trial court's entry of summary judgment as to counts III and IV in favor of Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio; and remand to the trial court with directions that it dismiss counts I and II as to Crown's Way, Dicicilia, and Cilio and for further proceedings.
Affirmed in part, reversed in part, and cause remanded with directions.
SOUTH, P.J., and HALL, J., concur.

=== CASE 9741648 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:07.248902+00 ===

BURKE, Judge
This is an action to determine adverse claims to 120 acres of real property located in McKenzie County. The plaintiff claimed an interest in the land described in the complaint under an oil and gas lease. The several defendants, by answer and counterclaim, asserted interests in said land adverse to the plaintiff and adverse to each other. Trial of the case resulted in a judgment decreeing that the plaintiff was the owner of a valid oil and gas lease of the entire mineral interest underlying such property. Defendants have appealed from the judgment and have demanded a trial anew in this court.
Prior to October 1, 1940, the land was owned by E. Y. Hull of Oshkosh, Wisconsin. On that date McKenzie County acquired title to the land by a valid tax deed which was immediately filed for record in the office of the register of deeds. On May 4, 1948, McKenzie County executed and delivered to Thomas G. Dorough a lease of oil and gas and other minerals under said property. This lease was executed and delivered without giving notice of the proposed sale to E. Y. Hull or his heirs in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 57-2818, NDRC 1943. This lease was recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of McKenzie County June 23, 1948. On October 25, 1948, Dorough assigned the lease to the defendant, Texas Company. This assignment was recorded December 6, 1948. McKenzie County thereafter sold the land, at private sale, to Ivan Murray and after the expiration of a 30 day notice of intention to sell at private sale, mailed by registered mail to E. Y. Hull at Oshkosh, Wisconsin, gave Murray a deed of the land on May 3, 1949. The deed recited that it was “subject to the provisions of Ch. 136, Laws of North Dakota, 1941, reserving tO' the county fifty per cent of all oil, gas or minerals that may be found underlying said land.”
On February 2, 1951, Murray conveyed the property to the United States of America in exchange for other land. Murray excepted from this grant “50% of all oil, gas or minerals upon or underlying said land, received by McKenzie County, North Dakota, under the provisions of Ch. 136, Laws of North Dakota 1941 * * *.” On February 1, 1954, the United States of America executed and delivered to the *669plaintiff, Halvor Holbeck, a lease of all of the oil, gas or minerals underlying the land.
Upon this record the defendants, Esther W. Hull, Lathrop W. Hull, Gertrude Felker and Ella J. Ewens, claim an interest in the land as heirs of E. Y. Hull, the former record owner. Their claim includes the whole interest in the land free of all incumbrances. These defendants do not challenge the county’s tax title, nor do they take any exceptions to the procedure by which the county conveyed the land to Ivan Murray. They say, however, that the ostensibly regular proceedings for the sale of the land to Ivan Murray were vitiated by the prior irregular proceedings in the sale of an oil and gas lease to the defendant, Dorough. The claim rests upon their construction of Sec. 57-2818, NDRC 1943. In so far as it is pertinent this statute provides :
“ * * * and if such property is sold at private sale to any person other than the former owner, his executor or administrator, or member of his immediate family, such sale shall be held in abeyance for a period of thirty days from the date of notice to the former owner, his executor or administrator, or member of his immediate family, given by registered mail by the county auditor, to his last known post office address, or if the post office address is not known, then to the post office nearest the land, during which time the former owner, his executor or administrator, or any member of his immediate family, may make redemption by payment in full of the delinquent taxes, penalty, and interest charged against such real estate or the proposed sale price, whichever may be the lesser. If no redemption is made by the former owner, his executor or administrator, or any member of his immediate family, during said period of thirty days, then the sale shall be final and the purchaser shall be entitled to a deed as provided in this chapter * * *”.
On behalf of the Hull heirs it is argued that the foregoing statute does not make the giving of the notice of sale a condition prerequisite to the making of a contract for sale, but only to the finality of the sale. It is pointed out that the statute does not prescribe any time within which the notice must be given, but merely provides that the sale shall be held in abeyance until 30 days after the notice has been given. It is also argued that, as assignee of Dorough’s lease, the defendant, Texas Company, has a potential interest in the land which is subject to the giving of such notice and possible repurchase by the Hull heirs ánd that as long as such potential interest was outstanding the county was without power to sell the land to the defendant, Ivan Murray.
While we agree generally with the construction placed on this statute by the Hull heirs we do not agree as to the effect of such a construction. The existence of an executory agreement, to dispose of a partial interest in the land to one person, would not bar the county from selling the remaining interest to another person. If the county gave proper notice of the intention to make such a sale, the sale would be valid, if no repurchase by the former owner, or members of his immediate family, was made. On the other hand, if repurchase was made, the purchaser would recover the entire interest which the former owner had possessed. The right to repurchase is not divisible. A person having a right to repurchase is entitled to only one opportunity to exercise it and although the county proposes to dispose of a partial interest only, the person holding the right must, if he chooses to repurchase, purchase the entire interest of the former owner. Pederson v. Federal Land Bank, N.D., 72 N.W.2d 227.
In this case the Hull heirs had their opportunity to repurchase. Notice of that right and of the proposed sale to Ivan Murray was given as required by statute. When they elected not to exercise the right, all *670their interest and privileges with respect to the land were terminated. It follows that the Hull heirs have no interest in the land described in the complaint. It also follows that Ivan Murray, by his purchase, acquired a valid title to the land subject to the limitations hereinafter discussed.
The next question is whether the title of Ivan Murray is subject to the oil and gas lease held by the Texas Company. Consideration of this question requires further inquiry into the nature of the former owner’s right to repurchase. This right was first created by Ch. 228, Laws of North Dakota 1939. By that statute the right was conferred both upon the former owner and upon his successor in interest. The right is not an interest in real property. It is in the nature of an option granted by the legislature as a special act of grace. Buman v. Sturn, 73 N.D. 561, 16 N.W.2d 837; Bloomdale v. Sargent County, 74 N.D. 651, 24 N.W.2d 38; Ulrich v. Amerada Petroleum Corp., N.D., 66 N.W.2d 397. Originally the right of repurchase was transferable, but the right was indivisible and could only be transferred in toto. Pederson v. Federal Land Bank, N.D., 72 N.W.2d 227. The legislature, in 1943, made the right nontransferable by limiting it to the former owner, his executor or administrator or the members of his immediate family. Ch. 121, Laws of North Dakota 1943. The right was thus reduced to the status of a family privilege. So, now, where a former owner transfers his interest in the property to a person outside the privileged class, such person may challenge the validity of the actual tax title proceedings but may not challenge a sale of a county acquired tax title to a third party upon the ground that a proper notice of private sale was not given to the former owner. Schule v. Reule, N.D., 72 N.W.2d 225. A fortiori one, who is not in privity with the former owner, may not challenge a sale or transfer on that ground. Thus Ivan Murray may not challenge the validity of the Texas Company’s lease on the ground that no notice of the proposed lease was given to E. Y. Hull or his heirs. And since the Texas Company’s lease was of record in the office of the Register of Deeds of McKenzie County at the time Murray purchased his interest that interest is subject to the lease. There is nothing said in Ulrich v. Amerada Petroleum Co., supra, that is inconsistent with this view. In that case we said (66 N.W.2d 397, 404):
“The title of the county to any tax forfeited land is not affected by this privilege given to the prior owner and his family. The county is only required to give a notice to them in case of the proposed, private sale of any interest therein. A lease given without that notice is subject to the right of the prior owner to repurchase. Such a lease is voidable by the prior owner or his family on repurchase according to the provisions of Section 57-2818, NDRC.”
In the foregoing paragraph we have stated three separate effects of the failure to give notice of a private sale of an interest in tax acquired land. They are: 1, the sale is subject to the right of the former owner to repurchase; 2, the sale is voidable, not void; and 3, the sale is voidable at the instance of a party who still has a right to repurchase. This decision clearly implies that a sale without notice may not be voided at the instance of a party who has no right to repurchase. It follows that the Texas Company’s lease is valid and that the subsequent lease of the plaintiff Holbeck is of no effect.
There remains in this case an issue as to whether Ivan Murray, in his deed to the United States of America, conveyed all of the minerals or only 50 per cent thereof. This issue involves the right to royalties and the reversion under the Texas Company’s lease. Since the United States of America was not made a party to this law suit, we are without power to give a binding decision on this issue. We therefore do not consider it.
*671The judgment of the district court is reversed and the case remanded for the entry of a judgment in accordance with this opinion.
SATHRE, C. J., and MORRIS, J., concur.

=== CASE 9741461 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:56:00.459369+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE REID, dissenting: I dissent. “[A] criminal or penal statute is to be strictly construed in favor of the accused, and nothing should be taken by intendment or implication beyond the obvious or literal meaning of the statute.” People v. Effler, 349 Ill. App. 3d 217, 219 (2004), citing People v. Laubscher, 183 Ill. 2d 330, 337 (1998). “Any ambiguity in a penal statute must be resolved in favor of the defense.” Effler, 349 Ill. App. 3d at 219, citing People v. Whitney, 188 Ill. 2d 91, 98 (1999). As the majority points out, “[a] person commits the offense of child pornography in Illinois by photographing any child *** ‘depicted or portrayed in any pose, posture or setting involving a lewd exhibition of the unclothed genitals *** of the child or other person.’ ” (Emphasis in original.) 354 Ill. App. 3d at 74-75, quoting 720 ILCS 5/11 — 20.1(a)(l)(vii) (West 2000). The legislature specifically chose the word “unclothed,” which the majority recognizes carries the primary meanings of “ ‘not clothed’ ” or “ ‘naked.’ ” 354 Ill. App. 3d at 75, quoting Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 2485 (1986). The majority writes that “it is undisputed that while the victim is wearing stockings, they are completely transparent and the vagina is clearly visible and exposed.” (Emphasis added.) 354 Ill. App. 3d at 75. The photographs in this record do not support the use of the word “transparent.” Though the child’s vagina is clothed in translucent panty hose, it is clothed. The legislature has chosen to criminalize photographs depicting the unclothed genitals. In its attempt to buttress the statute and its oversight of not contemplating a situation with translucent clothing such as this, the majority has extended the term “unclothed” to include clothing which fails to sufficiently “conceal” that which lay underneath. I believe this to be both a tortured construction of the statute and a result-oriented attempt to legislate from the bench. Unclothed means “without clothing.” Although what the defendant allegedly did might be repugnant to most people, the child in this case had clothing covering her genitals. I do not believe it is a court’s place to include covered genitals in the definition of “unclothed genitals.” That is for the legislature. Therefore, the conviction must be reversed.

=== CASE 2227309 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:32.229252+00 ===

617 N.W.2d 623 (2000)
Robert T. LUND, Respondent,
v.
Adam G. SOUTHAM, Appellant.
No. C7-00-579.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
October 10, 2000.
*624 Bricker Lavik, A. Minnie Alexander, Dorsey & Whitney, L.L.P., Minneapolis, for respondent.
Todd M. Johnson, Johnson Law Group L.L.P., Minnetonka, for appellant.
Considered and decided by PETERSON, Presiding Judge, CRIPPEN, Judge, and WILLIS, Judge.
OPINION
CRIPPEN, Judge
Granting a summary judgment to respondent Robert Lund in his suit on a $65,000 note, the trial court determined that appellant Adam Southam could not introduce evidence of respondent's failure to perform a promise allegedly constituting consideration for the note. Because the court erred in determining that the purported promise of respondent modified the note, and because appellant's parol evidence is not otherwise inadmissible, we reverse the summary judgment and remand the case for further proceedings.
FACTS
In 1994, the parties entered into a joint enterprise that required capital contributions from each of them. The next year, after appellant Southam withdrew from involvement in the business, respondent Lund asserted that appellant remained liable for his share of cost in financing the business. In the course of settling their differences, appellant gave respondent a $65,000 note, the subject of the present litigation.
Appellant admits that he executed the note in question. Before the trial court, he disputed the claim that respondent's right to recover financing costs was consideration for the note, claiming that respondent's contributions were offset by the value of stock transferred to him. Both in trial-court proceedings and on appeal, Southam claims that the note was given in exchange for an unperformed promise of respondent to execute a separate written agreement transferring to appellant the intellectual-property rights of their joint enterprise. The note merely states that appellant's agreement was given in exchange "for value received."
Appellant's note recites that it cannot be modified by an oral agreement:
This Promissory Note shall not be deemed or construed to be modified, amended, rescinded, cancelled or waived, in whole or in part, except by written instrument signed by both parties hereto.
The trial court determined that this language, together with the parol-evidence rule, precluded admission of appellant's evidence that respondent promised to transfer property rights. The court refused to consider this evidence and concluded that appellant's prior indebtedness to respondent was the consideration for his note. Finding no cause to question the sufficiency of this consideration, the court granted respondent a summary judgment on his note claim.
ISSUE
Did the trial court err in refusing to consider evidence that respondent breached a promise to transfer property and that this promise constituted the consideration for appellant's note?
ANALYSIS
Summary judgment is proper and should be granted when the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, admissions on file, and affidavits, if any, submitted *625 "show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that either party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Minn. R. Civ. P. 56.03. In reviewing a grant of summary judgment, this court determines whether there are any genuine issues of material fact and whether the lower court erred in its application of the law. Lubbers v. Anderson, 539 N.W.2d 398, 401 (Minn.1995). Construction of the contract of the parties is a matter of law that this court reviews de novo. Turner v. Alpha Phi Sorority House, 276 N.W.2d 63, 66 (Minn.1979). Similarly, the application of the parol-evidence rule, premised on an examination of the contract, presents a question of law. St. Louis Union Trust Co. v. United States, 617 F.2d 1293, 1300 (8th Cir.1980) (determining application of the parol-evidence rule a question of law); Seifert v. Mutual Benefit Life Ins. Co., 203 Minn. 415, 422, 281 N.W. 770, 773-74 (1938) (declaring rule on parol evidence a matter of substantive law, not a rule of evidence).
The parties do not dispute the rule of law permitting the receipt of either party's parol evidence to show the consideration for a contractual obligation stated in an instrument that makes a "mere recital" that value was received. Adams v. Reliance Acceptance Co., 187 Minn. 209, 211, 244 N.W. 810, 811 (1932) (permitting obligor on assignments, given "for value received" or for "a valuable consideration," to prove promise to pay certain sum); Albert Lea College v. Brown, 88 Minn. 524, 528-29, 93 N.W. 672, 673 (1903) (permitting obligee's parol evidence of consideration given for note that stated consideration merely as "for value received"). See generally R.E. Heinselman, Annotation, "Contractual" Consideration as Regards Parol-evidence Rule, 100 A.L.R. 17 (1936) (citing authorities for the principle and distinguishable cases where attempt is made to alter recital of specific consideration).[1] In circumstances like these, because a mere recital is not contradicted by proof of the actual consideration, there is no cause for application of the rule against modification of a contract by parol evidence. Flower v. King, 189 Minn. 461, 466, 250 N.W. 43, 45 (1933); Adams, 187 Minn. at 211, 244 N.W. at 811; cf. Jimmerson v. Troy Seed Co., 236 Minn. 395, 400-02, 53 N.W.2d 273, 277-78 (1952) (distinguishing the rule permitting evidence of consideration furnished; finding error in trial court's admission of obligor's proof that employee made promises other than the necessarily implied promise to make sales needed to earn commissions he sought to recover).
Making no reference to the rule permitting proof of consideration in circumstances like these, the trial court reached an incorrect conclusion, reciting the general rule against admission of parol evidence and pointing to the note language permitting modification only by a written instrument. The contract language constitutes no more than a recitation of the parol-evidence rule. Proof of consideration, upon the mere recitation that it was received, does not constitute alteration of the contract. Because the court's refusal to consider appellant's parol evidence contradicts an established proposition of law, we reverse and remand for further proceedings on the conflicting claims of the parties.
Respondent Lund presents an argument not addressed by the trial court, that appellant's parol evidence was precluded because his note contained more than a mere recital of consideration. Respondent directs our attention to language *626 found in the integration clause, which states:
This Promissory Note is the entire agreement between the parties with respect to the subject matter herein, represents the entire indebtedness of Southam to Lund and shall supersede all prior Promissory Notes or understandings between the parties whether written or oral.
Respondent contends that this statement acknowledges that appellant's prior indebtedness is the consideration for his note, making contrary evidence inadmissible under the parol-evidence rule. See Jimmerson, 236 Minn. at 400-02, 53 N.W.2d at 277-78 (applying parol-evidence rule to exclude proof of consideration other than that necessarily implied by written agreement).[2]
Respondent's argument rests on a misinterpretation of the legal meaning of the language he recites. The integration clause speaks generically of other debts, notes, or agreements of the obligor, rendering them invalid, and does not state the existence of actual debts that are replaced by the note. Respondent furnishes no authorityand there is nonesuggesting that a standard declaration against the validity of other agreements constitutes an acknowledgement that such an agreement actually exists.
Respondent also observes that appellant's proposed evidencethat respondent agreed to execute a transfer of intellectual property rights in exchange for appellant's noteincludes a proposed transfer document containing a recital that appellant was providing consideration for the transfer other than his $65,000 note; the proposed document states that the transfer is in exchange for appellant's claim for services rendered to the joint enterprise. Because the trial court refused to consider appellant's evidence, it did not reach this question or others that will likely arise upon development of a more complete record. Nothing in this opinion is intended to judge the merits of positions taken by the parties upon remand.
Finally, appellant advances the more general argument that the trial court erred by holding that appellant's alleged pre-existing debt was the consideration for his note. This disputed trial-court decision included factual determinations that the pre-existing debt existed, that it comprised half of the financing cost for the parties' joint enterprise, and that it amounted to more than $65,000. Appellant's trial-court arguments included the contention that respondent's financial contributions were offset by the value of corporate stock taken by him. Upon remand following correction of the trial court's holding on appellant's evidence, the consideration issue must be reexamined.
DECISION
Because the trial court erroneously disregarded appellant's evidence on the nature of the consideration supporting his note to respondent, the court's summary judgment cannot stand.
Reversed and remanded.
NOTES
[1]  In reviewing cases appellant cites in favor of admitting parol evidence, respondent observes that many of these decisions deal with ambiguous contract language or contracts that otherwise are not fully integrated. This recitation takes nothing from the authority for the proposition demonstrated, for example, in Albert Lea College. Acknowledging this line of authority, respondent asserts that the principle does not apply in this case but does not dispute the rule.
[2]  Respondent does not argue that an integration clause, because it declares a final agreement of the parties, alters the doctrine permitting parol evidence to show consideration of a contract that merely recites value received. See Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 218(2) (1981) (declaring consideration evidence admissible "even though the parties have reduced their agreement to a writing which appears to be a completely integrated agreement").

=== CASE 2227317 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:32.647766+00 ===

617 N.W.2d 416 (2000)
In Re Petition for DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST Kelly P. CALLAHAN, an Attorney at Law of the State of Minnesota.
No. C4-00-1608.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
October 5, 2000.
ORDER
The Director of the Office of Lawyers Professional Responsibility has filed a petition for disciplinary action alleging that respondent Kelly P. Callahan committed professional misconduct warranting public discipline. Specifically, the petition alleges that respondent neglected a client family's personal injury cases, failed to respond to discovery, failed to appear at a motion hearing, and failed to communicate information about the hearing to his clients; neglected another client's personal injury case, failed to settle or initiate a lawsuit within the statutory limitations period, and failed to communicate with the client; and failed to cooperate with the disciplinary investigation for eight months and misled the Director regarding the second neglected personal injury case. The alleged misconduct violates Minn. R. Prof. Conduct 1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 3.2, 8.1(a)(1), 8.1(a)(3), and 8.4(d).
*417 Respondent admits the facts stated in the petition and admits his conduct violated the Rules of Professional Conduct, waives his rights pursuant to Rule 14, Rules on Lawyers Professional Responsibility (RLPR), and has entered into a stipulation with the Director wherein they jointly recommend that the appropriate discipline is an indefinite suspension from the practice of law and payment of $900 in costs pursuant to Rule 24, RLPR.
This court has independently reviewed the file and approves the jointly recommended disposition.
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that respondent Kelly P. Callahan is immediately indefinitely suspended from the practice of law and must pay $900 in costs pursuant to Rule 24, RLPR. Respondent may petition for reinstatement at any time, but shall comply with the petition and hearing provisions of Rule 18(a) through (d), RLPR. Respondent shall also successfully complete the professional responsibility portion of the bar examination and satisfy the continuing legal education requirements, both pursuant to Rule 18(e), RLPR, before he may be reinstated.
BY THE COURT:
Alan C. Page
Associate Justice

=== CASE 9741464 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:56:06.1935+00 ===

JUSTICE REID delivered the opinion of the court: The plaintiff, Valerie Gray (Gray), individually and as special administrator of the estate of William Gray, deceased (decedent), brought a survival action, an action for wrongful death and a family expense action against the defendants, National Restoration Systems, Inc. (National Restoration), Crenova, Inc., f/k/a Hills America, Inc. (Hüls),1 and the Glenrock Corporation (Glenrock), to recover damages for the fatal injuries incurred by her husband, the decedent, resulting from an explosion at the decedent’s workplace. Gray appeals from the following orders of the circuit court of Cook County: (1) an order of May 31, 2000, which granted National Restoration’s motion to dismiss Gray’s second amended complaint pursuant to section 2 — 619(a)(9) of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2—619(a)(9) (West 2002)) with prejudice, (2) an order of September 13, 2000, that granted summary judgment in favor of Hüls as to certain portions of Gray’s second amended complaint, (3) an order of September 12, 2000, that granted Glenrock’s section 2 — 619 motion to dismiss Gray’s second amended complaint with prejudice, and the portion of a June 20, 2001, order that denied Gray’s motion for leave to allow her third amended complaint to stand against Glen-rock and that also struck Glenrock from Gray’s third amended complaint, and (4) a September 28, 2001, order that denied Gray’s motion to plead punitive damages. For the reasons that follow, we reverse the decision of the trial court in part, affirm it in part, and remand the cause for further proceedings. BACKGROUND National Resurfacing, Inc. (National Resurfacing), and National Restoration provided concrete repair, waterproofing and caulking services for a restoration project located at the Days Inn Hotel in Chicago, Illinois, in July 1995. During a deposition, Thomas F. Reagan (T. Reagan) stated that he was the president of National Restoration and oversaw the Days Inn project. T. Reagan said that at the time of the occurrence, the decedent was an employee of National Restoration. During a deposition, Frank Reagan (F. Reagan), T. Reagan’s father and also an owner of National Restoration and National Resurfacing, stated that although National Restoration and National Resurfacing were two separate legal entities, he and his son ran the two companies as if they were one. F. Reagan stated that the decedent was an employee of National Resurfacing at the time of the incident. F. Reagan’s statement was supported by a W2 form for the decedent which was from National Resurfacing. Hüls manufactures a concrete waterproofing product called ChemTrete BSM 20. Glenrock sells construction products including ChemTrete BSM 20. Glenrock sold Chem-Trete BSM 20 to National Restoration and National Resurfacing for the Days Inn project. The decedent worked as a laborer at the Days Inn project. On July 20, 1995, decedent was fatally injured when he attempted to saw the lid off a 55-gallon drum that contained residue of Chem-Trete BSM 20 and the drum exploded. Deposition testimony reveals that Nicholas LaFleur, the decedent’s direct supervisor, had instructed the decedent to load a Dumpster with debris by use of a chute from the second floor which led to the Dumpster. Several hours later, decedent’s coworker, Gerald McLin, spoke with decedent, and as McLin turned to walk away, he saw decedent pick up a saw. When McLin was approximately eight feet away from Gray, McLin heard the saw cut into a drum and then heard a loud explosion. McLin turned around and saw flames. Chem-Trete BSM 20 consists in relevant part of 70% ethanol and 10% methanol. Hüls attached a label to every container of Chem-Trete BSM 20 which displays a large red diamond with a flame inside and reads: “FLAMMABLE LIQUID.” The label also contains the following additional warnings: “WARNING! *** FLAMMABLE LIQUID AND VAPOR. *** KEEP AWAY FROM HEAT, SPARKS, AND FLAME. *** Since emptied containers retain product residue, follow label warnings even after container is emptied. Before Using This Chemical, Read Material Safety Data Sheet.” F. Reagan stated that he informed the decedent in July 1995 that the material safety data sheet (MSDS) for the Chem-Trete BSM 20 was in the “job box” and that the decedent could read it anytime. LaFleur confirmed that the MSDS for the Chem-Trete BSM 20 was in the job box and that the decedent could read it anytime. T. Reagan also confirmed that the MSDS was in the job box. After the explosion, photographs were taken of the drum that the decedent had cut with a saw. The pictures revealed that some text was missing from the label, but that the warnings, “Since emptied containers retain product residue, follow label warnings even when container is emptied,” and “KEEP AWAY FROM HEAT, SPARKS, AND FLAME,” appear on the label, along with the large, red diamond with the warning “FLAMMABLE LIQUID.” On October 5, 1995, Gray filed a worker’s compensation claim (application for adjustment No. 95 WC 57531), with the State of Illinois Industrial Commission against “National Resurfacing Inc. d/b/a National Restoration Systems” for damages associated with decedent’s fatal accident. On June 25, 1997, Gray filed suit against: (1) “National Restoration Systems, Inc., f/k/a National Resurfacing Inc.,” for negligence, (2) Hüls for negligence and strict liability, and (3) American States Insurance Co., Weidner & McAuliffe, Ltd., and Richard J. Leamy, Jr., for spoliation of evidence. On July 21, 1997, Gray filed her first amended complaint. Once again the complaint named “National Restoration Systems, Inc., f/k/a National Resurfacing Inc.,” as a defendant. Furthermore, Gray added seven additional defendants, which included Glenrock for strict liability and negligence. On September 30, 1997, “National Restoration Systems, Inc., f/k/a National Resurfacing Inc. (collectively, ‘National’),” filed a motion to dismiss Gray’s first amended complaint pursuant to section 2 — 619 of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2 —619(a)(9) (West 2002)) based on the exclusive remedy provision of the Workers’ Compensation Act (820 ILCS 305/5(a) (West 2002)) (the Act), which states: “No common law or statutory right to recover damages from the employer *** for injury or death sustained by any employee while engaged in the line of his duty as such employee, other than the compensation herein provided, is available to any employee who is covered by the provisions of this Act, to any one wholly or partially dependent upon him, the legal representatives of his estate, or any one otherwise entitled to recover damages for such injury.” On December 22, 1997, the trial court denied National Restoration’s motion without prejudice. The trial court advised the parties that if Gray collected any money from National Restoration in the worker’s compensation proceeding, her common law action would be dismissed. Gray’s claims against Richard J. Leamy, Jr., were settled and dismissed on April 2, 1999. On April 12, 1999, Gray’s claims against American States Insurance Co. and Weidner & McAuliffe, Ltd., were settled and dismissed. On February 14, 2000, Gray filed a second amended complaint against “National Restoration Systems, Inc., an Illinois corporation,” Hüls and Glenrock. In the complaint, Gray alleged that Hüls and Glenrock negligently failed to incorporate labeling on Chem-Trete BSM 20 drums that would warn users of: (1) its explosive potential, in violation of 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1200© (2003), and (2) the nature and extent of the risk and harm from explosion when power equipment capable of producing heat or sparks is operated on or in the vicinity of Chem-Trete BSM 20. In addition, Gray alleged that Hüls and Glen-rock carelessly and negligently: (1) failed to provide adequate warnings to users of Chem-Trete BSM 20 that would give notice of the concealed risk of the explosive potential of Chem-Trete BSM 20 vapors remaining in purportedly empty drums; (2) sold to National Restoration a quantity of Chem-Trete BSM 20 without investigating the ability of National Restoration to apply, use, store and dispose of such a chemical safely; (3) failed to ascertain whether National Restoration complied with applicable federal regulations in its use of Chem-Trete BSM 20; (4) failed to approve users of their product; and (5) sold drums of Chem-Trete BSM 20 to persons who were not qualified applicators of the chemical. On March 1, 2000, the Industrial Commission approved a settlement in Gray’s worker’s compensation claim. The settlement contract lump-sum petition and order (settlement contract) was entitled “Valerie Gray, widow of William Gray, deceased v. National Restoration Systems, Inc. a/k/a National Resurfacing, Inc.” The settlement contract stated: “Respondent, William Gray’s employer, National Restoration, Inc., to pay and petitioner to accept $220,000 in full and final settlement of any and all claims under the Worker’s Compensation and Occupational Disease Acts for all accidental injuries allegedly incurred as described herein ***.” On March 10, 2000, “National Restoration Systems, Inc. f/k/a National Resurfacing, Inc.,” filed a section 2 — 619(a)(9) motion to dismiss Gray’s second amended complaint based on the settlement contract and the exclusive remedy provision of the Act (820 ILCS 305/11 (West 2002)). Section 11 of the Act states: “§ 11. The compensation herein provided, together with the provisions of this Act, shall be the measure of the responsibility of any employer engaged in any of the enterprises or businesses enumerated in Section 3 of this Act, or of any employer who is not engaged in any such enterprises or businesses, but who has elected to provide and pay compensation for accidental injuries sustained by any employee arising out of and in the course of the employment according to the provisions of this Act, and whose election to continue under this Act, has not been nullified by any action of his employees as provided for in this Act.” 820 ILCS 305/11 (West 2002). On March 13, 2000, Glenrock moved to dismiss Gray’s second amended complaint pursuant to section 2 — 619(a)(9) based on the facts that: Glenrock was merely a distributor of Chem-Trete BSM 20; Glenrock receives drums of Chem-Trete BSM 20 from Hüls in sealed containers and does not alter the drums or the Chem-Trete BSM 20 in any manner; Glenrock served merely as a conduit between Hüls and the end user, in this case, National Restoration; Glenrock neither determines the form or content of the label and the MSDS, nor does it investigate, train or approve the customers who purchase Chem-Trete BSM 20; and Hüls does not require Glenrock to certify that its customers are knowledgeable in the use and application of Chem-Trete BSM 20. On August 11, 2000, Gray filed a response to Glenrock’s motion to dismiss claiming that the deposition testimony of Michael Watson, a Glenrock officer, suggested that Glenrock did not provide National Restoration with the MSDS. Gray also attached a document issued by Hüls regarding Chem-Trete BSM 20 entitled “Product Data Test Information.” Dated November 1996, 16 months following decedent’s fatal injury, Gray argued that the document retroactively imposed a duty upon Glenrock to sell Chem-Trete BSM 20 only to approved applicators of the chemical. Gray also cited the affidavit of Ed McGettigan, Hüls’ national sales manager, and claimed that this affidavit suggested that Glenrock was required to certify that National Restoration was aware of the contents of the Chem-Trete BSM 20 label and MSDS. In this affidavit, McGettigan stated: “Hüls did not require The Glenrock Company to in any way certify Glenrock’s customers regarding the customer’s knowledge of the nature of Chem-Trete BSM 20 or the application of the product beyond any national standards contained in the product labeling affixed to the metal drums by Hüls America or contained in the Material Safety Data Sheets issued in compliance with Federal government regulations.” On May 31, 2000, the trial court entered an order wherein it: (1) determined that at the time of the accident, National Restoration was the decedent’s immediate employer, (2) granted National Restoration’s section 2 — 619(a)(9) motion to dismiss with prejudice, and (3) stated that the order was “not final and appealable.” On June 23, 2000, Hüls filed a motion for summary judgment regarding Gray’s negligence claims. Hüls attached to the motion a color copy of the Chem-Trete BSM 20 label to illustrate that the label contained the warnings, “FLAMMABLE LIQUID AND VAPOR,” “KEEP AWAY FROM HEAT, SPARKS, AND FLAME,” “Since emptied containers retain product residue, follow label warnings even when container is emptied” and the large red diamond that stated, “FLAMMABLE LIQUID.” Gray’s response to Hüls’ motion attached the affidavit of an expert, Robert Kretvix. In the affidavit, Kretvix stated that he compared the color label attached to Hüls’ motion with postoccurrence photographs of the drum, and the postoccurrence photographs indicated that the warning “FLAMMABLE LIQUID AND VAPOR” was not on the label of the drum that Gray sawed, thereby admitting that the drum displayed the other warnings. On August 2, 2000, Hüls filed a motion to withdraw sections of its motion for summary judgment on the issue of the adequacy of the warnings. On August 11, 2000, over Gray’s objection, the trial court granted Hüls’ motion to withdraw portions of its motion of summary judgment. On September 13, 2000, the trial court heard arguments on Hüls’ motion for summary judgment. The trial court addressed Gray’s claim that the postoccurrence photographs indicated that certain text was missing from the label of the drum that the decedent sawed. The court stated: “Even under your [plaintiffs] theory, there [are] still the words on the destroyed drum’s label, since emptied containers contain product reside, follow label warnings after container is empty; and there is still the big flammable sign with the flame. # ijc It does have the warning that the empty container can have residue in it, and you should follow the label warning even after the container is empty. It does have the warning that you have to read the material safety data sheet. It does have the warning that there are vapors, and it does have the warning to keep away from sparks. That’s what’s on there no matter what exists.” The trial court then entered an order wherein it granted in part and denied in part Hüls’ motion. The court denied Hüls’ motion “as to preemption, adequacy of warnings; foreseeability, open and obvious.” The trial court then granted Hüls’ motion as to certain allegations in Gray’s second amended complaint, which it delineated in the order. Also on September 13, 2000, the trial court granted Glenrock’s motion to dismiss with prejudice. The trial court found that National Restoration had the MSDS and rejected as a nonissue Gray’s assertions that Glenrock was required to certify that National Restoration was aware of the contents of the label and MSDS and that Glenrock was required to approve National Restoration as an applicator. The trial court stated, “to be held on a voluntary assumption of duty, you have to do something. Nobody did anything here.” On June 13, 2001, Gray filed a third amended complaint. Despite the fact that the trial court dismissed Gray’s negligence allegations against Glenrock, Gray again alleged negligence against both Hüls and Glenrock. Gray alleged that Hüls and Glenrock violated several Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations in numerous particulars. On June 14, 2001, Grey sought leave to plead punitive damages against Hüls. On June 20, 2001, the trial court struck the claims in Gray’s third amended complaint that were against Glenrock. After a series of attempts to amend this motion and following a hearing, the trial court denied the motion on September 28, 2001. On October 10, 2001, Gray filed a motion to vacate the denial of her motion for leave to plead punitive damages, in which Gray argued for the first time that the motion was “mooted” by the filing of her fourth amended complaint. The trial court summarily denied Gray’s motion and Gray voluntarily dismissed the case. Hüls requested statutory costs and the trial court instructed Hüls to file a motion requesting same. On October 17, 2001, Hüls filed a motion for costs and the trial court scheduled the motion for hearing on November 8, 2001. On November 7, 2001, Hüls notified the trial court and Gray by letter that it would withdraw its motion for costs. On November 8, 2001, Gray filed a notice of appeal and the case was continued to November 14, 2001. On November 14, 2001, the trial court allowed Hüls to withdraw its motion for costs. ANALYSIS I The first question we will address on review is whether the trial court erred when it determined that National Restoration was the decedent’s immediate employer and dismissed Gray’s second amended complaint pursuant to section 2 — 619(a)(9) with prejudice. A section 2 — 619 motion to dismiss admits the legal sufficiency of the plaintiffs allegations but asserts affirmative matter that avoids or defeats the claim stated. Peetoom v. Swanson, 334 Ill. App. 3d 523, 526 (2002). The purpose of a section 2 — 619 motion to dismiss is to afford litigants a means of disposing of issues of law and easily proved issues of fact at the outset of a case, reserving disputed questions of fact for atrial. Zedella v. Gibson, 165 Ill. 2d 181, 185 (1995). Therefore, when ruling on a section 2 — 619 argument, a trial court may consider pleadings, depositions and affidavits. Zedella, 165 Ill. 2d at 185. If a cause of action is dismissed pursuant to a section 2 — 619 argument, the questions on appeal are whether a genuine issue of material fact exists and whether the defendants are entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Zedella, 165 Ill. 2d at 185-86. The dismissal of a complaint under section 2 — 619 is subject to de novo review. Peetoom, 334 Ill. App. 3d at 526.  We find Laffoon v. Bell & Zoller Coal Co., 65 Ill. 2d 437 (1976), to be instructive in regard to this matter. In Laffoon, the plaintiffs were the immediate employees of subcontractors that did not provide worker’s compensation insurance. Each of the plaintiffs suffered an injury while working on their respective jobs. Consequently, the general contractors in each case were forced to pay the injured plaintiffs worker’s compensation claims. The question that the Laffoon court was faced with was whether section 5(a) of the Act provided the general contractors with immunity from further litigation by the plaintiffs, since they paid the plaintiffs’ worker’s compensation claims. The Laffoon court held: “Accordingly, we must interpret section 5(a) as conferring immunity upon employers only from common law or statutory actions for damages by their immediate employees. To hold otherwise in light of the present factual situations would be violative of the injured employee’s right to due process and equal protection of the laws.” (Emphasis added.) Laffoon, 65 Ill. 2d at 447. Taking Laffoon into consideration, if National Resurfacing was the decedent’s employer at the time of the accident, Gray would have the right to pursue a common law suit against National Restoration. Although National Restoration paid the worker’s compensation claim, if National Restoration was not the decedent’s immediate employer, section 5(a) of the Act would not provide National Restoration with immunity from further litigation. Laffoon, 65 Ill. 2d at 447. Accordingly, the question of who was the decedent’s employer at the time of the accident becomes a question of paramount importance in this litigation.  Here, the trial court’s decision to grant National Restoration’s motion to dismiss was error because a question of fact exists as to whether the decedent was an employee of either National Restoration or National Resurfacing. Deposition testimony revealed that T. Reagan, the president of National Restoration, stated that the decedent was an employee of National Restoration at the time of the accident. However, in another deposition, E Reagan, an owner of both National Restoration and National Resurfacing, stated that the decedent was an employee of National Resurfacing at the time of the accident. These statements clearly present an issue of fact as to who was the decedent’s employer at the time of his death. As such, it was improper for the trial court to grant National Restoration’s motion to dismiss. In response, National Restoration argues that the settlement agreement which Gray signed prevents her from pursuing further relief from National Restoration. We disagree. After reviewing the record, we find that the settlement agreement which Gray signed only settled the worker’s compensation suit and nothing more. The settlement did not and cannot prevent her from pursuing further relief that she is entitled to pursue under the Act. National Restoration further argues that the doctrine of judicial estoppel prevents Gray from maintaining her common law cause of action against National Restoration because she took a prior position during the worker’s compensation claim. Particularly, National Restoration argues that because Gray argued that National Restoration was the decedent’s employer in the worker’s compensation suit, she cannot now argue that National Restoration was not the decedent’s employer.  The doctrine of judicial estoppel prevents a party from asserting inconsistent positions in separate proceedings to receive favorable judgments in each. Ceres Terminals, Inc. v. Chicago City Bank & Trust Co., 259 Ill. App. 3d 836, 849-50 (1994). “The doctrine of judicial estoppel provides that when a party assumes a certain position in a legal proceeding, that party is precluded from assuming a contrary position in a subsequent legal proceeding. People v. Wisbrock, 223 Ill. App. 3d 173, 175, 584 N.E.2d 513, 515 (1991). For the doctrine to apply: (1) the party must have taken two positions; (2) the positions must have been taken in separate judicial or quasi-judicial administrative proceedings; (3) the party must have intended for the trier of fact to accept the truth of the facts alleged in support of the position; (4) the party must have succeeded in asserting the first position and received some benefit from it; and (5) the two positions must be inconsistent. Wisbrock, 223 Ill. App. 3d at 175, 584 N.E.2d at 515.” People v. Melka, 319 Ill. App. 3d 431, 441 (2000).  Here, Gray is not judicially estopped from maintaining this cause of action against National Restoration because it is allowed by the provisions of the Act. Here, under the Act, National Restoration was liable to Gray for the injuries that the decedent incurred regardless of the stance that Gray took in those proceedings. Furthermore, if it is determined in the trial court on remand that National Resurfacing was the decedent’s employer at the time the accident, the Act also allows Gray to then file suit against National Restoration for common law negligence. This is allowed under the Act as interpreted by Laffoon, and Gray’s rights cannot be abridged by the application of the doctrine of judicial estoppel in this instance.  Finally, National Restoration argues that Gray’s cause of action is barred by res judicata. Specifically, National Restoration maintains that Gray’s decision to pursue worker’s compensation and the subsequent settlement precludes her from now advancing an inconsistent position in this litigation as a matter of law. A final judgment on the merits rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction acts as a bar to a subsequent suit between the parties involving the same cause of action under the doctrine of res judicata. River Park, Inc. v. City of Highland Park, 184 Ill. 2d 290, 302 (1998). Res judicata promotes judicial economy by requiring parties to litigate in one case all claims arising out of the same group of operative facts. Nowak v. St. Rita High School, 197 Ill. 2d 381, 393 (2001). The doctrine applies not only to what was decided in the first actions, but also “those matters that could have been decided in that suit.” River Park, Inc., 184 Ill. 2d at 302. The following requirements must be met for the doctrine of res judicata to apply: (1) a court of competent jurisdiction rendered a final judgment on the merits; (2) there is an identity of causes of action; and (3) there is an identity of parties or their privies. Nowak, 197 Ill. 2d at 390; River Park, Inc., 184 Ill. 2d at 302. The doctrine of res judicata does not bar Gray from further pursuing a suit against National Restoration, if it is determined that National Restoration was not the decedent’s employer at the time of the accident. Although National Restoration paid the settlement in Gray’s worker’s compensation suit, that does not bar Gray from bringing a common law suit. This right of action is allowed under Laffoon, and the doctrine of res judicata cannot prevent Gray from herein asserting her rights. II  Initially, Hüls and Glenrock argue that this court lacks jurisdiction to hear this appeal because Gray prematurely filed her notice of appeal. The record shows that the trial court dismissed plaintiffs claims against Glenrock on September 13, 2000, and June 20, 2001, without a finding pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 304(a) (155 Ill. 2d R. 304(a)), which provides for appeal from final judgments that do not dispose of an entire proceeding when the trial court makes an express written finding that there is no just reason for delaying either enforcement or appeal or both. Gray voluntarily dismissed her case on October 10, 2001, which made these two orders final and immediately appeal-able. Dubina v. Mesirow Realty Development, Inc., 178 Ill. 2d 496, 503 (1997) (a voluntary dismissal makes immediately appealable all prior orders that were final but not appealable). Also on October 10, 2001, the trial court granted Hüls leave to file a motion for costs. Hüls filed the motion on October 17, 2001, and the motion was scheduled for hearing on November 8, 2001. On November 7, 2001, Hüls informed the trial court and Gray by letter that it withdrew the motion for costs. On November 8, 2001, the trial court continued the case to November 14, 2001, without addressing the status of Hüls’ motion. Gray filed her notice of appeal on November 8, 2001. The trial court entered an order withdrawing Hüls’ motion for costs on November 14, 2001. Defendants argue that disposal of Hüls’ motion for costs was necessary in order to achieve finality in the underlying action and, therefore, the three orders did not become final and appealable until November 14, 2000. However, there is a distinction between necessary claims and claims that are incidental or collateral to an underlying action for the purpose of determining jurisdiction. Motions for fees collateral to the judgment do not affect the appealability of a final judgment. Servio v. Paul Roberts Auto Sales, Inc., 211 Ill. App. 3d 751, 759 (1991). Costs such as deposition fees are considered ancillary to the litigation. Physicians Insurance Exchange v. Jennings, 316 Ill. App. 3d 443, 451 (2000). Here, Hüls’ petition for costs primarily consisted of deposition costs and related filings, copies, transcripts and travel expenses related to the depositions. Thus the resolution of Hüls’ petition for costs need not have been resolved before this action became appealable. See Berger v. Matthews, 216 Ill. App. 3d 942 (1991). Gray’s appeal was proper once the case was voluntarily dismissed. This court therefore has jurisdiction over Gray’s appeal of the orders entered September 13, 2000, June 20, 2001, and September 28, 2001. Ill Next, Gray alleges that the trial court erred when it entered an order on September 13, 2000, in which it granted Glenrock’s section 2 — 619 motion to dismiss her second amended complaint with prejudice and dismissed Glenrock from the case. Gray’s second amended complaint alleged, inter alia, negligence against Glenrock for failing to provide warnings and labeling in violation of OSHA regulations, for negligently approving users of Chem-Trete BSM 20 and for selling Chem-Trete BSM 20 to persons who were not qualified applicators of the product. Gray further alleged that the trial court erred when it entered an order on January 20, 2001, wherein it denied her motion for leave to allow her third amended complaint against Glenrock and struck Glen-rock from her third amended complaint. Gray’s third amended complaint repled the allegations in her second amended complaint. It also alleged that Glenrock negligently failed to warn the decedent of the dangers of Chem-Trete BSM 20 in violation of OSHA regulations and the American National Standard for Hazardous Industrial Chemical’s Precautionary Labeling (ANSI Z129.1 — 1994, 400.1— 1993). As noted above, a motion to dismiss a claim based on section 2 — 619 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2—619 (West 2002)) admits the legal sufficiency of the plaintiffs allegations but asserts affirmative matter that avoids or defeats the claim stated. Peetoom, 334 Ill. App. 3d at 526. The purpose of section 2 — 619 is to afford litigants a means of disposing of issues of law and easily proved issues of fact at the outset of a case, reserving disputed questions of fact for a trial. Zedella, 165 Ill. 2d at 185. Therefore, when ruling on a section 2 — 619 argument, a trial court may consider pleadings, depositions, and affidavits. Zedella, 165 Ill. 2d at 185. If a cause of action is dismissed pursuant to a section 2 — 619 argument, the questions on appeal are whether a genuine issue of material fact exists and whether the defendants are entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Zedella, 165 Ill. 2d at 185-86. The dismissal of a complaint under section 2 — 619 is subject to de novo review. Peetoom, 334 Ill. App. 3d at 526. In order to recover damages based on a defendant’s alleged negligence, a plaintiff must allege and prove that the defendant owed a duty to the plaintiff, that the defendant breached that duty and that the breach was the proximate cause of the plaintiffs injuries. First Springfield Bank & Trust v. Galman, 188 Ill. 2d 252, 256 (1999). The determination of the existence of a duty is a question of law to be resolved by the court. McCoy v. Chicago Housing Authority, 333 Ill. App. 3d 305, 308 (2002). A duty to warn exists when there is unequal knowledge and the defendant, possessed with such knowledge, knows or should know that harm might occur if no warning is given. McColgan v. Environmental Control Systems, Inc., 212 Ill. App. 3d 696, 700 (1991). Here, as to the issue of Glenrock negligently failing to provide the proper warnings concerning the dangers of Chem-Trete BSM 20, Gray argues that the trial court committed error because there was an issue of fact as to whether Glenrock provided National Restoration with the MSDS for the Chem-Trete BSM 20. The record reveals that T. Reagan, F. Reagan and LaFleur all stated that the MSDS for the Chem-Trete BSM 20 was in the job box prior to the accident. However, Gray supported her second amended complaint with the deposition testimony of Michael Watson, a sales manager and secretary of Glenrock. In Watson’s deposition, he testified that there was nothing in the shipping documentation with respect to the delivery of the Chem-Trete BSM 20 from Glenrock to National Restoration which indicated that the MSDS was delivered. He further testified that this type of information was normally included with the shipping documents. As such, a genuine issue of material fact exists. However, as to the overall issue of Glenrock negligently failing to provide adequate warnings, Gray has failed to demonstrate that Glen-rock possessed unequal knowledge regarding the Chem-Trete BSM 20. The record demonstrates through the sworn testimony of Michael Watson, an officer of Glenrock, that Glenrock had no control over the design or manufacture of Chem-Trete BSM 20 and had no knowledge of any alleged defect in the product. Our review of the record reveals that Glenrock received the Chem-Trete BSM 20 in sealed containers from Hüls and transferred the sealed containers to the end user. As Glenrock points out, Gray’s allegations that the warnings on the label and the MSDS are inadequate is of no consequence to the existence of a duty on the part of Glenrock. Gray alleged negligence against Glenrock, not strict liability. Here, Gray has failed to show that Glenrock possessed superior knowledge and consequently had a duty to warn decedent about the dangers of sawing on a drum containing flammable vapors of Chem-Trete BSM 20. Next, Gray argues that Glenrock owed the decedent a duty to approve National Restoration as an applicator of Chem-Trete BSM 20. Gray relies on a document from Hüls which provides that Chem-Trete BSM 20 is available to “approved applicators.” The document to which Gray refers, entitled “Product Data and Test Information,” was issued 16 months after the decedent’s fatal injury. Postevent literature cannot be used to show the standard of care. Granberry v. Carbondale Clinic, S.C., 285 Ill. App. 3d 54, 65 (1996). Also, Gray maintains that Glenrock owed the decedent a duty to certify National’s knowledge of the contents of the Chem-Trete BSM 20 label and the MSDS. Ed McGettigan, an employee of Hüls, testified that Hüls did not require Glenrock to certify that Glenrock’s customers were knowledgeable in the use and application of Chem-Trete BSM 20. Even if Hüls required Glenrock to certify National Restoration’s knowledge of the contents of the label and MSDS, Gray failed to present any evidence which showed that Glenrock affirmatively undertook any duty to certify National Restoration’s knowledge of the label and the MSDS and thereby was the proximate cause of the decedent’s death. Finally, as to the OSHA regulations that Gray alleged that Glen-rock violated, the trial court’s decision was improper. In its third amended complaint, Gray initially alleged that Chem-Trete BSM 20 is a hazardous chemical as defined by OSHA regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1200(c) (2003). Gray then goes on to allege that Glenrock violated the following OSHA regulations: 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1200(f)(l)(ii) (2003), 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1200(f)(ll) (2003), 29 C.F.R. §§ 1910.1200(g)(2)(iii) and (g)(2)(ix) (2003), and 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1200(g)(7) (2003). Gray also alleged that Glenrock violated these OSHA regulations in conjunction with ANSI standards Z129.1— 1994 and 400.1 — 1993. Glenrock cannot have violated any OSHA regulations without first having a duty to warn. We will now look at the particular OSHA regulations that Glenrock is alleged to have violated. OSHA regulation 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1200(f)(l)(ii) (2003) states: “[T]he chemical manufacturer, importer or distributor shall ensure that each container of hazardous chemicals leaving the workplace is labeled, tagged or marked with *** *** (ii) appropriate hazard warnings[.]” (Emphasis added.) 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1200(0(11) (2003) states: “Chemical manufacturers, importers, distributors, or employers who become newly aware of any significant information regarding the hazards of a chemical shall revise the labels for the chemical within three months of becoming aware of the new information. Labels on containers of hazardous chemical shipped after that time shall contain the new information. If the chemical is not currently produced or imported, the chemical manufacturer, importers, distributor, or employer shall add the information to the label before the chemical is shipped or introduced into the workplace again.” (Emphasis added.) 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1200(g)(7) (i) (2003) states: “Distributors shall ensure that material safety data sheets, and updated information, are provided to other distributors and employers with their initial and with the first shipment after a material safety data sheet is updated.” (Emphasis added.) 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1200(g)(7)(ii) (2003) states: “The distributor shall either provide material safety data sheets with the shipped containers, or send them to the other distributor or employer prior to or at the time of the shipment.” (Emphasis added.)  Obviously, these regulations are directed toward distributors. OSHA defines a “distributor” as: “a business, other than a chemical manufacturer or importer, which supplies hazardous chemicals to other distributors or to employers.” 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1200(c) (2003). Glenrock is a distributor and therefore subject to these regulations. Therefore, Glenrock had a duty to observe these regulations. As stated earlier, Gray raised an issue of material fact through the deposition testimony of Watson as to whether Glenrock sent the MSDS to National Restoration as required. As such, the trial court’s ruling as it pertains to these allegations was improper. The trial court’s ruling as it pertains to 29 C.F.R. §§ 1910.100(g)(2)(iii) and (g)(2)(ix) (2003) appears to be correct. Our reading of 29 C.F.R. §§ 1910.100(g)(2)(iii) and (g)(2)(ix) (2003) suggests that these regulations only apply toward chemical manufacturers and importers, not distributors. Furthermore, as to the ANSI standards which Gray alleges that Glenrock violated, these standards appear to be of a voluntary nature and not mandatory. Consequently, the trial court’s ruling as to these allegations was correct. IV Gray argues that the trial court improperly entered “partial summary judgment” in favor of Hüls as to certain allegations that Gray made in her second amended complaint. In her second amended complaint, filed on February 14, 2000, Gray alleged strict liability and negligence against Hüls. Hüls filed an answer, and on June 23, 2000, Hüls filed a motion for summary judgment on the grounds that Gray’s action in cutting into the drum that contained the Chem-Trete BSM 20 was not reasonably foreseeable, that Hüls had no duty to warn because the risks involved were open and obvious, and that all warnings and labels sufficiently advised of any hazards involved and complied with any and all federal regulations. Gray filed a response. On August 2, 2000, Hüls filed a motion to withdraw sections of its motion for summary judgment on the issue of the adequacy of the warnings. On August 11, 2000, over Gray’s objection, the trial court granted Hüls’ motion to withdraw portions of its motion of summary judgment. On September 13, 2000, the trial court heard arguments on Hüls’ motion for summary judgment. The trial court also entered an order on September 13, 2000, providing the following, “(2) Hüls’ motion is denied as to preemption, adequacy of warnings; foreseeability, open and obvious.” The trial court also granted summary judgment in favor of Hüls as to certain allegations in Gray’s second amended complaint as follows: “3. Hüls’ motion is granted in favor of Hüls and against [Gray] as to the following: (a) counts IV V and VI, paragraphs 14(a),(b),(c),(d), (of counts IV V and VI), (b) counts VII, VIII and IX, paragraphs 13(a),(b),(c), (d),(e),(g),(h),(i) and (j); (of counts VII [s¿c], VIII, and IX) 4. counts IV V and VI, paragraphs 14(a)(b)(c)(d) (of said counts) are dismissed with prejudice; of plaintiffs 2nd amended complaint; 5. counts VIII, VII and IX, paragraphs 13(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(g),(h)(i) and (j) are dismissed with prejudice, of plaintiffs 2nd amended complaint.” Gray contends that a certain number of paragraphs for which the trial court granted summary judgment pertained to the adequacy of the warnings and that the issue of the adequacy of the warnings was not before the trial court because the issue had been withdrawn from Hüls’ motion for summary judgment. Gray is specifically concerned with the inclusion of paragraphs 14(c) and (d) in counts iy V and VI and paragraphs 13(d) and (e) of counts VII, VIII and IX. Gray argues that the trial court’s ruling is not a final and appealable order and is otherwise erroneous.  The order to which Gray raises her objection was a final order but not an appealable order at the time it was entered. Gray took her appeal from this order within the statutorily appropriate time after her voluntary dismissal. As such, we have jurisdiction over this issue. On August 4, 2000, Hüls filed a motion to withdraw sections of its motion for summary judgment. In the motion, Hüls requested the court for leave “to withdraw that portion of its motion on the issue of the warning labels and material safety data sheet.” The trial court granted this motion on August 11, 2000. As such, the issue of the adequacy of warnings was not before the trial court when it ruled on Hüls’ motion for summary judgment and issued its order on September 13, 2000, with regard to Hüls’ motion for summary judgment. Our review of the September 13, 2000, order shows that the trial court in fact made rulings that pertained to the adequacy of warnings and contravened its previous order of August 11, 2000. In particular, the September 13, 2000, order dismissed paragraphs 14(c) and (d) of counts iy V and VI, which state: “(c) There were no warnings given to reasonably anticipated users of, or person who would come in contact with CHEM-TRETE BSM 20 to give notice of the highly explosive character of its vapors in violation of 29 CFR 1900.1200(f)(l)(ii). (d) There were no warnings given to reasonably anticipated users of CHEM-TRETE BSM 20 to give notice of the nature and extent of the risk of harm from explosion when power equipment capable of producing heat or sparks is operated on or in the vicinity of CHEM-TRETE BSM 20 drums in violation of 29 CFR 1900.1200(f)(l)(ü).” 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1200(f)(l)(ii) (2003) states: “[T]he chemical manufacturer, importer or distributor shall ensure that each container of hazardous chemicals leaving the workplace is labeled, tagged or marked with *** *** (ii) appropriate hazard warnings!.]” (Emphasis added.) This was clearly a ruling that pertained to issues that were no longer before the court, and as such, was improper. Furthermore, paragraphs 13(d) and (e) of counts VII and VIII and IX addressed the issue of adequacy of warnings. These paragraphs stated: “(d) Carelessly and negligently failed to incorporate labeling on CHEM-TRETE BSM 20 drums which would warn users of CHEMTRETE BSM 20 of its highly explosive character in violation of 29 CFR 1900.1200(f)(l)(ii); (e) Carelessly and negligently failed to incorporate labeling on CHEM-TRETE BSM 20 drums which would warn users of CHEMTRETE BSM 20 of the nature and extent of the risk of harm from explosion when power equipment capable of producing heat or sparks is operated on or in the vicinity of CHEM-TRETE BSM 20 in violation of 29 CFR 1900.1200(f)(l)(ii).” Clearly these paragraphs also dealt with the adequacy of warnings. This was clearly erroneous. As such, we find that the trial court decision was erroneous as it pertains to these paragraphs. V  Finally, Gray contends that the trial court improperly denied her'motion for leave to plead punitive damages against Hiils. Gray argues that the order of September 28, 2001, was not intended to be final and that the voluntary dismissal on October 10, 2001, did not make the order appealable. Nevertheless, Gray appeals “out of an abundance of caution.” Hiils responds that the trial court’s order is a final order. A judgment or order is final if it disposes of the rights of the parties, either on the entire case or on some definite and separate part of the controversy. Dubina v. Mesirow Realty Development, Inc., 178 Ill. 2d 496, 502 (1997). When the bases for recovery under the counts that are dismissed are different from those under the counts left standing, the dismissal is appealable because it disposes of a distinct cause of action. Heinrich v. Peabody International Corp., 99 Ill. 2d 344, 348 (1984). The record shows that Gray filed her motion for leave to plead punitive damages against Hiils pursuant to section 2 — 604.1, which provides: “The court shall allow the motion to amend the complaint if the plaintiff establishes *** a reasonable likelihood of proving facts at trial sufficient to support an award of punitive damages.” 735 ILCS 5/2—604.1 (West 2002). Gray’s motion for leave to seek punitive damages is separate and distinct from her claims seeking compensatory damages from Hiils under theories of negligence and strict liability. Strict liability and negligence are distinct causes of action because strict liability does not require proof of the defendant’s fault. Freeman v. White Way Sign & Maintenance Co., 82 Ill. App. 3d 884, 891 (1980). Punitive damages are not awarded as compensation, but serve instead to punish the offender and to deter that party and others from committing similar acts of wrongdoing in the future. Loitz v. Remington Arms Co., 138 Ill. 2d 404, 414 (1990). In order to plead punitive damages, Gray has the burden to show “a reasonable likelihood of proving facts at trial sufficient to support an award of punitive damages.” 735 ILCS 5/2—604.1 (West 2002). This burden is qualitatively different from the elements of Gray’s claim for compensatory damages. Thus, the trial court’s ruling disposed of Gray’s rights and Hüls’ regarding a definite and separate part of the case and the order was final and appealable upon Gray’s voluntary dismissal of her case. Gray has failed to sustain the burden required to plead punitive damages. Although Gray tries to show that Hüls was aware that the warnings it provided on Chem-Trete BSM 20 were inadequate, Gray relies on two cases (a civil action in the Superior Court of New Jersey, Law Division, docket No. L — 39482—88, sub nom. Clark v. Degussa Corp. (Clark), and a civil action in the Superior Court of New Jersey, Law Division, docket No. L — 018612—86, sub nom. Cicalese v. Dynamit Nobel of America (Cicalese)), which were irrelevant to the consideration of Hüls’ role in the current case. Clark concerned a completely different product that is not similar to Chem-Trete BSM 20. Cicalese was litigated prior to the present case and additional warnings were attached to drums of Chem-Trete BSM 20 16 months prior to the decedent’s accident. The trial court properly concluded that Hüls’ actions in supplying additional warnings to a hazardous product subsequent to the Cicalese case did not reveal an evil motive or a reckless regard for the safety of others or the degree or moral blame attached to intentional conduct that is required to support an award of punitive damages. This case is similar to Tyler Enterprises of Elwood, Inc. v. Skiver, 260 Ill. App. 3d 742 (1994). There, the pharmaceutical manufacturer, Eli Lilly, sold the herbicide Balan to the plaintiff. The plaintiff melted the Balan for incorporation into its own products. Lilly instructed the plaintiff not to heat the Balan above 185 degrees Fahrenheit and the MSDS stated that Balan burns and was not to be stored near open flames. The plaintiff was heating two drums of Balan when they caught fire and destroyed the plaintiffs factory. The plaintiff brought an action against Lilly for strict liability and alleged that Lilly’s conduct was wilful and wanton. The trial court granted Lilly’s motion for summary judgment on both claims and this court affirmed. This court found that “Lilly did advise Tyler not to heat the Balan above 185 degrees, the MSDS stated that Balan burns and advised not to store it near an open flame ***. In light of the above facts, we cannot conclude that Lilly acted with a conscious disregard for, or indifference to, the safety of Tyler.” Tyler, 260 Ill. App. 3d at 753. Gray’s further contention that her motion was mooted by the filing of her fourth amended complaint is without merit. Defendants note that at the hearing on September 28, 2001, Gray actively sought a ruling on the merits of her motion and never suggested that the filing of her fourth amended complaint mooted the motion. In addition, Gray raised the issue of mootness for the first time on October 10, 2001, twelve days after her motion to plead punitive damages was denied. Under these facts, Gray has waived the issue of mootness for review. McMath v. Katholi, 191 Ill. 2d 251, 255 (2000) (a party cannot complain of error which he induced the court to make or to which he consented.) CONCLUSION For the foregoing reasons, the decision of the trial court is reversed in part, affirmed in part, and remanded. Reversed in part and affirmed in part; cause remanded. HARTIGAN, J., concurs.  Tlaintiff s original complaint named Degussa Corporation as a defendant. Degussa apparently changed its business name and/or association numerous times (Creanova, Inc., Sivento, Inc., Degussa Hüls Corporation, Kay Fries, Inc., Dynamit Nobel Corporation of America, Inc.). On appeal, the parties refer to this corporation only as Hüls America, Inc.

=== CASE 9741465 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:56:06.199373+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE CAMPBELL, concurring in part and dissenting in part: I wholeheartedly concur with the analysis and conclusions of the majority detailed in sections II, III, and V of the opinion. However, I would affirm the judgment of the trial court in its entirety, and respectfully dissent from sections I and IV of the majority opinion. I The majority concludes that the trial court erred in dismissing plaintiffs second amended complaint against National Restoration Systems, Inc., after determining that National Restoration Systems, Inc., was the decedent’s immediate employer. The majority acknowledges the facts that both National Restoration Systems, Inc., and National Resurfacing, Inc., provided concrete repair, waterproofing and caulking services; are owned and operated by the same individuals, Thomas Reagan and Frank Reagan; and that the two companies operate out of the same corporate location, 4242 Kirchoff Road, in Rolling Meadows, as one company. However, the majority states merely that “[t]he decedent worked as a laborer at the Day’s Inn project” (354 Ill. App. 3d at 349), without revealing undisputed facts which show that the decedent was employed by both National entities beginning in the early 1990s. The majority states that plaintiff filed her application for adjustment of claim against both entities, “National Resurfacing Inc. d/b/a National Restoration Systems,” on October 5, 1995 (354 Ill. App. 3d at 350) and that plaintiff named National Restoration Systems, Inc., as the decedent’s employer. On June 25, 1997, plaintiff filed her complaint in the circuit court of Cook County. On December 22, 1997, the trial court denied the motion to dismiss by National Restoration Systems, Inc., without prejudice, while at the same time specifically advising plaintiff that if plaintiff collected any money from National Restoration Systems, Inc., in a worker’s compensation proceeding, her complaint would be dismissed. On March 1, 2000, plaintiff and her attorney signed a two-page settlement contract entitled: “Valerie Gray, widow of William Gray, deceased vs. National Restoration Systems, Inc., a/k/a National Resurfacing, Inc.,” which released all claims against the decedent’s employer. The settlement agreement names the “Employer-Respondent” as “National Restoration Systems, Inc.,” and the address of the employer is listed as “4242 Kirchoff Rd., Rolling Meadows, IL 60008.” The settlement contract provides in pertinent part as follows: “Respondent, William Gray’s employer, National Restoration, Inc., to pay and petitioner to accept $220,000.00 in full and final settlement of any and all claims under the Worker’s Compensation and Occupational Disease Acts for all accidental injuries allegedly incurred as described herein and including any and all results or developments, fatal or non-fatal allegedly resulting from such accidental injuries. Issues exist between the parties as to whether petitioner has incurred injuries to the degree alleged and whether or not such injuries are compensable, and this settlement is made to amicably settle all issues. This settlement includes [illegible] for temporary total compensation and all medical, surgical and hospital expenses, past or future, for all of which petitioner expressly assumes responsibility. All rights under §§ 4, 8, 16 and 19 of the Act are expressly waived by the parties. *** This settlement represents a full and final resolution of all issues and a compromise of any and all benefits to which the claimants may be entitled pursuant to § 7 and § 8 of the Illinois Workers’ Compensation Act.” (Emphasis added.) On May 31, 2000, the trial court entered an order finding that National Restoration Systems, Inc., was, at the time of the occurrence, William Gray’s immediate employer and granted National Restoration Systems, Inc.’s motion to dismiss with prejudice. The majority here opines, however, that there remains a question of fact as to which National entity was the decedent’s employer. The majority relies on Laffoon v. Bell & Zoller Coal Co., 65 Ill. 2d 437 (1976), primarily for the court’s final language “interpreting” section 5(a) of the Workmen’s Compensation Act (formerly Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 48, par. 138.5(a)), “as conferring immunity upon employers only from common law or statutory actions for damages by their immediate employees.” Laffoon, 65 Ill. 2d at 447. Thus, the majority appears to conclude that even if National Restoration Systems, Inc., paid compensation benefits to plaintiff, National Resurfacing, Inc., may be sued in court by plaintiff as the “immediate” employer. Laffoon is inapposite. There, the plaintiffs in three consolidated appeals were employees of subcontractors and were injured while working on sites controlled by general contractors that were separate entities from their subcontractor-employers. In all three situations, the plaintiffs’ subcontractor-employers carried no compensation insurance, and the plaintiffs recovered workers’ compensation benefits from the general contractors. Subsequently, the three plaintiffs filed complaints against the three general contractors alleging violations of the Structural Work Act (formerly Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 48, par. 60 et seq.), and their complaints were dismissed pursuant to section 5(a) of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, which provided immunity from an action for damages by an employee of an uninsured subcontractor after being required to pay compensation benefits to that employee under section 1(a)(3) of the Act. On appeal, the Illinois Supreme Court compared the facts of the three cases to the following hypothetical situation: “Two men are working on a beam which suddenly collapses injuring both men. The first man is an employee of a subcontractor who has workmen’s compensation insurance. This man will receive compensation benefits from his employer and may subsequently sue the general contractor — or the person ‘engaging in any business or enterprise referred to in subsections 1 and 2 of Section 3 of [the Workmen’s Compensation] Act’ (hereinafter included under the term general contractor) — who, he maintains, is tortiously liable for his injuries. The second man is an employee of a subcontractor who carries no compensation insurance and has not ‘guaranteed his liability to pay such compensation.’ Under section 1(a)(3) of the Act, this man will receive compensation benefits from the general contractor. He will be precluded, however, under defendants’ interpretation of section 5(a) from maintaining a suit for damages against the general contractor even though he is liable for the employee’s injuries. Moreover, the general contractor who pays benefits to the injured employee is permitted by section 1(a)(3) to recover from the subcontractor the amount paid, and, thus, may suffer no monetary loss. Plaintiffs contend that a construction of section 5(a) which allows the result illustrated creates an arbitrary and impermissible classification among injured employees.” Laffoon, 65 Ill. 2d at 443-44. The court reversed, finding that a construction of section 5(a) of the Act which provided general contractors with immunity from actions for damages by injured employees of a subcontractor who carries no compensation insurance would result in an arbitrary classification. Laffoon, 65 Ill. 2d at 445. The facts of the present case are wholly distinguishable from those in Laffoon. Here, the record shows National Restoration Systems, Inc., was a subcontractor on the Days Inn project. Plaintiff here does not and cannot claim that National Restoration Systems, Inc., either failed to carry compensation insurance or that National Restoration Systems, Inc., was a general contractor that may be liable in a subsequent action under the Structural Work Act. National Restoration Systems, Inc., in fact, carried compensation insurance and paid compensation to the plaintiff in the amount of $200,000. While plaintiff has failed to allege that National Resurfacing, Inc., was uninsured, Thomas Reagan stated that both National entities were insured on the same policy of insurance by American States. Nor can plaintiff show that she can recover from National Restoration Systems, Inc., under a theory of “dual capacity.”2  Plaintiff entered into a settlement contract that released all claims against National Restoration Systems, Inc., and National Resurfacing, Inc. A release is presumed valid, and the party challenging the release shoulders the burden of proving any assertion of invalidity. Brown v. Torin Corp., 175 Ill. App. 3d 544, 550, 529 N.E.2d 1077 (1988). Settlements between parties should not be set aside absent a showing of fraud or mistake. Sheffield Poly-Glaz, Inc. v. Humboldt Glass Co., 42 Ill. App. 3d 865, 868, 356 N.E.2d 837 (1976). Contrary to the conclusion of the majority, there exists no question of fact that the decedent was employed by National Restoration Systems, Inc. Plaintiff makes no claim of mistake or confusion as to the identity of the decedent’s employer as a result of language of the settlement contract referring to “National Restoration Systems, Inc.,” on page one of the settlement contract, and as “National Restoration, Inc.” on the top portion of the second page. Plaintiff was well aware of the fact that National Restoration Systems, Inc., was the decedent’s employer at the time of his injury and that she was entering into a settlement agreement which would extinguish her claim in the circuit court against National Restoration Systems, Inc. The record further shows that plaintiff was well aware that the two National entities operated as one, as plaintiff accepted the decedent’s last paycheck written on the account of National Restoration, Inc., as well as a check for funeral expenses in the amount of $1,000 drawn on the same account. The only rational explanation for the reference in the settlement contract to “National Restoration, Inc.,” is as a “scrivener’s error” which merely omitted the word “Systems”: “[A ‘scrivener’] is ‘A writer; esp., a professional drafter of contracts or other documents.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1349 (7th ed. 1999). A “scrivener’s error” is defined as a “clerical error”: “clerical error. An error resulting from a minor mistake or inadvertence, esp. in writing or copying something on the record, and not from judicial reasoning or determination. • Among the boundless examples of clerical errors are omitting an appendix from a document; typing an incorrect number; mistranscribing a word; and failing to log a call.” (Emphasis added.) Black’s Law Dictionary 563 (7th ed. 1999). We cannot give the contract a construction that would render the phrase superfluous or meaningless; we must give it some reasonable meaning. Huskey v. Board of Managers of Condominiums of Edelweiss, Inc., 297 Ill. App. 3d 292, 295, 696 N.E.2d 753 (1998). Several Illinois cases have confronted the issue of a scrivener’s error. In each instance, the correction was mechanical or technical in nature, not decisional or judgmental. See People v. Wyzgowski, 323 Ill. App. 3d 604, 606, 752 N.E.2d 1253 (2001) (Court found “scrivener’s error” in an officer’s sworn report “merely a formal defect” where the report incorrectly stated the date of arrest as July 7, 2000, as opposed to July 6, 2000); Krilich v. Plencer, 305 Ill. App. 3d 709, 712-13, 713 N.E.2d 231 (1999), quoting First Bank v. Rezek, 179 Ill. App. 3d 956, 959 (1989) (“ ‘The distinction between a clerical error and a judicial one does not depend upon the source of the error, but rather, upon whether it was the deliberate result of judicial reasoning and determination’ ”); Dauderman v. Dauderman, 130 Ill. App. 2d 807, 808-09, 263 N.E.2d 708 (1970) (Trial court amended the parties’ divorce decree to read “$400.00 per month” rather than “$400.00.” Appellate court held the failure to include the words “per month” was clearly an “inadvertent clerical error” or “scrivener’s error” because the lump-sum award did not match the decree absent the language “per month”); People ex rel. Cameron, 214 Ill. 287, 290-91, 73 N.E. 362 (1905) (Although a legal description in a petition for the organization of a village — where the property must be contiguous — had been defective in that it referred to “the north three-fourths” instead of the “south three-fourths,” a plat attached to the petition was used for the purpose of correcting the scrivener’s error and giving effect to the intention of the petition); Garrick v. Chamberlain, 97 Ill. 620, 638 (1880) (A notice was considered valid when it described property as “lot 5, lot 23, in Carpenter’s addition” instead of “lot 5, in Block 23, in Carpenter’s addition” because the mistake was a typographical or a scrivener’s error readily apparent on the face of a notice). Plaintiff cannot claim ignorance as to the identity of the decedent’s employer as a result of this minor typographical error, just as the majority must know the actual names of the parties notwithstanding the error in their identification at the outset of the opinion. The settlement contract acts to preclude any further recovery against National Restoration Systems, Inc. I would further find that plaintiff is judicially estopped from claiming that the decedent was employed by National Resurfacing, Inc., rather than National Restoration Systems, Inc., and as such, plaintiff cannot maintain any further action under the Workers’ Compensation Act. As stated by the majority, when a party assumes a certain position in a legal proceeding, that party is estopped from assuming a contrary position in a subsequent proceeding. People v. Coffin, 305 Ill. App. 3d 595, 598, 712 N.E.2d 909 (1999). Judicial estoppel is established by fulfilment of the following five factors: (1) the party being estopped must have taken two positions; (2) the positions must have been taken in separate judicial or quasi-judicial administrative proceedings; (3) the party must have intended for the trier of fact to accept the truth of the facts alleged in support of the position; (4) the party must have succeeded in asserting the first position and received some benefit from it; and (5) the two positions must be inconsistent. Coffin, 305 Ill. App. 3d at 598. All of these elements are found in the present case. Plaintiff has claimed in alternate complaints that the decedent was employed by National Restoration Systems, Inc., and by National Resurfacing, Inc. I would find that plaintiff is judicially estopped from maintaining this complaint against National Restoration Systems, Inc., as a result of the settlement agreement of her worker’s compensation claim. I would further find plaintiff barred from her current complaint against National Restoration Systems, Inc., on principles of res judicata, having already entered into a settlement with National Restoration Systems, Inc., and by the Workers’ Compensation Act, which provides, as noted above, that once an injured employee has collected compensation under the Act, the employee cannot then allege that those injuries fall outside of the Act’s provisions. 820 ILCS 305/11 (West 2002) (“Compensation as full measure of employer’s responsibility”); Collier v. Wagner Castings Co., 81 Ill. 2d 229, 241, 408 N.E.2d 198 (1980). I cannot conclude that the trial erred in granting the motion to dismiss of National Restoration Systems, Inc. II I also dissent from section IV of the opinion wherein the majority concludes that the trial court erred in granting partial summary judgment in favor of Hüls as to four paragraphs in plaintiff’s second amended complaint. In those paragraphs, plaintiff alleged various inadequacy of warnings, as detailed in the majority opinion. 354 Ill. App. 3d at 363-64. Plaintiff contends that the trial court’s ruling was not a final order and is otherwise erroneous. The record shows that on September 13, 2000, the trial court entered judgment for Hüls on paragraphs (a) through (e) and (g) through (j) of plaintiffs negligence claims, and entered judgment for Hüls on several of plaintiffs claims for strict liability. Plaintiff appealed from that portion of the order pertaining to paragraphs (d) through (e) of the negligence claims and from the trial court’s order pertaining to the strict liability claims. Plaintiff now argues that the order entered by the trial court was not final in an attempt to preemptively defeat a res judicata argument by Hüls in support of the dismissal of her refilled case. The record shows that the order entered by the trial court was a final order and that plaintiff failed to appeal within 30 days as required by Supreme Court Rule 303(a). 134 Ill. 2d R. 303(a). This issue is res judicata as to plaintiffs refilled action and I would find that plaintiff has waived this issue for review on appeal. Accordingly, I dissent.  The case of Murcia v. Textron, Inc., 342 Ill. App. 3d 433 (2003), is instructive. There, the plaintiff sought damages for injuries he sustained while operating a trim press owned by his employer, Callen Manufacturing Company (Callen). Plaintiff asserted a claim of negligence against Callen, asserting that Callen operated in a “dual capacity,” both as his employer and as a “quasi manufacturer” of the trim press. The trial court dismissed the plaintiffs negligence claim as barred by section 5(a) of the Act. On appeal, this court affirmed, holding that the “dual capacity doctrine,” recognized as a limited exception to the exclusive remedy provision of section 5(a), under which an employer may become liable in tort to an injured employee if, in addition to acting in its capacity as employer, it operates in a second capacity that confers upon it obligations independent of those imposed upon it as employer, did not apply. The plaintiff failed to allege any “facts to support the conclusion that, by modifying, changing or altering the press, Callen incurred obligations unrelated to those flowing from its status as an employer.” Murcia, 342 Ill. App. 3d at 439; see also Rosales v. Verson Allsteel Press Co., 41 Ill. App. 3d 787, 354 N.E.2d 553 (1976); Ocasek v. Krass, 153 Ill. App. 3d 215, 505 N.E.2d 1285 (1987).

=== CASE 2227331 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:33.437285+00 ===

582 N.E.2d 886 (1991)
S.E.S., Appellant-Respondent,
v.
GRANT COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF WELFARE, Appellee-Petitioner.
No. 27A05-9103-CV-86.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Fifth District.
December 17, 1991.
*887 Anne C. Selby, Marion, for appellant-respondent.
Warren Haas, Marion, for appellee-petitioner.
SHARPNACK, Judge.
S.E.S. (Mother) appeals from an order of the Grant Superior Court terminating her parental rights. We affirm.
Mother raises three issues for review which we consolidate and restate as:
1. Whether the judgment is supported by sufficient evidence.
2. Whether the DPW was required to prove by clear and convincing evidence that it offered Mother reasonable services to assist her in fulfilling her parental obligations.
The facts most favorable to the judgment of the trial court are as follows. On September 23, 1987, Mother's two sons, D.S., then age 7, and J.S., who was six months old, were removed from Mother's custody under a dispositional decree having previously been adjudicated as being children in need of services (CHINS). The Grant County Department of Public Welfare (DPW) instituted that action after Mother had been convicted of driving while intoxicated. Both children remained in the custody of the DPW except for a seven month period in 1988. Following a petition from the Grant County Department of Welfare and a subsequent hearing, the court terminated Mother's parental rights with regard to both children. The juvenile referee issued findings stating, in relevant part, that there was a reasonable probability that the conditions resulting in the children's removal would not be remedied and that termination was in the best interests of the children. The trial court adopted the referee's findings.
Mother has a long history of problems stemming from her alcoholism. She has been convicted of several alcohol related offenses. At the time of the hearing, she had received counseling for at least eight years. She experienced periods of sobriety followed by relapses into drinking. Following her second conviction for driving while intoxicated, Mother underwent 32 days of treatment at the Wabash Addiction Center, and she responded very well. However, following her release, she did not continue with her "aftercare" programs and relapsed into alcohol abuse. In May, 1988, Mother's sister reported to the DPW that Mother appeared at her residence drunk, dropped off her children, and disappeared. The children did not have clothes or diapers. During an extended visit by J.S. in March, 1990, Mother stabbed R.D., D.S.'s father, in front of J.S.
The Department of Welfare offered both personal and family counseling services to Mother. The sessions were designed to help Mother remain sober, improve her interpersonal relationships, resolve her own childhood issues, control her temper, learn parenting, and raise her self esteem. Mother missed nine of forty-one personal counseling sessions without an excuse. When the DPW attempted to help Mother with her alcohol problem, she assured them that she was in aftercare and was attending Alcoholics Anonymous meetings.
During the time that D.S. lived with Mother, he witnessed Mother being repeatedly raped and beaten by her second husband, as well as frequent losses of control by Mother. D.S. has serious emotional problems which are the result of his mother's alcohol related behavioral problems. He has exhibited extreme hostility and frustration and needs a stable environment. At the time of the hearing, he was still in classes for emotionally handicapped children, but he had been almost fully mainstreamed into normal classes. D.S. showed signs of regression following visits with *888 Mother. The DPW intends to attempt to place D.S. in a home with a very stable environment, and it believes the prognosis for doing so is good.
J.S. lived with Mother for the first three months of his life and for a seven month period in 1988. J.S. is a very troubled child who has exhibited instances of extreme hostility and frustration. He has demonstrated an extreme fear of abandonment. Mary Pacios, a clinical psychologist who has counseled J.S., described him as a high risk child in need of a structured and stable environment. Like D.S., J.S. did not do very well in the first foster home in which he was placed, but he had improved in the foster home where he resided at the time of the trial. He became markedly more hostile and violent following visits with his mother. After one visit, during which he saw Mother stab R.D., he stabbed a kitten and pretended to stab other things with knives. He also spoke of wanting to see blood and of being covered in blood. The DPW plans to place him for adoption in the near future. The prognosis for his placement is excellent.
Here, the trial court has filed special findings pursuant to Ind.Trial Rule 52. We therefore apply a two-tier standard of review. First, we determine whether the evidence supports the findings, and then, we determine whether the findings and conclusions support the judgment. Page v. Greene County Department of Welfare (1991), Ind. App., 564 N.E.2d 956, 959. In applying that standard, we will not reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of witnesses. Instead, we consider only the evidence and reasonable inferences drawn therefrom that are most favorable to the judgment of the trial court. Id.
IND. CODE § 31-6-5-4 controls the termination of parental rights. That section provides that the attorney for the county welfare department or the prosecutor may file a petition to terminate the parent-child relationship of a child in need of services, and
(c) The petition ... must allege that:
(1) the child has been removed from the parent for at least six (6) months under a dispositional decree;
(2) there is a reasonable probability that the conditions that resulted in the child's removal will not be remedied;
(3) the termination is in the best interests of the child; and
(4) the county department has a satisfactory plan for the care and treatment of the child.
I.C. § 31-6-5-4 (1988)[1]. The petitioner has the burden of demonstrating the above elements by clear and convincing evidence. Matter of J.K.C. (1984), Ind. App., 470 N.E.2d 88, 91. If the trial court finds that the petitioner has proven the allegations in the petition, it must terminate the parent-child relationship. I.C. § 31-6-5-4.3 (1991 Supp).
Mother essentially claims that the DPW failed to demonstrate a reasonable probability that the conditions that led to the removal of her children will not be remedied. She bases her argument on her assertion that alcoholism is the root of the problems resulting in the removal of her children, and that she has remained sober for the past six months, the longest period of sobriety in her adult life. She points to the testimony of Joseph Grott, a case manager at the Medpark Center, where she was ordered to undergo treatment as a condition of her probation pursuant to her conviction for stabbing R.D. Grott testified that Mother was doing very well in treatment. Mother contends that, because Grott's testimony is the only testimony regarding how she was doing at the time of the hearing, the trial court erred in finding that there was a reasonable probability *889 that the conditions resulting in the removal of the children would not be remedied. We disagree.
Mother's argument, while eloquently made, is plainly an invitation for us to reweigh the evidence. In Matter of JKC, the court recognized that a trial court should judge parental fitness as of the time of the hearing, taking into consideration evidence of changed conditions. However, the court additionally recognized the permanent effect of termination and stated that the trial court must also evaluate the parent's habitual patterns of conduct to determine whether there is a substantial probability of future neglect or deprivation of the children. Matter of JKC, 470 N.E.2d at 92. Here, the trial court found that alcohol and chemical dependency played a major role in Mother's life, at least through April, 1990. The court also found that Mother had gone through counseling for the previous eight years, and the court cited incidents such as the stabbing of R.D. that occurred as recently as March, 1990. The trial court was entitled to conclude that Mother was likely to regress once she left the structured environment of Medpark, especially in light of her relapse after being released from Wabash Addiction Center where she had also made great progress. Furthermore, the trial court also found that Mother had not attempted to address the special problems of her children, and that finding is supported by the fact that Mother refused to acknowledge that she was a cause of J.S.'s problems.
Mother also contends that the trial court erred in finding that it was in the children's best interests to terminate her parental rights. She points to the fact that the children were still exhibiting many of the same behavior problems in foster care that they had when they were in her custody. Again, this is simply an invitation to reweigh the evidence. It is true that both the children remained very troubled at the time of the hearing. However, there was also strong evidence that they had improved in structured environments. Furthermore, the DPW presented evidence that the children had regressed following visits with Mother. The trial court's findings clearly are supported by substantial evidence.
Mother cites several cases in which appellate courts have found the evidence sufficient to uphold termination of parental rights. She argues that factors present in those cases, such as great progress made in foster care, parents who did not maintain contact with the children, and parents who remained unemployed or transient, do not exist in her case. While her observation is correct, it does not mandate reversal. Each case has unique facts. There is no exclusive list of factors that must be present for a trial court to find that termination would be in the children's best interests.
Finally, Mother contends that the trial court erred in terminating her parental rights because the DPW did not demonstrate that it had offered her reasonable assistance in fulfilling her parental obligations. She claims that the DPW did not offer her services aimed at treating her alcoholism, which she claims was the root of her inability to properly parent her children.
Proof that the parent has been offered reasonable services to assist the parent in fulfilling her parental obligations is not required under I.C. § 31-6-5-4. Prior to 1982 that section required that the petition to terminate allege that "reasonable services have been offered or provided to the parent to assist him in fulfilling his parental obligations, and either he has failed to accept them or they have been ineffective[.]" I.C. § 31-6-5-4 (1979). However, the legislature specifically deleted that language. Acts 1982, P.L. 183 Sec. 4. Mother urges us to continue to read such a requirement into the statute. She relies upon I.C. § 31-6-1-1(5) which states that it is the purpose of Article 6 "to strengthen family life by assisting parents to fulfill their parental obligations[.]" I.C. § 31-6-1-1 (1990).
We do not accept Mother's construction of the statute. The object of statutory interpretation is to determine and effect the intent of the legislature. Walton v. *890 State (1980), 272 Ind. 398, 402, 398 N.E.2d 667, 671. The legislature clearly enumerated in I.C. 31-6-5-4 the specific elements that must be proved for termination of parental rights. Where certain items or words are specified or enumerated in a statute, other items or words are excluded by implication. Health and Hospital Corporation of Marion County v. Marion County (1984), Ind. App., 470 N.E.2d 1348, 1355, reh'g denied 476 N.E.2d 887, trans. denied. Furthermore, the legislature has clearly expressed its intent that the offer of reasonable services by the DPW is not an element by repealing that specific provision. We will not use the general policy statement of Article 6 to judicially rewrite a requirement into I.C. 31-6-5-4 that the legislature has specifically removed. We disagree with Matter of Campbell (1989), Ind. App., 534 N.E.2d 273 and Matter of D.B. (1990), Ind. App., 561 N.E.2d 844 to the extent that those cases may be read to require proof that the DPW has offered reasonable services to assist the parent in fulfilling her parental obligations as a prerequisite to termination.
For the reasons contained herein, we affirm the the trial court's order terminating Mother's parental rights.
AFFIRMED.
BUCHANAN and BARTEAU, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  I.C. § 31-6-5-4(c) now reads:
(2) there is a reasonable probability that:
(A) the conditions that resulted in the child's removal will not be remedied; or
(B) the continuation of the parent-child relationship poses a threat to the well-being of the child;
* * * *
(4) there is a satisfactory plan for the care and treatment of the child.
I.C. § 31-6-5-4(c) (as amended effective July 1, 1990 by Acts 1990, P.L. 155-1990, SEC. 24).

=== CASE 2227335 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:33.527015+00 ===

582 N.E.2d 788 (1991)
Don W. MINDER, Robert L. Snedeker, and Woodridge Homeowners Association, Inc., Appellants (Plaintiffs below),
v.
MARTIN LUTHER HOME FOUNDATION, a Nebraska Corporation, Appellee (Defendant below).
61S04-9112-CV-951.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
December 4, 1991.
Myrl O. Wilkinson, Timothy R. Hayes, Patrick Wilkinson Goeller & Modesitt, Terre Haute, for appellants.
*789 Jordan D. Lewis, Lewis & Lewis, Terre Haute, for appellee.
DICKSON, Justice.
The opinion in this case and its companion, Clem v. Christole, Inc. (1991), Ind., 582 N.E.2d 780, are being handed down contemporaneously. Like Clem, this is an appeal from a summary judgment in which the trial court applied Ind. Code § 16-13-21-14 to invalidate the application of subdivision restrictive covenants to the operation of a group home for developmentally disabled persons. Rejecting arguments including a claim that the statute violates the contract clause of the Indiana Constitution, the Court of Appeals affirmed. Minder v. Martin Luther Home Foundation (1990), Ind. App., 558 N.E.2d 833. In accord with our decision today in Clem, we grant transfer.
Plaintiffs-Appellants Don W. Minder, Robert L. Snedeker, and the Woodridge Homeowners Association, Inc., here seek relief against the defendant Martin Luther Home Foundation which had acquired a lot in the plaintiffs' subdivision for the purpose of operating a group home for developmentally and mentally handicapped persons. The plaintiffs asserted that the proposed use would violate various provisions of the applicable restrictive covenants. In entering summary judgment in favor of the defendant, the trial court did not reach whether defendant's operation of the group home was violative of the restrictive covenants. The determinative issue was whether or not Ind. Code § 16-13-21-14 was constitutional. Because of the reasons expressed today in Clem, we hold that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment for the defendant.
Transfer is granted. Summary judgment is reversed, and this cause is remanded to the trial court to determine whether the proposed group home violates the restrictive covenants and to proceed accordingly.
SHEPARD, C.J., and GIVAN, J., concur.
DeBRULER and KRAHULIK, JJ., dissent and would affirm summary judgment for the defendant.

=== CASE 2227337 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:33.578354+00 ===

411 Mass. 345 (1991)
582 N.E.2d 514
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
GARY STEWART.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Middlesex.
September 5, 1991.
December 9, 1991.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, ABRAMS, NOLAN, & GREANEY, JJ.
Patricia A. O'Neill, Committee for Public Counsel Services, for the defendant.
David R. Marks, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
GREANEY, J.
A jury in the Superior Court convicted the defendant, Gary Stewart, of murder in the second degree. The Commonwealth proceeded against the defendant on a joint venture theory, asserting that the defendant had participated *346 with John Good in the murder of Robert Perry.[1] A divided Appeals Court reversed the defendant's conviction, concluding that he was entitled to the allowance of his motion for a required finding of not guilty because the Commonwealth's evidence was insufficient to warrant a finding by the jury that the defendant knew of, and shared, Good's intent to kill or grievously injure Perry. Commonwealth v. Stewart, 30 Mass. App. Ct. 569 (1991). We allowed the Commonwealth's application for further appellate review. We conclude that the Commonwealth's evidence was sufficient to warrant the jury's finding that the defendant was guilty of murder in the second degree as a joint venturer with Good. We also reject the defendant's arguments claiming error in: (1) the denial of his motion in limine; (2) the exclusion of testimony from a defense witness; (3) the prosecutor's final argument; and (4) the jury instructions on joint venture. Consequently, we affirm the defendant's conviction.
The Commonwealth's evidence permitted the jury to find the following facts concerning the murder. Around noon on Sunday, July 27, 1986, Robert Perry was walking along Cambridge Street in Cambridge. John Good approached Perry and fatally shot him several times with a .38 caliber handgun. Good then ran to, and got into, the passenger seat of a Pontiac automobile bearing the Massachusetts registration number 104MND. This automobile, driven by the defendant, immediately sped down Maple Avenue. At a nearby intersection, the Pontiac ignored a stop sign and collided with another automobile. Good then left the automobile and rapidly walked away, telling the defendant that he intended to leave. The defendant remained with the automobile.
The Commonwealth's case concerning the defendant's knowledge and intent contained the following evidence. At about 1 A.M, July 27, 1986, the defendant, Good, and a third, unidentified man were together at a bar on Tremont and *347 Cambridge Streets, about four blocks east of Cambridge City Hospital and seven blocks west of Hunting Street. Approximately seven hours later, at about 7:50 A.M., the defendant, Good, and another man were driving west on Cambridge Street near Hunting Street in a yellow or off-white automobile bearing Massachusetts registration number 104MND. The defendant was driving, Good was in the front passenger seat, and the third man was in the back seat. Perry lived on or near Hunting Street. Good also lived in the area.
As the three men drove along, they passed a green automobile parked at the curb. A white cat lay on the hood of the automobile. The defendant turned his vehicle around on Cambridge Street and again pulled abreast of the green automobile. Good pointed a handgun out of the passenger window and shot the cat twice in the neck, killing it. A witness saw Good pull the handgun back into the automobile and heard the three men laugh as the defendant drove off. The witness saw and recorded the registration number of the automobile, 104MND. He then made contact with the Cambridge police, who broadcast this registration number over the police radio system.
At approximately 11:45 A.M., Perry was at or near Inman Square on Cambridge Street. He made a telephone call to his former wife, and they agreed to meet for brunch. About fifteen minutes later, Perry's former wife was driving along Cambridge Street toward Inman Square. When she reached the area of the hospital, she saw two paramedics leaning over Perry, who was lying on the street between two parked automobiles.
A witness, William Thomas, was watching television in his third-floor apartment at 66 Maple Avenue. Maple Avenue, a one-way street, begins at Cambridge Street, in front of the hospital, and runs south to Broadway. Number 66 is on the east side of Maple Avenue, three house lengths down from Cambridge Street. Hearing gunshots, Thomas went to the front windows of his apartment and looked up toward Cambridge Street. Thomas saw a man with a handgun running diagonally from the corner of Cambridge Street, down and *348 across to the east side of Maple Avenue. This man ran past Thomas's house and got into the passenger seat of an automobile parked in front of the house next door to Thomas's, one house length further from Cambridge Street. The automobile was parked on Maple Avenue where it was accessible to Cambridge Street and in position to be driven south down the one-way street. Thomas left the window to get paper and pencil to write down the registration number of the automobile, which he described as "off-white." When he returned to the window, the automobile was pulling out of its position and heading south. The registration number was 104MND.
Another witness, Thomas Scott, was with his children at a playground on the west side of Maple Avenue, one block down from Cambridge Street and about seventy-five yards away from a parked automobile. Scott also saw a man running from Cambridge Street, down and across Maple Avenue, to the passenger side of a parked automobile, which Scott described as "yellow." The driver then pulled away "immediately." When the automobile passed Scott, it was travelling at about forty-five miles per hour, and Scott saw Good peering out of the passenger side window.
Other witnesses testified that Good lived on Highland Park, a dead-end street running off of Highland Avenue, the next street to the west of Maple Avenue. Good could have reached his house on foot from Maple Avenue by going into the driveway of the second house down from the playground, through to the backyard, and then through a hole in the fence and onto his property.
As the defendant drove away from the scene, he disregarded a stop sign at the intersection of Dana and Harvard Streets, and struck another automobile, driven by Cheryl Bergeron, broadside. Just after the accident, Bergeron saw Good walking quickly down Dana Street towards Massachusetts Avenue. She also saw Good look over his shoulder and heard him say, "`I'm getting out of here,' something of that nature." The defendant, described by a witness as "very heavy," made no effort to leave the scene of the accident and leaned against the fender of his automobile.
*349 A Cambridge police officer, Kevin Davis, arrived at the accident scene and recognized the registration number on the defendant's automobile, 104MND, as the one that had been broadcast earlier that morning and again before noon. Officer Davis gave the defendant Miranda warnings immediately, and the defendant responded, "What's the big deal about an accident? I'm the only one." Either the defendant or a bystander later told Officer Davis that another person had been in the automobile. A brown paper bag containing six or seven bullets (similar to those used to kill Perry)[2] was found on the floor of the defendant's automobile by the passenger seat. There was also gunpowder residue on the inside upper portion of the passenger side door of the automobile.
In his case, the defendant offered one witness, his mother, who worked at Cambridge City Hospital. The judge excluded her testimony as inadmissible hearsay. We shall address the issue of the judge's ruling on this testimony later in the opinion.
1. Motion for required finding. At the conclusion of all the evidence, the defendant moved for a required finding of not guilty on the basis that the Commonwealth's evidence was insufficient to show that he knew of, and shared, Good's intention to kill or grievously injure Perry. See Mass. R. Crim. P. 25 (a), 378 Mass. 896 (1979). The judge denied the motion and submitted the case to the jury. The defendant argues that the motion should have been allowed.
"The essential question in evaluating the denial of a motion for a required finding of not guilty is whether the evidence received, viewed in a light most favorable to the Commonwealth, is sufficient so that the jury `might properly draw inferences, not too remote in the ordinary course of events, or forbidden by any rule of law, and conclude upon all the established circumstances and warranted inferences that the guilt of the defendant was proved beyond a reasonable *350 doubt.' Commonwealth v. Vellucci, 284 Mass. 443, 445 (1933)." Commonwealth v. Clary, 388 Mass. 583, 588-589 (1983). A joint venturer, is "one who aids, commands, counsels, or encourages commission of a crime while sharing with the principal the mental state required for the crime." Commonwealth v. Soares, 377 Mass. 461, 470, cert. denied, 444 U.S. 881 (1979). "To be convicted of murder on a joint venture theory `[a] joint venturer need only intend that the victim be killed or know that there is a substantial likelihood of the victim's being killed.' Commonwealth v. Podlaski, 377 Mass. 339, 347 (1979)." Commonwealth v. Champagne, 399 Mass. 80, 86-87 (1987). "A person's knowledge or intent is a matter of fact, which is often not susceptible of proof by direct evidence, so resort is frequently made to proof by inference from all the facts and circumstances developed at the trial.... The inferences drawn by the jury need only be reasonable and possible and need not be necessary or inescapable ..." (citations omitted). Commonwealth v. Casale, 381 Mass. 167, 173 (1980). "The line that separates mere knowledge of unlawful conduct and participation in it, is `often vague and uncertain. It is within the province of the jury to determine from the evidence whether a particular defendant [has] crossed that line.'" Commonwealth v. Cerveny, 387 Mass. 280, 287 (1982), quoting Commonwealth v. Beneficial Fin. Co., 360 Mass. 188, 250 (1971), cert. denied sub nom. Farrell v. Massachusetts, 407 U.S. 910, and Beneficial Fin. Co. v. Massachusetts, 407 U.S. 914 (1972). "To the extent that conflicting inferences are possible from the evidence, `it is for the jury to determine where the truth lies.'" Commonwealth v. Wilborne, 382 Mass. 241, 245 (1981), quoting Commonwealth v. Amazeen, 375 Mass. 73, 81 (1978).
Applying these standards to this case, we conclude that the Commonwealth presented evidence sufficient to prove that the defendant had the requisite knowledge and intent. There was evidence that the defendant was seen with Good several times from 1 A.M. on September 27, until just before the murder, at about noon, and again immediately after the murder. *351 On each occasion, the defendant and Good were seen driving on Cambridge Street close to Perry's residence. There was evidence that, at about 8 A.M., Good shot and killed a cat from the passenger side window of the defendant's automobile while the defendant drove. There was evidence that, immediately after the murder, Good ran directly to, and entered, the defendant's automobile; that the automobile had been parked discreetly on a one-way side street near the scene of the murder where it would be accessible to Good; and that the automobile instantly pulled away from the curb at high speed without any apparent conversation between Good and the defendant. There was also evidence that the defendant lied to the police officer at the scene of the accident that occurred as Good and the defendant attempted to flee, telling the officer that no one else had been in the automobile with him.
From all the Commonwealth's evidence, the jury reasonably could have inferred that the defendant and Good had been driving up and down Cambridge Street over the course of several hours looking for Perry so Good could shoot him;[3] that in the vicinity of the Perry's home a cat was killed to test the gun, to target practice, or to pass the time during the "stake-out" for Perry; and that the defendant deliberately parked on a side street near Cambridge Street, and around the corner from where Perry was soon to pass, in order to facilitate a speedy escape after the murder. The jury could *352 also have reasonably inferred that the defendant's intent to assist Good in this venture was further shown by evidence that Good ran directly to the defendant's automobile after the shooting; that, without any hesitation or conversation, the defendant immediately pulled away and sped up the street at a high rate of speed; and that the defendant subsequently covered Good's escape by lying to the police.
The defendant refers to Commonwealth v. Mandile, 403 Mass. 93 (1988), and Commonwealth v. Walsh, 407 Mass. 740 (1991) (decisions in which the Commonwealth's evidence that the defendant had participated in a murder as a joint venturer was found insufficient to overcome a motion for required finding of not guilty), and argues that these decisions control the outcome here. The Commonwealth's evidence in this case is stronger than the Commonwealth's evidence in either Mandile or Walsh for the reasons we now explain.
In Mandile, supra at 95, the defendant and the shooter pulled into the driveway of the victim's home. The shooter then entered the home alone, leaving the defendant waiting in his automobile for ten to fifteen minutes. Id. There was no evidence that the defendant pulled away immediately when the shooter returned to the automobile. Id. at 95, 101. We considered the lack of such evidence a serious weakness in the Commonwealth's case, id. at 101. We concluded, based on the absence of this evidence, the length of time the shooter remained in the victim's home, and other factors, that the evidence was not sufficient for the jury to infer that the defendant actually knew the shooter intended to kill the victim. In this case, the murder occurred quickly after Good spotted Perry, and there was evidence that Good ran to the defendant's automobile which had been parked nearby immediately after the murder. Moreover, there was evidence that the defendant instantly moved the automobile out of its parking space and accelerated rapidly without first conversing with Good. This sort of evidence, lacking in Mandile, was indicative of prearrangement between the defendant and Good, and tended to prove advance knowledge on the defendant's *353 part of what had just occurred on Cambridge Street. See Commonwealth v. Giang, 402 Mass. 604, 609 (1988).
In Walsh, supra at 741, the Commonwealth prosecuted the defendant as a joint venturer with another man. Two victims had been assaulted  the other man attacked one victim with a knife, while the defendant attacked the second victim with a bottle. Id. at 742. The victim attacked by the defendant's companion subsequently died of stab wounds, but the victim attacked by the defendant survived. Id. at 743. The defendant was convicted of several charges in connection with his attack, and, on a joint venture theory, was also convicted of the murder of the victim he did not attack. Id. at 740. We concluded that the Commonwealth's evidence was insufficient on several grounds. First, and most crucially, there was no evidence that the defendant knew prior to the attacks that his companion was armed. Id. In addition, there was no evidence that the two attacks were made in concert in any way. Id. at 745. Also, none of the evidence of consciousness of guilt presented in Walsh went specifically to the defendant's consciousness of guilt in the murder. All of that evidence was equally explainable as consciousness of guilt in the defendant's separate assault on the injured victim. Id. In this case, there was evidence that the defendant knew that Good was armed with a working handgun because the defendant had seen Good shoot the cat. Also in this case, there was only one attack, the fatal shooting of Perry. There was evidence, therefore, from which the jury could have found that Good and the defendant were acting in concert in carrying out a single deadly attack with a handgun. Further, in this case the defendant's lying to the police at the scene of the subsequent automobile accident could not have been designed to shield the defendant for his conduct in some other, independent event.
For these reasons, we find the decisions relied upon by the defendant inapposite. We conclude that the judge properly submitted the case against the defendant to the jury because experience and common sense permitted the jury to infer *354 from the evidence that the defendant was an active participant in the murder.
2. Motion in limine. The defendant filed a motion in limine to bar the testimony concerning the shooting of the cat. The defendant argued that the testimony was irrelevant, or that its marginal relevance was substantially outweighed by unfair prejudice. After a hearing, the judge denied the motion. The defendant objected to the evidence when it was introduced at trial. See Commonwealth v. Gabbidon, 398 Mass. 1, 7 (1986). The defendant now argues that the evidence of the cat shooting should have been excluded because it was (1) irrelevant and (2) unfairly prejudicial evidence of a prior bad act. We reject both contentions.
Whether evidence is relevant depends on its logical tendency to prove some issue in the case on trial. Commonwealth v. Tobin, 392 Mass. 604, 613 (1984). Commonwealth v. Chretien, 383 Mass. 123, 135 (1981). Evidence of a defendant's prior bad acts is inadmissible to prove guilt, but is admissible for other relevant probative purposes. Commonwealth v. Cordle, 404 Mass. 733, 744 (1989). Commonwealth v. Weaver, 400 Mass. 612, 619 (1987). Commonwealth v. Chalifoux, 362 Mass. 811, 815-816 (1973).
The evidence of the shooting of the cat was relevant. It was highly probative of the defendant's knowledge that Good was armed with a working handgun. This knowledge, in turn, had a rational tendency to prove that the defendant knew of Good's intent to kill Perry before the murder actually took place. The defendant's intent was the most strenuously contested issue at trial. In the circumstances, the evidence of the cat shooting clearly "provide[d] a link in the chain of proof" against him. Commonwealth v. Gordon, 407 Mass. 340, 351, (1990), quoting Commonwealth v. Tobin, supra at 613.
For similar reasons, the evidence was not unfairly prejudicial. While the evidence suggested that the defendant had participated in a cruel act, the judge reasonably concluded that the probative value of the evidence on an essential element of the Commonwealth's proof outweighed any prejudice. The judge properly admitted the evidence.
*355 3. Exclusion of testimony. As has been noted, the defendant called his mother as a witness. The defendant's trial counsel asked the witness whether she had a telephone conversation with the defendant after 10 A.M. on the day of the murder. The prosecutor objected to the witness's being allowed to state the substance of the telephone conversation. The judge sustained the objection, ruling that the testimony constituted inadmissible hearsay. The defendant's trial counsel indicated that the witness would have testified, if permitted to do so, that the defendant had telephoned on the morning of the murder and had made arrangements to meet her at noon for lunch at Cambridge City Hospital where she worked. The judge refused to change his ruling that excluded the testimony.[4]
The defendant's trial counsel offered the judge no acceptable basis on which to allow the conversation in evidence. In support of his offer of proof, trial counsel stated only that the proposed evidence fell within "the classic case, the Hillmon case." The reference by counsel was to Mutual Life Ins. Co. v. Hillmon, 145 U.S. 285 (1892). In that decision, the United States Supreme Court stated that evidence that a person expressed an intention in the past to go somewhere and meet someone was admissible to prove that the person later actually did what he or she intended. Id. at 295-296. The testimony offered in this case does not fit the Hillmon rule because the defendant did not offer the evidence of his intention to meet his mother for lunch to prove the fact that he had lunch with her. See Commonwealth v. Trefethen, 157 Mass. 180, 185-186 (1892); Cooke v. Moore, 11 Cush. 213, 217 (1853). Rather, the defendant offered the evidence to prove his intention. Therefore, on what was argued to him at trial, the judge correctly rejected the offer of proof because *356 the testimony concerned an out-of-court statement which was offered to prove the truth of the matter contained in the statement, see P.J. Liacos, Massachusetts Evidence 265 (5th ed. 1981), and did not fall within the Hillmon rule.
On appeal, the defendant maintains that the testimony was not hearsay and refers to several decisions (none of which was given to the judge) to support a revised argument that the testimony was necessary to afford him a fair trial. The decisions now relied on by the defendant are not helpful to him. They involve such matters as in-court testimony by a defendant about his intent to commit the crime with which he is charged, see Commonwealth v. Caldron, 383 Mass. 86, 89-90 (1981); Commonwealth v. Huffman, 11 Mass. App. Ct. 185, 190, S.C., 385 Mass. 122 (1982); statements of intent expressing background circumstantial facts not offered for their truth, see Commonwealth v. Goulet, 374 Mass. 404, 418 (1978); Commonwealth v. Wampler, 369 Mass. 121, 122-123 (1975); Commonwealth v. Fiore, 364 Mass. 819, 824 (1974); Commonwealth v. Marcotte, 18 Mass. App. Ct. 391, 396 (1984); statements involving the defendant's mental condition when his sanity was in issue, see Commonwealth v. Louraine, 390 Mass. 28, 34 (1983); and statements falling within the Hillmon rule described above, see Commonwealth v. Ferreira, 381 Mass. 306, 310-311 (1980). None of the bases for admitting the statements in these decisions is involved in this case. There is, therefore, still no showing by the defendant of a supportable reason for allowing the testimony. Furthermore, considering that the judge was not presented with the arguments now made about the evidence, there is no showing of any basis for concluding that its exclusion gives rise to a substantial risk of a miscarriage of justice. Finally, it follows from what has been said that, to the extent that the judge may have possessed discretion to admit the testimony, it has not been demonstrated that he abused that discretion.
4. The prosecutor's closing argument. The defendant argues that certain portions of the prosecutor's summation to the jury touched on matters not in evidence and were attempts to inflame the jury. The criticized remarks were not *357 objected to by the defendant's trial counsel. We therefore consider only whether the remarks of the prosecutor created a substantial risk of a miscarriage of justice. Commonwealth v. Kozec, 399 Mass. 514, 518 n. 8 (1987).
a. The prosecutor referred to the incident of the cat shooting several times in his final argument. The references, by and large, concerned the drawing of fair and reasonable inferences from evidence that was properly admitted. The prosecutor's effort at the end of his summation to draw an analogy between the shooting of the cat and the shooting of the victim involved some hyperbole but nothing beyond the ability of the jury to discount. Commonwealth v. Glass, 401 Mass. 799, 806 (1988).
b. The prosecutor's argument directing the jury's attention to the fact that the Commonwealth's witnesses had not been shown to have any stake in the outcome of the case was, in context, an effort to focus the jury on a factor to consider in assessing the credibility of the witnesses. The argument also did not constitute improper vouching by the prosecutor for the credibility of the Commonwealth's witnesses. The argument did not suggest in any way that the prosecutor personally believed that the defendant was guilty or that the prosecutor knew something outside of the evidence that implied an opinion on witness veracity. The over-all thrust of the prosecutor's argument was to invite the jury to determine for themselves, as was their duty, the credibility of the witnesses. See Commonwealth v. Nicholson, 20 Mass. App. Ct. 9, 18 (1985).
c. The prosecutor's reference, early in his argument, that "[i]t's [a] joint venture, two people take part in a common enterprise, to wit: to rob, to kill Robert Perry," stated a consideration ("to rob") of which there was no evidence. The reference was improper. The absence of any objection by the defendant's trial counsel indicates that his counsel did not consider "the tone, manner, and substance" of the prosecutor's statement when it was made to be harmful. Commonwealth v. Toro, 395 Mass. 354, 360 (1985). In view of the complete lack of any evidence of robbery, and assuming *358 some measure of sophistication on the part of the jury to sort out claims that had been supported by proof from those that had not, see Commonwealth v. Yesilciman, 406 Mass. 736, 746 (1990), we are not prepared to say that the isolated reference by the prosecutor fatally prejudiced the jury's impartial consideration of the evidence against the defendant.
d. The other portions of the prosecutor's final argument criticized on appeal concerned comments that the Commonwealth did not have to prove a long-standing plan between the defendant and Good to murder Perry to obtain a conviction and the location of the defendant's automobile on Cambridge Street in a good spot to effect a quick getaway. Both portions of the argument were proper. The first point was a proper comment on the Commonwealth's burden of proof which responded to a statement made by the defendant's trial counsel in his closing argument that could have been misconstrued. The second point argued permissible inferences from the evidence.
5. Jury instructions. The defendant's trial counsel objected to the judge's instructions on joint venture. Trial counsel stated that the instructions had not "adequately said [that the defendant's] knowledge and intent [to participate in the crime] must exist prior to the shooting." On appeal, while admitting that the judge's instructions on joint venture "mirrored the case law," the defendant continues to argue that the instructions failed completely to inform the jury that they had to be satisfied in order to return a guilty verdict that the defendant knew before the shooting what Good was going to do, and that he shared with Good the mental state necessary for the crime. We conclude that the instructions accurately stated the law, and properly informed the jury of the mental state that the defendant had to have formed before the killing.
The judge told the jury the defendant was charged with murder as a joint venturer with Good and that the Commonwealth had to prove such an association beyond a reasonable doubt. The jury were instructed that the Commonwealth must establish that the defendant associated himself with a *359 criminal venture and participated to some extent in the commission of the crime. Commonwealth v. Chinn, 6 Mass. App. Ct. 714, 716-717 (1978). The judge told the jury that mere presence at a crime scene was not enough, that failure to prevent commission of the crime was insufficient, and that a mere agreement to commit the crime could not prove joint venture liability. Commonwealth v. Casale, 381 Mass. 167, 173 (1980). Commonwealth v. Saez, 21 Mass. App. Ct. 408, 410-411 (1986).
The judge described the requirements of proof of joint venture by tracking the language of Commonwealth v. Soares, 377 Mass. 461, 470 (1979), and Commonwealth v. Chinn, supra at 716, stating that the evidence must show that "[the defendant], counselled, hired, or otherwise procured the actual perpetrator, rendered aid to the perpetrator, assistance or encouragement to the perpetrator, or put himself in a position ready to render aid in the commission of the crime." Importantly, the judge stressed the following:
"A defendant's guilt under a joint venture theory is established when it is shown beyond a reasonable doubt that he, meaning Mr. Stewart, intentionally assisted the actual perpetrator in the commission of a crime and that he did this while sharing the mental state required for the crime. I'm going to repeat that because that's going to be important in respect to instructions I'm going to give you about murder in the first degree, the elements of murder in the first degree. I want to repeat that. The defendant's guilt is established when it is shown beyond a reasonable doubt that he intentionally assisted the actual perpetrator in the commission of the crime and that he did this while sharing the mental state required for that crime, the same specific intent that the perpetrator had."
See Commonwealth v. Casale, supra at 173; Commonwealth v. Soares, supra at 470; Commonwealth v. Saez, supra at 410. This instruction directed the jurors to determine *360 whether the defendant had the mental state required for the crime of murder in the first degree, that is, deliberately premeditated malice aforethought.
These instructions on joint venture were accompanied by clear and correct instructions on the elements of murder in the first degree and second degree, including the elements of premeditation and the various types of malice. The matter was summed up by a direct instruction that the Commonwealth was required to show "beyond a reasonable doubt that [the defendant] intentionally assisted Good and that he did this while sharing the mental state required for that crime [i.e., murder]. In other words, that he shared this state of deliberate premeditation."
We are satisfied that the jury instructions on joint venture and murder, considered as a whole, adequately advised the jury that, to find the defendant guilty as a joint venturer with Good, they must find that the defendant possessed the requisite state of mind prior to, and at the time of, Perry's murder, and that he acted in keeping with that intention to assist in the crime.
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Good was tried separately and convicted of murder in the first degree. We have already considered Good's appeal and have affirmed his conviction. Commonwealth v. Good, 409 Mass. 612 (1991).
[2]  Perry was shot several times with .38 caliber bullets. Some of the bullets removed from the victim's body had a lead core and others had a copper jacket over a lead core. The paper bag contained .38 caliber bullets, some with a lead core and some with a copper jacket over a lead core.
[3]  On the evidence presented in Good's separate trial, a jury might conceivably have inferred that Good did not plan long in advance to kill the victim at the exact time and place of the shooting. See Commonwealth v. Good, supra, at 618 n. 5. Our observation to this effect was made in response to Good's argument on his appeal that evidence of premeditation was entirely lacking. We did not relate the observation to the context of the defendant's involvement in Good's crime over the long period of time the two men spent together. We concluded in Good's case that, at a minimum, the jury could have found that Good resolved to murder Perry no later than the time he approached him on the street. However, this was not the only reasonable inference in Good, nor is it in this case. In this case, we conclude that the evidence permitted the stronger inference that Good planned in advance to kill Perry, and that the defendant knew of this plan and intended to aid Good in committing the murder.
[4]  The judge explained his ruling by stating that the defendant's statement constituted "an out of court statement made to prove the truth of the matter asserted. Namely that he was not planning [to] kill ... anybody, but rather was going to have lunch with his mother." The judge concluded that "[m]y problem is [the mother's] plans are not relevant to the case and his statements are rank hearsay...."

=== CASE 9741466 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:56:17.432991+00 ===

CONOVER, Judge.
Plaintiff-Appellant Charles E. Smith (Smith) appeals the Marion Superior Court, Civil Division, Room No. l’s entry of summary judgment in favor of Defendant-Ap-pellee Leon Hansen d/b/a Harvester Bar in a negligent bartender suit.
This appeal presents the following issues:
1. whether enactment of the Indiana Comparative Fault Law abrogated the rule that release of one joint tort-feasor releases all, and
2. whether the release at issue expressly released appellee in this action.
Smith got drunk in Hansen’s bar, left, and stepped into the street. He was hit by Ball’s automobile and injured.' Smith settled with Ball for $50,000, signed a release for that sum, then sued Hansen d/b/a Harvester Bar for negligently giving Smith liquor when he was obviously drunk.
The release stated, in part
This release is entered into to fully and finally compromise all matters arising out of the above occurrence....
I/We hereby authorize my/our attorney of record to dismiss with prejudice at my/our cost any suit or claim which I/we may have brought or which may have been brought in my/our behalf, arising out of the matters described above.... I/We have read this entire document and understand everything herein contained; and I/We am/are satisfied in every respect to accept said sum of money with full knowledge that in doing so I/we am/are giving up all the rights and claims that I/we have or may have against all persons in consequence of said accident, injuries and damage.
(R. 37-38).
Summary judgment is appropriate when the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits and testimony, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact, and the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Beckett v. Clinton Prairie School Corp. (1987), Ind., 504 N.E.2d 552. With respect to an issue upon which the non-moving party will bear the burden of proof at trial, the burden of the moving party on summary judgment may be discharged by pointing out (by reference to the pleadings, affidavits, et cetera) that there is an absence of evidence to support the non-moving party’s case. Hinkle v. Niehaus Lumber Co. (1988), Ind., 525 N.E.2d 1243, 1245-1246. The judgment of the trial court will be affirmed on appeal if sustainable on any basis. Huffman v. Monroe Cty. Com. School Corp. (1991), Ind.App., 564 N.E.2d 961, 963.
*448Smith initially argues the judge-made rule that release of one joint tort-feasor releases all was abrogated in Indiana upon passage of the Indiana Comparative Fault Law because it “abolished joint and several liability among joint tort-feasors and required the fact-finder to apportion the plaintiff’s entire loss among the parties and non-parties in a case.” (Appellant’s Brief, p. 9). Smith cites as authority for this statement Gray v. Chacon, 684 F.Supp. 1481, 1485 (S.D.Ind.1988). See also, Huffman, supra (rule applies as to governmental entities due to their exemption from Comparative Fault Law, Baker, J. dissents), and Young v. Hoke (1986), Ind.App., 493 N.E.2d 1279, trans. denied (unqualified release of one joint tort-feasor, absent fraud or mistake, acts to release all joint tort-feasors, Staton J. concurs in result, Garrard, J. dissents). While “Hansen accepts Chacon as the appropriate rule of law to be applied in this case, and does not contend that the mere release of Ball by operation of law released Hansen,” (Appellee’s Brief, p. 11) we cannot and do not.
Even though it pre-dates enactment of Indiana’s Comparative Fault Law, our supreme court's most recent pronouncement on this subject unanimously reaffirmed the long-standing rule in Indiana that absent fraud or mistake, a release of one joint tort-feasor is a release of all; and, language in a release exempting certain joint tort-feasors from its operation is void. Bellew v. Byers (1979), 272 Ind. 37, 396 N.E.2d 335, 336; Cooper v. Robert Hall Clothes, Inc. (1979), 271 Ind. 63, 390 N.E.2d 155, 157. In Cooper, a four to one decision, our supreme court specifically rejected this court’s suggestion the old rule should be abolished and § 885(1) of the Restatement (Second) of Torts specifically be adopted.
It is true this rule is much-maligned. See, Chacon, and Young and Huffman dissents. However, such observers and critical text writers argue primarily passage of the Comparative Fault Act effectively destroyed the supreme court’s concept of “joint tort-feasors” as being a group of individual defendants whose individual acts of negligence combined to produce plaintiff’s injuries and damage. This is so, they argue, because fact finders under it are to determine each defendant’s percentage of fault at trial. However, our supreme court’s “joint tort-feasors” rationale was merely the second reason the supreme court gave for continuing the rule’s viability in Bellew. The first reason was
[1]t prevents an unfair prejudice against the defendant by precluding the plaintiff from recovering in excess of his injuries by successively obtaining settlements from the various tort-feasors in return for releases.
Bellew, 396 N.E.2d at 336.
That case, and its myriad predecessors, took a practical approach to this problem. The rule in question places the burden on the plaintiff to determine the monetary value of his damages and settle the case at that figure at his peril, if he deems settlement prior to trial his best course of action. Given the arguments for abolishing the rule, it also can be reasonably asserted in rebuttal, the Chacon rule grants plaintiffs a license to hunt for windfalls from other defendants if plaintiff’s settlement with one defendant fully compensates him for his damages. That undesirable result was the first reason our supreme court stated in Bellew for keeping the rule intact. Whether passage of the Comparative Fault Act has abolished the rule is a question for our supreme court to answer, not this one. cf. Cooper, supra. Because Bellew and Cooper still unequivocally state the law on this subject, their teachings are reason enough to sustain the trial court here.
Even if that rule has been abrogated as Smith contends, Hansen would still prevail here. Release agreements are contracts, and “like contracts generally, are interpreted as a matter of law [for the courts], absent some ambiguity.” Lechner v. Reutepohler (1989), Ind.App., 545 N.E.2d 1144, 1147; Huntington Mutual Ins. Co. v. Walker (1979), 181 Ind.App. 618, 392 N.E.2d 1182, 1184. In Turnpaugh v. Wolf (1985), Ind.App., 482 N.E.2d 506, the court stated
*449If the language of the instrument is unambiguous the intent of the parties is determined from its four corners ... A contract is ambiguous only if a reasonable person could find its terms susceptible to more than one interpretation.
Turnpaugh, Id. at 508.
The release’s terms here are plain and unambiguous as to who the parties intended to release. It provides
This release is entered into to fully and finally compromise all matter arising out of the above occurrence....
I/We have read this entire document and understand everything herein contained; and I/We am/are satisfied in every respect to accept said sum of money with full knowledge that in doing so I/We am/are giving up all the rights and claims that I/we have or may have against all persons in consequence of said accident, injuries and damage. (Emphasis supplied)
(R. 37-38). The language which releases “all persons” is clear and unambiguous, and included Hansen d/b/a Harvester Bar, a person against whom Smith was asserting a claim “in consequence of said accident.”
Affirmed.
RUCKER, J., concurs in result.
CHEZEM, J., concurs in result with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9741468 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:56:17.688522+00 ===

JUSTICE SLATER delivered the opinion of the court: This is an appeal from the circuit court of Rock Island County wherein the trial court, by judgment dated September 24, 1990, entered a deficiency judgment in a foreclosure proceeding in favor of plaintiff and against defendants Andrew L. Sill and Jean E. Sill (the Sills). The Sills purchased a home in the City of East Moline on July 26, 1983, and secured financing for the purchase from United Savings Association of Silvis, Illinois, plaintiff’s predecessor in interest. The Sills executed a 30-year note and mortgage providing for a monthly payment of $214 with interest at 13.25%. The Sills desired to sell the home in 1986 to defendants Paul and Cindy Williams (the Williams). The Sills contacted Bill Grimes, plaintiff’s loan officer, concerning an assumption of the mortgage by the Williams. Mr. Grimes consented to the sale but no written agreement was entered into between any of the parties at that time. Subsequent to the completion of the sale, plaintiff and the Williams entered into a “Loan Modification Agreement,” wherein the parties reduced the monthly payment and interest rate on the remaining unpaid balance of the Sills’ loan, but maintained the same amortization period. The agreement further provided that the terms and conditions of the original note and mortgage were to remain in full force and effect. This document was executed without the Sills’ knowledge. In August of 1987, the Williams became delinquent in their payments to plaintiff prompting a notice of acceleration letter from plaintiff’s attorneys to the Sills. In this letter plaintiff’s attorneys acknowledged that the Williams “assumed and agreed to pay” the debt but nonetheless maintained the Sills were obligated to cure the default under the original note and mortgage. The default was thereafter cured by the Williams. In September of 1987, a second notice of acceleration letter was sent to the Sills indicating that the Sills were liable under the note and mortgage but referring to the loan modification agreement as an “Assumption Agreement.” This default was not cured, and a foreclosure proceeding was commenced resulting in a deficiency judgment against the Sills for $9,982.60. Two issues are raised on appeal: first, whether plaintiff’s execution of the loan modification agreement released the Sills from liability under the original note and mortgage; and second, whether plaintiff’s actions of altering the terms of the note and mortgage without notice to the Sills released the Sills from liability under the original note and mortgage. Regarding the first issue, paragraph 17 of the mortgage reads, in part, as follows: “Transfer of the Property; Assumption. If all or any part of the Property or an interest therein is sold or transferred by Borrower without Lender’s prior written consent, *** Lender may, at Lender’s option declare all sums secured by this Mortgage to be immediately due and payable. Lender shall have waived such option to accelerate if, prior to the sale or transfer, Lender and the person to whom the Property is to be sold or transferred reach agreement in writing to the effect that the credit of such person is satisfactory to Lender and that the interest payable on the sums secured by this Mortgage shall be at such rate as Lender shall request. If Lender has waived the option to accelerate provided in paragraph 17, and if Borrower’s successor in interest has executed a written assumption agreement accepted in writing by Lender, Lender shall release Borrower from all obligations under this Mortgage and Note ***.”  Clearly, plaintiff did not exercise its option to accelerate the note pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 17. The question then is whether the loan modification agreement was in effect an assumption agreement accepted by plaintiff thereby releasing the Sills from liability. The loan modification agreement specifically states that all conditions and terms of the original note and mortgage, not altered by the agreement, were to remain in full force and effect. With this in mind, it is not unreasonable for plaintiff to have entered into a loan modification agreement with the Williams so long as the Sills would still be ultimately responsible for any liability that might arise in the future due to any default under the note and mortgage. Additionally, the Sills’ argument that plaintiff must have believed the loan to have been assumed by the Williams through the use of the assumption language in deficiency notices is without merit. Even though this language was used, it is clear that plaintiff sent these notices to the Sills and unquestionably stated that the Sills were obligated to cure the default or be subject to foreclosure proceedings. Finally, paragraph 10 of the mortgage states that “[ejxtension of the time for payment or modification of the sums secured by this mortgage granted by lender to any successor in interest of borrower shall not operate to release, in any manner, the liability of the original borrower.” This clause further supports plaintiff’s argument that the loan modification agreement was not an assumption of the debt, but merely a revision of the amortization of the loan which the Williams agreed to pay.  Secondly, the Sills argue that plaintiff, by entering into the loan modification agreement, materially altered the terms of the original note and mortgage. The changes complained of are a lowering of the interest rate by 2.5% and a lowering of the monthly payment by $34.40 per month. These changes were made without the Sills’ knowledge or consent. As authority, the Sills cite Prudential Insurance Co. of America v. Bass (1934), 357 E. 72, 191 N.E. 284, Conerty v. Richtsteig (1942), 379 Ill. 360, 41 N.E.2d 476, and Prudential Savings & Loan Association v. Nadler (1976), 37 Ill. App. 3d 168, 345 N.E .2d 782. These cases, however, are distinguishable because in each case, the mortgagee and the grantee of the original mortgage entered into agreements extending the payoff dates of the original notes to the detriment of the original mortgagors. In each respective case, the court reasoned that when the mortgagee accepted benefits from the grantee, the mortgagor became a surety of the underlying debt. Thereafter, when the debt was extended without the knowledge or consent of the surety, the surety no longer had the option of paying off the debt after the original maturity date and then seeking to recover the amount paid from the grantor. The surety instead had to wait until the extension period had expired. Because of this detriment to the surety, each court determined that the original mortgagor had been discharged as a surety of the debt. See Bass, 357 Ill. 72, 191 N.E. 284; Conerty, 379 Ill. 360, 41 N.E .2d 476; Nadler, 37 Ill. App. 3d 168, 345 N.E.2d 782. In this case, the SEs may arguably be construed as sureties of the underlying debt, but no detriment to the SEs resulted from the subsequent execution of the loan modification agreement by plaintiff and the WEiams. The payoff date of the loan remained the same. There is no evidence that the balance due at any given time would be greater under the modified amortization schedule than under the original amortization schedule. In fact, it appears that the modification agreement was a benefit to the SEs because in the event the WEiams defaulted in paying the debt, interest did not accrue as rapidly on the debt as it would have under the original amortization schedule thereby decreasing the balance due. We therefore affirm the trial court’s order and judgment. Affirmed. GORMAN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741469 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:56:17.692505+00 ===

JUSTICE HAASE, dissenting: I respectfully dissent from the opinion of the court in this case. This transaction was governed by paragraph 17 of the mortgage, which reads in part as follows: “Transfer of the property; Assumption. If all or any part of the Property or an interest therein is sold or transferred by Borrower without Lender’s prior written consent, *** Lender may, at Lender’s option, declare all sums secured by this Mortgage to be immediately due and payable. Lender shall have waived such option to accelerate if, prior to the sale or transfer, Lender and the person to whom the Property is to be sold or transferred reach agreement in writing to the effect that the credit of such person is satisfactory to Lender and that the interest payable on the sums secured by this Mortgage shall be at such rate as Lender shall request. If Lender has waived the option to accelerate provided in paragraph 17, and if Borrower’s successor in interest has executed a written assumption agreement accepted in writing by Lender, Lender shall release Borrower from all obligations under this Mortgage and Note ***.” The language of paragraph 17 of the mortgage deals with two topics. The first, under the heading “Transfer of the Property,” is a due on sale clause. It gives the lender the right to declare all sums due and payable upon a transfer of the property. The next sentence of the paragraph provides for a waiver by the lender of the option to accelerate. Under that sentence, the waiver occurs if the lender and the buyer of the property reach agreement in writing that the credit of the buyer is satisfactory to the lender and that the interest payable on the sum secured shall be at such rate as lender shall request. That sentence states that such agreement is to occur prior to the sale or transfer. The agreement did not occur prior to the sale in this case. Therefore, the waiver did not occur precisely in accordance with the terms of paragraph 17 of the mortgage. However, the parties agree in their briefs that the lender’s action in continuing to accept payments and not accelerate the loan amounted to a waiver. The second portion of paragraph 17 deals with assumption agreements. Under that language, it says that if the lender has waived the option to accelerate, and if borrower successor in interest has executed a written assumption agreement accepted in writing by lender, lender shall release borrower from all the obligations under this mortgage and note. In this case, a waiver did occur, albeit not precisely in accordance with paragraph 17. Subsequent to the completion of the sale, the plaintiff and the buyer entered into a “Loan Modification Agreement.” The issue presented in this case was whether that loan modification agreement constituted an assumption agreement accepted by plaintiff in writing thereby releasing the Sills from liability. The loan modification agreement which was entered into between plaintiff’s predecessor, United Savings Association of Silvas, Hlinois, and defendants’ successors in interest, Paul and Cindy Williams, does several things. First, it recites the original obligation between Andrew Sill, Jean Rimkus, and United Savings Association in the amount of $19,000. It further recites that the parties (the Williams and United Savings Association) acknowledge mutual considerations to revise the terms of payment of said indebtedness. The agreement further sets forth the unpaid balance of $18,818.83 and recites that the borrowers promise to pay the indebtedness with interest at the rate of 10.75% upon the unpaid balance. That interest rate was less than the original interest rate. In the final paragraph the agreement states that “In all other respects said note and mortgage contract shall remain in full force and effect, and the undersigned promise to pay said indebtedness as hereinstated and to perform all of the obligations of said mortgage contract, as herein revised.” The majority opinion in this case reasons that it was “not unreasonable for plaintiff to have entered into a loan modification agreement with the Williams so long as the Sills would still be ultimately responsible for any liability that might arise in the future due to any default under the note and mortgage.” (221 Ill. App. 3d at 600.) I respectfully submit that the issue is not the reasonableness of the conduct of the bank, but rather whether under paragraph 17 of a mortgage document drafted by the bank and under a loan modification agreement drafted by the bank the legal effect of those documents is to release defendants Andrew and Jean Sill. It has long been the law that when a document is prepared by one party and not by the other, any ambiguities should be resolved in favor of the party who did not draft the document. Also, it seems clear that what a party who drafts a document calls it is not determinative of the issue. What is important is the language in the body of the document taken together with all of the facts of the case. The fact that the bank chose to call the agreement a “Loan Modification Agreement” merely shows one of its purposes in drafting the agreement, i.e., to reduce the interest rate and extend the time for payment which made the agreement more attractive to the new buyers. However, the bank was also obtaining the agreement of the Williams to pay the outstanding balance and comply with the rest of the terms of the original note and mortgage. Black’s Law Dictionary defines the legal term “ASSUMPTION” as: “The act or agreement of assuming or taking upon one’s self. The undertaking or adoption of a debt or obligation primarily resting upon another, as where the purchaser of real estate ‘assumes’ a mortgage resting upon it, in which case he adopts the mortgage debt as his own and becomes personally liable for its payment. The difference between the purchaser of land assuming a mortgage on it and simply buying subject to the mortgage, is that in the former case he makes himself personally liable for the payment of the mortgage debt, while in the latter case he does not. When he takes the conveyance subject to the mortgage, he is bound only to the extent of the property. Where one ‘assumes’ a lease, he takes to himself the obligations, contracts, agreements, and benefits to which the other contracting party was entitled under the terms of the lease.” Black’s Law Dictionary 123 (6th ed. 1990). In this case the new buyers promised to pay the balance of the sums owed on the original note and mortgage subject to the new interest rate and payment schedule and to perform all the obligations of the original mortgage contract. Very clearly they assumed the terms of the note and mortgage and are bound personally on the note and mortgage. The fact that the bank called the agreement a loan modification agreement is of no import. It is also significant that the bank used the term “assumption” in deficiency notices that it sent. A review of the record in this case shows that the bank believed that this was an assumption situation although it is also clear that the bank was not intending to release the Sills because they continued to send the Sills notices. Returning then to paragraph 17 of the mortgage, we have, by agreement of the parties, a waiver of the option to accelerate and we have an executed written assumption agreement which has been accepted in writing by the lender. Those two conditions having been met, the lender shall release the borrower from all obligations under this mortgage and note. The lender did not have to draft paragraph 17 in the way that it did. It could have included language that said that even on an assumption agreement, the lender shall release the original borrower from all obligations only for additional consideration, or that the lender shall release the borrower only upon application by the borrower, or that the borrower shall still be bound unless there is a specific release executed by the lender. No language of that kind appears in the mortgage at all. Therefore, I believe that all of the requirements of paragraph 17 have been satisfied and that the Sills should be released by operation of the language of paragraph 17 from any further obligation under the mortgage and note. Therefore, I respectfully dissent and would reverse the trial court’s order entering a deficiency judgment against the Sills.

=== CASE 9741470 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:56:18.277061+00 ===

JUSTICE GREIMAN delivered the opinion of the court: After a bench trial, defendant was found guilty of unlawful restraint and residential burglary. He was sentenced to the minimum four years for residential burglary and two years for unlawful restraint, sentences to run concurrently. We affirm the convictions.  For residential burglary, the State must prove that the defendant knowingly and without authority entered the dwelling of another with the intent to commit a felony or theft. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 19 — 3.) Under the State’s theory, unlawful restraint was the underlying felony. The felony of unlawful restraint is proven when a person knowingly and without legal authority detains another. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 10 — 3. On appeal defendant asserts that the conviction for residential burglary should be reversed because (1) the State did not prove the two elements of the statute: (a) that the defendant, without authority, entered the dwelling of another and (b) that he entered the house with the intent to commit the underlying felony; (2) the defendant was denied a fair trial because of the introduction of other uncharged misconduct of defendant; (3) the defendant’s cross-examination was unduly restricted; and (4) defendant was improperly convicted of multiple offenses. Defendant and complainant, Ann Harrison (Ann), jointly owned the residence where the alleged residential burglary occurred. They were married and parties to dissolution of marriage proceedings pending in the circuit court of Cook County. During the pendency of the matrimonial action, Ann sought and received orders of protection since early 1987, which orders were on several occasions extended in accordance with the appropriate statutory authority. From time to time defendant visited his children on the premises with Ann’s permission and occasionally slept overnight. Occasionally, defendant and Ann engaged in consensual sexual relations as well. For a short period during the pendency of the order of protection, defendant lived in the residence with the couple’s minor children and Ann resided elsewhere, although at the time of the incident upon which his conviction was based, it is clear that defendant was not residing at the subject premises. On numerous occasions police were called concerning defendant’s violation of the order of protection. On these occasions, defendant entered the premises without appropriate permission or in some manner harassed his wife. Evidence showed defendant knew the protective orders were in place in May 1988 and that Ann renewed the orders without allowing them to lapse. There was further testimony that the defendant was not allowed into the residence without Ann’s permission. On the morning of October 26, 1988, defendant entered the residence by crawling through a basement window. Ann testified that she was in the house at that time preparing to leave when defendant grabbed her from behind and would not allow her to leave. She kept reaching for the door handle, but defendant continued to hold her around the waist. Shortly thereafter, the parties engaged in a violent fight, injuring Ann and ripping her clothes. Defendant testified that he had been invited by his wife to meet her at the house to discuss reconciliation and upon entering the home he had no intent to commit the alleged underlying felony. The trial court found that the order of protection was valid and stated it was “crystal clear” that defendant knew and understood the terms of the protective order. The court further determined that defendant’s method of entering the house through the basement window “is indicative of the kind of entry made by a person who does not feel he has a right to enter the premises.” The trial court indicated and believed Ann’s testimony that the defendant had never come on the premises "without her permission and that defendant entered the premises with more than mere discussion on his mind. The residential burglary statute provides as follows: “A person commits residential burglary who knowingly and without authority enters the dwelling place of another with the intent to commit therein a felony or theft.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 19 — 3. Defendant asserts that the State failed to prove that his entry on the day in question was “without authority” or that it was the “dwelling of another.”  In order to maintain this theory, defendant questions the validity of the order of protection although the record does not disclose that he raised an objection to its admission into evidence during the trial. Where the defendant fails to interpose an objection to a document during the course of a trial and no issue is raised in a post-trial motion, no issue has been preserved for appeal and defendant has accordingly waived any objections in this regard. People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 176, 522 N.E.2d 1124.  While we agree with this proposition, we also believe that the order of protection was a valid and subsisting order which clearly directed the defendant be restrained from entering the premises which were previously the marital home of the parties. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, pars. 2312-19, 2312-14(b)(2). Under the Illinois Domestic Violence Act of 1986 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 2311 — 1 et seq.), three types of orders of protection may be issued: plenary, emergency and interim orders. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 2312 — 14(a).) Defendant contends that the order at issue was an emergency order and, thus, could extend only 14 days in accordance with sections 217 and 220 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, pars. 2312 — 17, 2312 — 20). However, there was no evidence in the record indicating this protective order was other than a plenary order under section 219 of the statute. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 2312-19.  Defendant further suggests that he lacked knowledge of the orders of protection and therefore could not have “knowingly” entered the residence improperly. A plethora of violent incidents lead us to a contrary view. Time and again the police were called to the residence as a result of defendant’s violation of the order of protection, so that it is difficult to imagine that defendant was not aware of these orders of protection even though the extension of the orders may have been ex parte in the sense that this defendant did not appear. Further, defendant relies on People v. Wilson (1988), 176 Ill. App. 3d 358, 531 N.E.2d 134, to support his argument that he could not have knowingly broken into a home he jointly owns. In Wilson, defendant was the 17-year-old son of the complainant and had lived at his father’s house prior to leaving of his own accord to live with his grandmother. A judgment of dissolution of marriage required the father to provide the “primary place of residence” for his children, including defendant. Defendant had not lived at the house for 10 months when he broke in one night and stole items belonging to his father. Although the father had occasionally given permission for defendant to retrieve personal property from the house, defendant had never been given formal notice that he was barred from the house. Since his conviction for residential burglary was set aside on grounds other than defendant’s right to enter the premises, reliance here upon Wilson is misplaced. In People v. Yager (1984), 128 Ill. App. 3d 702, 471 N.E.2d 244, a former foster child of the victims was convicted of residential burglary upon entering the residence after he had ceased to use it as his home. In Yager and the case at bar, defendants previously had had authority to enter the victims’ premises. However, defendants in both cases were unable to show that they had a history of casual entry without permission of the custodial person. More directly, the Illinois Domestic Violence Act expressly states that the owner of a home may be prohibited from entering the premises if the protected party has a right to exclusive occupancy of the residence. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 2312 — 14(b)(2). Defendant next contends that he did not have the requisite intent to commit unlawful restraint when he entered the premises. He testified that he merely sought to have a conversation with her at that time and that Ann was not in the house. On the other hand, she testified that she was in the home at that time and that the first knowledge she had of his entry was when he grabbed her from behind and sought to restrain her. Ann further testified that he thereafter physically restrained and injured her, refused to leave and made verbal threats.  Evidence of intent is not usually direct, but proved circumstantially by inferences reasonably drawn from the circumstances of the defendant’s conduct. People v. Toolate (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 301, 461 N.E.2d 987 (insufficient evidence to infer intent to commit rape as underlying felony for residential burglary charge); People v. Monigan (1990), 204 Ill. App. 3d 686, 561 N.E.2d 1358 (intent to commit aggravated battery was properly inferred from the evidence to support residential burglary charge even where defendant entered intending to commit one felony but committed another instead); People v. Sehr (1986), 150 Ill. App. 3d 118, 501 N.E.2d 848 (evidence inferred intent to commit theft where defendant broke into stranger’s house and walked into master bedroom and claimed he was merely looking for a place to sleep). Given the circumstances shown in the record, the curious mode of entry, the spontaneous and continued violence towards Ann and the previous history of violence and harassment, the trier of fact was certainly justified in concluding that defendant intended to commit unlawful restraint at the time of his entry to the premises. The trial court had an opportunity to observe the testimony and demeanor of the witnesses and found Ann to be a credible witness. Any rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements beyond a reasonable doubt (People v. Young (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 1, 538 N.E.2d 453), and the trier of fact must consider the evidence in a light most favorable to the prosecution. People v. Collins (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 237, 478 N.E.2d 267.  Defendant next argues that the introduction in evidence of other uncharged acts of violence deprived him of a fair trial and may have unduly influenced his conviction. The prior incidents of violence were properly allowed because they establish that defendant had knowledge of the protective order and showed a pattern of acting in a violent or threatening way toward Ann, thus allowing the trier of fact to draw a reasonable inference as to defendant’s intent. Most of the incidents involve defendant either restraining or harassing Ann, or refusing to leave the house. They are sufficiently similar to the incident in question to show a common scheme reflecting defendant’s intent. People v. Shum (1987), 117 Ill. 2d 317, 512 N.E.2d 1183; People v. Bartall (1983), 98 Ill. 2d 294, 456 N.E.2d 59; People v. Burgos (1989), 184 Ill. App. 3d 474, 540 N.E.2d 456.  Defense also contends that the trial court unfairly limited its questioning of Wayne and Ann on various issues surrounding Wayne’s prior arrests for domestic incidents; on the reconciliation of Wayne and Ann; on the fact that Wayne had not been ordered to pay child support; and on the fact that Wayne believed he might still be married to Ann. The defense argues that these excluded questions somehow relate to theories upon which the defense relies. Defendant failed to make offers of proof to most of the trial court’s rulings which he now finds objectionable. It is difficult to determine whether these rulings were prejudicial to the defendant since an offer of proof is lacking. While a court does not generally make decisions of this nature lacking an offer of proof in the record (People v. Sanchez (1989), 131 Ill. 2d 417, 546 N.E.2d 574), we recognize that an offer of proof is not a formalistic ritual, but an aid to justice and where justice is not served, the requirement of an offer of proof will not be enforced. People v. Lynch (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 194, 470 N.E.2d 1018. Where a question obviously indicates its purpose, relevance and materiality and is in proper form or the court understands what the defense is intending to establish, the offer of proof may not be required. People v. Lynch (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 194, 470 N.E.2d 1018; People v. Husted (1981), 97 Ill. App. 3d 160,168, 422 N.E.2d 962. Even were this court to find that there was an obvious benefit to the trier of fact because of the questions’ contents, the questions do not pass the test of relevance. The same rule obtains on those issues where defendant did make offers of proof regarding the possible reconciliation of the parties and the fact that no child support had been imposed upon the defendant. We find that these also do not meet the test of relevance to the issues of this case.  Defendant next argues that conviction of residential burglary where unlawful restraint is the underlying felony and conviction for unlawful restraint alone is improper. In Illinois a defendant may be prosecuted for more than one criminal act that arises from the same episode or transaction, as long as the charges do not arise from the same physical act. (People v. Segara (1988), 126 Ill. 2d 70, 533 N.E.2d 802.) Defendant here committed two separate criminal acts: (1) residential burglary when he entered the house with the intent to commit unlawful restraint, and (2) unlawful restraint when he forcibly detained Ann and would not allow her to leave.  Finally, defendant suggests the residential burglary statute is inappropriate in this circumstance because it is intended only to provide additional protection for home burglaries and argues that his conduct is merely a violation of the order of protection, which is a Class A misdemeanor. While defendant admits that certain conduct can violate both an order of protection and criminal statutes, he argues that applying the residential burglary statute in this particular situation is contrary to the legislative intent behind the enactment of the residential burglary. The Illinois Domestic Violence Act of 1986 does not provide that it is an exclusive remedy. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 2312 — 20.) The residential burglary statute (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 19— 3) is intended to provide a mandatory jail sentence for violators. The misdemeanor provided in the Domestic Violence Act does not contemplate or sanction commission of a felony. The residential burglary statute is applied equally to all violators, whether the focus of the invasion is theft, rape or another felony. See People v. Toolate (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 301, 461 N.E.2d 987; People v. Monigan (1990), 204 Ill. App. 3d 686, 561 N.E.2d 1358; People v. Yager (1984), 128 Ill. App. 3d 702, 471 N.E.2d 244; People v. Hawkins (1984), 125 Ill. App. 3d 520, 466 N.E.2d 299. Ann’s rights to exclusive possession of the premises was founded on the order of protection entered in the pending dissolution case. Residential burglary is an offense against habitation and incorporates the common law concept of burglary. (People v. Bales (1985), 108 Ill. 2d 182, 483 N.E.2d 517.) The marriage between the resident or custodian and the invader does not create any exception under the statute, nor does their joint ownership obviate the court-imposed restrictions on the defendant. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 40, par. 2312 — 14(b)(2); 82d Ill. Gen. Assem., Senate Proceedings, May 19, 1981, at 215-27, and House Proceedings, June 17,1981, at 67-76. Defendant’s conduct matches the conduct prohibited by the residential burglary statute: he was legally excluded from the premises but broke into the house (“entering) the dwelling place of another”) and restrained Ann (“with intent to commit therein a felony”). His intent to restrain can be inferred from the circumstances and the history of violence he has shown toward her. Defendant’s actions were prohibited by this statute and properly adjudicated under it. We affirm the trial court’s convictions. Affirmed. CERDA, P.J., and RIZZI, J., concur. SUPPLEMENTAL OPINION UPON DENIAL OF REHEARING

=== CASE 9741471 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:56:18.282924+00 ===

JUSTICE GREIMAN delivered the opinion of the court: In addition to the issues addressed in our original opinion, defendant has filed a petition for rehearing in which he requests a reduction in the degree of the offense. Defendant recognizes that because he has not previously raised this issue, it would ordinarily be waived. But given the unprecedented application of the residential burglary statute in the context of a violation of an order of protection under the Domestic Violence Act, we choose to address defendant’s argument to make certain that all issues are fully examined.  Under Supreme Court Rule 615(b)(3), a reviewing court may reduce the degree of the offense of which an appellant was convicted. (107 Ill. 2d R. 615.) This power is only available where a lesser-included offense is involved and should be used with extreme caution and only in rare instances. (People v. Kick (1991), 216 Ill. App. 3d 787, 576 N.E.2d 395; People v. Jackson (1989), 181 Ill. App. 3d 1048, 1051-52, 537 N.E.2d 1054; People v. Coleman (1979), 78 Ill. App. 3d 989, 398 N.E.2d 185.) Defendant requests that this court reduce his offense to either unlawful restraint or violation of an order of protection. He cites Jackson to support his argument that a reduction in offense has previously been made in a residential burglary case to ameliorate the harshness of the result where, though the evidence was sufficient, the court found evidentiary weakness as to some elements. All three of the cases acknowledge that there are two relevant factors in assessing the reduction of an offense: (1) whether an evidentiary weakness exists and (2) whether the trial judge expressed dissatisfaction with imposing the mandatory sentence. Both factors were present in Jackson and Coleman; however, in Kick, no evidentiary weakness was apparent and notwithstanding the trial court’s reluctance to impose a mandatory sentence, the conviction was affirmed. Kick, 216 Ill. App. 3d at 792-93. Kick and other cases state that Rule 615(b)(3) may not be read to allow a reduction in the degree of the offense merely out of a sense of “merciful benevolence.” (Kick, 216 Ill. App. 3d at 792; People v. Munday (1985), 134 Ill. App. 3d 971, 481 N.E.2d 338; People, v. Man (1980), 88 Ill. App. 3d 924, 411 N.E.2d 323.) The Kick court observed that it is the legislature’s prerogative to establish sentences and Rule 615(b)(3) may not be construed to sanction any circumvention of the mandatory minimum sentence corresponding to an offense of which a defendant has been proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Kick, 216 Ill. App. 3d at 793.  We find that a defendant’s offense may be reduced only where there is an evidentiary weakness with regard to an element of the offense charged and where the trial judge has expressed dissatisfaction with imposing the mandatory minimum sentence. In the present case, while there may be some question of defendant’s intent as he entered the premises through the basement window, we find no evidence in the record that the trial judge was dissatisfied with the required imposition of the four-year mandatory minimum sentence. Therefore, we find defendant is not entitled to a reduction in degree of the offense of which he was convicted. The petition for rehearing is denied. Petition denied. CERDA, P.J., and RIZZI, J., concur.

=== CASE 2227354 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:34.137808+00 ===

411 Mass. 309 (1991)
582 N.E.2d 496
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
BRIAN HENDERSON.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Hampden.
October 9, 1991.
December 5, 1991.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, LYNCH, O'CONNOR, & GREANEY, JJ.
Brett J. Vottero, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
M. Page Kelley, Committee for Public Counsel Services, for the defendant.
WILKINS, J.
A judge of the Superior Court dismissed an indictment charging the defendant with unarmed robbery. We transferred the Commonwealth's appeal to this court and now affirm the judge's order.
A police officer who interviewed the victim after an unarmed robbery in August, 1987, wrote down the victim's description of her assailant. That description, which has been lost or destroyed, was potentially exculpatory evidence. There is no indication that the government lost or destroyed the evidence *310 in bad faith. In such a situation, the law of the Commonwealth provides that, on a motion to dismiss charges because of the government's loss of potentially exculpatory evidence, the judge must consider and balance the degree of culpability of the government, the materiality of the evidence, and the potential prejudice to the defendant in order to protect the defendant's constitutional due process right to a fair trial. See Commonwealth v. Olszewski, 401 Mass. 749, 754-755 (1988). If the loss of the evidence threatened the defendant's right to a fair trial, the judge has discretion concerning the manner in which to protect the defendant's rights. We conclude that, after he properly weighed the relevant factors, the judge was warranted, in the exercise of his discretion, in dismissing the indictment. We see no indication that the Commonwealth urged some sanction less severe than dismissal if the judge were to conclude that the loss of the written description violated the defendant's due process rights.
The defendant was charged with the crime more than two years after it occurred. While the victim was serving on a six-person jury in a case in which the defendant was on trial, she recognized the defendant as the man who had robbed her.
Weighing the appropriate factors, the judge determined that the interests of justice would be best served by dismissing the indictment. The judge concluded that the degree of police fault in losing the written description of the defendant was not great, considering the passage of time, but that some mechanism should be in place to preserve information of this type. It was, of course, impossible to determine whether the lost notes would have been material and exculpatory, but there was the reasonable possibility, the judge rightly said, that the notes, if saved, could have been used to impeach the identifying witness. He ruled that, because of the length of time that had passed and the suggestive circumstances under which the victim identified the defendant, *311 the absence of the notes created a strong possibility of prejudice.[1]
The Commonwealth argues that the judge applied the wrong standard in assessing the consequences of the loss of the police notes. It claims that Arizona v. Youngblood, 488 U.S. 51, 58 (1988), has established that due process of law is not denied unless the defendant can show the police acted in bad faith in failing to preserve potentially useful evidence.
The rule under the due process provisions of the Massachusetts Constitution is stricter than that stated in the Youngblood opinion. See Commonwealth v. Phoenix, 409 Mass. 408, 412 n. 1 (1991); Commonwealth v. Olszewksi, supra. Other States recently dealing with claims that the police lost allegedly exculpatory evidence have held the government to higher due process of law standards under their State constitutions than the bad faith test stated in Arizona v. Youngblood, supra. See Thorne v. Department of Pub. Safety, 774 P.2d 1326, 1330 n. 9 (Alaska 1989); State v. Youngblood, 164 Ariz. 61, 64 (Ct. App. 1989); Hammond v. State, 569 A.2d 81, 87 (Del. 1989); State v. Matafeo, 787 P.2d 671, 673 (Haw. 1990); State v. Smagula, 133 N.H. 600, 603 (1990). Contra People v. Cooper, 53 Cal.3d 771, 811 (1991) (adopting the Youngblood bad faith standard as a matter of State constitutional law). The fact that the police did not act in bad faith when they negligently lost the potentially exculpatory evidence cannot in fairness be dispositive of the issue. See Commonwealth v. Willie, 400 Mass. 427, 432-433 (1987). As Justice Stevens said, concurring in the Youngblood case, "there may well be cases in which the defendant is unable to prove that the State acted in bad faith but in which the loss or destruction of evidence is nonetheless so critical to the defense as to make a criminal trial fundamentally unfair." Arizona v. Youngblood, supra at 61 (Stevens, J., concurring).
*312 We adhere to the due process of law principles that we have previously expressed for determining the consequences of the government's loss of potentially exculpatory evidence. In this case, the judge applied the proper test and did not abuse his discretion in dismissing the indictment.
Order dismissing indictment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The victim and the police made a composite sketch of the assailant that has not been lost, but it was not presented to the judge. The existence of the composite sketch does not make the defendant's proof inadequate or the judge's conclusion inappropriate.

=== CASE 9741472 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:56:23.858174+00 ===

JUSTICE HEIPLE delivered the opinion of the court: The issue before the court is whether plaintiffs are allowed more than one refiling of an action if the refilings fall within the applicable statute of limitations pursuant to section 13—217 of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 13—217). We interpret the language of section 13—217 as providing for one and only one refiling regardless of whether the applicable statute of limitations has expired. Section 13 — 217 provides as follows: “In the actions specified in Article XIII of this Act or any other act or contract where the time for commencing an action is limited, if judgment is entered for the plaintiff but reversed on appeal, or if there is a verdict in favor of the plaintiff and, upon a motion in arrest of judgment, the judgment is entered against the plaintiff, or the action is voluntarily dismissed by the plaintiff, or the action is dismissed for want of prosecution, or the action is dismissed by a United States District Court for lack of jurisdiction, then, whether or not the time limitation for bringing such action expires during the pendency of such action, the plaintiff, his or her heirs, executors or administrators may commence a new action within one year or within the remaining period of limitation, whichever is greater, after such judgment is reversed or entered against the plaintiff, or after the action is voluntarily dismissed by the plaintiff, or the action is dismissed for want of prosecution, or the action is dismissed by a United States District Court for lack of jurisdiction.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 110, par. 13—217. This suit arose out of a written option for leasing coal lands between plaintiffs Henry and Anna Flesner, now both deceased, and defendant Youngs Development Company, a partnership, and its partners C. James Youngs and Darwin Youngs. Plaintiffs initially began their lawsuit against defendants in the United States District Court for the Central District of Illinois in May 1981. That case was dismissed for lack of jurisdiction in November 1981. Plaintiffs refiled their action in the circuit court of Jefferson County, Illinois, in April 1982. On December 2, 1986, plaintiffs filed a motion for voluntary dismissal. Over defendants’ objections, an “Order of Dismissal Without Prejudice” was entered on December 17, 1986. Plaintiffs then filed their third complaint on December 11, 1987, arising out of the same facts and claims as ■the two previous lawsuits. Defendants’ motion to dismiss the action was granted in October 1988. Plaintiffs then filed a motion to reconsider the order of dismissal with prejudice. The circuit court allowed plaintiffs’ motion to set aside the order of dismissal and to reinstate the complaint. The appellate court affirmed. We reverse. In so ruling, we concur in the analysis and rulings announced in the appellate court opinions of Walicek v. Ciba-Geigy Corp. (1987), 155 Ill. App. 3d 667, Bernstein v. Gottlieb Memorial Hospital (1989), 185 Ill. App. 3d 709, and Howard v. Francis (1990), 204 Ill. App. 3d 722. These cases all stand for the proposition that section 13—217 expressly permits one, and only one, refiling of a claim even if the statute of limitations has not expired. Correspondingly, we reject the contrary analysis as promulgated by the appellate court in Relaford v. Kyaw (1988), 173 Ill. App. 3d 1034. Accordingly, we reverse the orders of the trial and appellate courts which reinstated plaintiffs’ complaint and we order dismissal of the plaintiffs’ complaint. Reversed and dismissed.

=== CASE 9741473 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:56:23.862879+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE MILLER, specially concurring: I concur in the court’s disposition of the present appeal but write separately to explain the basis for my agreement. Under section 13 — 217 of the Code of Civil Procedure, if a plaintiff voluntarily dismisses an action, “then, whether or not the time limitation for bringing such action expires during the pendency of such action, the plaintiff *** may commence a new action within one year or within the remaining period of limitation, whichever is greater.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 110, par. 13—217.) In Gendek v. Jehangir (1988), 119 Ill. 2d 338, 343, a decision not cited by the majority, this court held that section 13—217 “was not intended to permit multiple re-filings following voluntary dismissals of an action for which the original statute of limitations has lapsed.” Significantly, the language used in Gendek governs not only the plaintiff who seeks to lengthen, year by year, the time allowed for suit beyond the original limitations period through a succession of voluntary dismissals and refilings, but also the plaintiff who attempts to voluntarily dismiss and then refile the action within the single one-year period afforded by section 13 — 217. A second refiling is prohibited in either instance. Indeed, the appellate court in the present case recognized that both plaintiffs would be treated alike under the statute. The appellate court stated: “We agree *** that the plaintiff may not engage in multiple refilings after the statute of limitations has expired. We also agree that section 13—217 was not intended to allow the plaintiff to extend the statute of limitations in one-year increments by successive dismissals and re-filings. Once a statute of limitations has passed, the plaintiff is entitled to refile only once and that refiling must take place within one year of the dismissal.” (Emphasis in original.) 205 Ill. App. 3d at 645. Thus, section 13 — 217 affords a single one-year extension of time, and a plaintiff may not further lengthen the time for bringing suit through subsequent refilings. Moreover, it is also clear from the language used in Gendek, as well as that used by the appellate court in the present case, that a plaintiff may not attempt multiple refilings during the single one-year extension allowed by the statute. The question that remains, then, is whether multiple, or successive, refilings are permitted during the original limitations period. The statutory language and the case law require that this question be answered in the negative. By its own terms* section 13—217 is applicable “whether or not the time limitation for bringing such action expires during the pendency of such action.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 110, par. 13—217.) This language was added to the statutory predecessor of section 13—217 in 1967, and it replaced a proviso restricting application of the statute to cases in which the limitations period expired during pendency of the suit. The amendment therefore made the statute applicable regardless of whether the original limitations period had already run. (See Baird & Warner, Inc. v. Addison Industrial Park, Inc. (1979), 70 Ill. App. 3d 59, 75-76.) The 1967 amendment thus eliminated, for purposes of the refiling provision, any distinction between causes of action for which the original limitations period had expired and those for which it had not. Once it is conceded that section 13—217 may not be used to gain successive one-year extensions of time for bringing suit and, more important, that the statute bars multiple refilings during the single one-year extension it affords, I fail to see how that provision may be read to permit multiple refilings of an action during the original limitations period. Section 13—217 itself draws no distinction among those different cases. The statutory language cannot be understood to prohibit successive re-filings in the first two instances, when the refilings would occur either after or during the single one-year extension of time afforded to plaintiffs, but to allow successive refilings in the third instance, when they would occur during the original statute of limitations. The underlying rationale was well expressed in Gibellina v. Handley (1989), 127 Ill. 2d 122, 134: “While a [voluntary dismissal] motion in conjunction with section 13—217 may protect the right of a plaintiff to have a decision in the particular case made on the merits of the claim by potentially permitting ‘two bites of the apple’ when the first bite turns sour, the statutory scheme does not allow a third bite.” (127 Ill. 2d at 134.) The same reasoning is, in my view, applicable here. Indeed, recent decisions of this court have demonstrated that a plaintiff’s statutory right to voluntarily dismiss an action even once should not be viewed in isolation but rather must be balanced against other considerations. (See, e.g., Gibellina, 127 Ill. 2d 122; O’Connell v. St. Francis Hospital (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 273.) To deny section 13—217 the consistent interpretation that I have suggested and permit a third bite of the apple here would be contrary to that authority.

=== CASE 9741685 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:30.998123+00 ===

Thompson, C. J.
Perseverance is sometimes a virtue and is often rewarded. “If at first you don’t succeed, try, try again” says the old copybook maxim. Joseph E. Young, the benefited defendant here, has beyond doubt practiced these principles. Litigation concerning his right to a.pension as the surviving spouso of a deceased policewoman pensioner now appears in this court for the third time, In Young v. O’Keefe, 246 Iowa 1182, *100769 N.W.2d 534, it made its first appearance. The basis of that suit was that the trustees of the policemen’s pension fund had denied his claim; there was an affirmance by the district court and by this court. We there held that “widowers” were not included in the statutory language defining those entitled to survivor’s pensions.
Thereupon the legislature, which can hardly be accused of lack of co-operation in Mr. Young’s efforts, amended the statutes applicable — sections 410.10, 411.1(10) and 411.6(13) — so that all “spouses” of deceased pensioners are included. See House Files 174 and 229, Acts of the Fifty-sixth General Assembly. This brought about the second attempt by Mr. Young. Again the trustees denied his claim, again the district court upheld them, and again, upon appeal, we affirmed. Young v. O’Keefe, 248 Iowa 751, 82 N.W.2d 111. Our decision was based upon two grounds: that the statutes as amended by the Fifty-sixth General Assembly were not retroactive; and if they were so construed the doctrine of res judicata would apply.
Again the legislature, acting as the Fifty-seventh General Assembly, tried a remedial measure. It enacted chapter 200, effective July 4, 1957, which we quote:
“Section 1. Section four hundred ten point ten (410.10), Code 1954, is amended by adding* a paragraph thereto as follows:
“This section and its provisions shall be interpreted for all purposes as including all surviving spouses whether such spouse existed at the time of the amendments to said section by the Fifty-sixth General Assembly or became such surviving spouse thereafter.”
Mr. Young then filed his third application for a survivor’s pension with the Board of Trustees, and on September 12, 1957, it was granted. The Woodbury District Court upon application of the City of Sioux City granted a writ of certiorari to review this holding of the board, but upon trial the writ was annulled and the action of the Board of Trustees upheld. The matter is now before us upon appeal by the city from this judgment.
I. We are first confronted with a matter of procedure. The defendant-appellee Young contends that the City of Sioux City has no right to bring an action against the Board of Trustees. The argument is that the board is an arm of the city, and a suit *1008by the city against it is in effect a suit by the city against itself; that it is actually attempting to act as both plaintiff and defendant, and under well-established rules of law and of logic this may not be done.
We find no merit in this contention. We think the argument is answered by holdings in State v. Bonzer, 68 N.D. 311, 279 N.W. 769, relied upon strongly by the appellee Young, who will hereinafter be referred to as the defendant. After stating the general rule that the same person cannot be both plaintiff and defendant in an action, the court said: “* * * this rule * * * does not apply where according to the actual interests involved the case does not amount to an action by one party against himself. * * * In the first place there is an actual controversy. * * * The State has no interest in this fund other than to see it is safely guarded and conserved and that those for whose benefit it is created receive their just dues.” 68 N.D., pages 315, 316, 279 N.W., pages 771, 772.
It is the duty of a city or town to levy an annual tax for the purpose of creating a pension fund. Section 410.1, Code of 1958. The Board of Trustees of the fund is set up by law, and its actions are not controlled by the city. Section 410.2, Code of 1958. But we think the city has the right, even the duty, to see that the fund, a large part of which is raised by taxes from the citizens, is administered and disbursed in accordance with law; and to this end it may bring an action to prevent illegal allowances and expenditures. 64 C. J. S., Municipal Corporations, section 2186(2), page 1030; Jersey City v. Hague, 18 N.J. 584, 115 A.2d 8; City of Philadelphia v. Wyszynski, 381 Pa. 153, 112 A.2d 327. It requires no extensive analysis of the situation here to know that the interests of the City of Sioux City on the one hand and of Young and the board on the other are not the same, and that an actual controversy is involved. Defendant’s position at this point is entirely lacking in merit.
II. We turn then to the substantial question involved. It may be stated thus: May the legislature by a later enactment direct the courts to give an interpretation to a statute different from the one which they have already applied to the same law in a ease involving the same claim, the same state of facts and the same parties? We think it clear that it may not.
*1009Qur opinion in the second Young v. O’Keefe case, 248 Iowa 751, 82 N.W.2d 111, answers every contention made by the defendant in the litigation now before us. It must be remembered that the facts are identical in the first two cases and this one. And all three cases affect the same parties, involve the same subject matter and determine the same cause of action. Hoover v. Iowa State Highway Commission, 210 Iowa 1, 8, 230 N.W. 561, 564, cited with approval in the second Young v. O’Keefe case, supra, at page 756 of 248 Iowa, page 114 of 82 N.W.2d. In the case in 248 Iowa, 82 N.W.2d, which we shall hereinafter designate as the second case, we were considering the effect of legislative amendments which changed the word “widow” to “spouse.” We there held that the amendments were not to be construed as retroactive, but prospective only, and so did not bring Mr. Young within their operation.
After we had so interpreted the amendments, the Fifty-seventh General Assembly, by enacting chapter 2001 of its Acts, attempted to change the nonretroactive construction we had put upon them. It said “This section [410.10, Code of 1954] * * * shall be interpreted for all purposes as including all surviving spouses whether such spouse existed at the time of the amendments to said section by the Fifty-sixth General Assembly or became such surviving spouse thereafter.” It must be the contention of the defendant here that the legislature thereby overruled our interpretation of the amendments made by the Fifty-sixth General Assembly, and that we are now bound to follow the legislative fiat. We do not agree. The legislature had a right to say whether its enactments were retrospective or prospective, as applied to future interpretations; it did not have the right to direct the courts how its statutes were to be construed with reference to matters already decided. We have construed the amendments made by the Fifty-sixth General Assembly as applied to a certain ease; the legislature may not, by later enactment, direct us to change our interpretation as it affects this same litigation. In Richardson v. Fitzgerald, 132 Iowa 253, 255, 109 N.W. 866, 867, we said: “* * * any direction by the Legislature that the judicial function shall be performed in a particular [certain] way is a plain violation of the Constitution.” Immediately following this, page 255 of 132 Iowa, page 867 of 109 *1010N.W., we quoted with approval from Cooley on Constitutional Limitations (7th Ed.) 114: “As the Legislature cmvnot set aside the construction of the law already applied by the courts to actual cases, neither can it compel courts for the future to- adopt a particular construction of a law which the Legislature permits to remain in force.” (Italics supplied.) We further said, at the same pages: “Expository legislation is so uniformly condemned by the courts that we need cite no more than a few of the numerous decisions with our approval of the principle. [Citing authorities] The Legislature may say what the law shall be, not what it is or has been * * To the same effect is Anderson v. Hadley, 245 Iowa 550, 559, 63 N.W.2d 234, 239, from which we quote: “* * * courts are not bound by the mere construction one legislature may put upon an act of a previous session. The interpretation of an existing statute is a judicial, not a legislative-, function. * * * The legislative intent that controls in the construction of a statute has reference to the legislature that enacted it, not a subsequent one.” To the same effect is Des Moines Independent Community School District v. Armstrong, 250 Iowa 634, 645, 646, 95 N.W.2d 515, 521, 522.
III. In fact, every point made by the defendant here to support his claim is denied by the opinion in the second case, in 248 Iowa-. We there held that the- statute changing “widow” to “spouse” was not retroactive. We are now confronted by a later legislative enactment saying we shall interpret it as retroactive. This comes clearly within the things the legislature may not do to control the decisions of the courts, as defined in the authorities cited and quoted from last above. We further said that if we should construe the amendments of the Fifty-sixth General Assembly as retroactive, “to do so would run into- the doctrine of res judicata.” Page 757 of 248 Iowa, page 115 of 82 N.W.2d.
We also said: “The spectre of res judicata arises to haunt plaintiff. The record conclusively establishes that his ease was already adjudicated when the statutory change occurred. He seeks here to establish the same status he sought before, by the same evidence. # * * If the purpose of res judicata be to add finality to judicial decision, the propriety of its presence here cannot be doubted. A judgment based on plain statutory con*1011struction, as was our earlier decision [246 Iowa 1182, 69 N.W.2d 534], would not be exactly final if the legislature could by subsequent retroactive (nunc pro tune) change of statute reopen the identical controversy for the benefit of a losing litigant.” 248 Iowa at pages 755, 756, 82 N.W.2d at pages 114, 115. Further pertinent language is this: “To accomplish it would require us to hold the amendment not only was not retroactive, but that it was sufficient to create a new right. The language will not bear that construction.”
"What we held in the second case, supra, was that the amendments made by the Fifty-sixth General Assembly were not retroactive; and that., if we should so construe them, the plaintiff’s claim would still be defeated by the doctrine of res judicata because it had been litigated and denied by the first case, Young v. O’Keefe, supra, 246 Iowa 1182, 69 N.W.2d 534. The amendment enacted by the Fifty-seventh General Assembly, supra, is a clear attempt, so far as this litigation is concerned, to direct us to consider the amendments of the Fifty-sixth General Assembly as retroactive, in reversal of our previous holding. This was beyond the power of the legislature, nor would it avail Mr. Young in any event; because we said in the second case that such a construction would merely result in a holding that he was barred by res judicata.
The defendant relies much upon Wagner v. Baron, Fla., 64 So.2d 267, 37 A. L. R.2d 831. We shall not attempt to analyze this case, further than to point out that the decision was by a court divided four to three, and that the reason given by one of the majority for his concurrence has little to do with the legal questions involved. To us, the reasoning of the minority seems sound. In any event, we think the ease at bar is ruled by the second Young v. O’Keefe case, supra. We cannot affirm the judgment of the trial court unless we abandon the reasoning of that case and overrule it. This we are not inclined to do. We there held the statute not retroactive, which determined the proper interpretation of it so far as Mr. Young’s claim is concerned. In addition, we now have two adjudications that he may not recover instead of one. As we said in the second ease, matters that have been decided by the courts may not be reopened by a *1012later legislative attempt to say that the construction put upon a statute must be changed for the benefit of a losing litigant.
The case is reversed and remanded to the district court with directions to sustain the writ of certiorari. All costs will be taxed against defendant-appellee Young, except that appellant will be allowed only $1.50 per page as cost of printing the record. —Reversed and remanded, with directions.
Garfield, Garrett, Oliver, Peterson, and Thornton, JJ., concur.
Larson, J., concurs specially.
Bliss and Hays, JJ., join in special concurrence.