=== CASE 9737630 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:30:57.506639+00 ===

Young, J.
We granted leave in this case to address the application of the Michigan Freedom of Information Act (foia) and the Michigan Open Meetings Act (oma) in the context of the municipal hiring process. We conclude that Bay City violated the FOIA when it refused to disclose public records concerning final candidates for the position of Bay City Fire Chief, because the requested records were not within any *115exemption under the FOIA. We additionally conclude that the city manager in this case was neither part of, nor acting as, a “public body” within the contemplation of the OMA, and thus was not subject to its requirements. Accordingly, we affirm in part and reverse in part the decision of the Court of Appeals and remand this matter to the trial court for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
Plaintiff challenges the process used by defendant Bay City to select a new fire chief. The relevant facts are not in dispute.
In February 1996, the Bay City Fire Chief retired. The Bay City Charter prescribes that a new fire chief must be appointed by the Bay City Commission on the recommendation of the city manager. The city manager at that time, defendant Bruce McCandless, formed a committee to assist him in making his recommendation. The purpose of the committee was to aid McCandless in establishing hiring criteria, soliciting and screening applicants, and interviewing applicants, and to advise him on the selection of the most qualified candidate. The committee consisted of defendants Howard Asch, Thomas Rhine, Boyd Boettger, Bruce Wagner and Jacob Hutter.1
The five-member committee received thirty-four applications and recommended that nine of those applicants be considered for the fire chief position. Two of the nine recommended candidates withdrew their applications. The remaining seven applicants *116were interviewed by the committee, and the committee concluded that three of these candidates deserved further consideration. McCandless agreed with the committee’s recommendation and personally interviewed the final three candidates. All of the committee’s meetings and the interviews were conducted in private.
On May 6, 1996, before McCandless made a recommendation to the city commission, the editor of The Bay City Times2 filed a Freedom of Information Act request for “the names, current job titles, cities of residence and age of the seven final candidates for the job of Bay City fire chief . ...” In a letter dated May 13, 1996, the city denied plaintiff’s request.
On May 16, 1996, McCandless sent a letter to the city commission recommending one candidate, Gary Mueller, for the fire chief position. At an open meeting on June 3, 1996, the city commission deliberated and voted to appoint Gary Mueller as the Bay City Fire Chief.
After the appointment, plaintiff filed suit alleging violations of the FOIA and the OMA. Plaintiff argued that the foia required the city to comply with plaintiff’s request for information about the candidates who were interviewed, and that the OMA required McCandless and his committee to conduct interviews in open meetings.
The trial court eventually granted summary disposition for defendants on both the foia and oma claims. The court held that plaintiff’s FOIA request was defective and, alternatively, that the requested information *117was exempt from disclosure. As to the oma, the trial court concluded that McCandless and his committee were not subject to its provisions, and thus that there was no violation. Plaintiff appealed the grant of summary disposition, and the Court of Appeals reversed on both counts.3 We granted defendants’ application for leave to appeal.4
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
The trial court granted summary disposition for defendants on the basis of its interpretation of the Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et seq:, MSA 4.1801(1) et seq., and the Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq:, MSA 4.1800(11) et seq. This Court reviews the grant or denial of summary disposition de novo. Maiden v Rozwood, 461 Mich 109, 118; 597 NW2d 817 (1999). Similarly, we review questions of statutory construction de novo as a question of law. Donajkowski v Alpena Power Co, 460 Mich 243, 248; 596 NW2d 574 (1999); Mager v Dep’t of State Police, 460 Mich 134, 143, n 14; 595 NW2d 142 (1999). Because our judicial role precludes imposing different policy choices than those selected by the Legislature, our obligation is, by examining the statutory language, to discern the legislative intent that may reasonably be inferred from the words expressed in the statute. People v McIntire, 461 Mich 147, 152-153; 599 NW2d 102 (1999). If the language of a statute is clear and unambiguous, the plain meaning of the statute reflects the legislative intent and judicial construction *118is not permitted. Tryc v Michigan Veterans’ Facility, 451 Mich 129, 135; 545 NW2d 642 (1996). We must give the words of a statute their plain and ordinary meaning. MCL 8.3a; MSA 2.212(1); Turner v Auto Club Ins Ass’n, 448 Mich 22, 27; 528 NW2d 681 (1995).
in. FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT CLAIM
A. INTRODUCTION
Subsection 1(2) of the FOIA declares that
[i]t is the public policy of this state that all persons . . . are entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs of government and the official acts of those who represent them as public officials and public employees, consistent with this act. The people shall be informed so that they may fully participate in the democratic process. [MCL 15.231(2); MSA 4.1801(1)(2) (emphasis added).]
Consistent with this broadly declared legislative policy, the foia’s specific provisions generally require the full disclosure of public records in the possession of a public body:5
(1) Upon an oral or written request which describes the public record sufficiently to enable the public body to find the public record, a person has a right to inspect, copy, or receive copies of a public record of a public body ....
(2) A public body shall furnish a requesting person a reasonable opportunity for inspection and examination of its public records, and shall furnish reasonable facilities for making memoranda or abstracts from its public records during the usual business hours. . . .
*119(3) This act does not require a public body to make a compilation, summary, or report of information ....
[4] This act does not require a public body to create a new public record, except as required in sections 5 and 11, and to the extent required by this act for the furnishing of copies, or edited copies pursuant to section 14(1), of an already existing public record. [MCL 15.233; MSA 4.1801(3).]
The foia provides, in § 13, several exemptions which, if applicable, permit a public body to deny a request for disclosure of public records.6 On its express terms, the foia is a prodisclosure statute, and the exemptions stated in § 13 are narrowly construed. Mager, supra at 143; Bradley v Saranac Community Schools Bd of Ed, 455 Mich 285, 293; 565 NW2d 650 (1997); Swickard v Wayne Co Medical Examiner, 438 Mich 536, 544; 475 NW2d 304 (1991). The burden of proof rests on the party asserting the exemption. Bradley, supra at 293; Swickard, supra at 544.
At issue in the instant case is the following foia exemption:
A public body may exempt from disclosure as a public record under this act:
(a) Information of a personal nature where the public disclosure of the information would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of an individual’s privacy. [MCL 15.243(1); MSA 4.1801(13)(1).]
*120The trial court concluded that plaintiffs foia request was defective because it requested information rather than documents, and, alternatively, that the information requested was exempt from disclosure as “[i]nformation of a personal nature where the public disclosure of the information would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of an individual’s privacy.” The Court of Appeals disagreed on both counts, and reversed the grant of summary disposition for defendants. We conclude that the requested records were not exempt from disclosure, and therefore affirm the holding of the Court of Appeals.
B. PROPRIETY OF PLAINTIFF’S REQUEST
The foia does not establish detailed requirements for a valid request. Instead, it merely requires that a request “describe [] the public record sufficiently to enable the public body to find the public record.” MCL 15.233(1); MSA 4.1801(3)(1). Defendants argue that plaintiff’s request failed to meet this basic requirement. We disagree.
In this case, plaintiff requested “the names, current job titles, cities of residence and age of the seven final candidates for the job of Bay City fire chief.” The city admits that this description was sufficient to allow it to find documents containing the information, but argues that the request was flawed because it requested the information itself, rather than documents containing the information.7 Also according to defendants, to satisfy plaintiff’s request, the city *121would have had to “create a new public record.” Defendants’ arguments are deeply flawed.
We begin by reiterating that the Legislature entitled this statute the “Freedom of Information Act,” and declared as the public policy of this state “that all persons . . . are entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs of government . . . .” MCL 15.231(2); MSA 4.1801(1)(2) (emphasis added).
Consistent with this stated purpose, the Legislature did not impose detailed or technical requirements as a precondition for granting the public access to information. Instead, the Legislature simply required that any request be sufficiently descriptive to allow the public body to find public records containing the information sought. In contrast, the city would have us read an additional requirement into the statute— that a request must describe the specific public records to be disclosed. We have no authority to impose requirements not found in the statute, and we note that it would be odd indeed to ask a party who has no access to public records to attempt specifically to describe them. Because the request in this case was sufficient to allow the city to find the requested information, the request was valid under MCL 15.233(1); MSA 4.1801(3)(1).
Defendants’ related argument contends that plaintiff’s request would have required the city to create a new public record — something the statute expressly states that the city is not required to do. MCL 15.233(4); MSA 4.1801(3)(4). Again, we disagree with defendants’ construction of the foia.
*122Plaintiff’s request did not specify or require the disclosure of any document, newly created or otherwise, from the city. It simply asked for information. Under the foia, the city could have satisfied the request in several different ways. It could have allowed plaintiff access to the public records containing the information (such as the applicants’ résumés or applications), it could have allowed plaintiff to copy the public records containing the information, or it could have provided plaintiff with copies of the public records containing the information. MCL 15.233(1); MSA 4.1801(3)(1). It is true that the request also could have been satisfied by the city’s creation of a new public record, but plaintiff did not request creation of such a record, and the fact that the city had no obligation to create a record says nothing about its obligation to satisfy plaintiff’s request in some other manner as required by the foia.8
C. PRIVACY EXEMPTION
Defendants also argue that the information plaintiff requested is exempt from disclosure as “information of a personal nature” pursuant to MCL 15.243(1); MSA 4.1801(13)(1). The trial court agreed, finding that public disclosure of the information would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of the applicants’ privacy. The Court of Appeals disagreed, reasoning that *123the information disclosed is not “of a personal nature,” and, alternatively, that “[disclosure of the requested information would not constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of privacy because nothing of a highly personal nature would be disclosed.” 228 Mich App 290.
This case requires us to decide whether the fact of application for a particular public job and information supplied therewith is “information of a personal nature” and, if so, whether the disclosure of such information would “constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of an individual’s privacy.”
We begin by once again observing that this exception involves “ ‘a highly subjective area of the law where the Legislature has provided little statutory guidance’ . . . .” Mager, supra at 143, quoting Swick-ard, supra at 556. Bearing this in mind, we conclude that the information sought is not personal, and, moreover, that its revelation would not constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of privacy.
1. “PERSONAL NATURE” OF THE INFORMATION
The text of the statute at issue reveals little about the Legislature’s intended scope when it provided an exemption for “information of a personal nature.” From this Court’s numerous attempts to fashion a workable formulation for determining on a case-by-case basis whether requested information is “personal” within the Legislature’s contemplation, the following standard has emerged:
“[W]e conclude that information is of a personal nature if it reveals intimate or embarrassing details of an individual’s private life. We evaluate this standard in terms of ‘the *124“customs, mores, or ordinary views of the community” . . . ” [Mager, supra at 142, quoting Bradley, supra at 294 (emphasis added).]
Applying this standard in Bradley, we determined that personnel records of public school teachers and administrators were not of a “personal nature”:
Significantly, none of the documents contain information of an embarrassing, intimate, private, or confidential nature, such as medical records or information relating to the plaintiffs’ private lives. Moreover, the appellants have not alleged specific private matters that would be revealed by the disclosure of their personnel records. Instead, the requested information consists solely of performance appraisals, disciplinary actions, and complaints relating to the plaintiffs’ accomplishments in their public jobs. Because the requested information does not disclose intimate or embarrassing details of the plaintiffs’ private lives, we hold that the requested records do not satisfy the personal-nature element of the privacy exemption. [Id. at 295.]
More recently, in Mager, supra, we applied this same standard and reached the opposite conclusion because of the nature of the request at issue there. In Mager, the plaintiff requested that the State Police provide the names and addresses of persons who owned registered handguns. In determining that the fact of gun ownership was “information of a personal nature,” we noted that “[t]he ownership and use of firearms is a controversial subject,” and that “[a] citizen’s decision to purchase and maintain firearms is a personal decision of considerable importance.” Id. at 143. Accordingly, we held that “gun ownership is an intimate or, for some persons, potentially embarrassing detail of one’s personal life.” Id. at 144.
*125In contrast to the fact of gun ownership, which— assessing the customs, mores or ordinary views of the community — certainly may be viewed as an intimate and potentially embarrassing aspect of one’s private life, we conclude that the fact of application for a public job, or the typical background information one may disclose with such an application, is simply not “personal” within the contemplation of this exemption. Given the public nature of the position at issue, we think it difficult to conclude that the “customs,” “mores,” and “views” of the community contemplate that an application for such a position could be made without expectation of considerable public scrutiny. Certainly, defendants have failed to establish on this record why any of the information requested by plaintiff is the kind of intimate or embarrassing information that this FOIA exception protects.
Importantly, even if the requested information was contained in public documents that also referenced embarrassing or intimate personal information (for example, medical data), the foia imposes on the city a duty to “separate the exempt and nonexempt material and make the nonexempt material available for examination and copying.” MCL 15.244(1); MSA 4.1801(14)(1); see also Evening News Ass’n v City of Troy, 417 Mich 481, 503; 339 NW2d 421 (1983).
2. “CLEARLY UNWARRANTED INVASION” OF PRIVACY ELEMENT
Although we have already concluded that the information sought was not characteristically “of a personal nature” and, therefore, that the privacy exemption does not apply, we will now briefly address the *126second step of the inquiry: whether disclosure would “constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion” of privacy.
We first note that the trial court committed an error of law when it proceeded directly to this inquiry without first determining whether the request sought information that was of a “personal nature.” The trial court additionally erred when it concluded that, on these particular facts, disclosure of the requested information would have constituted a “clearly unwarranted invasion” of privacy. By providing that the invasion of privacy must be clearly unwarranted, the Legislature has unmistakably indicated that the intrusion must be more than slight, but a very significant one indeed.
In Mager, we determined that disclosure of the names and addresses of registered gun owners would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of the gun owners’ privacy. Taking guidance from federal decisions concerning the federal foia, we noted that “ ‘a court must balance the public interest in disclosure against the interest [the Legislature] intended the exemption to protect.’ ” Id. at 145, quoting United States Dep’t of Defense v Federal Labor Relations Authority, 510 US 487, 495; 114 S Ct 1006; 127 L Ed 2d 325 (1994). We further held that the relevant “public interest” to be weighed in this balance “ ‘is the extent to which disclosure would serve the core purpose of the foia, which is contributing significantly to public understanding of the operations or activities of the government.’” Mager, supra at 145, quoting United States Dep’t of Defense, supra at 495 (emphasis in original).
On the basis of the foregoing, we held that fulfilling a request for personal information concerning private *127citizens, where the request was “entirely unrelated to any inquiry regarding the inner working of government,” would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of privacy. Mager, supra at 146. In short, when the information sought is embarrassing or intimate, and the relationship between the personal information to be disclosed and the operations of our government is slight, the weaker is the case that disclosure should be made under the foia.
In contrast to the highly personal information at issue in Mager, we conclude that disclosure of the information concerning the final candidates for fire chief in the instant case would serve the policy underlying the foia because disclosure would facilitate the public’s access to information regarding the affairs of their city government. It can hardly be challenged that the citizens of Bay City had a valid interest in knowing the identities of the final candidates considered in contention for this high-level public position. Keeping in mind that defendants bear the burden of proof that an exemption applies, and balancing the public interest against the relatively circumscribed privacy interest protected by the foia exemption, we cannot conclude that the disclosure sought might result in a “clearly unwarranted invasion of an individual’s privacy.”9
*128IV. OPEN MEETINGS ACT CLAIM
A INTRODUCTION
The OMA provides, in part:
(1) All meetings of a public body shall be open to the public and shall be held in a place available to the general public. . . .
(2) All decisions of a public body shall be made at a meeting open to the public.
(3) All deliberations of a public body constituting a quorum of its members shall take place at a meeting open to the public .... [MCL 15.263; MSA 4.1800(13).]
The statute strictly limits “closed session” meetings of public bodies and expressly states that, “except as otherwise provided ... , all interviews by a public body for employment or appointment to a public office shall be held in an open meeting pursuant to this act.” MCL 15.268(f); MSA 4.1800(18)(f).
B. ANALYSIS
Plaintiff argues that (1) the city manager in this case was a public body, (2) the city manager and city commission together formed a public body, and (3) in any event, the committee that established the hiring criteria, screened the initial applications, and conducted interviews before reducing the field to three applicants was a public body. The Court of Appeals agreed that the city manager may be a public body in his own right, and that he is certainly part of a public body when he acts in concert with the city commis*129sion. We disagree with the analysis suggested by plaintiff and the Court of Appeals.
The threshold issue under the oma is whether an entity is a “public body.” The OMA defines “public body” as
any state or local legislative or governing body, including a board, commission, committee, subcommittee, authority, or council, which is empowered by state constitution, statute, charter, ordinance, resolution, or rule to exercise governmental or proprietary authority or perform a governmental or proprietary function, or a lessee thereof performing an essential public purpose and function pursuant to the lease agreement. [MCL 15.262(a); MSA 4.1800(12)(a).]
The definition of “public body” in the OMA contains two requirements: First, the entity at issue must be a “state or local legislative or governing body, including a board, commission, committee, subcommittee, authority, or council.” Second, the entity must be “empowered ... to exercise governmental or proprietary authority or perform a governmental or proprietary function,” and that power must derive from “state constitution, statute, charter, ordinance, resolution, or rule . . . .”
As used in the oma, the term “public body” connotes a collective entity. The statutory terms used illustratively to define “public body” — “legislative body” and “governing body” — do not encompass individuals. A single individual is not commonly understood to be akin to a “board,” “commission,” “committee,” “subcommittee,” “authority,” or “council” — the bodies specifically listed in the act by the Legislature.*13010 We draw additional comfort in our construction of the oma because the Legislature is certainly free to define, and has, in fact, defined elsewhere, the term “public body” in such a way as to encompass individuals.11 However, it would be awkward, to say *131the least, to apply the OMA to an individual. Perhaps the strongest common-sense basis for concluding that an individual was not contemplated by the Legislature as a “public body” is to consider how odd a concept it would be to require an individual to “deliberate” in an open meeting. MCL 15.263(3); MSA 4.1800(13)(3). Thus, we conclude that an individual executive acting in his executive capacity is not a public body for the purposes of the OMA.12
The Court of Appeals observed that, under the Bay City Charter, the city commission shall appoint a fire chief “on the recommendation of the city manager.”13 *132According to the Court of Appeals, that provision arguably “effectively delegates the function of selecting the fire chief to the city manager.”14 We disagree with the proposition that an individual executive making a recommendation to a deciding body constitutes a delegation of authority. The city commission did not delegate to the city manager the responsibility to make a recommendation; that authority is given directly to the city manager by the charter. Further, the fact that the charter requires the city commission to act only on the recommendation of the city manager in no way constitutes a delegation of the commission’s right to make the final determination regarding whether a recommended individual should be appointed to the position under the Bay City Charter.15
We see no merit to plaintiff’s contention that the city manager and city commission together constitute a public body. Certainly the city commission constitutes a public body when it appoints a fire chief, but *133the city manager remains an individual executive. We see no basis in the OMA to combine for the purposes of this statute two separate entities where each entity is performing its own independent function as designated in the city charter. The cases plaintiff relies on for this proposition are inapposite.
In Menominee Co Taxpayers Alliance, Inc v Menominee Co Clerk, 139 Mich App 814; 362 NW2d 871 (1984), the Court held that a group formed as required by statute to select a new county treasurer was a public body for the purposes of the OMA.16 The group consisted of the county clerk, the prosecutor, and a probate judge. After the county treasurer resigned, this statutorily prescribed group met in private and selected a new treasurer. The plaintiff then filed suit alleging that the group was a public body subject to the OMA. After the trial court dismissed the case, the Court of Appeals reversed and held that the group was a public body. Id. at 819.
The group in Menominee was a collective body in the plainest sense, thus satisfying the first requirement for a public body under the OMA. The fact that the three members held other positions was essentially irrelevant because, while on the committee, they were voting members of a group that was empowered by statute to exercise governmental authority. In the present case, the city manager was acting as a city *134manager, not as a commissioner or committee member.
Plaintiff also relies on our holding in Booth Newspapers, Inc v Univ of Michigan Bd of Regents, 444 Mich 211; 507 NW2d 422 (1993), to support the proposition that the city manager, individually, constituted a public body. Like Menominee, Booth is not analogous to the present case. In Booth, the University of Michigan Board of Regents attempted to evade the requirements of the oma during the process of selecting a new university president. The board took several evasive actions, including: (1) appointing itself as a presidential selection committee, (2) entrusting one regent with the authority to make “cuts” in the candidate list, (3) using a system of telephone calls and subquorum meetings to gather the opinions of all regents without convening a meeting of a quorum of the board, and (4) having small, subquorum groups of regents interview candidates. Id. at 216-219. This Court held that the board violated the oma. The important distinguishing feature of Booth was that the board was clearly a “public body” that was subject to the oma, and the various regents and subquorum groups had no independent authority to narrow the field, make a recommendation, or select a president. The board effectively sought to delegate its authority as a body subject to the oma to various bodies of its own creation that it believed were not subject to the OMA, for the express purpose of avoiding the requirements of the oma.17
*135Thus, the decision in Booth precluded an attempt by a public body to evade the oma (and thus circumvent legislative intent) by delegating its authority. In this case, the city manager was assigned the task of recommending a new fire chief directly by the city charter, and, therefore, he required no delegation of authority from the city commission in order to perform that function. Under these circumstances, the Legislature, by electing not to include individuals in the definition of public body in the OMA, has exempted the city manager from its requirements.18
Nor do we agree with the contention that the committee that was formed by the city manager was subject to the requirements of the OMA under the rationale in Booth. The city manager may have delegated some of his authority to the committee he created and, were the city manager himself subject to the oma, the committee he created might also have been subject to the oma pursuant to Booth. Here, however, because the city manager was not subject to the OMA, Booth has no application. Because the city manager’s committee in this case was not “empowered by state constitution, statute, charter, ordinance, resolution, or rule,” it was not a public body for purposes of the *136oma, and the committee’s actions did not violate that statute.19
V. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated, in regard to plaintiff’s Freedom of Information Act claim, we affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals, and we remand for proceedings consistent with this opinion. Regarding plaintiff’s Open Meetings Act claim, we reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals and reinstate the trial court’s grant of summary disposition for defendants.
Weaver, C.J., and Cavanagh, Taylor, Corrigan, and Markman, JJ., concurred with Young, J.
Hutter was also a city commissioner.
The Bay City Times is owned and operated by plaintiff The Herald Company.
228 Mich App 268; 577 NW2d 696 (1998).
461 Mich 906 (1999).
The foia provisions at issue were amended shortly after this dispute arose. These amendments are not substantive and they are not relevant to our analysis.
It is worth observing that the foia does not prevent disclosure of public records that are covered by § 13 exemptions. Rather, it requires the public body to disclose records unless they are exempt, in which case the foia authorizes nondisclosure at the agency’s discretion. See Mager, supra at 138, n 8; Bradley v Saranac Community Schools Bd of Ed, 455 Mich 285, 293; 565 NW2d 650 (1997); Tobin v Civil Service Comm, 416 Mich 661, 666-671; 331 NW2d 184 (1982).
In response to questioning at oral argument, counsel for defendants acknowledged that the city “knew what [plaintiff was] looking for” and could have looked for documents that responded to plaintiffs request. We *121also note that, in its request, plaintiff specifically offered to provide further description, if necessary.
We find defendants’ asserted construction of the foia to be disingenuous and contrary to a common-sense application of its express terms. Plaintiff’s request made specific reference to the foia, including its statutory citation. Defendants acknowledge that the request clearly specified the information sought. Defendants do not dispute that most, if not all, the requested information was contained in public records in the city’s possession.
It has been suggested by the city that we should consider a provision of the oma in deciding whether the information at issue is protected by the foia privacy exemption. As will be discussed in the second part of this opinion, the oma generally requires that meetings of a public body be open to the public. However, the oma contains an exception providing that a public body may meet in a closed session “[t]o review and consider the contents of an application for employment or appointment to a public office if the candidate requests that the application remain confidential.” MCL 15.268(f); MSA 4.1800(18)(f). Because we hold that none of the candidate reviews and interviews in this case was conducted by a “public *128body,” we need not determine whether application of this OMA provision would change our analysis.
This construction is further bolstered by the ordinary definition of “body.” The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (New College ed), p 147, defines “body” as “[a] group of individuals regarded as an entity” and “[a] number of persons, concepts, or things regarded collectively; a group.” Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary (7th ed), p 94, similarly defines the term as “a group of persons or things” and “a group of individuals organized for some purpose ... (a legislative [body]).” The dissent suggests that we have ignored the definition of “body” that refers to the human body. We find that proposition to be unworthy of further comment.
Justice Kelly also argues in her dissent that the city manager is an “authority” and thus a public body subject to the oma. We acknowledge that “authority” is one of the illustrative entities listed in the oma describing what constitutes a “public body.” However, we disagree with Justice Kelly’s conclusion that an individual may constitute an oma “authority.”
“Contextual understanding of statutes is generally grounded in the doctrine of noscitur a sociis," which “stands for the principle that a word or phrase is given meaning by its context or setting.” Tyler v Livonia Public Schools, 459 Mich 382, 390-391; 590 NW2d 560 (1999). See also Wilmers v Gateway Transportation Co (On Remand), 227 Mich App 339, 352; 575 NW2d 796 (1998) (YOUNG, P.J., dissenting). Accordingly, the term “authority” must be viewed in light of the other terms employed in the OMA definition of “public body,” which provide guidance regarding what “authority” means in this context. “[I]n seeking meaning, words and clauses will not be divorced from those which precede and those which follow.” Sanchick v State Bd of Optometry, 342 Mich 555, 559; 70 NW2d 757 (1955).
In the statutory definition of “public body,” all designated bodies other than “authority” are necessarily multimember bodies. Thus, the principle of noscitur a sociis indicates that “authority” should likewise be interpreted in this context as referring only to a multimember body.
Indeed, the Legislature knows how to include individuals within the definition of “public body” when it intends to, as it did when it defined “public body” for purposes of the foia:
“Public body” means any of the following:
(i) A state officer, employee, agency, department, division, bureau, board, commission, council, authority, or other body in the executive branch of the state government, but does not include the governor or lieutenant governor, the executive office of the governor or lieutenant governor, or employees thereof.
*131(ii) An agency, board, commission, or council in the legislative branch of the state government.
(iii) A county, city, township, village, intercounty, intercity, or regional governing body, council, school district, special district, or municipal corporation, or a board, department, commission, council, or agency thereof.
(iv) Any other body which is created by state or local authority or which is primarily funded by or through state or local authority.
(v) The judiciary, including the office of the county clerk and employees thereof when acting in the capacity of clerk to the circuit court, is not included in the definition of public body. [MCL 15.232(d); MSA 4.1801(2)(d) (emphasis added).]
Given this foia definition of “public body” that explicitly includes individuals, we cannot conclude, as does the dissent, that the Legislature intended to include single-member entities as public bodies within the meaning of the oma, where the Legislature referenced only multimember entities.
We note that an individual executive may be part of a public body as defined by the oma. See, for example, Menominee Co Taxpayers Alliance, Inc v Menominee Co Clerk, 139 Mich App 814; 362 NW2d 871 (1984), wherein a statute mandated that persons holding “executive” positions (the county clerk, the prosecutor, and a probate judge) collectively select a county treasurer. However, when, as here, the executive is performing functions exclusively vested in the solitary executive, as opposed to a legally mandated group, the executive is not a public body within the meaning of the OMA.
The complete charter provision states:
The city commission shall appoint for such terms as it may establish the following officers: clerk, treasurer, comptroller, *132assessor, deputy assessor, attorney, and on the recommendation of the city manager, chief of police, fire chief, superintendent of electric light, superintendent of waterworks, engineer, street commissioner, superintendent of parks and superintendent of bridges.
228 Mich App 276.
Even if true, this observation would establish, at best, that the city manager is empowered by the Bay City Charter to exercise governmental authority, satisfying the second requirement for a public body under the OMA. This arguable conclusion does not establish the first requirement— that the city manager was a legislative or governing body. In any event, we disagree with any construction of the city charter as requiring the city commission to appoint as fire chief a particular candidate who is recommended by the city manager. The only reasonable interpretation of the pertinent charter provision is that the city manager must recommend a candidate for fire chief who then may (or may not) be appointed by the city commission. The city commission retains the exclusive right to reject recommended candidates until the one it finds satisfactory is presented by the city manager.
The relevant statute, MCL 168.209(2); MSA 6.1209(2), as in effect at the time of the court’s decision in Menominee, provided:
If the vacancy shall be in any other county office [other than county clerk or prosecuting attorney], either elective or appointive, the presiding or senior judge of probate, the county clerk and the prosecuting attorney shall appoint some suitable person to fill such vacancy.
We note that, after our decision in Booth, this Court held that the oma cannot constitutionally be applied to a public university in the context of a presidential search. Federated Publications, Inc v Mich State Univ Bd of Trustees, 460 Mich 75; 594 NW2d 491 (1999).
We do not quarrel with the conclusion in Booth that an individual member of a public body may, under certain circumstances, qualify as a “public body.” The distinguishing factor is that, in Booth, there existed a public body in the first instance — the Board of Regents — that impermissi-bly attempted to delegate its authority as a body to subunits of its individual members. Here, no such delegation by a public body occurred. Similarly, in Booth, the Board of Regents puiposely attempted to evade the requirements of the oma. No such evasive activity occurred in the present case. Today’s decision in no way dilutes Booth’s recognition that the purpose of the oma cannot be evaded by arguing form over substance. Booth, swpra at 226.
We recognize that one member of the city manager’s committee, Jacob Hutter, was a city commissioner. This does not affect our analysis. In sharp contrast to the facts of Booth, in which a public body attempted to delegate authority to an individual member of that body in an effort to avoid compliance with the oma, Hutter — although a member of the public body that would ultimately determine who would be appointed fire chief — was not given any individual authority to make hiring decisions. Furthermore, the committee’s duties — as specified by McCandless, not the city commission — were of a purely advisory nature. Thus, Booth on this score is also inapposite.
Finally, we acknowledge that the committee formed by the city manager was a multimember entity of the kind recognized in the oma, and that the committee arguably "exercise [d] governmental or proprietary authority or performefd] a governmental or proprietary function.” However, the committee, as the creation of the city manager, did not derive its power from “state constitution, statute, charter, ordinance, resolution, or rule . . . .” Therefore, the committee does not meet the second requirement of the oma’s definition of “public body,” and it was not subject to that act.

=== CASE 2211445 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:06.932544+00 ===

210 Cal.App.2d 96 (1962)
GERALDINE R. CODDINGTON, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
KENNETH R. CODDINGTON, Defendant and Respondent.
Civ. Nos. 25820, 26188.
California Court of Appeals.
Nov. 23, 1962.
A. Richard Backus and William C. Hiscock for Plaintiff and Appellant.
David C. Marcus for Defendant and Respondent.
FILES, J.
Number 25820 is an appeal from an order made August 24, 1961, changing custody of an 11-year-old girl from sole custody of the mother to joint custody, and giving physical custody to the father during the school year 1961-62.
Number 26188 is an appeal from an order refusing to order defendant to pay additional counsel fees to plaintiff's attorneys.
The parties married May 25, 1949, and their daughter, Linda, was born April 18, 1950. In 1954 plaintiff obtained by default an interlocutory decree of divorce whereby she was awarded custody of Linda. The final decree was entered a year later. In 1956 plaintiff married her present husband and in 1959 moved to Citrus Heights, an unincorporated community in Sacramento County, where the husband had employment. Their household included four children: Linda, two daughters of the husband by a previous marriage, and an older son of plaintiff by an earlier marriage.
In late 1958 or early 1959 defendant married his present wife and established a home in San Gabriel. She has no children.
In November 1960 plaintiff obtained an order to show cause for an increase in support for Linda and for a specific delineation of defendant's visitation rights. Thereupon defendant obtained an order to show cause re change of custody. Defendant requested that Linda spend one-half of each year with each parent, so that she might attend school in San Gabriel for one semester each year, so that her "learning habits may be improved." The two applications came on for hearing *98 December 6, 1960, before Judge pro tempore Heublein. After testimony had been taken, the court made an order "by stipulation" modifying the interlocutory decree so as to provide for physical custody of the minor with defendant during certain vacation periods only. The order also increased the support payments.
In June 1961 Linda came to San Gabriel to spend a part of the summer with her father, as provided in the order. While she was there, defendant obtained a new order to show cause why the physical custody of Linda should not be awarded to him. A hearing was held before Judge Lucas on August 23 and 24, 1961, after which the court made the order which is the subject of the present appeal. This order provided that the divorce judgment be modified in the following respects, among others: Legal custody of Linda was awarded to plaintiff and defendant jointly. Physical custody was awarded to defendant from September 9, 1961, to June 16, 1962, except for specified periods during Christmas and Easter vacations. The matter was continued to July 5, 1962, for further proceedings. The order also contained detailed provisions relating to support, transportation expenses, and other matters not here pertinent. Defendant was ordered to pay a fee of $100 to plaintiff's attorneys.
Plaintiff asked the trial court for a stay pending appellate review, but the request was denied. Plaintiff then petitioned this court for a writ of supersedeas, which was denied without opinion.
The notice of appeal indicates an appeal from the entire order. In her briefs plaintiff is attacking only the change of custody and the inadequacy of the attorneys' fee.
Before this appeal could be heard on its merits, respondent on July 30, 1962, filed a motion to dismiss the appeal on the ground that it was moot. A declaration filed in opposition to the motion states that on July 12, 1962, a further hearing was held before Judge Lucas and oral testimony was taken. An order was then made giving defendant father physical custody of Linda during the 1962-63 school year, and continuing the matter for further hearing on June 25, 1963. The declaration further states that an appeal from that order has been taken. However, the record has not yet reached this court.
The appeal is not moot. The order of August 24, 1961, which is the subject of this appeal, changed the custody of Linda from the mother to the parents jointly, for the purpose *99 of facilitating a year-to-year supervision of her physical placement. This arrangement is still in effect, and plaintiff is properly in this court to attack it. Moreover, with respect to the inadequacy of counsel fees, the appeal clearly is not moot.
At the 1961 hearing the court heard testimony from both parents and both stepparents and interviewed Linda out of the presence of the parties but in the presence of the court reporter. The evidence was not in substantial conflict except for the views of the respective witnesses as to what is best for Linda. The evidence most favorable to defendant may be summarized as follows: Both parents and both stepparents love Linda and she loves them. Linda is a normal, healthy, well adjusted child, who has no special problems except that she is below grade level in reading. There is no suggestion that any of the four adults lacks any of the qualities of a devoted parent, or that either home is lacking in any basic requirement. While with her mother, she is a member of a family of six in a three-bedroom home in a semirural community. This family lives on a total take-home income of about $900 monthly, including child support. Linda shares a bedroom with her two stepsisters.
Her father lives in a new home in San Gabriel where Linda has her own bedroom and bath. There is a swimming pool. Defendant is a partner in a small business, from which he draws $1,200 per month for living expenses. During the summer of 1961 Linda was enrolled in a San Marino public school where she took a reading course and received a grade of A--. Her stepmother worked with her during the summer to help her with her reading. The stepmother planned to continue to work with Linda to improve her schoolwork throughout the school year.
At the end of the 1961 summer session in San Marino Linda was tested and showed a reading grade level of 3.7. This indicated that she was below a norm established for fourth grade pupils. Although Linda had completed the fifth grade at Citrus Heights in June 1961, it was planned to have her repeat the fifth grade in San Marino in the 1961-1962 school year.
When interviewed by the judge, Linda expressed her approval of all four of the adults, but did not say anything that could be construed as indicating a real preference of one home over the other. She did tell the judge, "I will stay down here and get my reading better because the school right around the *100 corner from us is about the best school in San Gabriel. That is what Kay told me."
The statutory standard for awarding custody of a minor child is set forth in Civil Code, section 138: The court is to be guided by what appears to be for the best interests of the child; and, other things being equal, if the child is of tender years custody should be given to the mother.
[1] In determining whether other things are equal within the meaning of this rule the trial court is necessarily allowed a wide latitude in exercising its discretion. Its discretion will not be reversed on appeal unless the record presents a clear case of abuse. (Goto v. Goto, 52 Cal.2d 118, 123 [338 P.2d 450]; Munson v. Munson, 27 Cal.2d 659 [166 P.2d 268].)
[2] Plaintiff's appeal rests on her contention that the trial court abused its discretion, in that the evidence does not support any grounds for change of custody.
There is no fixed scientific formula for the care of children, and no one standard of what constitutes a child's best interests. Necessarily, the judge whose duty it is to make such a decision views the matter in the light of his own attitude and experience, realizing as he must that someone else, equally wise, might see the matter differently. In this case the trial court expressed no reasons for its decision. Before announcing the ruling the court said: "I might make some comment on the evidence, but I am not going to. Nice people, all sincerely interested in the little child, all wanting her. I can't give her to both, so here is the order."
The frustration of an appellate court, when asked to review the decision of the trial judge in a custody case, was eloquently described by Justice Duniway in Stack v. Stack, 189 Cal.App.2d 357 [11 Cal.Rptr. 177]. What was said there about the legal and practical aspects of the problem is fully applicable here.
We are not impressed that the privileges of an only child in the luxurious San Gabriel home would be so much better for Linda than sharing the more crowded Citrus Heights home with her mother and stepsisters and half-brother. There may be more merit in the hypothesis that Linda's apparent progress in reading during the summer session, under the supervision of her stepmother, indicated the desirability of continuing this regime for a full year in order to try to overcome a serious reading handicap.
Skeptical though we might be, we are mindful that weighing the evidence and exercising discretion are the functions of *101 the trial judge. Where minds may reasonably differ, it is his discretion and not ours which must control. Moreover, the trial court saw and talked with the principals, and was able to obtain impressions which cannot be communicated in an appellate record.
The order made by the trial judge was clearly experimental, calling for a reexamination one year later. We are impressed by the absurdity of our attempting, after the year is over, to judge the wisdom of the experiment without knowing anything of the results. Linda is now well into her second school year in her father's home. A reversal would not undo what has occurred. Any direction which this court could now give would be purely negative. Not knowing the present circumstances, this court could not, on the 1961 record, offer its advice on what next should be done. At most, a reversal would bring the parties back for another hearing and a reweighing of the imponderables.
If the record showed that Linda had been placed in a situation which appeared clearly detrimental to her, it would be a simple matter to reverse the order, notwithstanding the lapse of time. But this is not a case in which we can say that the trial court's order was or is likely to harm the child. Nor could we say with any confidence that the trial judge was not right in thinking that the San Gabriel experiment would be highly beneficial to her.
Plaintiff relies upon Washburn v. Washburn, 49 Cal.App.2d 581 [122 P.2d 96], where an order changing custody from the mother to the father was reversed. The principal issue was the fitness of the mother, and the opinion discusses at length the principles of law which are involved. The order was reversed, however, not because of insufficiency of the evidence, but because the trial court had based its decision in large part upon an investigator's report which was inadmissible hearsay. Nothing in that case calls for a reversal here.
As a part of the order of August 24, 1961, the trial court directed that defendant pay plaintiff's attorneys $100. [3] The amount to be allowed as attorneys' fees under Civil Code, section 137.3 is also one to be determined in the exercise of a sound discretion by the trial court, but it is a subject on which we are better able to correct an injustice. [4] The record shows that the plaintiff's case was well prepared and ably presented. Plaintiff lacks funds, and defendant is well able to pay. In court, counsel spent a half *102 day waiting to be heard, a half day in trial, and then a second half day of trial. Substantial time must have been devoted to preparation for the trial, and in consultations with their client both before and after the trial. A fee of $300 appears reasonable under the circumstances.
On September 8, 1961, plaintiff's attorneys made a motion for an order augmenting the award of fees for services in the trial court and for an allowance of fees and expense money for an appeal. The court ordered payment of fees and expenses on appeal, but denied any further award for services in the trial court. Defendant then appealed from this order insofar as it allowed fees for the appeal, and plaintiff took a cross-appeal from the order insofar as it denied additional compensation for trial services. Defendant failed to file a brief and his appeal was dismissed on July 5, 1962. In view of the decision in the appeal from the order of August 24 (Number 25820), plaintiff's appeal from the September 8 order (Number 26188) is now moot, and must be dismissed on that ground.
The order in Number 25820 is modified in that defendant is ordered to pay to plaintiff's attorneys an additional $200, making a total fee of $300; and as so modified, the order is affirmed.
In Number 26188 the appeal is dismissed. Appellant shall recover her costs in Number 25820 except to the extent that such costs have been or can be paid out of the expense money which the trial court allowed by its order of September 8, 1961. Neither party shall recover costs in Number 26188.
Shinn, P. J., and Ford, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737633 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:00.22658+00 ===

SHIELDS, Judge,
concurring.
Although I agree that Vanness’s conviction for interference with custody should be affirmed, I disagree with the majority opinion in two respects.
In my opinion, the trial court erroneously admitted the writ of attachment into evidence. A prior civil judgment is admissible as proof of the judgment’s existence and of the legal consequences that could result from that fact. Indiana State Highway Commission v. Rickert (1981), Ind., 425 N.E.2d 620, 622-23. However, a judgment cannot be offered as proof of some fact upon which the judgment was founded, because the judgment is not binding upon anyone except parties thereto. Lasher v. Gerlach (1939), 107 Ind.App. 572, 580, 23 N.E.2d 296, 299. Thus, the trial court improperly admitted the writ of attachment to *786demonstrate that Vanness left the jurisdiction in violation of the custody order. However, in view of the overwhelming evidence against Vanness, the error is harmless.
I also disagree with the implication in the majority opinion that Vanness’s conviction would be sustainable if the custody order had not specifically imposed geographical limitations regarding visitation. As this court stated in Cook v. State (1989), Ind. App., 547 N.E.2d 1118, trans, denied:
[I]n the absence of specific restrictions in the custodial order, a custodial or noncustodial parent who removes the child from the state either with bad intent or, perhaps, with no intent whatsoever to violate the terms of the order, does not violate the letter of the law.... We find that the statute means what it says, that the removal by the parent must violate a specific provision of the custody order.
Cook, 547 N.E.2d at 1123. Thus, had the present order not imposed specific geographical limitations, it would have had to state that Elizabeth could not be removed from the State for the fact finder to have found that Vanness violated the custody order within the meaning of IC § 35-42-3-4.

=== CASE 2211470 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:07.246705+00 ===

136 Cal.App.2d 916 (1955)
LOS ANGELES LOCAL JOINT EXECUTIVE BOARD OF CULINARY WORKERS AND BARTENDERS, A. F. OF L., Respondent,
v.
STAN'S DRIVE-INS, INC. (a Corporation), Appellant.
Civ. No. 21012.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
Oct. 11, 1955.
Max Fink, Cyrus Levinthal and Emmet G. Lavery, Jr., for Appellant.
Alexander H. Schullman for Respondent.
Memorandum
VALLEE, J.
This is a companion case to In the Matter of Arbitration between Los Angeles Local Joint Executive Board of Culinary Workers and Bartenders, A. F. of L., and Stan's Drive-Ins, Inc., ante, p. 89 [288 P.2d 286], and to the same titled case, ante, p. 95. Reference is made to those opinions for the facts.
After Stan's Drive-Ins, called Stan's, had appealed from the order of May 27, 1954, requiring it to give an undertaking, the court on motion of respondent Union made an order that Stan's execute and file with the court a written undertaking by two or more good and sufficient personal sureties or a corporate surety in the sum of $25,000, conditioned for the performance of the order of May 27, 1954, "if the said Order is affirmed or the said appeal therefrom is dismissed, said undertaking to be for the protection of all parties entitled to payments under and by virtue of the arbitration award confirmed, as modified and corrected, by said Judgment Order herein of February 18, 1954, and said Judgment Order." Stan's appeals from this later order.
Stan's makes the same contentions on this appeal as it made on the appeal from the order of May 27, 1954. There *917 is no distinction between this appeal and that one, and the result here must be that reached there.
On the authority of In the Matter of Arbitration between Los Angeles Local Joint Executive Board of Culinary Workers and Bartenders, A. F. of L., and Stan's Drive-Ins, Inc., No. 20746, the order is affirmed.
Shinn, P. J., and Wood (Parker), J., concurred.

=== CASE 2211474 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:07.317275+00 ===

60 Cal.App.2d 587 (1943)
LLOYD A. MASON, Respondent,
v.
UNITED STATES FIDELITY AND GUARANTY COMPANY (a Corporation), Appellant.
Civ. No. 12417.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
Sept. 27, 1943.
Stern & Grupp for Appellant.
H. C. George for Respondent.
PETERS, P. J.
Mason, respondent herein as beneficiary of a deed of trust, and Milburn as trustee thereof, acting pur *589 to the provisions of the deed of trust, properly noticed a sale of the property covered thereby for May 17, 1940, at 9:30 a. m. One Knowles, on May 16, 1940, in order to stop that sale, secured, ex parte, from a judge in Stanislaus County an order to show cause and a temporary restraining order. This order required Mason and the other named defendants to show cause on June 3, 1940, in the Superior Court of Mariposa County why an injunction restraining the sale should not be issued, and in the meantime "pending a decision upon said order to show cause" the sale of the property was temporarily restrained. As a condition of granting this restraining order the judge required that Knowles furnish an undertaking in the sum of $1,000. The bond was furnished by appellant herein. Before 9:30 a. m. on May 17, 1940, Knowles filed an action in Mariposa County to restrain the sale and to cancel the deed of trust, and caused the order to show cause and the temporary restraining order to be served on Mason and Milburn shortly before the time set for the sale. Those parties immediately postponed the sale. On May 30, 1940, fourteen days after the issuance of the order to show cause, Mason and Milburn filed responses to the order to show cause, and also filed demurrers to the complaint, motions to strike, and motions to dissolve the temporary restraining order. The motions were noticed to be heard on June 3, 1940, the same date as the order to show cause was made returnable, which date was eighteen days after the order to show cause was issued. On June 3, 1940, the motions and demurrer were argued before Judge Schottky. That judge granted the motions to dissolve the restraining order, denied Knowles' application for a preliminary injunction, and sustained the demurrers to the complaint. The complaint was never amended, and Mason and the others named as defendants in the Knowles' complaint were given judgment by default, which judgment has long since become final.
After the restraining order had been dissolved Mason paid his attorney $350, the bill for this amount specifically reciting it was for "services rendered in procuring dissolution of restraining order." Milburn paid his attorney $150 for the same purpose. The payment made by Milburn was in fact paid by Mason, and Milburn assigned his claim for reimbursement against appellant bonding company to Mason. Mason thereupon instituted this action against the bonding company to recover the $500 thus expended to secure the dissolution of the restraining order. This action was tried *590 before the same judge who had granted the order dissolving the restraining order. The trial court found that Mason and Milburn were "necessarily compelled" to retain attorneys to secure a dissolution of the restraining order, and that the sums paid were "the reasonable value of the services" rendered. It accordingly entered judgment for Mason for $500, from which judgment the bonding company appeals.
[1] The main contention of appellant is that the temporary restraining order was absolutely void because it provided it was to remain in effect for eighteen days, whereas section 527 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that such ex parte order can be effective for but ten days. That section provides for the issuance of an ex parte restraining order in certain circumstances, but provides that in such event "the matter shall be made returnable on an order requiring cause to be shown why the injunction should not be granted, on the earliest day that the business of the court will admit of, but not later than ten days from the date of such order." Because the specified effective period of this temporary restraining order did exceed the ten-day period it is urged that it was obviously void, that Mason and Milburn were not compelled to abide by its terms, and were not reasonably required to retain attorneys to secure its dissolution. It is also pointed out that the motions to dissolve were not made until fourteen days after the issuance of the order. It is the thought of appellant that, at least after May 26th, Mason and Milburn should have disregarded the restraining order and should not have incurred attorneys' fees in attacking that which it contends was already a nullity. This is a strange argument to be advanced by a defendant who, by issuing the bond, made the issuance of the allegedly void restraining order possible. If this theory were sound it would require each person served with a restraining order to make a quasi judicial determination as to the validity of the order. If it were void he would have to ignore it and could recover attorney's fees expended in securing its dissolution only if it were not void. There is no logical or legal reason why such a burden should be placed on the innocent person served with the restraining order. (See Robertson v. Smith, 129 Ind. 422 [28 N.E. 857, 15 L.R.A. 273]; Littleton v. Burgess, 16 Wyo. 58 [91 P. 832, 16 L.R.A.N.S. 49].) While it is *591 true that the restraining order violated the time limitations of section 527, supra, it is at least debatable as to whether or not it was valid for at least ten days, a thought that was expressed by Knowles' counsel when he noticed the discrepancy. Moreover, Mason and Milburn were in the position of having been served with a formal order of the superior court restraining the sale for eighteen days and thereafter until the order to show cause was determined. Even if they believed the order was void they were faced with the possibility of contempt proceedings if they violated it. Counsel for Knowles and the trial judge that issued the order had already made one mistake and there was no assurance it would not be repeated. Orderly procedure suggests that where the party served believes the order is invalid he should take the proper steps to have it dissolved rather than resort to self help. A party should not be penalized because he resorts to orderly legal procedure rather than deciding for himself whether or not to abide by a formal court order. Even if the restraining order was completely void (a point we do not decide) it cannot be held, as a matter of law, that Mason and Milburn did not act reasonably in proceeding to secure its dissolution by formal motions to dissolve.
[2] Had Knowles personally put up the undertaking here involved and were he now being sued on such undertaking, the law is clear that he, having secured the order, would be estopped to challenge its validity. (See cases collected 4 Cal.Jur. p. 362,  8; 32 C.J. p. 453,  783; 28 Am.Jur. p. 525,  352.) There is no sound reason why a similar rule should not apply against a corporate bondsman. The evidence shows that upon application of Knowles' counsel the appellant issued its bond before the papers that were to be submitted to the judge of Stanislaus County had even been prepared. It knew that the purpose of the bond was to secure the defendants named in the restraining order from damage in the event the order was improperly secured. It knew that the securing of such an undertaking was a condition precedent to securing the restraining order. If its counsel had examined the moving papers before issuing the undertaking perhaps the error would not have occurred. It elected to issue the bond without such examination, and the bond was used for the very purpose for which it was issued. Under such circumstances, the appellant is in no legal position to now *592 contend that respondent and Milburn acted unreasonably in moving to dissolve the order.
[3] Appellant next urges that, inasmuch as Mason and Milburn had the hearing on the motion to dissolve set for June 3d, the same day the order to show cause was returnable, the motion to dissolve was a useless and unnecessary act, because, so it is urged, at that precise point of time the restraining order fell of its own weight, whatever the court should decide on the hearing of the order to show cause. It is urged that if, on the hearing of June 3d, the temporary injunction had been granted, the temporary restraining order would have been supplanted, and that when it was denied, there was no ground to continue the restraining order. Therefore, so it is urged, the motion to dissolve was a totally unnecessary act. There is an obvious fallacy in the basic premise upon which this conclusion is predicated. The restraining order here involved was not one that automatically terminated on June 3d. It provided for its continuance until June 3d and until there was "a decision upon said order to show cause." There was no assurance to Mason and Milburn that the trial court would decide the order to show cause on the return day. The trial judge might have required briefs and might have taken ninety days from the date of the submission of the matter to decide that controversy. Admittedly, the issues involved were serious ones, and were argued a full day. For these reasons it is obvious that it was reasonably necessary for Mason and Milburn in order to protect their rights to move for a dissolution. There is nothing in Warden v. Choate, 33 Cal.App. 354 [165 P. 36], relied upon by appellant, contrary to the views herein expressed. In that case no motion to dissolve the restraining order was ever made. The party restrained simply resisted the order to show cause, and on the return date his demurrer was sustained. Of course the restraining order then fell of its own weight at the expiration of the time fixed in the order.
[4] The appellant next contends that there was no consideration for the bond, and for that reason urges it cannot be held liable thereunder. The bond recites that "Whereas, the plaintiff desires to give an undertaking for Restraining Order as provided by Section 527 of the Code of Civil Procedure. ..." Appellant urges that since no restraining order as provided by that section was ever issued, because of the erroneous time limit fixed therein, no liability can *593 attach to it. The argument is unsound. The issuance of a proper restraining order was not the consideration for the issuance of the bond. The bonding company did not bargain to issue a bond in consideration of Knowles securing a proper restraining order under section 527. It issued the bond for a premium, which was apparently paid. Whatever rights it may have against Knowles because he secured an improper order are not involved in this case. For reasons already stated, the bonding company cannot urge such defenses against Mason and Milburn.
[5] In its closing brief appellant urges, for the first time, that it obligated itself on a restraining order for ten days' duration, and that when the court issued one for eighteen days it materially altered its obligation without its consent. It urges that this "material alteration" discharged it from all obligations on its bond. It cites several cases for the well settled proposition that a surety is discharged by a change in its obligation not consented to by the surety. This is merely another way of restating the consideration point above considered. The obligation of the bond was not changed. The obligation was to pay damages suffered by those restrained if the restraining order was improperly issued. That is the obligation sued upon.
[6a] The next contention of appellant is that there is no substantial evidence to support the finding that the two fees totaling $500 were charged solely to secure the dissolution of the restraining order. Appellant points out that the motion to dissolve was heard together with the order to show cause and the demurrers to the complaint, and contends that, under the evidence, the services actually were in connection with the order to show cause and the demurrers and not in connection with the motion to dissolve. It is, of course, the law that the amount recoverable on account of attorney's fees on such a bond is limited to fees paid for procuring the dissolution of the restraining order, and does not extend to fees paid for defending the case on its merits. (Soule v. United States F. & G. Co., 82 Cal.App. 572 [255 P. 886]; see, also, San Diego W. Co. v. Pacific Coast Steamship Co., 101 Cal. 216 [35 P. 651]; Curtiss v. Bachman, 110 Cal. 433 [42 P. 910, 52 Am.St.Rep. 111]; Warden v. Choate, 33 Cal.App. 354 [165 P. 36].) But the respondent here is clearly entitled, up to the limits of the bond, to recover *594 all fees reasonably paid to secure a dissolution of the order, even though other matters were also heard at the same time. (Moore v. Maryland Casualty Co., 100 Cal.App. 658 [280 P. 1008]; Handy v. Samaha, 117 Cal.App. 286 [3 P.2d 602].) The question was one of fact. The trial court has found that $500 was charged to secure the dissolution of the restraining order and that such fee was reasonable. The sole question is whether there is any substantial evidence to support that finding. In this connection it should be kept in mind that the judge who tried this cause was the same judge who presided at the hearing of June 3, 1940. The trial judge knew how much of the argument that day was devoted to the point relating to the dissolution of the restraining order and how much was devoted to other matters. As a lawyer he was able to evaluate the worth of those services. [7] It is well settled that when a judge is informed of the extent and nature of legal services he can determine what is a reasonable fee from his own knowledge and experience without the necessity of other evidence. (See cases collected 3 Cal.Jur. p. 714,  111.)
It is of course true that the attorneys for Mason and Milburn in preparing for the hearing of the motion to dissolve did much work that could also be used on the argument on the order to show cause and on their demurrers. [6b] Aside from the point that the restraining order exceeded the time limit fixed by section 527 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the same arguments that would defeat the application for the temporary injunction would show that the restraining order should be dissolved. The three matters were inextricably interwoven. But this fact does not relieve the appellant from all responsibility for attorneys' fees. The attorney for Mason and the attorney for Milburn explained at length what they did in preparation for the hearing of June 3d. This included matters that were used on all three arguments. They then testified that they submitted bills totaling $500 for securing the dissolution of the restraining order, and submitted bills totaling $225 for other services rendered in the action. Under such circumstances we cannot say, as a matter of law, that the charges totaling $500 were not made to secure the dissolution of the order, or were excessive.
The judgment appealed from is affirmed.
Knight, J., and Ward, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2211463 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:07.172464+00 ===

614 N.W.2d 227 (2000)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
James Paul SECORD, Appellant.
No. CX-99-1721.
Court of Appeals of Minnesota.
June 20, 2000.
Review Denied September 13, 2000.
*228 Mike Hatch, Attorney General, St. Paul; and Amy Klobuchar, Hennepin County Attorney, Linda M. Freyer, Assistant County Attorney, Minneapolis, for respondent.
John A. Fabian, Diane M. Odeen, Nichols Kaster & Anderson, Minneapolis, for appellant.
Considered and decided by SCHUMACHER, Presiding Judge, HARTEN, Judge, and SHUMAKER, Judge.
OPINION
SCHUMACHER, Judge.
After his conviction of gross misdemeanor possession of child pornography, James Paul Secord appeals the district court's refusal to suppress material seized from his residence pursuant to a search warrant. We reverse.
FACTS
On October 22, 1998, Secord took his car to a Firestone garage for servicing. While the car was being inspected and repaired, a Firestone mechanic, Gary Voit, noticed that one of the taillights was not working. Voit called Secord for permission to fix the light, and Secord agreed. To fix the taillight, Voit opened the car's hatchback and saw what he thought was a box of child pornography videotapes, as well as some soft-cover child pornography books. Voit showed his manager, Randy Petersen, and another employee, Timothy Hanlin, what he had found. They did not remove any of the materials from the car. Secord picked up his car later that afternoon.
On October 28, 1998, Sergeant Bernie Martinson of the Sex Crimes Unit of the Minneapolis Police Department received a phone call from a Hennepin County probation officer. The probation officer told Martinson that a friend who worked at the Firestone garage had told him about suspected child pornography in Secord's car. That same day, Martinson called the garage and talked to Peterson, who told him that while servicing Secord's car, several employees saw what they thought was child pornography in the car. Martinson also spoke with Hanlin, who gave a description of Secord and his clothes.
Based on this information, Martinson applied for and received a search warrant to search Secord's car and residence. Martinson executed the search warrant on October 29, 1998. He seized the box of videotapes and the soft-cover books from Secord's car. Although some of the videotape titles suggested that they might be child pornography, none of them contained child pornography or photographic representations of sexual conduct involving minors within the meaning of the relevant statutes. The soft-cover books were not pornographic.
Martinson and another investigator also searched Secord's residence, where they seized pornographic tapes and magazines that did not contain child pornography or photographic representations of sexual conduct involving minors within the meaning of the relevant statutes. But Secord told the officers that he had used his computer to download "pictures of juveniles posing in sexual positions and having sex with adults." The officers seized the pictures.
Secord moved to suppress the materials seized from his residence on the grounds that the warrant was not supported by probable cause, did not establish a sufficient nexus to his residence to support a search of the residence, and contained misrepresentations. Although the district court found that the affidavit's uses of the word "pedophiles" were misrepresentations because there was no evidence to suggest that Secord was a pedophile, the court found that even disregarding those sections of the affidavit, the remaining portions *229 established probable cause to search both Secord's car and his residence.[1]
Secord's motion to suppress the evidence seized at his residence was denied. He submitted to a bench trial on stipulated facts and was found guilty. He was sentenced to 365 days in the county correctional facility, with the sentence stayed pending compliance with certain terms of probation. He now appeals the district court's refusal to suppress the material seized at his residence pursuant to the search warrant.
ISSUE
Did the district court err in determining the warrant was supported by probable cause and thus refusing to suppress the evidence seized from Secord's residence?
ANALYSIS
Both the United States and Minnesota Constitutions protect citizens from unreasonable searches and seizures. See U.S. Const. amend. IV; Minn. Const. art. I, § 10. The court's task on appeal is to "ensure that the issuing judge had a `substantial basis' for concluding that probable cause existed." State v. Souto, 578 N.W.2d 744, 747 (Minn.1998) (citation omitted). To determine whether the district court had a substantial basis for finding probable cause, we look to the "totality of the circumstances." State v. Wiley, 366 N.W.2d 265, 268 (Minn.1985). Under this test, the
issuing judge "is simply to make a practical, commonsense decision whether, given all the circumstances set forth in the affidavit before him, including the `veracity' and `basis of knowledge' of persons supplying hearsay information, there is a fair probability that contraband or evidence of a crime will be found in a particular place."
State v. Zanter, 535 N.W.2d 624, 633 (Minn.1995) (quoting Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 238, 103 S.Ct. 2317, 2332, 76 L.Ed.2d 527 (1983)). In determining whether probable cause exists, both the district court and the reviewing court may consider only the information in the application for the search warrant. State v. Kahn, 555 N.W.2d 15, 18 (Minn.App.1996). We pay "great deference" to the district court's determination of probable cause supporting a search warrant. Gates, 462 U.S. at 236, 103 S.Ct. at 2331; State v. Jannetta, 355 N.W.2d 189, 194 (Minn.App. 1984), review denied (Minn. Jan. 14, 1985). But see State v. Gabbert, 411 N.W.2d 209, 212 (Minn.App.1987) ("deference to the magistrate * * * is not boundless") (quoting United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 914, 104 S.Ct. 3405, 3416, 82 L.Ed.2d 677 (1984)). Doubtful or marginal cases should be "`largely determined by the preference to be accorded to warrants.'" State v. Albrecht, 465 N.W.2d 107, 109 (Minn.App.1991) (quoting Massachusetts v. Upton, 466 U.S. 727, 734, 104 S.Ct. 2085, 2089, 80 L.Ed.2d 721 (1984)).
Secord argues that the warrant was not supported by probable cause because the information in the supporting affidavit did not establish sufficient nexus to his residence to support a search of the residence. The only connection in the affidavit between the materials the Firestone employees saw in Secord's car and Secord's residence is Martinson's assertions that on the basis of his training and experience he knows that "pedophiles" "keep," "maintain," and "collect" such materials. But the court ruled that it would not consider those portions of the affidavit because there was no evidence to support the implied assertion that Secord was a pedophile. *230 The state did not challenge this ruling by filing a notice of review, nor does it argue in its brief that Martinson's training or experience supports a nexus between the materials seen in Secord's car and Secord's residence sufficient to support a search of that residence. As a result, it may not argue that Martinson's conclusory statements based on his training and experience support finding probable cause for the warrant. See City of Ramsey v. Holmberg, 548 N.W.2d 302, 305 (Minn.App.1996) (issue decided adversely to respondent not properly before court absent notice of review), review denied (Minn. Aug. 6, 1996); Melina v. Chaplin, 327 N.W.2d 19, 20 (Minn.1982) (issues not briefed on appeal are waived).
Instead of relying on Martinson's training and experience, the state argues that reasonable inferences from the nature of the materials and surrounding circumstances support a nexus to Secord's home. Observing that the district court "is entitled to draw common-sense and reasonable inferences from the facts and circumstances" in an affidavit, State v. Eggler, 372 N.W.2d 12, 15 (Minn.App.1985), review denied (Minn. Sep. 19, 1985), the state argues that since the videotapes were likely to be used at Secord's residence, a sufficient nexus to that residence existed to support probable cause for a warrant to search the residence.
Although the question whether the district court can infer a nexus to a residence based on the inference that videotapes are likely to be used or stored at home appears to be one of first impression in Minnesota, other courts presented with the argument have rejected it:
In this case, a magistrate could infer from the affidavit that [the defendant] would be unlikely to view or store the video tapes at his place of employment. A further possible inference was that, after removing the tapes from his workplace, [the defendant] would take the tapes home to view or store. [The defendant's] home, however, was but one of an otherwise unlimited possible sites for viewing or storage. The [postal inspector's] affidavit provided no basis to either limit the possible sites or suggest that [the defendant's] home was more likely than the otherwise endless possibilities. As a consequence, the possible inference that [the defendant] would take the tapes home, in and of itself, is insufficient to provide a substantial basis for concluding there was probable cause to believe the contraband would be in [the defendant's] home at the time the search was to take place.
United States v. Rowland, 145 F.3d 1194, 1205 (10th Cir.1998). On similar facts, the Third Circuit reached the same result:
Although it may have been reasonable for the magistrate judge to infer that [the defendant] would not view the videotape at the storage facility, there was no basis for finding that he would view it at his home as opposed to some other location.
United States v. Loy, 191 F.3d 360, 366 (3rd Cir.1999), cert. denied, ___ U.S. ___, 120 S.Ct. 1429, 146 L.Ed.2d 319 (2000).
The state, however, relies on Minnesota cases in which the absence of evidence that drug dealers kept drugs elsewhere was one factor supporting the nexus necessary for a search of their residences:
No evidence suggested that appellant stored drugs in a separate place or obtained drugs from another source before making the sale to the dealer. Such indications would have weakened the inference of a nexus between the controlled buy and appellant's residence. See Novak v. State, 349 N.W.2d 830, 832-33 (Minn.1984) (affidavit supported inference that marijuana would be found in appellant's residence following sale that did not take place at that house, where there was no evidence that appellant stored marijuana elsewhere or obtained it from others before making sale). *231 State v. Bynum, 579 N.W.2d 485, 487 (Minn.App.1998), review denied (Minn. Aug. 18, 1998).
But the cases on which the state relies are distinguishable. In both Bynum and Novak, the information available to the district court included the fact that the suspects were drug dealers. In fact, the Novak court specifically pointed this out:
We attach considerable significance to the information indicating that petitioner was a drug wholesaler. The fact that petitioner dealt in large quantities increased the likelihood that police would find marijuana in a search of his residence.
Novak, 349 N.W.2d at 832-33.
When the district court is informed that a suspect is a drug dealer, it is reasonable to infer that the suspect keeps a supply of drugs to sell. In the absence of any contrary information, it is reasonable to infer that that supply is kept at the suspect's residence. But in this case, that reasoning does not work, because there is nothing in the affidavit that indicates that Secord had more pornography anywhere, much less at his residence. Had the informants seen Secord sell pornography to someone, Bynum and Novak would arguably have been relevant. But without any facts to indicate that the pornography seen in Secord's car was part of a larger supply, there was no reasonable basis to infer that more pornography would be found at Secord's home.
The state suggests that the large quantity of pornography seen in Secord's car made it likely that more would be found at home, but does not suggest why this is so. The state also says "it is reasonable to infer that [Secord] was using the car to transport the pornography to his residence," but does not explain why that inference is any more reasonable than the inference that Secord was using the car to transport the pornography somewhere else.
Under the totality of the circumstances presented in the affidavit, we conclude the district court did not have a substantial basis to believe that child pornography would be found at Secord's residence. The warrant therefore was not properly supported by probable cause. We need not reach Secord's additional arguments.
DECISION
The district court erred by refusing to suppress the child pornography seized from Secord's residence.
Reversed.
NOTES
[1]  The affidavit supporting the application for a search warrant included the following paragraph:
Your affiant also wishes to seize any handwritten books or diaries which will describe sexual acts with children. It is known that pedophiles will collect such data on computer discs and software, and then correspond with other known pedophiles in order to further their collection of sexual erotica.

=== CASE 9737634 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:06.135412+00 ===

Young, J.
In this premises liability case the plaintiff, Violet Moeller, was injured when she tripped over a concrete tire stop in defendant church’s parking lot.1 Plaintiff was visiting the church to attend bible study. Plaintiff sued the church, alleging that the defendant negligently placed the tire stops and failed to provide adequate lighting in the parking lot.
At trial, the jury was instructed on the obligations property owners owe to licensees. The jury returned a verdict in favor of the church. The Court of Appeals reversed and remanded the case for a new trial after determining that the trial court erred by instructing the jury on the obligations owed to licensees rather than “public invitees” as defined in 2 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 332, p 176.2
We granted leave in this case to determine the proper standard of care owed to individuals on church property for noncommercial purposes. We hold that the trial court correctly instructed the jury that such individuals are licensees and not invitees. Accordingly, we reverse the Court of Appeals deci*594sion and reinstate the trial court judgment in favor of the church.
i
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
On the evening of November 22, 1989, Violet Moeller accompanied her friend Pat Drake to defendant’s church to attend bible study. Ms. Moeller was not a member of the church. Ms. Drake parked her car in the church parking lot. As she exited Ms. Drake’s car, plaintiff tripped and fell over a tire stop, fracturing her left arm. Plaintiff subsequently sued the defendant church, asserting that defendant negligently placed the concrete tire stops and failed to provide adequate lighting in the parking lot.
Before trial, the church twice filed motions for summary disposition. The trial court denied both motions, but determined that Ms. Moeller was a licensee and not an invitee at the time of the accident. The case proceeded to trial, at which time the judge instructed the jury on the duties owed to licensees.3 At the close of trial, the jury returned a verdict in favor of the defendant. The court subsequently entered a judgment of no cause on the verdict.
*595Plaintiff appealed, contending that the trial court erred in determining that she was a licensee at the time of her accident. The Court of Appeals held that the plaintiff was a “public invitee” as defined in 2 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 332, and not a licensee.4 The Court of Appeals acknowledged that this Court has never explicitly adopted the Restatement provision. However, on the basis of its reading of Preston v Sleziak, 383 Mich 442; 175 NW2d 759 (1970), the Court of Appeals concluded that this provision applies in Michigan and that the trial court improperly instructed the jury. Accordingly, the Court of Appeals .reversed the trial court judgment and remanded the case for a new trial. We granted defendant’s application for leave to appeal. 461 Mich 861 (1999).
n
STANDARD OF REVIEW
As a general rule, if there is evidence from which invitee status might be inferred, it is a question for the jury. See Nezworski v Mazanec, 301 Mich 43, 58; 2 NW2d 912 (1942). However, this case presents the broader question whether invitee status should be extended to an individual who enters upon church property for a noncommercial purpose. This is a question of law that we review de novo. See Cardinal Mooney High School v Michigan High School Athletic Ass’n, 437 Mich 75, 80; 467 NW2d 21 (1991).
*596ih
ANALYSIS
A. THE COMMON-LAW CLASSIFICATIONS
Historically, Michigan has recognized three common-law categories for persons who enter upon the land or premises of another: (1) trespasser, (2) licensee, or (3) invitee. Wymer v Holmes, 429 Mich 66, 71, n 1; 412 NW2d 213 (1987). Michigan has not abandoned these common-law classifications. Reetz v Tipit, Inc, 151 Mich App 150, 153; 390 NW2d 653 (1986). Each of these categories corresponds to a different standard of care that is owed to those injured on the owner’s premises. Thus, a landowner’s duty to a visitor depends on that visitor’s status. Wymer, supra at 71, n 1.
A “trespasser” is a person who enters upon another’s land, without the landowner’s consent. The landowner owes no duty to the trespasser except to refrain from injuring him by “wilful and wanton” misconduct. Id.
A “licensee” is a person who is privileged to enter the land of another by virtue of the possessor’s consent. Id. A landowner owes a licensee a duty only to warn the licensee of any hidden dangers the owner knows or has reason to know of, if the licensee does not know or have reason to know of the dangers involved. The landowner owes no duty of inspection or affirmative care to make the premises safe for the licensee’s visit. Id. Typically, social guests are licensees who assume the ordinary risks associated with their visit. Preston, supra at 451.
The final category is invitees. An “invitee” is “a person who enters upon the land of another upon an *597invitation which carries with it an implied representation, assurance, or understanding that reasonable care has been used to prepare the premises, and make [it] safe for [the invitee’s] reception.” Wymer, supra at 71, n 1. The landowner has a duty of care, not only to warn the invitee of any known dangers, but the additional obligation to also make the premises safe, which requires the landowner to inspect the premises and, depending upon the circumstances, make any necessary repairs or warn of any discovered hazards. Id. Thus, an invitee is entitled to the highest level of protection under premises liability law. Quinlivan v Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co, Inc, 395 Mich 244, 256; 235 NW2d 732 (1975).
A possessor of land is subject to liability for physical harm caused to his invitees by a condition on the land if the owner: (a) knows of, or by the exercise of reasonable care would discover, the condition and should realize that the condition involves an unreasonable risk of harm to such invitees; (b) should expect that invitees will not discover or realize the danger, or will fail to protect themselves against it; and (c) fails to exercise reasonable care to protect invitees against the danger. Id. at 258, citing Restatement, § 343.
The Court of Appeals correctly recognized that invitee status is commonly afforded to persons entering upon the property of another for business purposes. See, e.g., Nezworski, supra; Pelton v Schmidt, 104 Mich 345; 62 NW 552 (1895). In this case, we are called upon to determine whether invitee status should extend to individuals entering upon church property for noncommercial purposes. Because invitee status necessarily turns on the existence of an *598“invitation,” we must examine our common law in order to ascertain the meaning of that term.
B. THE MEANING OF INVITATION IN MICHIGAN’S COMMON LAW
Unfortunately, our prior decisions have proven to be less than clear in defining the precise circumstances under which a sufficient invitation has been extended to a visitor to confer “invitee” status. On the one hand, several of our decisions appear to support the requirement that the landowner’s premises be held open for a commercial business purpose. See, e.g., Perl v Cohodas, Peterson, Paoli, Nast Co, 295 Mich 325; 294 NW 697 (1940); Diefenbach v Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co, 280 Mich 507; 273 NW 783 (1937);5 Sink v Grand Trunk W R Co, 227 Mich 21; 198 NW 238 (1924). Indeed, several panels of our Court of Appeals have interpreted our decisions as supporting the requirement of a business purpose. See, e.g., Butler v Ramco-Gershenson, Inc, 214 Mich App 521; 542 NW2d 912 (1995); Bradford v Feeback, 149 Mich App 67; 385 NW2d 729 (1986); Leep v McComber, 118 Mich App 653; 325 NW2d 531 (1982).6 The “commercial purpose” distinction is sufficiently *599recognized in Michigan case law that there are even secondary authorities that include Michigan among those jurisdictions conferring invitee status only on business visitors. See, e.g., 95 ALR2d 992, § 4, p 1014.
In contrast with the line of cases supporting a commercial puipose requirement, some of our earlier decisions are replete with broad language suggestive of the Restatement’s “public invitee” definition, although the precise contours of the definition are difficult to discern. See, e.g., Polston v S S Kresge Co, 324 Mich 575; 37 NW2d 638 (1949);7 Sheldon v Flint & P M R Co, 59 Mich 172; 26 NW 507 (1886); Hargreaves v Deacon, 25 Mich 1 (1872).8
Finally, there is Preston, supra which is internally inconsistent on this point. Preston was interpreted by the Court of Appeals as having implicitly adopted the Restatement definition of “public invitee.” At the same time, Preston, supra at 448, quoting Cooley on *600Torts, appears to recognize the commercial purpose requirement associated with invitee status:
An invitation may be inferred when there is a common interest or mutual advantage, a license when the object is the mere pleasure or benefit of the person using it. “To come under an implied invitation, as distinguished from a mere license, the visitor must come for a purpose connected with the business with which the occupant of the premises is engaged, or which he permits to be carried on there. There must be some mutuality of interest in the subject to which the visitor’s business relates, although the particular business which is the object of the visit may not be for the benefit of the occupant.
“The distinction between a visitor who is a mere licensee and one who is on the premises by invitation turns largely on the nature of the business that brings him there, rather than on the words or acts of the owner which precede his coming----” [3 Cooley, Torts (4th ed), § 440, pp 193-194 (emphasis added).][9]
Cooley’s acknowledgment that an invitee’s status is dependent upon a visit associated with a “commercial purpose” and “mutuality of interest” concerning the reason for the visit demonstrate the extent to which Michigan has historically, if not uniformly, recognized a commercial business purpose as a precondition for establishing invitee status.
Despite the divergence of our cases concerning the elements necessary to confer invitee status, one thing has been consistent: to our knowledge, this Court has never squarely addressed the question whether a *601mere “public invitee” such as a churchgoer is entitled to invitee status. While plaintiff suggests that our cases have already recognized invitee liability for churches, a careful review of these cases shows that this is a less than accurate analysis. To the contrary, Michigan cases that have conferred invitee status upon an individual injured on church premises reveals that each has involved a plaintiff who was on the church premises for a commercial business purpose. For example, in Bruce v Central Methodist Episcopal Church, 147 Mich 230; 110 NW 951 (1907), the plaintiff was allowed to recover from the defendant church for injuries he sustained while painting the church building. The plaintiff was working for a contractor, painting the ceiling of the church when the scaffolding on which he was standing broke.
Almost fifty years later, a defendant church was held liable in Manning v Bishop of Marquette, 345 Mich 130; 76 NW2d 75 (1956). In Manning, the plaintiff fell and was injured on church property as she was leaving a bingo game. The defendant argued that the plaintiffs claim was barred because she was at the church for an illegal purpose and should not use her illegal conduct as a foundation for her claim that she was on the premises as an invitee. Id. at 137. The Court refused to entertain any defenses based on illegality or charitable immunity and held that the plaintiff was an invitee.
Later, in Kendzorek v Guardian Angel Catholic Parish, 178 Mich App 562; 444 NW2d 213 (1989), overruled on other grounds in Orel v Uni-Rak Sales Co, 454 Mich 564; 563 NW2d 241 (1997), a child was injured on a swing at a carnival held on the church grounds. The carnival was a church fund-raiser. The *602child’s mother brought suit against the church. The Court of Appeals held that, at the time the child was injured, she was an invitee.
As these cases illustrate, invitee status has traditionally been conferred in our cases only on persons injured on church premises who were there for a commercial purpose.
C. THE RESTATEMENT
We begin by noting that a large number of jurisdictions have adopted § 332 of the Restatement:
(1) An invitee is either a public invitee or a business visitor.
(2) A public invitee is a person who is invited to enter or remain on land as a member of the public for a purpose for which the land is held open to the public.
(3) A business visitor is a person who is invited to enter or remain on land for a purpose directly or indirectly connected with business dealings with the possessor of the land.
Subsection (2) of § 332 of the Restatement creates an invitee status that does not depend on a commercial purpose. In this case, the Court of Appeals interpreted Preston, supra, as having implicitly adopted the Restatement definition of “public invitee.” We certainly agree that Preston relied on § 332 of the Restatement. However, the issue whether to adopt the Restatement definition of “public invitee” was not before this Court in Preston.
In Preston, the plaintiffs were social guests who had been invited to the defendant’s cottage for the weekend. In order to access the cottage, the plaintiffs entered a lift. The lift consisted of a car that was controlled by cable and an electric winch. After the plain*603tiffs entered the lift, a shaft broke and the car crashed, injuring the plaintiffs. Id. at 445. The plaintiffs filed suit against the defendants. The jury returned a verdict in favor of the defendants. The Court of Appeals erroneously determined that the plaintiffs were invitees merely because they had been “invited” onto the premises. That Court reversed and remanded the case for a new trial. Id. This Court held that the Court of Appeals committed error requiring reversal because the trial judge properly instructed the jury on the duty owed by a host to his social guests, licensees. Id. at 454. As stated by the trial judge, a host has no duty to reconstruct his premises or make his home more convenient or more safe for those accepting his hospitality. The guest assumes the ordinary risks that come with the premises. Id. at 446.
There was no contention in Preston that the plaintiffs were “public invitees,” because that case involved only the duty owed to social guests. Thus, the issue whether to adopt the Restatement definition of “public invitee” was not before this Court in Preston and there is room for doubt regarding whether Preston can properly be regarded as binding precedent on this point. However, to the extent Preston purported to adopt the Restatement definition, and this could be properly considered a binding holding, we overrule Preston. Moreover, as explained below, we decline to adopt § 332 of the Restatement here.
d. business purpose as a precondition of invitee status
Given the divergence of our cases on what circumstances create invitee status, we must provide some form of reconciliation in this case. In harmonizing our *604cases, we conclude that the imposition of additional expense and effort by the landowner, requiring the landowner to inspect the premises and make them safe for visitors, must be directly tied to the owner’s commercial business interests. It is the owner’s desire to foster a commercial advantage by inviting persons to visit the premises that justifies imposition of a higher duty. In short, we conclude that the prospect of pecuniary gain is a sort of quid pro quo for the higher duty of care owed to invitees. Thus, we hold that the owner’s reason for inviting persons onto the premises is the primary consideration when determining the visitor’s status: In order to establish invitee status, a plaintiff must show that the premises were held open for a commercial purpose.
With regard to church visitors, we agree with the court in McNulty v Hurley, 97 So 2d 185 (Fla, 1957), that such persons are licensees.10 In McNulty, a churchgoer was injured when, as she was leaving the church, she was pushed to the ground by a crowd of people. The lower court granted the defendant church’s motion to dismiss on grounds that the plaintiff failed to state a cause of action. The defendant contended that one entering church premises for the purpose of attending religious services is a mere licensee. Thus, the only duty of the church was to refrain from wanton negligence or wilful misconduct and to refrain from intentionally exposing her to danger. Id. át 187. The plaintiff, on the other hand, argued that she was on the church premises by invitation and *605that most religions urge members and others to enter their churches and hold their doors open as a standing invitation. Id. The Florida Supreme Court disagreed, stating:
[A]n invitation to enter and worship, whether it be either express or implied, does not constitute one who accepts the invitation an invitee in the legal sense. In order for such relationship to arise the person entering onto the premises, i.e. the invitee, must have done so for purposes which would have benefited the owner or occupant of the premises, i.e. the invitor, or have been of mutual benefit to the invitee and the invitor. And as we view it this benefit must be of a material or commercial rather than of a spiritual, religious, or social nature. [Id. at 188.]
Thus, as we do, the McNulty court considered a business purpose or a business or commercial benefit to the landowner as a necessary requirement in order for a visitor to be deemed an invitee. The McNulty court rejected the argument that church members confer a benefit to the church by supporting the church, stating:
It cannot be successfully or logically argued that a person enters a place of worship, call it by any name, and participates in worship and prayer to the God or Supreme Being of his choice for the benefit of the body or organization which owns the church, the religious or lay readers who conduct the services, or the God or Supreme Being whom he worships and asks for guidance, help or forgiveness. One of the concepts of all religious beliefs known to us is that participation in religious activities is for the benefit of the mortals who participate therein. [Id,.]
The McNulty court also addressed the issue whether financial contributions at a religious service provided a sufficient basis for invitee status. We find *606this analysis instructive because the plaintiff in the case at bar similarly alleges that on prior visits to the church she made financial contributions to the church to such an extent that she should be considered an invitee. The McNulty court stated:
Nor would it matter if the plaintiff had alleged that she made a contribution when the collection plate was passed, for this would not have changed her status. ... It seems clear to us . . . that one who attends a religious edifice for the purpose of attending a religious service, as did the plaintiff in this case, does so “for his own convenience, pleasure or benefit” and is at best a licensee. [Id. at 188-189.]
We agree that whether the plaintiff in the instant case previously gave an offering to the church has no bearing on whether she was a licensee or an invitee. Absent a showing that the church’s invitation to attend its services was for an essential commercial purpose, Ms. Moeller should be considered a licensee and not an invitee. A person who attends church as a guest enjoys the “unrecompensed hospitality” provided by the church in the same way that a person entering the home of a friend would. Hambright v First Baptist Church, 638 So 2d 865, 868 (Ala, 1994). We conclude that church visitors who are attending church for religious worship are more like social guests (licensees) than business visitors (invitees).11
*607
w
conclusion
We recognize that a majority of jurisdictions considering the issue have adopted the public invitee definition set forth in § 332 of the Restatement. However, in exercising our common-law authority, our role is not simply to “count heads” but to determine which common-law rules best serve the interests of Michigan citizens. We believe that Michigan is better served by recognizing that invitee status must be founded on a commercial purpose for visiting the owner’s premises.
For the above stated reasons, we hold that persons on church premises for other than commercial purposes are licensees and not invitees. Accordingly, we reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals. We remand this case to the Court of Appeals for consideration of the other issues raised by plaintiff in her appeal which were not resolved by the Court of Appeals in light of its analysis of the present issue.
Weaver, C.J., and Taylor, Corrigan, and Markman, JJ., concurred with Young, J.
Violet Moeller is now deceased. Jill Stitt, decedent’s personal representative has been substituted as the named plaintiff. For purposes of this opinion, Ms. Moeller will be referred to as the plaintiff.
Section 332 of the Restatement provides:
(1) An invitee is either a public invitee or a business visitor.
(2) A public invitee is a person who is invited to enter or remain on land as a member of the public for a purpose for which the land is held open to the public.
(3) A business visitor is a person who is invited to enter or remain on land for a purpose directly or indirectly connected with business dealings with the possessor of the land.
The trial court gave the following instructions:
The possessor of land or premises is liable for physical harm caused to the licensee by a condition on the premises if, but only if, (A) the possessor knew or should’ve known of the condition, and should have realized that it involved an unreasonable risk of harm to the licensee, and should have expected that she would not discover or realize the danger and (B) the possessor failed to exercise reasonable care to make the conditions safe or to warn the licensee of the condition and the risk involved, and (C) the licensee did not know or have reason to know of the condition and risk involved.
229 Mich App 504; 582 NW2d 849 (1998).
For example, in Diefenbach, the plaintiff was injured when he entered the defendant’s store. He alleged he entered the store for the purpose of purchasing groceries and denied defendant’s contentions that he entered the store to participate in a rat hunt that was going on at the time. The Court noted that, although plaintiff actually bought no groceries, if he came to the store for a business purpose he would undoubtedly be an invitee.
In Butler, the Court of Appeals defined invitees as persons who enter the premises at the owner’s express or implied invitation to conduct business concerning the owner. Correlatively, in Bradford, the Court of Appeals defined licensee as a person who, other than for a business purpose, enters another’s land with the express or implied permission of the owner or person in control of the property.
In Polston, this Court held that members of the public who use a sidewalk with the defendant’s knowledge, permission, and acquiescence were not trespassers but licensees. The Polston Court provided that the rule for licensees is different when the licensee is using a path that has been openly and notoriously held out to the public for use. In such cases, the Court held that the defendant owed a greater duty of ordinary care.
We note that Polston and other cases decided about that time seem to impose a special heightened duty for persons injured on sidewalks, bridges, and roadways held open to the public. Hence, where such persons would ordinarily be considered licensees, they were nonetheless entitled to a duty of ordinary care. See, e.g., Brown v Michigan R Co, 202 Mich 280; 168 NW 419 (1918); Morrison v Carpenter, 179 Mich 207; 146 NW 106 (1914).
In Hargreaves, this Court stated that a landowner owes a duty of care when an injured party has been induced to come by personal invitation or employment or by resorting there as a place of business or “of general resort held open” to customers or others whose lawful occasion may lead them to come visit. Id. at 5. Interestingly, Hargreaves is cited in 95 ALR2d 992, § 4, p 1014 as supporting a commercial puipose requirement.
9 Given that Preston is purported to have adopted the Restatement “public invitee” definition, which does not require a business purpose, we find it difficult to reconcile Preston’s citation to Cooley, which expressly requires a business purpose, as an accurate statement of Michigan law. Id. at 448, 450.
The Florida Supreme Court has since moved away from McNulty and has adopted § 332 of the Restatement. See Post v Lunney, 261 So 2d 146 (Fla, 1972). However, we continue to find McNulty’s reasoning persuasive.
The solicitation of entirely voluntary donations by a nonprofit organization is plainly not a commercial activity. Accordingly, a church providing an opportunity for voluntary donations during a religious service that are in no way required to attend the service, i.e., passing a collection plate, does not transform one who attends the church service and elects to make a donation from a licensee into an invitee. Indeed, we imagine that many religious individuals would find it offensive to have their voluntary donations to a church regarded as part of a business or commercial *607transaction, rather than as a gift intended to aid in various religious good works.

=== CASE 9737635 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:06.143844+00 ===

Kelly, J.
(dissenting). I concur with the majority’s chronicling of the facts and its statement of the applicable standard of review. I agree, also, with its recitation of the three common-law categories for persons who enter the land or premises of another. However, I dissent from the remainder of the majority’s opinion.
*608The issue is whether individuals who enter another’s property for noncommercial purposes are invitees for purposes of determining the standard of care a property owner or possessor owes to them. We have never held that invitee status arises solely where there is a commercial purpose for visiting the owner’s premises. Instead, we have long recognized and applied both the commercial-purpose provision and the public-invitee provision of 2 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 332 to classify visitors as invitees. The majority’s reliance on McNulty v Hurley,1 to identify visitors as invitees only when they are visiting for a commercial purpose is misplaced. The majority’s action rejects a recognized principle of Michigan law.
A
The common law and the statutes make up a major portion of the law of Michigan. Const 1963, art 3, § 7.
“The common law does not consist of definite rules which are absolute, fixed, and immutable like the statute law, but it is a flexible body of principles which are designed to meet, and are susceptible of adaption to, among other things, new institutions, public policies, conditions, usages and practices, and changes in mores, trade, commerce, inventions, and increasing knowledge, as the progress of society may require. So, changing conditions may give rise to new rights under the law . . . .” [Beech Grove Investment Co v Civil Rights Comm, 380 Mich 405, 430; 157 NW2d 213 (1968), quoting 15A CJS, Common Law, § 2, pp 43-44.1
“The Restatement is ... an attempt to categorically recite the content of the common law.” Yoder Co *609v Liberty Mut Ins Co, 92 Mich App 386, 390; 284 NW2d 810 (1979). Section 332 of the Restatement provides:
(1) An invitee is either a public invitee or a business visitor.
(2) A public invitee is a person who is invited to enter or remain on land as a member of the public for a purpose for which the land is held open to the public.
(3) A business visitor is a person who is invited to enter or remain on land for a purpose directly or indirectly connected with business dealings with the possessor of the land.
Section 332 of the Restatement is consistent with the common law of Michigan.
Our common law, as it pertains to invitees, has been developing since 1872. In numerous cases, we have recognized or applied a rule that is similar to that contained in subsection 332(2). Long ago, in Hargreaves v Deacon,2 this Court recognized a distinction between the duty owed to a trespasser and to one who enters another’s property under an inducement or a lawful right. Hargreaves, supra at 9. The distinction required something more than mere permission. Id. To be entitled to damages, the visitor had to have been invited by the landowner to be on the property. Id. at 7.
Notably, for the landowner to incur liability, the Hargreaves Court did not require that a person be on a landowner’s property solely for a commercial purpose. It stated that a suit for damages can lie when the
*610party injured has been induced to come by personal invitation, or by employment which brings him there, or by resorting there as to a place of business, or of general resort held out as open to customers or others whose lawful occasions may lead them to visit there. [Id. at 5 (emphasis added).]
Thus, Hargreaves formed the basis for recognizing several means by which a person could become an invitee. See Preston v Sleziak, 383 Mich 442, 450; 175 NW2d 759 (1970); Polston v S S Kresge Co, 324 Mich 575, 578; 37 NW2d 638 (1949); Douglas v Bergland, 216 Mich 380, 387-388; 185 NW 819 (1921).
Also long ago, in Sheldon v Flint & P M R Co,3 this Court applied the public invitee doctrine, although it did not identify it as such. The plaintiffs decedent was a child induced to enter the defendant’s property by a band playing there. Id. at 173. The child had no particular business with the defendant and was not on the property for the pecuniary gain of the defendant. Id. at 177. While there, he was struck by the defendant’s train and killed. Id. at 174.
The Court found that the music was naturally calculated to attract a crowd. The defendant should have anticipated that and made provisions to avoid the hazard that resulted in the child’s death. Id. at 177-178. It held that a jury question remained whether the defendant had exercised the degree of care owed the plaintiff’s decedent under the circumstances. Id. at 178. Notably, the Court did not merely label the child a licensee, despite the absence of any pecuniary benefit to the defendant from the decedent’s presence on its property. Id. at 177-178. Thus, we can infer that the *611Court determined that the decedent could be classified as an invitee on the basis of invitation alone, without a commercial purpose for being on the property.
In 1908, this Court quoted former Justice Cooley in Blakeley v White Star Line4 to state our common-law definition of an invitee:
“One is under no obligation to keep his premises in safe condition for the visits of trespassers. On the other hand, when he expressly or by implication invites others to come upon his premises, whether for business or for any other purpose, it is his duty to be reasonably sure that he is not inviting them into danger, and to that end he must exercise ordinary care and prudence to render the premises reasonably safe for the visit.” [Blakeley, supra at 637, quoting Cooley, Torts, p 605 (emphasis added).]
Particularly significant is the fact that Justice COOLEY identified two different means by which one could be classified as an invitee: (1) by a finding that the person was invited upon the property for business, or (2) by a finding that the person was invited for any other purpose. Id.
On the basis of Justice Cooley’s definition of an invitee, the Blakeley Court expressly formulated the applicable rule: “Invitation is sufficient. Pecuniary profit to the owner is not essential.” Id. at 639. Thus, in Blakeley, we again recognized that our common law does not require a commercial purpose for one to be an invitee.4
5
*612Forty-one years later, in Polston, supra, this Court continued to recognize that it could assign invitee status on the basis of invitation alone. It derived the following definition of an invitee:
From Hargreaves v Deacon, [supra], it appears that damages for accidental injuries sustained on private premises resulting from the negligence of the owner may not be recovered by one on the theory that he is an invitee “unless the party injured has been induced to come by personal invitation, or by employment which brings him there, or by resorting there as to a place of business, or of general resort held out as open to customers,” et cetera. [Polston, supra at 578 (emphasis added).]
Only after the Court concluded that the plaintiff did not fall within the definition of an invitee did it confer licensee status on him. Id.
In Preston, supra, we find again that the licensee-invitee distinction does not turn on whether the invitor has the expectation of a pecuniary gain from the invitation. Id. at 449-450. “[I]n this state the status of an invitee is tested not only by the theory of economic benefit, but also upon the concept of invitation.” Id. at 450 (emphasis added).
The majority argues that Preston is “internally inconsistent on this point.” Ante at 599. However, a close reading of Preston indicates that its analysis is actually consistent with our common-law rule and the Restatement definition of a public invitee.
*613In Preston, we considered whether social guests invited to another’s home were invitees or licensees. The Court of Appeals had relied on Genesee Merchants Bank & Trust Co v Payne6 to hold that Michigan law classifies the social guest as an invitee. Preston, supra at 447.
This Court rejected the Genesee Merchants Bank decision and reversed the Court of Appeals. 383 Mich 455. In so doing, we stated:
“An invitation may be inferred when there is a common interest or mutual advantage, a license when the object is the mere pleasure or benefit of the person using it. ‘To come under an implied invitation, as distinguished from a mere license, the visitor must come for a purpose connected with the business with which the occupant of the premises is engaged, or which he permits to be carried on there. There must be some mutuality of interest in the subject to which the visitor’s business relates, although the particular business which is the object of the visit may not be for the benefit of the occupant.’
“ ‘The distinction between a visitor who is a mere licensee and one who is on the premises by invitation turns largely on the nature of the business that brings him there, rather than on the words or acts of the owner which precede his coming____’ ” [Id. at 448, quoting 3 Cooley, Torts (4th ed), § 440.]
The majority latches onto the quotation from Cooley as proof that Michigan classifies a visitor as an invitee only when there is a commercial purpose for the visit. Ante at 600. However, the majority ignores the context of the quotation. The Preston Court quoted Cooley to preserve the historical distinction between a social guest and invitee. Preston, *614supra at 448. The quotation was not meant to provide the general rule for assigning invitee status,to visitors in all other situations.
Later in its opinion, the Court quoted § 332 of the Restatement as the general definition of an invitee. Id. at 450. It stated that the Restatement “definition fairly represents the law of this state pertaining to what constitutes the legal status of an invitee.” Id. at 451 (citations omitted). The Court then identified that the comment accompanying § 332 states that invitee status under the Restatement definition does not apply to social guests. Id. at 450-451. A social guest “ ‘does not come as a member of the public upon premises held open to the public for that puipose, and he does not enter for a purpose directly or indirectly connected with business dealings with the possessor.’ ” Id. at 451, quoting 2 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 330, comment h. Thus, the Court held that social guests were not invitees and went on to classify them as licensees. Id. at 453.
Comparable Michigan appellate cases decided after Preston have focused exclusively on the business invitee provision of § 332.7 They did not consider the public invitee provision of § 332. In each, however, it *615was unnecessary to consider the public invitee provision, because invitee status was established on the basis of an economic benefit to the property owner.8
In order to consider further the public invitee provision of § 332, we had to await a case in which liability was premised on the basis of an injured party being a public invitee. See, e.g., Roberts v Auto-Owners Ins Co, 422 Mich 594, 611; 374 NW2d 905 (1985). This case presents that basis, and we should not hesitate to apply the public invitee provision to it.
As identified above, the concept that invitee status is determined by either an economic benefit to, or an invitation by, the property owner is well established in our common law. It has been recognized as the law in Michigan since 1970 in Preston. See Leveque v Leveque, 41 Mich App 127, 129; 199 NW2d 675 (1972); Sendelbach v Grad, 246 NW2d 496, 499 (ND, 1976); 62 Am Jur 2d, Premises Liability, § 88, p 442, n 54. In *616fact, I would interpret Preston as implicitly adopting the Restatement definition of an invitee.
The majority argues that the issue “whether to adopt the Restatement definition of ‘public invitee’ was not before this Court in Preston . . . .” Ante at 603. However, in that case we were required to consider whether a social guest was an invitee or a licensee. Preston, supra at 445. In considering that issue, we were obliged to examine the definition of an invitee and a social guest to determine whether the two were compatible. Id. at 450-451. We determined that they were not and that the status of a social guest is more consistent with that of a licensee. Id. at 451-452. Thus, our discussion of what constitutes an invitee was essential to the resolution of the case.
Accordingly, I find that the issue whether to adopt the Restatement definition of an invitee was squarely before the Court in Preston. I would apply Preston as precedent, binding on this case.9
B
The majority rejects the public invitee provision of § 332 and adopts the reasoning contained in the Flor*617ida case of McNulty, supra, as more consistent with our state’s legal tradition. Ante at 604. In McNulty, the Florida Supreme Court held that, to be classified an invitee, one must have been on the property for a material or commercial puxpose that benefited the invitor. Id. at 188. The Court rejected the plaintiff’s argument that the defendant church received a benefit from his presence at a worship service, and labeled him a licensee. Id. at 189.
For over a century, Michigan has recognized that one can be classified as an invitee when on an invitor’s property for a commercial purpose or pursuant to an invitation. See Hargreaves, supra. Thus, the McNulty decision runs contrary to recognized principles of Michigan law by imposing a commercial purpose requirement to the designation of an invitee. This Court has expressly stated, “Invitation is sufficient. Pecuniary profit to the owner is not essential.” Blakeley, supra at 639. Therefore, the majority’s reliance on McNulty is misplaced.
Furthermore, Florida itself has rejected the McNulty decision. See Post v Lunney, 261 So 2d 146 (Fla, 1972). In Post, the Florida Supreme Court adopted § 332, including the public invitee provision. Id. at 148. It pointed out that the McNulty mutual benefit test was too narrow and had the potential to cause unjust results. Id. at 149.
For example, it would prohibit recovery for damages due to ordinary negligence to a “window-shopping” visitor to a store, while permitting recovery to a person who made a purchase, however small. To avoid these and similar results, “the economic benefit theory has been strained to the breaking point.” [Id., quoting Smith v Montgomery Ward & Co, 232 So 2d 195, 198 (Fla App, 1970).]
*618The Florida court applied the public invitee provision of § 332 to the case. Id. at 148. It concluded that the plaintiff was an invitee because she had been invited to enter property opened to members of the public for tours. Id. at 148-149.
The recognized law of Michigan is more consistent with the decision in Post than it is with the decision in McNulty. We have long recognized that one could be an invitee without benefiting the owner or being on the property for a commercial purpose. That principle is contained in the public invitee provision of § 332. Therefore, as the Florida court did in Post, this Court should find that the public invitee provision of § 332 is applicable to this plaintiff.10
c
Michigan’s definition of a common-law invitee is identical to that contained in § 332, and § 332 has been, at least implicitly, adopted by Preston. However, even if I were to agree with the majority that the Restatement rule is not the law, public policy supports adoption of the Restatement view at this time. As previously stated, our common law is a flexible body of principles and is adaptable to changes in public policy. Beech Grove, supra. The application of the public invitee provision to this case is entirely consistent with that view. It is responsive to the public interest that is implicated when premises are opened *619to the public. Furthermore, § 332 provides greater protection to the public without unduly burdening property owners.
I agree with the Indiana Court of Appeals when it stated:
The public invitee test set out in Restatement section 332(2) would require that the occupant open his premises to the public or to some broad segment of it. Thus, it would not extend invitee status to social guests. When premises are opened to the public, their use and condition begin to affect the public interest, so that it is reasonable for courts to impose upon the occupant a standard of reasonable care toward those members of the public who enter for the purpose for which they were invited. Prosser, [Business visitors and invitees, 26 Minn L R 573, 587 (1942)].
The occupant does not lose control of his property; he can withdraw the invitation or restrict entry as he sees fit.
Id. Neither does he owe a duly of reasonable care to the public in general. The test would further require that the visitor enter the premises for the particular purpose for which the occupant has encouraged the public to do so. It is this latter fact which raises the inference that the occupant will use reasonable care to keep the premises safe for the visitor.
Given the public interest involved and our recognition of the implication of safety which arises when the public is encouraged to enter premises for a particular purpose, we conclude that the public invitee test is a proper guide for determining invitee status. [Fleischer v Hebrew Orthodox Congregation, 504 NE2d 320, 323 (Ind App, 1987).]
CONCLUSION
The public invitee provision of § 332 accurately reflects the common law of Michigan. It was adopted *620by this Court in Preston and should be applied here. Furthermore, it reflects the sound public policy of protecting members of the public when premises are open to them.
I would affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals. This case should be remanded to the trial court for a new trial in which the jury is instructed according to both provisions of the § 332 definition of an invitee.
Cavanagh, J., concurred with Kelly, J.
97 So 2d 185 (Fla, 1957).
25 Mich 1 (1872).
59 Mich 172; 26 NW 507 (1886).
154 Mich 635; 118 NW 482 (1908).
The majority completely ignores the Blakeley definition of an invitee. It states that there are several cases that “appear” to support a commercial purpose requirement. Ante at 598. It recognizes that there are cases that are suggestive of the Restatement’s public invitee definition. But, it *612finds that the contours of the definition are difficult to discern. While the contours of the definition to this point may not be a model of clarity, I ask what is difficult to discern regarding the statement in Blakeley that “[pecuniary profit to the owner is not essential”? Blakeley, supra at 639. From that statement, one can scarcely fail to discern that Michigan law does not require a commercial purpose for someone to be classified as an invitee.
6 Mich App 204; 148 NW2d 503 (1967).
See Stanley v Town Square Cooperative, 203 Mich App 143, 147; 512 NW2d 51 (1993) (“The distinguishing characteristic that fixes the duty depends upon whether the licensee’s visit is related to the pecuniary interests of the possessor of the land”); White v Badalamenti, 200 Mich App 434, 436; 505 NW2d 8 (1993) (“To be an invitee, plaintiff’s presence on defendants’ land must have been related to an activity of some tangible benefit to defendants”); Doran v Combs, 135 Mich App 492, 496; 354 NW2d 804 (1984) (“An invitee is one who is on the owner’s premises for a purpose mutually beneficial to both parties”); Danaher v Partridge Creek Country Club, 116 Mich App 305, 312; 323 NW2d 376 (1982) (“[A]n invitee is one who is on the owner’s premises for a purpose mutually beneficial to both parties”); Socha v Passino, 105 Mich App 445, 447-448; 306 NW2d 316 (1981) (“An individual can be an invitee if the visit may reasonably be *615said to confer or anticipate a business, commercial, monetary, or other tangible benefit to the occupant”).
See Stanley, n 7 supra (the guest of a co-op resident was an invitee because the co-op obtained pecuniary gain in exchange for giving the resident the right to license visitors); White, n 7 supra (the question for the jury to decide is whether an unpaid babysitter who slipped on ice at the defendant’s home was an invitee); Doran, n 7 supra (a former mother-in-law who fell on the defendant’s driveway while returning children from the former husband’s home was an invitee because of the pecuniary benefit received by the defendant); Danaher, n 7 supra (the plaintiff was deemed an invitee when he arrived at the defendant’s golf course to play golf); Socha, n 7 supra (the plaintiff was a licensee when injured in the defendant’s house while removing a piece of furniture that benefited him, but provided no benefit to the defendant).
This is especially true with regard to the cases cited by the majority in which courts have recognized invitee liability for churches. See ante at 601-602. In each case this Court or the Court of Appeals classified the visitor as an invitee because the church received a commercial benefit from the visitor’s presence. Id. There simply was no need to rely on the concept of invitation and apply the public invitee definition.
I note that, in other instances, we have adopted Restatement sections as the law of this state without formally identifying that we were doing so. See Senior Accountants, Analysts & Appraisers Ass’n v Detroit, 399 Mich 449, 458; 249 NW2d 121 (1976). In Senior Accountants, it was sufficient for us to have mentioned the Restatement section and applied it to that case for later Courts to recognize that we adopted it. See Nummer v Dep’t of Treasury, 448 Mich 534, 557, n 2; 533 NW2d 250 (1995) (Mallett, J., dissenting).
Similar to the manner of adoption we employed in Senior Accountants, in Preston we mentioned § 332 and then applied it to find that the plaintiff was not an invitee. Preston, supra at 451. Therefore, I disagree with the majority when it states that we have never adopted the public invitee provision of § 332.
The majority recognizes that most jurisdictions have adopted the public invitee definition provided in § 332. However, it states that our role is “not simply to ‘count heads.’ ” Ante at 607. I agree that we should not “simply count heads,” but neither should we “bury our heads in the sand” to avoid recognizing that our common law includes the public-invitee definition of an invitee.

=== CASE 2211478 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:07.355006+00 ===

605 N.E.2d 221 (1992)
Boyce Brown WOMACK, Appellant-Petitioner,
v.
Anna WOMACK, Appellee-Respondent.
No. 47A01-9207-CV-224.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
December 29, 1992.
Rehearing Denied February 19, 1993.
*222 David P. Allen, Salem, Donald M. Frey, Seymour, for appellant-petitioner.
Brent E. Steele, Steele, Steele & Steele, Bedford, for appellee-respondent.
BAKER, Judge.
This is an appeal from a marriage dissolution action in which only one issue was litigated: whether Wife should retain title to a particular piece of land and the house located on it. Wife maintained Husband deeded the property to her as a gift inter vivos; Husband, on the other hand, insisted he had no intention of making a gift when he allowed title to be placed in Wife's name and further suggested the presence of Wife's undue influence and his own incompetence. The trial court believed Wife and awarded her the property. Husband appeals.
FACTS
The record reveals that petitioner-appellant Boyce Brown Womack (Husband), age 85 at the time of trial, and respondent-appellee Anna Womack (Wife), age 78 at the time of trial, married on January 29, 1988. Several days after their marriage Husband and Wife executed a "Pre-Nuptial Agreement" in which each agreed, among other things, that each would retain exclusive ownership and control of scheduled property owned before or acquired during the marriage.[1] Husband agreed to "provide the reasonable necessary expenses of support and maintenance of the Wife in a suitable home consistent with his financial ability." Record at 151. The agreement also noted that each party was free to make "additional provision for the other, whether by lifetime gift, by future Will or Codicil, by joint or community property, by insurance or otherwise." Record at 151.
It appears that Husband and Wife lived tranquilly for most of their 20-month marriage. *223 The two divided their time between one of Husband's three farm properties and Wife's mobile home, where they had met. Husband purchased a home in Salem, Indiana, but after the couple realized it was too small for them, Husband sold it and the two returned to the main farm. Eventually Husband sold the other two farm properties.
In July of 1990 adversity struck. Husband fell and was hospitalized after apparently suffering a stroke. His pacemaker was replaced and he had kidney trouble. Wife continued the search for a suitable marital home and found one she liked on seven acres of land near Mitchell, Indiana; this property is the subject matter of the dispute. Wife contacted the realtor and asked him to speak with Husband, who by that time was at home. When the two met, Husband told the realtor without much elaboration that the sale would go through, that he did not need to see the house first because it was to be Wife's, and that title would be listed in Wife's name alone. Wife made a $500.00 down payment on the property's $53,400.00 price.
On September 7, 1990, Husband called the bank and unsuccessfully tried to arrange a loan over the telephone, although he had enough money in his checking account to cover the purchase price. Husband, Wife, and Husband's granddaughter then personally went to the bank, where Husband discussed the loan with the bank president. After Husband agreed to secure the loan with his $68,000.00 certificate of deposit, the bank loaned Husband the money to buy the home. According to Wife, Husband told the bank president the property was a gift to Wife and that she would have no liability on the loan. On September 14, 1990, the purchase complete, title to the property was put in Wife's name.
Just two weeks later, Husband filed a petition to dissolve the marriage. The parties agreed that their pre-nuptial agreement prevented the Mitchell property from being lumped in the marital pot, as would ordinarily be done in a dissolution action. After a trial which addressed only the property's disposition, the trial court awarded the home to Wife after finding Husband had competently given it to her and had not been unduly influenced in doing so. Additional facts will be supplied as necessary.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Standard of Review
Wife requested and the trial court prepared findings of fact and conclusions of law under Ind. Trial Rule 52. Accordingly, our standard of review is limited. We first determine whether the evidence presented supports the findings and then whether the findings support the judgment. Vanderburgh County Bd. of Commissioners v. Rittenhouse (1991), Ind. App., 575 N.E.2d 663, 665, trans. denied. We will reverse the judgment only if it is "clearly erroneous," meaning unsupported by the factual findings and the conclusions based on those findings. Id. Findings of fact are clearly erroneous when the record lacks any facts or reasonable inferences to support them. Id. When determining whether the findings or judgment are clearly erroneous, we consider only the evidence most favorable to the judgment and the reasonable inferences flowing from that evidence. As always, we refuse to reweigh the evidence or reassess witness credibility. Id. at 666. Finally, our standard of review is also affected by whether Husband suffered adverse or negative judgments on the issues of donative intent and undue influence.
A. Donative Intent
At trial Husband attempted to prove title was in Wife's name alone because he and Wife had an agreement that Wife would later repay part or all of the property's purchase price. In other words, he claimed, he had no intention of simply giving the entire property to Wife inter vivos. The trial court found there was no agreement and that it was not true Husband had no donative intent when he placed the title in Wife's name. Husband now claims the trial court erroneously placed the burden of proof on him and wrongly *224 found he intended to give the property to Wife.
There can be no doubt that because Wife was the sole legal owner of the property, Husband bore the burden of proving his assertion that, in reality, the property was at least half his. When he lost his argument that the property was in Wife's name pursuant to an agreement and that he had no donative intent, Husband suffered a negative judgment. A negative judgment is one entered against the party bearing the burden of proof. Id. When the court enters specific findings against a party bearing the burden of proof, we will reverse only if the evidence is uncontradicted and supports no reasonable inferences in favor of the decision or if after reviewing the record we are left with a definite and firm conviction a mistake has been made. Id.
Contrary to Husband's suggestions, the evidence concerning the existence of both an agreement and donative intent is not uncontradicted. Wife denied that she entered an agreement with Husband to repay the purchase price in whole or in part. She testified Husband told her and others on more than one occasion that the property's purchase was meant to be his gift to her. This testimony was corroborated by the realtor, who described how Husband told him essentially the same thing. The trial court heard testimony that Husband had on several previous occasions been very generous with his children; moreover, when Husband loaned the children money he invariably required them to sign a promissory note acknowledging the loan and promising repayment.
While we acknowledge Husband's testimony that an agreement existed and that no gift was intended, we obviously cannot say the evidence is uncontradicted and supports no reasonable inferences in favor of the trial court's resolution. Neither can we say that we have been left with a definite and firm conviction a mistake has been made on the gift issue. The issue of whether title was listed in Wife's name as a result of a gift or by agreement was a factually sensitive matter that can be resolved only by scrutinizing testimony, judging demeanor, and assessing credibility as a whole. At the conclusion of both the realtor's and Wife's testimony, respectively, the trial court carefully re-questioned both witnesses about the circumstances surrounding the purchase. We, of course, were not present at the trial and are not free to second-guess the trial court's factual findings. Id.
The trial court did not err by requiring Husband to prove the property was not Wife's, and the evidence supports the finding that title was in Wife's name alone pursuant to a gift and not because of an agreement. There was no error.
B. Undue Influence
Husband also claimed title was in Wife's name because Wife unduly influenced him. Because the transfer of title was so disadvantageous to him and because it was between two parties in a confidential relationship, Husband claims the law imposed a presumption that the transaction was constructively fraudulent.
In Indiana, transactions between parties to certain legal and domestic confidential relationships give rise to a rebuttable presumption that the transaction was constructively fraudulent upon a showing that the transaction "resulted in an advantage to the dominant person in whom trust and confidence was reposed by the subordinate." Lucas v. Frazee (1984), Ind. App., 471 N.E.2d 1163, 1167. To rebut the presumption, the dominant party must present clear and convincing evidence that the transaction was at arm's length and thus valid. Id.
The confidential relationships given in Lucas "include attorney and client, guardian and ward, principal and agent, pastor and parishioner, husband and wife, parent and child, and there may be others." Id. With regard to these confidential relationships, the law presumes one party (the attorney, the guardian, the principal, the pastor, the parent) is dominant and the other party (the client, the ward, the agent, the parishioner, the child) is subordinate, *225 and with good reason. See id. We fail to see, however, why we should continue to indulge a belief that the marital relationship in and of itself bestows dominant status upon one party (presumably the husband) and subordinate status upon the other party based solely on gender. The list of relationships cited in Lucas originated in an era with vastly different expectations and beliefs concerning the roles of spouses (Lucas cited Keys v. McDowell (1913), 54 Ind. App. 263, 269, 100 N.E. 385, which, in turn, cited even older Indiana cases), and we note contemporary Indiana family law strives to place husbands and wives on equal footing. See, e.g., IND. CODE 31-1-11.5-11 (presumption that equal division of property in marriage dissolution action is reasonable and just).
We hold the law no longer presumes one party in the marital relationship is dominant and the other subordinate. Instead, the burden of proving undue influence remains on the party seeking to set aside the transaction. Upon a prima facie showing that the parties did not deal on terms of equality and that the result was an unfair advantage to the dominant party, the burden shifts to the defending party to demonstrate affirmatively that "no deception was practiced, no undue influence was used, and all was fair, open, voluntary, and well-understood." Lucas, supra, at 1167.
Husband claims that even if he was entitled to no presumption of constructive fraud, he met his burden of proving undue influence and that thereafter Wife did not disprove it. The trial court, however, thought otherwise, declaring Husband's allegation of undue influence "finds no support in the evidence... . There is simply no evidence of any deception or undue influence." Record at 19.
Husband's failure to meet his burden of proving undue influence resulted in a negative judgment which we will reverse only if the evidence is uncontradicted or we are left convinced a mistake has been made. Vanderburgh County Bd. of Commissioners, supra.
The evidence here is not as malleable as Husband would have us believe. Husband's own testimony is dispositive:
Q: Well, your attorney said something in opening statement about undue influence and I've not heard anything, I'm sorry. Your attorney said something in the opening statement about somebody pressuring you and putting undue influence on you and I have not seen for myself, maybe everybody else in this courtroom has, but I've not seen any evidence of any undue influence. I'm trying to see who twisted your arm or what they did to pressure you to get to do something you didn't want to do. Can you tell be what it was that somebody did to pressure you?
A. No one pressured me.
Record at 52. In addition, as the trial court noted, Husband testified that he knowingly and intentionally took out the loan and bought the house, albeit with the expectation that someday he would be repaid at least in part. Moreover, no one at the bank and no one at the real estate office reported any perception of undue influence.
Like the issue of donative intent, whether Wife exercised undue influence was also a factual matter to be resolved by the finder of fact after assessing credibility. The evidence supports the trial court's finding that Husband did not prove Wife exercised undue influence over Husband concerning the decisions to purchase the property and place title in Wife's name. Neither are we persuaded the trial court made a mistake. Even if we were to assume Husband met his initial burden in showing undue influence, the rebuttal evidence Wife presented affirmatively shows the transaction and surrounding circumstances were fair, open, voluntary, and well-understood. There was no error.
C. Competence
As a final matter, Husband argues that even if he intended to transfer the property as a gift and even if he was not unduly influenced, the trial court erred when it found he was competent to act as he did. A donor must be competent to *226 make a gift inter vivos. Lucas, supra, at 1168.
Once again, the evidence on the issue is conflicting, and we do not deny that Husband presented evidence which, if believed, supported his position that he was incompetent at the time. The trial court entered the following findings:
The only factor which is reasonably in issue is the question of Husband's competency during the relevant period of time... . The evidence reveals that the Husband fell and injured himself in mid-July or early August of 1990, ultimately having to be hospitalized... the evidence is clear that the Husband was not in good health from the time of his fall to and beyond the date of the purchase of this real estate. Two of his sons from out of state returned due to concern about his future and he was described by his sons as being `pretty sick,' `pretty out of it,' and occasionally incoherent during the Labor Day weekend of 1990.
On the other hand, the evidence indicates that on the date that the loan and cashier's check were obtained, only about three days after Labor Day, the Husband appeared to be quite lucid. He dialed the telephone number of the bank, tried to arrange for the availability of the money by telephone (although he testified at trial he could not remember this detail), traveled personally to Salem to execute the note and obtain the money, and conducted the loan discussions with the bank president. According to the Wife, he even advised the bank president that the Wife had no liability on the note and that this was his gift to her.
No readily available witness from the realtor's office, the hospital, or the bank testified concerning any perceived confusion, lack of understanding, incoherency, or lack of voluntary will on the part of the Husband during this time frame or during the specific transaction. Furthermore, this contention is inconsistent with the Husband's own testimony that he knowingly and intentionally paid the purchase price on behalf of the Wife, albeit with the unproved expectation of being repaid.
This Court finds that the evidence is insufficient to establish that the Husband did not have a reasonable understanding of the nature and terms of the transaction.
Record at 20-21. Husband does not contend the evidence cited by the trial court does not exist. It is readily apparent the evidence supports the trial court's finding that Husband was competent to make the gift. The finding, in turn, supports the conclusion that the transaction was a valid gift from Husband to Wife and that therefore Wife keeps the property.
The judgment is affirmed.
RATLIFF, Senior Judge, and ROBERTSON, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  That the parties executed a "Pre-Nuptial Agreement" after their marriage is the first of several irregularities suggesting the parties were less than fully alert. Both parties incorrectly reported the year of their marriage to their attorneys. Record at 18. Wife thought it was Congressman Lee Hamilton, and not local attorney Bob Hamilton, who drafted the pre-nuptial agreement, and Husband could not remember that he lived in Seymour. Record at 26, 185.

=== CASE 9737636 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:07.190405+00 ===

MILLER, Chief Justice.
[¶ 1.] Steven Alan Ganrude appeals the denial of his application for writ of habeas corpus. He claims the habeas court erred in denying his motion for discovery of information regarding sentences imposed for similar offenses and that his life sentence for aggravated assault enhanced by his habitual offender status violates the Eighth Amendment. We affirm.
FACTS AND PROCEDURE
[¶ 2.] The criminal activities which led to Ganrude’s conviction and life sentence took place at the 1991 South Dakota State Fair and are detailed in this Court’s unanimous affirmance on direct appeal. State v. Ganrude, 499 N.W.2d 608 (S.D.1993). Briefly, the facts are that Ganrude and several companions forced 17-year-old Ryan Bowar to endure four to five hours of terror and humiliation at knifepoint. Bowar reported the incident to law enforcement despite Ganrude’s threats to kill Bowar’s family and rape and kill his sister if he did. Ganrude was found guilty of aggravated assault and was adjudicated a habitual offender. He received a life sentence.
[¶ 3.] After we affirmed the judgment of conviction on direct appeal, Ganrude filed an application for habeas corpus, claiming his life sentence violated the Eighth Amendment’s protection against cruel and unusual punishment. Following a hearing, his application was denied.
[¶ 4.] Ganrude raises two issues in this habeas appeal:
1. Whether the habeas court erred in denying Ganrude’s motion for discovery of information regarding sentences imposed for similar, crimes.
2. Whether Ganrude’s life sentence violates the Eighth Amendment’s protection against cruel and unusual punishment.
ANALYSIS AND DECISION
[¶ 5.] 1. The habeas court did not err in denying Ganrude’s motion for discovery of information regarding sentences imposed for similar crimes.
[¶ 6.] The habeas court cited State v. Bonner, 1998 SD 30, 577 N.W.2d 575 as supporting authority for denying Gan-rude’s discovery motion. In Bonner, we stated:
In summary, to assess a challenge to proportionality we first determine whether the sentence appears grossly disproportionate. To accomplish this, we consider the conduct involved, and any relevant past conduct, with utmost deference to the Legislature and the sentencing court. If these circum*809stances fail to suggest gross dispropor-tionality, our review ends. If, on the other hand, the sentence appears grossly disproportionate, we may, in addition to examining the other Solern factors, conduct an intra- and inter-jurisdictional analysis to aid our comparison or remand to the circuit court to conduct such comparison before resentencing. We may also consider other relevant factors, such as the effect upon society of this type of offense.
Id. at ¶ 17, 577 N.W.2d at 580 (emphasis added). The habeas court informed Gan-rude that if it ruled in his favor oh the first prong of Bonner, the grossly disproportionate portion of his Eighth Amendment claim, it would then address the second prong regarding sentencing comparisons. Following a hearing, the court ruled against Ganrude on the first prong and denied his motion for discovery of information relevant to the comparative analysis.
[¶ 7.] Ganrude claims Bonner applies only to review on direct appeal of sentences and does not bar a habeas petitioner from pursuing discovery to show disproportionality. However, the rule of Bonner applies to an Eighth Amendment challenge, regardless of whether the challenge is brought on direct appeal or in a habeas action. The “shock the conscience” test that Bonner, 1998 SD 30 at ¶ 13, 577 N.W.2d at 579, replaced for federal constitutional analysis has been applied in both types of actions to Eighth Amendment challenges. Compare State v. Raymond, 1997 SD 59, 563 N.W.2d 823 with Bult v. Leapley, 507 N.W.2d 325 (S.D.1993). The habeas court did not err in denying Gan-rude’s motion for discovery of materials relevant to the second prong of Bonner when it had ruled against his claim on the first prong.
[¶ 8.] 2. Ganrude’s life sentence does not violate the Eighth Amendment’s protection against cruel and unusual punishment.
[¶ 9.] “The Eighth Amendment does not require strict proportionality between crime and sentence. Rather it forbids only extreme sentences that are ‘grossly disproportionate to the crime.’” Bonner, 1998 SD 30, ¶ 15, 577 N.W.2d at 579 (citing Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U.S. 957, 1001, 111 S.Ct. 2680, 2705, 115 L.Ed.2d 836, 869 (1991) (Kennedy, J., concurring)). We determine whether a sentence is grossly disproportionate to the crime by considering the conduct involved and any relevant past conduct, with utmost deference to the sentencing court and to the legislature. Bonner, supra. We have also stated that life sentences:
‘are rare and should involve a history of much more serious offenses that by reason of their brutality of calculated destructiveness render irrelevant the goal of rehabilitation and require in vindication of public safety and the moral underpinnings of the criminal law that the offender forfeit his right to ever again be set free.... ’
Bult, 507 N.W.2d at 327 (quoting State v. Weiker, 342 N.W.2d 7, 12 (S.D.1983)).
[¶ 10.] The maximum sentence for aggravated assault, a Class 3 felony, is 15 years imprisonment and may include a fine of $15,000.00. SDCL 22-18-1.1; 22-6-1(5). Further, SDGL 22-7-8 mandates that if a defendant has been convicted of three or more additional felonies, with one or more of them being crimes of violence, the sentence for the principal felony is enhanced to that of a Class 1 felony, which carries a maximum sentence of life imprisonment. When Ganrude was sentenced for the aggravated assault of Ryan Bowar, he had a significant criminal history of eight prior felony convictions, including five separate burglaries, two of which are considered violent crimes under South Dakota criminal statutes.1
*810[¶ 11.] The record shows Ganrude was 30 years old when he committed this aggravated assault. He had previously been incarcerated in Minnesota county jails as well as in Minnesota state correctional facilities. He held a G.E.D. completed while in prison. The record showed no evidence of steady employment. By his. own account, he had no family. As observed by the sentencing court, he had a career in crime. His 1986 burglary conviction resulted in the following comments by a corrections officer on his presentence investigation report: “[Ganrude has] an ongoing history of self-destructive antisocial behavior. He had considerable difficulty as a juvenile and he has been locked up almost constantly since becoming an adult. He is currently, looking at his third period of incarceration in a prison setting and he is not yet 25 years old.” Ganrude admitted at the habeas hearing that in the 12 years between ages 18 and 30, he spent 6-8 years in prison and during , his 4-6 years of freedom, he committed eight felonies, excluding the aggravated assault on Bo-war.
[¶ 12.] The sentencing court also took into account Ganrude’s written statements to the court concerning the crime and the victim impact statements of the minor victim and his family. Ganrude!s comments showed no remorse. He considered himself a victim and questioned why he was being “crucified” by Beadle County. Meanwhile, 17-year-old Bowar was nervous, had headaches and nightmares, had difficulty sleeping, had dropped out of school and lost interest in work, was insulting to people, was afraid, to be alone and had no friends. Bowar spoke with his pastor every other day but had not received additional counseling because of the cost. Bowar reported he felt Ganrude represented a continued threat to him as soon as he is released from prison. Bo-war’s father stated he feared Ganrude would make good on his threats to kill the Bowar family when he is released from prison.2 This report was completed 7½ months after the crime, indicating it had great impact still on the victim and his family.
[¶ 13.] On appeal, Ganrude admits his acts were offensive but claims they were not sufficiently serious to warrant a life sentence. This argument ignores his habitual offender status that .enhanced his sentence for aggravated assault to a life sentence.3 He also claims he served his time for those prior felonies and should not be punished again. Although this argument is not developed beyond this bare claim, we have previously held that this state’s habitual offender statutes do not violate a defendant’s right against double jeopardy. State v. Nilson, 364 N.W.2d 532, 533 (S.D.1985) (quoting Gryger v. Burke, 334 U.S. 728, 732, 68 S.Ct. 1256, 1258, 92 L.Ed. 1683, 1687 (1948)). Any argument on the efficacy of the habitual offender statutory scheme is more properly addressed to the legislature rather than to the courts.
[¶ 14.] In assessing whether Ganrude’s life sentence is grossly disproportionate to the crime, we consider “the conduct involved, and any relevant past conduct, with utmost deference to the Legislature and the sentencing court.” Bonner, supra. *811Here, relevant past conduct shows a significant criminal history of eight prior felonies, including crimes of violence. SDCL 22-7-8 mandated that Ganrude’s sentence for aggravated assault be enhanced to a maximum sentence of life imprisonment. His lack of remorse and failure (even now) to acknowledge the seriousness of his conduct are also to be considered.
[¶ 15.] The sentencing court noted Gan-rude is a “career criminal” who trivializes his past criminal conduct. This observation continued to ring true at the habeas hearing. Ganrude has a history of disregard for the law. He has ignored the warnings of his previous felony convictions. State v. Anderson, 1998 SD 98, ¶ 18, 588 N.W.2d 151, 155. A life sentence, under this record, is not grossly disproportionate and presents no Eighth Amendment violation. We affirm.4
[¶ 16.] SABERS, KONENKAMP, and GILBERTSON, Justices, concur.
[¶ 17.] AMUNDSON, Justice, dissents.
. Ganrude also threatened to kill the prosecutor after he heard his life sentence pronounced. His comments were recorded on the sentencing hearing transcript: "You better hope I never get out 'cuz I’m gonna kill ya, bitch.” As noted, this comment was made after sentencing and did not therefore influence the court in determining Granrude’s life sentence.
. The dissent also ignores Ganrude's habitual offender status in that none of the seven cases analyzed for comparison to Ganrude's involved a defendant with any prior adult felony record, much less a habitual offender with eight prior felony convictions.
. We do not address Ganrude’s claim that the sentencing court failed to consider his potential for rehabilitation. "Upon review we will address this subject only if we initially determine there is a gross disproportionality in the sentence.” State v. Milk, 2000 SD 28, ¶ 18, 607 N.W.2d 14, 20 (citing Bonner, 1998 SD 30, ¶ 17, 577 N.W.2d at 580).

=== CASE 9737637 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:07.19495+00 ===

AMUNDSON, Justice
(dissenting).
[¶ 18.] As I have traveled along the path of sentencing review, I have encountered numerous sentences that have struck me as excessive. In reviewing the ten pages or more of the sentencing transcript in this case and other information in the record, this sentence, after an objective review, certainly, in my mind, constitutes cruel and unusual punishment no matter how you look at it. What is “cruel and usual punishment” has never been precisely defined. In Trop v. Dulles, 356 U.S. 86, 99-101, 78 S.Ct. 590, 597-98, 2 L.Ed.2d 630, 642 (1958), Justice Earl Warren of the United States Supreme Court stated,
[t]he exact scope of the constitutional phrase “cruel and unusual” has not been detailed by this Court.... The basic concept underlying the Eighth Amendment is nothing less -than the dignity of man. While the State has the power to punish, the Amendment stands to assure that this power be exercised within the limits of civilized standards.... The Court [has] recognized ... that the words of the Amendment are not precise, and that their scope is not static. The Amendment must draw its meaning from the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society.
[¶ 19.] In concluding that this sentence is disproportionate to the crime committed, I can not erase from my mind other appeals that have come before this Court, such as the following cases.
[¶ 20.] In State v. Bonner, 1998 SD 30, 577 N.W.2d 575, Bonner was accused of breaking into a lock box at a party, stealing necklaces, a watch and several two dollar bills and engaging in sexual acts with several minor girls. Bonner, who was charged with third degree rape and second degree burglary, was sentenced to the maximum. punishment of two consecutive fifteen year prison terms. Bonner had no prior felony record and only a few lesser misdemeanors. On appeal, this Court held that the fifteen year sentence for burglary was grossly out of proportion to-the severity of the crime.
[¶ 21.] In State v. Lemley, 1996 SD 91, 552 N.W.2d 409, Lemley strangled a man after Lemley’s friend McClanahan beat him up. Both men left with the deceased’s wallet and car and fled to Sioux Falls. Lemley had a learning disability, a tenth grade education, a third grade reading level, math skills of a sixth grader and an inability to express himself in writing. Lemley was ultimately charged with first degree manslaughter after the murder and burglary charges were dismissed and was sentenced to 350 years in the South Dakota penitentiary. On appeal, we held that *812Lemley failed to establish that 350 years shocked the conscience of men generally because Lemley was eligible for parole on August 15, 2038 (age 64) and good time release on December 30, 2170. This Court further noted that “the sentencing court imposed a term of years rather than a life sentence to give Lemley an opportunity to rehabilitate himself. ‘[A] term of years allows for rehabilitation and allows [the defendant] hope.’ ” Id. at ¶ 15, 552 N.W.2d at at 413 (quoting State v. Ferguson, 519 N.W.2d 50, 54 (S.D.1994)).
[¶ 22.] In State v. Henjum, 1996 SD 7, 542 N.W.2d 760, Henjum was charged with first degree murder, second degree murder and manslaughter for shooting and killing his roommate. After pleading guilty to first degree manslaughter, Hen-jum was sentenced to forty-five years in the South Dakota State Penitentiary. On appeal, this Court opined that Henjum’s sentence did not amount to cruel and unusual punishment.
[¶ 23.] In State v. Chase in Winter, 534 N.W.2d 350 (S.D.1995), Chase in Winter took his 11 year old male cousin hostage at knife point and did many deplorable acts to him. Chase in Winter had been arrested eight prior times on juvenile delinquency charges, assault and battery, and tribal pickup orders. He ultimately pled guilty but mentally ill to kidnapping and aggravated assault. He was sentenced to 200 years for kidnapping and a concurrent fifteen years for aggravated assault. On appeal, this Court held that Chase in Winter’s sentence did not shock the conscience. We further held that while he was a “young first time felon”, he had had an extensive juvenile record whereby he had committed crimes which mirrored the crimes for which he was presently convicted. He pled guilty to avoid a possible life without parole sentence and received instead an opportunity for rehabilitation, therapy and parole eligibility at the age of forty-six.
[¶ 24.] In State v. Cragoe, 514 N.W.2d 396 (S.D.1994), Cragoe had committed numerous sexual contact offenses. While on probation for those offenses, he babysat for a five and eight year-old girl and sexually molested them. Cragoe was charged with six counts of first degree rape and four counts of sexual contact with a child under age sixteen. Cragoe was sentenced to concurrent 99 year penitentiary terms with thirty-four years conditionally suspended on each sentence. . He would be eligible for parole in ten years. This Court noted on appeal that Cragoe began molesting children at age fifteen and was twenty at the time of this sentencing. Further, based upon the gravity of offenses and his lack of remorse, the sentence did not shock the conscience or was so disproportionate to the crime to violate the Eighth Amendment.
[¶ 25.] In Ferguson, 519 N.W.2d 50, a karate instructor and volunteer in big brother/big sister developed relationships with eight young boys, ranging from ages eight to thirteen, who he later molested. Ferguson was charged with one count of rape and seven counts of contact with a minor. Ferguson was sentenced to 180 years in the penitentiary for rape. Ninety years of his sentence was conditionally suspended and an additional fifteen years was imposed for sexual contact with minors. The sentences were ordered to be served concurrently. We held on appeal that Ferguson’s sentence did not shock the conscience because he had pled guilty to avoid a life sentence without parole. Further, he had placed himself in a position of trust with the victims and then repeatedly sexually abused them.
[¶ 26.] Finally, in State v. Holloway, 482 N.W.2d 306 (S.D.1992), Holloway had drunken confrontation with a man in an alley which led to the stabbing death of the man. Holloway then took the man’s wallet and other property. Holloway was charged with first degree manslaughter and robbery and was sentenced to 121 years for manslaughter and twenty-five years for robbery, to be served consecutively for a total sentence of 146 years. *813This Court held on appeal that Holloway’s sentence did not shock the conscience because the sentence was well within the statutory limits and he could have received a life sentence without parole. Further, because he received a sentence for a term of years, he would be eligible for parole.
[¶ 27.] When imposing sentences after a plea or conviction, the court is required to draw a line to determine what the proper term would be and not whether or not imprisonment should be ordered. Under our pre-Bonner jurisprudence in Henjum, we have-held that when deciding a case under the old “shock the conscious” test, our Legislature determines the range of sentences, but where it has provided broad sentencing authority that “suggests that a term less than a life sentence[,][it] would be unlikely so shock the conscience of humankind.” See Henjum, 1996 SD 7, ¶ 8, 542 N.W.2d at 762. Even under our new “grossly disproportionate” rule, a sentence of less than mandatory life is not likely to shock any jurist.
[¶ 28.] In the case of Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U.S. 957, 1014-15, 111 S.Ct. 2680, 2712, 115 L.Ed.2d 836, 878 (1991), the United States Supreme Court, when ruling on an Eighth Amendment issue, stated:
“[T]his Court has ‘not confined the prohibition embodied in the Eighth Amendment to “barbarous” methods that were generally outlawed in the 18th century,’ but instead has interpreted the Amendment ‘in a flexible and dynamic manner.’ ” In so doing, the Court has borne in mind Justice McKenna’s admonition in Weems v. United States, [217 U.S. 349, 373, 30 S.Ct. 544, 551, 54 L.Ed. 793, 801], that “[t]ime works changes, brings into existence new conditions and purposes. Therefore a principle to be vital must be capable of wider application than the mischief which gave it birth. This is peculiarly true of constitutions.” [citations omitted.]
[¶ 29.] In this case, the finality of this life sentence, the other decisions involving lesser sentences for less severe or as severe offenses and the constitutional restriction against cruel and unusual punishment lead this writer to only one conclusion. “[A] life sentence was just that, a life sentence!.]” See Brim v. South Dakota Bd. of Pardons & Paroles, 1997 SD 48, ¶ 19, 563 N.W.2d 812, 817. This life sentence without parole clearly constitutes cruel and unusual punishment. The only medicine to help in changing or rehabilitating any individual seems to be the “hope” that he or she can again obtain their freedom by amending their attitude and ways. There should generally be a light at the end of the tunnel for any human no matter how bad he appears or how bad his past conduct reflects he is. Mr. Ganrude, when reviewing this record, has done very little to convince a court. that he is remorseful, sorry, or accepts the consequences of his deplorable conduct in this case. While he was not the only individual involved in commission of the deplorable acts for which he was charged, he certainly will be the only when spending the rest of his life incarcerated. It seems as though the result of this sentence is to cast this individual into the human waste dump and let him languish there until he finally totally decomposes and has gasped his last breath. I cannot agree that this should be the severity of the sentence and would hold that a light should remain on at the end of the tunnel for this individual.
[¶ 30.] I would reverse and remand for resentencing proceedings.

=== CASE 9737638 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:08.652395+00 ===

STREIT, J.
Guests “are often welcomest when they are gone.” William Shakespeare, The First Part of King Henry the Sixth, act 2, sc. 2. Lorenzo Dollison found these words ringing true, when faced with houseguests who brought drugs and trouble to his home. In an effort to alleviate this trouble, Dollison sought the help of the police. In a search of Dollison’s apartment, the police searched a jacket of one of his guests. Inside, the officers found a large quantity of crack cocaine. The jacket belonged to Krista Grant, who now claims the search violated her Fourth Amendment rights. We agree, finding it was unreasonable under the circumstances for officers to believe Dollison had the authority to consent to all closed containers in the room where Grant was staying. Because the search violated Grant’s Fourth Amendment rights, we reverse the conviction, overturn the trial court’s denial of her motion to suppress, and remand for further proceedings.
I. Background Facts & Proceedings.
In the early morning hours of June 16, 1998, Lorenzo Dollison, upset with his houseguests, left his Waterloo apartment and walked down to the local police station. At the station, he told the police a *851woman1 just brought a gun into his home, hid it somewhere inside, and then left with the promise of returning with more. Dolli-son asked for help in removing the weapon. Officers were dispatched, and Dollison returned home to await their arrival.
A short time later, Dollison greeted the responding officers outside his home and again recounted his story regarding the weapon. After confirming Dollison was the only tenant, officers accompanied him into the apartment. Dollison directed officers to one of the two bedrooms in the apartment. Upon entering the bedroom, the officers were greeted by the defendant, Krista Grant, and her boyfriend, Torrey Brown, lying naked on the bed. Grant and Brown had just arrived in Waterloo from Chicago and were staying with Dollison on a short-term basis.2 In exchange for Dolli-son’s hospitality, Brown gave him some money for beer and cigarettes, as well as a small amount of crack cocaine. The couple, however, quickly wore out their welcome, and Dollison requested the couple leave on two separate occasions.
Upon rousting the couple from their slumber, the officer instructed the couple to dress and told them they were looking for a gun. The couple admitted seeing the weapon and suggested it may be between the bed’s mattress and box spring. The couple offered to assist the police in their search, but an officer ordered them from the room. In searching the room, an officer picked up Grant’s jacket and noticed it was unusually heavy and contained a large bulge in one pocket. Fearing it was the weapon,3 the officer unzipped the pocket and discovered the crack cocaine Brown intended to sell. In an effort to determine the owner of the jacket, the officer told the couple to get their personal belongings out of the room. In picking up their stuff, Brown told Grant numerous times to get her jacket from the officer. She denied it was her jacket, and the couple left the room leaving the jacket with the officer. The officer arrested the couple for possession of the crack cocaine. The gun, a .22 caliber rifle, was discovered under the bed.
Brown and Grant confessed to possessing the crack cocaine and to knowing the location of the rifle. The State charged Grant with possession with intent to deliver more than five grams but less than fifty grams of crack cocaine.while in the immediate possession of a firearm, and a drug tax stamp violation. See Iowa Code §§ 124.401(1)(a), 124.401(1)(e) (1997). Grant moved to suppress the admission of the crack cocaine, claiming the officers violated her Fourth Amendment right to be free from unreasonable .search and seizure. Grant waived her right to a jury trial and agreed to submit the case to the court on stipulated facts. The court received all the depositions, minutes of testimony, and the testimony from the motion to suppress. The court found her guilty of possession with intent to deliver crack cocaine while in immediate possession of a firearm, forgot to specifically deny the motion to suppress in its findings, and sentenced her accordingly.
Grant appeals, claiming the trial court erred in denying her motion to suppress.
II. Preservation of Error.
Grant filed her motion to suppress on November 18, 1998. There was no ruling *852on the motion to suppress prior to the bench trial on the merits of the case. On January 8, 1999, Grant appealed her conviction and sentence. After the appeal was filed, her appellate counsel filed a motion in district court seeking a ruling on the motion to suppress. On June 28, 1999, the court entered a ruling denying the motion to suppress.
It is clear the district court did not have jurisdiction to address the motion to suppress. As a general rule, a district court loses jurisdiction over the merits of a controversy once the notice of appeal is perfected. Shedlock v. Iowa Dist. Ct., 534 N.W.2d 656, 658 (Iowa 1995). The district court retains jurisdiction only as to issues collateral to and not affecting the subject matter of the appeal. Waterhouse v. Iowa Dist. Ct., 593 N.W.2d 141, 142 (Iowa 1999). Here, the issue addressed in the ruling entered after the appeal was filed mimics the issue raised on appeal. Because the district court lacked jurisdiction to further address the motion to suppress, we do not consider the court’s June 1999 ruling.
It is quite clear, however, that by proceeding to the trial on stipulated facts, the court implicitly overruled the motion to suppress. The motion to suppress was to be ruled on in conjunction with the court’s finding of guilt but was overlooked in the court’s written findings. Furthermore, the State does not allege Grant failed to preserve error. Rather, the State concurs the issue was properly preserved for appellate review. We, therefore, hold the issues raised by the motion to suppress are properly before us.. ,
III. The Search.
Grant first contends the search of the bedroom was unreasonable under the Fourth Amendment. She claims she had a privacy interest in the bedroom and the officers were not operating under any legitimate exception to the warrant requirement.
A. Standard of Review.
When assessing an alleged violation of a constitutional right, we review de novo the totality of the circumstances as shown by the entire record. State v. Breuer, 577 N.W.2d 41, 44 (Iowa 1998). We consider both the evidence presented during the suppression hearing and that introduced at trial. State v. Jackson, 542 N.W.2d 842, 844 (Iowa 1996).
B. The Bedroom.
Grant contends, because she had a privacy interest in the bedroom and the owner of the home had no authority to consent to the search, her Fourth Amendment rights were violated. The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution secures the right of the people to be free from unreasonable government searches.4 U.S. Const, amend. IV. The Fourth Amendment, however, is not a general societal protection, but rather “a personal right that must be invoked by an individual.” Minnesota v.-Carter, 525 U.S. 83, 88, 119 S.Ct. 469, 473,142 L.Ed.2d 373, 379 (1998). The extent of protection it affords an individual depends largely on the location of the person seeking its safeguards. Id. at 88, 119 S.Ct. at 473, 142 L.Ed.2d at 379. The capacity to invoke the protections of the Fourth Amendment depends “upon whether the person who claims the protection of the Amendment has a legitimate expectation of privacy in the invaded place.” Rakas v. Illinois, 439 U.S. 128,143, 99 S.Ct. 421, 430, 58 L.Ed.2d 387, 401 (1978). It is incumbent upon the defendant to show she had a legitimate *853expectation of privacy in order to litigate the lawfulness of the government search. State v. Osborn, 200 N.W.2d 798, 803 (Iowa 1972). A legitimate expectation of privacy in an invaded place, however, is not so narrowly construed as to mean only a person’s home. Rather, even an overnight guest has a legitimate expectation of privacy in the host’s home. Minnesota v. Olson, 495 U.S. 91, 99-100, 110 S.Ct. 1684, 1689-90, 109 L.Ed.2d 85, 95 (1990). That expectation of privacy, however, is applicable only to the unwarranted actions of government actors. It does not ensure the guest’s “possessions will not be disturbed by ... [the] host and those [the] host allows inside.” Id. at 99, 110 S.Ct. at 1689, 109 L.Ed.2d at 94. Thus, an overnight guest’s legitimate expectation of privacy does not vitiate the homeowner’s ability to consent to a search of his home. See United States v. Oates, 173 F.3d 651, 656 (8th Cir.1999); United States v. Wright, 971 F.2d 176, 180 (8th Cir.1992) (“[the homeowner] possessed authority to consent to a search of his own home, including the guest bedroom where [defendant] spent the evening.”); United States v. Salinas-Cano, 959 F.2d 861, 863 (10th Cir. 1992); United States v. Isom, 588 F.2d 858, 860-61 (2d Cir.1978) (“As the lawful tenant, [the homeowner] clearly had authority to consent to a search of her premises, even though a ‘guest’ was also present.”). A consent search of a home is only proper if the police reasonably believed the person granting the police permission to search had the authority to do so. See Illinois v. Rodriguez, 497 U.S. 177, 185-86, 110 S.Ct. 2793, 2800, 111 L.Ed.2d 148, 159-60 (1990).
Grant, as an overnight guest, did have a legitimate expectation of privacy in the Dollison home. Dolhson’s consent, however, countermands that privacy interest. It is undisputed that Dollison granted the officers permission to search his apartment. See Oates, 173 F.3d at 656. Dollison was the sole tenant on the lease and had free access to all rooms in the apartment. See id. The room searched was normally Dollison’s private bedroom and still contained his personal effects. It could be expected Grant’s host would need ready access to the room. See 3 Wayne R. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 8.5(d), at 796 (3d ed. 1996) (“If, for example, the room contains personal effects of the host which it could be expected the host would want ready access to on a regular basis, this is a factor in favor of upholding the host’s consent.”). Dollison also requested Grant leave the residence, and she failed to comply. See Oates, 173 F.3d at 656; Isom, 588 F.2d at 860-61 (“[E]ven if appellant had some right, doubtful at best, as a ‘licensee’ to countermand [the homeowner’s] consent to the search, [the homeowner] had undoubtedly revoked the ‘license’ by asking appellant to leave her apartment.”). Finally, the search was undertaken to ensure Dollisoh’s safe and secure enjoyment of his home. See 3 Wayne R. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 8.5(d), at 796 (3d ed. 1996) (“If the search was undertaken upon the initiative of the host for reason relating to the host’s interest in the safe and secure enjoyment of his premises, then this is a factor in favor of recognizing the host’s consent as effective.”). Under the totality of the circumstances, we find Dollison had the authority to consent to the search of the bedroom in which Grant was located.
C. The Jacket.
Grant next claims the trial court erred in denying her motion to suppress because she had a legitimate expectation of privacy in her jacket and the government was not operating under an exception to the warrant requirement.
1. The Consent Exception.
The State first contends the search was permissible under the consent exception to the Fourth Amendment. While one may have the authority to consent to the search of a general area, that authority does not automatically “extend to the interiors of every discrete enclosed space capable of search within the area.” *854United States v. Block, 590 F.2d 535, 541 (4th Cir.1978). Guests in a home retain a privacy interest in their personal items that cannot be waived by their host’s consent to search the general premises. See United States v. Gilley, 608 F.Supp. 1065, 1068 (S.D.Ga.1985); see also United States v. Karo, 468 U.S. 705, 726, 104 S.Ct. 3296, 3309, 82 L.Ed.2d 530, 548-49 (1984) (O’Connor, J., concurring) (“[W]hen a guest in a private home has a private container to which the homeowner has no right of access, ... the homeowner ... lacks the power to give effective consent to the search of the closed container.”); United States v. Salinas-Cano, 959 F.2d 861, 863 (10th Cir.1992); United States v. Poole, 307 F.Supp. 1185, 1189-90 (E.D.La. 1969); 3 Wayne R. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 8.5(d), at 799 (3d ed.1996). Therefore, Grant retained a privacy right in her jacket, and Dollison did not have actual authority to consent to the search of the jacket.5
Determining whether a party’s consent to a search is valid, however, is not driven solely by whether the , party has actual authority to consent to the search. Law enforcement officers may also rely on the apparent authority of the consenting party. For officers .to rely .on a claim of apparent authority, they must “reasonably (though erroneously) believe that the person who has consented to their” search had authority to do so. Illinois v. Rodriguez, 497 U.S. 177, 186, 110 S.Ct. 2793, 2800, 111 L.Ed.2d 148, 160 (1990). However, if the surrounding circumstances raise reasonable doubts as to the authority of the consenting party, officers have an obligation to make further inquiries into the precise nature of the situation. Id. at 188-89, 110 S.Ct. at 2801, 111 L.Ed.2d at 161; see United States v. Salinas, 959 F.2d at 864; United States v. Whitfield, 939 F.2d 1071, 1075 (D.C.Cir.1991) (“The [government’s] burden cannot be. met if agents, faced with an ambiguous situation, nevertheless proceed without making further inquiry.”); United States v. Poole, 307 F.Supp. at 1190. Without further inquiry, the search is unlawful. Illinois v. Rodriguez, 497 U.S. at 189, 110 S.Ct. at 2801, 111 L.Ed.2d at 161.
Upon entering a bedroom the officers believed empty, they immediately encountered a situation fraught with ambiguity. The officers found a couple sleeping naked in .the bedroom. The officers did not know the relationship between Dollison and the occupants of the room or which items belonged to which party. It was clear Grant and her companion were guests and, given their state of disrobement, at least some of the clothing in the room belonged to them. The officers, faced with this surprising and somewhat perplexing situation, did not make further inquiry into the circumstances surrounding Grant’s stay or the extent of her belongings. Rather, the officers proceeded to remove both Grant and her companion *855from the room and began searching.6 It was only after an officer discovered the crack cocaine did officers inquire into who owned the jacket. Such inquiry was too late. Under the circumstances known to the officers at the time of the search, it was unreasonable to believe Dollison had the authority to consent to all closed containers in the bedroom.
2. Abandonment.
The State next contends because Grant denied ownership of the jacket she fails to have a recognizable expectation of privacy for purposes of Fourth Amendment protection. The Fourth Amendment does not protect voluntarily abandoned property. Abel v. United States, 362 U.S. 217, 241, 80 S.Ct. 683, 698, 4 L.Ed.2d 668, 687 (1960); State v. Bumpus, 459 N.W.2d 619, 625 (Iowa 1990). However, an abandonment of property is not normally construed as voluntary if it was in direct response to an illegal search or seizure. See e.g., United States v. King, 990 F.2d 1552, 1564 (10th Cir.1993); United States v. Brady, 842 F.2d 1313, 1315 n. 7 (D.C.Cir.1988) (“[A]bandonment will not be recognized when it is the result of illegal police conduct.”); cf. United States v. Roman, 849 F.2d 920, 923 (5th Cir.1988) (ruling an illegal x-raying of a suitcase did not lead to defendant’s abandonment as he was completely unaware of the illegality). In determining the causal nexus between the illegality of a search and the abandonment, we examine the totality of the circumstances including the temporal proximity between the constitutional violation and the abandonment, any intervening circumstances, and the flagrancy of the State’s misconduct. Cf. Brown v. Illinois, 422 U.S. 590, 603-04, 95 S.Ct. 2254, 2262, 45 L.Ed.2d 416, 427 (1975) (citations & footnote omitted).
From the record it appears Grant was aware the officers had found the crack cocaine before they asked Grant and her boyfriend to gather their belongings.' Understandably, Grant no longer wanted to be associated with the jacket and refused to acknowledge ownership. The temporal proximity between the illegal search and the subsequent abandonment was nearly instantaneous, and there were no other intervening circumstances. Grant’s abandonment of the jacket was directly caused by the illegal search. Therefore, the abandonment was involuntary and cannot be relied on in denying her the opportunity to assert her Fourth Amendment claims.
TV. Conclusion.
Grant not only had a constitutionally protected right to privacy in her jacket, but the actions of the officers violated that right. The appropriate remedy for such violation is suppression of all evidence directly or indirectly gathered through the search. See Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 484-85, 83 S.Ct. 407, 415-16, 9 L.Ed.2d 441, 453 (1963). The district court decision denying the motion to suppress and the conviction based thereon is reversed, and a new trial is ordered. We remand to the district court for further proceedings in conformance with this opinion.
REVERSED AND REMANDED FOR NEW TRIAL.
All judges concur except MAHAN, J., who dissents.
. Although Dollison was rather nonspecific as to the identity of the woman, she was actually romantically involved with Dollison, was in the apartment earlier in the evening, and occasionally stayed with Dollison at his apartment.
. Brown was sent to Waterloo by a drug connection to sell a large quantity of crack cocaine. Grant accompanied him, serving as the vessel for hiding the drugs.
.In the course of Dollison’s narrative at the police station, there was a miscommunication as to the type of gun involved. Dollison said he told the officer the gun was a .22 caliber rifle. The officer, in dispatching a unit to Dollison's- apartment, described the weapon as a .22 caliber pistol.
. Grant alleges the search violated both the Fourth Amendment to United States Constitution and article I, section 8, of the Iowa Constitution. Because, "the language of those clauses is substantially identical and we have consistently interpreted the scope and purpose of article I, section 8, of the Iowa Constitution to track with federal interpretations of the Fourth Amendment” we will address her arguments jointly. State v. Showalter, 427 N.W.2d 166, 168 (Iowa 1988).
. This case turns squarely on the applicability of the consent exception to the Fourth Amendment. The facts do not intimate nor has the State argued the search-incident-to-arrest exception applies. Initially, the record is not clear whether there was probable cause to justify an arrest for criminal trespass. See Iowa Code § 716.7(2)(b) (1997). The record was never adequately developed with regard to the manner in which Dollison requested his guests leave or whether they had sufficient time to exit the residence. Second, the officers were called to the scene not to forcibly eject Grant and her boyfriend, but to remove a weapon from the home. Dollison never requested the officers remove Grant from the apartment or charge her with criminal trespass, and the officers specifically stated there was nothing criminal about Grant's presence in the apartment. Third, we do not find that a search-first-justify-later approach whereby we hypothesize all the potential crimes a defendant could have been charged with justifies an invasive search. Finally, even if we were to suppose súch an exception was proper, a search incident to arrest is limited to the area within the accused’s immediate control. See State v. Canas, 597 N.W.2d 488, 492 (Iowa 1999). There is simply no record of Grant's precise location relative to her jacket at the time of the arrest. It would be mere speculation to assume her jacket was in an area within her immediate control.
. We do not intimate the officers were incorrect for removing the occupants from the room or taking steps to insure their own safety. However, after securing the scene, the officers still have the responsibility to inquire as to the possessory interests of particular items easily attributable to the occupants.

=== CASE 9737639 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:08.657164+00 ===

MAHAN, J.
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. Grant filed a motion to suppress but did not seek a ruling thereon prior to proceeding to a trial on stipulated facts. It was only after her appeal was filed that appellate counsel filed a separate motion seeking a ruling *856from the district court on the motion to suppress. The majority correctly concludes the district court did not have jurisdiction to address the motion to suppress at that time. However, the majority then concludes it is “quite clear” from the record that the district court had previously implicitly overruled the motion to suppress. I disagree.
It is a defendant’s duty to seek a ruling on a motion to suppress. That did not happen under this record. Appellate counsel recognized this and attempted to correct the matter after the appeal was filed. This attempt was unsuccessful. I disagree with the majority’s conclusion the district court “implicitly overruled” the motion to suppress simply by proceeding to a trial on stipulated facts. It would be more reasonable under these facts to conclude the district court considered the motion withdrawn. I would conclude the issue has not been preserved for review and would affirm the district court.

=== CASE 2211496 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:07.627215+00 ===

605 N.E.2d 237 (1992)
Rebecca SANTIAGO, M.D., and Grant-Blackford Mental Health, Inc., Appellants-Defendants,
v.
George McQ. KILMER, Executor of Estate of Martha S. Kilmer, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 27A04-9205-CV-174.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Fourth District.
December 30, 1992.
Rehearing Denied March 15, 1993.
*238 Edward L. Murphy, Jr., Larry L. Barnard, Miller, Carson & Boxberger, Fort Wayne, for appellants-defendants.
James McNeal, Indianapolis, for appellee-plaintiff.
CONOVER, Judge.
Defendants-Appellants Rebecca Santiago, M.D., and Grant-Blackford Mental Health, Inc. appeal the Grant Circuit Court's granting of Plaintiff-Appellee George Kilmer's motion for relief from judgment. Ind.Trial Rule 60(B)(6).
We affirm.
The health care providers present two issues which we restate and consolidate as:
whether the trial court had subject matter jurisdiction to:
(a) order admitted an unanswered T.R. 36 request for admission stating the applicable standard of medical care had been met, and then
(b) grant summary judgment in favor of the health care providers based on that admission.
This appeal arises out of a claim under the Indiana Medical Malpractice Act filed by Kilmer against Dr. Santiago and Grant-Blackford Mental Health, Inc. On March 6, 1985, Kilmer took his wife to Grant-Blackford Mental Health, Inc., where she was seen by Dr. Santiago. The doctor prescribed medication, ordered tests, and instructed Martha to return to the clinic in two days. Less than six hours later, Martha died at her home.
On January 21, 1986, Kilmer filed a proposed complaint with the Indiana Insurance Commissioner pursuant to the Medical Malpractice Act. He claimed the health care providers were negligent in their diagnosis, care, and treatment of Martha, and her death proximately resulted from their negligence.
On April 21, 1988, while the matter was pending before the medical review board, the health care providers served Kilmer, by counsel, with a series of T.R. 36 requests for admission.[1] Neither Kilmer nor his counsel, Richard L. Schultheis, answered. Upon receiving no reply, the health care providers filed with the trial court a copy of Kilmer's proposed complaint and a written motion asking the unanswered T.R. 36 requests be deemed admitted. At the hearing on the matter, the court ruled the unanswered requests for admission were deemed admitted. Only Kilmer appeared at the hearing, not his attorney.
The health care providers then filed a motion for summary judgment based upon *239 the fact one of the requests deemed admitted by the court's order stated the medical care given Martha met or exceeded the standard of reasonably competent care in Indiana. The health care providers argued since Kilmer, by this admission, had conceded that they were not negligent, no genuine issue of material fact thus existed, and they were entitled to summary judgment.
In the meantime, Schultheis notified Kilmer he was not willing to represent him in the cause of action. On September 22, 1988, after a hearing, the trial court granted the health care providers' motion for summary judgment. Neither Schultheis nor Kilmer were at this hearing although the docket sheet indicated notice of the hearing had been sent. The medical review panel never rendered its opinion.
Subsequently, Kilmer filed a motion to strike the admissions and to reconsider the court's order in this regard. He argued the trial court had exceeded the limited jurisdiction conferred on it by the Medical Malpractice Act. Additionally, he filed a T.R. 60(B)(6) motion for relief from judgment along with an affidavit from a physician to make a prima facie showing of a meritorious case against the health care providers for the death of Martha. After a hearing, the trial court granted his motion and vacated its September 22, 1988, order and judgment. It referred to a decision of this court in which we held, after reviewing a legal malpractice claim filed by Kilmer against Schultheis, a trial court does not have subject matter jurisdiction in a medical malpractice claim to enter summary judgment based on an issue reserved for the medical review panel prior to the panel's decision. The health care providers appeal.[2]
The health care providers first contend the trial court erred in granting Kilmer's motion for relief from judgment. They argue the original judgment was not void for want of subject matter jurisdiction. Since the Medical Malpractice Act empowers a court with power to compel discovery and to grant summary judgment motions before the medical review panel renders its written opinion, they argue the trial court's action in ordering the requests for admission deemed admitted was within the general scope of authority conferred upon the court by statute.
The standard of review for the granting or denying of a T.R. 60(B) motion is limited to whether the trial court abused its discretion. Freels v. Winston (1991), Ind. App., 579 N.E.2d 132, 135, reh. denied, trans. denied. However, a motion under T.R. Rule 60(B)(6) alleging the judgment is void requires no discretion on the part of the trial court because either the judgment is void or it is valid. Schoffstall v. Failey (1979), 180 Ind. App. 528, 389 N.E.2d 361, 363. Void judgments can be attacked, directly or collaterally, at any time. International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees v. Sunshine Promotions, Inc. (1990), Ind. App., 555 N.E.2d 1309, 1315.
To render a valid judgment, a court must possess jurisdiction over the subject matter, over the parties, and over the particular case. Chapin v. Huylse (1992), Ind. App., 599 N.E.2d 217, 220. Subject matter jurisdiction concerns the power of the court to hear and to determine a *240 general class of cases to which the proceedings before it belong. Harp v. Indiana Dept. of Highways (1992), Ind. App., 585 N.E.2d 652, 659. This power must be derived from the constitution or from statute. Gorman v. Northeastern REMC (1992), Ind. App., 594 N.E.2d 843, 845, reh. denied. In determining subject matter jurisdiction, the relevant inquiry is whether the claim falls within the general scope of authority conferred upon such court by the constitution or by statute. Harp, 585 N.E.2d at 656. Subject matter jurisdiction, unlike personal jurisdiction or jurisdiction over a particular case, cannot be waived or conferred by agreement and should be raised sua sponte by the appellate court if not asserted by the parties on appeal. City of Hobart v. Chidester (1991), Ind. App., 582 N.E.2d 457, 459; Gorman, 594 N.E.2d at 845; Behme v. Behme (1988), Ind. App., 519 N.E.2d 578, 582, reh. denied; Jennings v. Jennings (1988), Ind. App., 531 N.E.2d 1204, 1206.
The Medical Malpractice Act provides no action against a health care provider may be commenced in any court of this state before the claimant's proposed complaint has first been presented to a medical review panel and an opinion rendered by the panel. IND. CODE 16-9.5-1-6; IC 16-9.5-9-2. The medical review panel is charged with rendering an opinion as to whether the evidence supports the conclusion the defendants failed to observe the appropriate standard of care. IC 16-9.5-9-7.
The Grant Circuit Court is a court of general original jurisdiction. IC 33-4-2-1, et seq. As such, until such time as the medical review panel renders its decision on that issue, it has only limited jurisdiction to (1) preliminarily determine any affirmative defense or issue of law or fact that may be preliminarily determined under the Indiana Rules of Procedure; and/or (2) compel discovery in accordance with the Indiana Rules of Procedure. IC 16-9.5-10-1; Griffith v. Jones (1992), Ind. App., 602 N.E.2d 107.[3] The grant of power to the trial court to preliminarily determine these matters is to be narrowly construed. Id. The court is without subject matter jurisdiction to rule preliminarily upon any affirmative defense or issue of law or fact preserved for a written opinion by the medical review panel. Id.; Cha v. Warnick (1983), Ind. App., 455 N.E.2d 1165, 1167.
Prior to the medical review panel's decision and without expert testimony, the trial court entered summary judgment based upon request for admission No. 16 which asked Kilmer to admit the health care providers had utilized the appropriate standard of care. The legal effect of the court's entry of summary judgment was to rule on an issue of fact reserved for the medical review panel. In effect, the court determined the health care providers were not negligent. This determination is reserved initially to the medical review panel and then, after the panel's opinion is rendered, to the trier of fact. Since the court's action was beyond the subject matter jurisdiction conferred upon it by the Act, the judgment is void.
The health care providers argue both Castillo v. Ruggiero (1990), Ind. App., 562 N.E.2d 446, trans. denied, and Johnson v. Padilla (1992), Ind. App., 433 N.E.2d 393, trans. denied, recognize the jurisdiction of a court, on motion for preliminary determination under the Act, to enter summary judgment with regard to claims against defendant health care providers. Therefore, they claim the trial court did not err when it entered summary judgment based on Kilmer's admission of appropriate care.
In Johnson we expressly determined the question of whether Dr. Padilla actually was the physician who performed the procedure was not an issue which required expert opinion and therefore, was not reserved to the medical panel. 433 N.E.2d at 395. Similarly, in Castillo, we held the *241 determination of one's employment status is not a question reserved for the panel because it is not an issue of fact requiring expert opinion. 562 N.E.2d at 455.
In contrast, the health care providers' request for admission no. 16 concerned an issue of fact requiring expert opinion and thus, was reserved for the medical panel. IC 16-9.5-9-7(b). Therefore, Johnson and Castillo are clearly distinguishable and do not support the health care providers' argument.
In the alternative, the health care providers contend Kilmer waived any objection because he did not raise a specific and timely objection to the court's lack of jurisdiction in this particular case. They cite Williams v. Williams (1990), Ind., 555 N.E.2d 142, and State ex.rel. Hight v. Marion Superior Court (1989), Ind., 547 N.E.2d 267.
A judgment rendered by a court lacking subject matter jurisdiction is void and may be attacked at any time, directly or collaterally. Mann v. Mann (1988), Ind. App., 528 N.E.2d 821, 822, reh. denied, trans. denied. It cannot be waived. Id. In contrast, jurisdiction of the particular case refers to the right, authority, and power to hear and determine a specific case within that class of cases over which a court has subject matter jurisdiction. Harp, 585 N.E.2d at 659. When a court lacks jurisdiction over the particular case, the judgment is voidable, requiring proper and timely objection to the court's exercise of jurisdiction or it is waived. Id.
Since we have determined the trial court was without subject matter jurisdiction, we need not address the issue of whether the court had jurisdiction over the particular case.
The court did not abuse its discretion in granting Kilmer's T.R. 60(B) motion for relief of judgment.
Affirmed.
MILLER and CHEZEM, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Request for admission no. 16 read as follows:
The standard of medical and psychiatric care rendered by Dr. Santiago and Grant-Blackford Mental Health, Inc. met or exceeded the standard of reasonably competent medical care in the State of Indiana.
[2]  Before addressing the merits of the issue, the health care providers contend Kilmer may not rely on our unpublished decision reviewing his legal malpractice claim against Schultheis. They correctly state unpublished decisions are not regarded as precedent before a court except for establishing the defense of res judicata, collateral estoppel or the law of the case. Ind.Appellate Rule 15(A). In the instant case, since the health care providers were not parties to Kilmer's legal malpractice action against Schultheis or in privity with any of the parties to that action, they urge Kilmer cannot establish the elements necessary to show res judicata. Therefore, they argue our unpublished decision in Kilmer's legal malpractice action against Schultheis is not res judicata in this case and Kilmer may not cite to the decision. However, in his motion for relief from judgment, Kilmer did not assert the doctrine as a basis for granting relief although he did refer to the decision. On appeal he stated he was submitting the issue to this court de novo. The claim of res judicata is considered waived if it is not raised. Lake Monroe Regional Waste v. Waicukauski (1986), Ind. App., 501 N.E.2d 466, 469. Therefore, we will consider the case on its merits.
[3]  In Griffith, our supreme court held the trial court had exceeded its authority when it preliminarily determined whether a medical review panel was precluded from rendering an expert opinion on the issue of informed consent and from interpreting the term "factors" in IC 16-9.5-9-7. The court stated the Act does not intend to empower trial courts to dictate to the medical review panel concerning the content of the panel's opinion, the manner in which the panel arrives at its opinion, or the matters which the panel may consider in arriving at its opinion.

=== CASE 9737640 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:13.729361+00 ===

Corrigan, J.
We granted the prosecution’s application for leave to appeal to decide whether the trial court had a duty to grant a continuance on its own motion in response to newly discovered evidence. We conclude that it did not, and that defendant is not otherwise entitled to a new trial on the basis of the alleged discovery violations. Accordingly, we vacate the judgment of the Court of Appeals, which reversed *754defendant’s jury trial conviction of first-degree criminal sexual conduct, MCL 750.520b; MSA 28.788(2), and remand for consideration of defendant’s remaining appellate issues.
I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Defendant lived with his girlfriend and her two-year-old son. Defendant and the young child were taking a bath together, on defendant’s suggestion, when the mother heard her son screaming. When she entered the bathroom, her son was crying and shaking. Neither defendant nor the child were dressed. Defendant explained that the boy fell and almost hit his head. When the mother noticed some blood between her son’s buttocks, she asked defendant to drive her and the child to the hospital. Defendant refused and suggested that they wait until the next day to see if the boy’s injuries improved.
The child’s mother then enlisted the aid of her second cousin, who picked them up and drove them to the hospital. When the cousin first arrived at the house she observed that the child’s bottom was swollen, bruised, and covered with dried blood. As they drove to the hospital, the child was saying “Chad butt.” He said the same thing at the hospital when he saw his grandmother. In the emergency room, Scott Randall, D.O., examined the boy. Dr. Randall observed swelling, redness, bruising, and two fissures, or tears, around the anus. Concerned that the child may have been the victim of sexual abuse, Dr. Randall obtained a “criminal sexual conduct kit” and contacted the local police department.
*755When questioned by the police immediately after the incident, defendant denied any improper sexual conduct with the boy. Defendant speculated that the child’s injuries may have been caused by falling onto the spout of the bathtub. In a written statement, defendant explained that the child slipped in the tub as he was standing up and attempting to put his toys away. A few months later, the police questioned defendant a second time. In his second police interview, defendant changed his story and explained that he had attempted to place his smallest finger into the child’s anus. When the officer opined that a penetration by just the tip of defendant’s finger was inconsistent with the boy’s injuries, defendant explained that he placed his finger into the child’s rectum up to his second knuckle and made a “c” motion.
Dr. Randall opined that the child’s injuries were not consistent with a fall or with the insertion of a finger, but that they were consistent with penetration by an adult penis. In collecting evidence for the criminal sexual conduct kit, Dr. Randall performed two dry swabs of the boy’s rectum. Tests of these dry swabs conducted at the Michigan State Police Laboratory revealed no evidence of semen. In addition to the dry swabs, Dr. Randall took two wet swabs. Dr. Randall explained that a wet swab, or “wet prep,” would be more effective than a dry swab for obtaining sperm from dry areas such as the rectum. When Dr. Randall later looked at the results of the wet prep under a microscope, he observed two sperm fragments.
Defendant did not testify or present any proofs. The jury found defendant guilty of first-degree criminal sexual conduct and the trial court sentenced *756defendant to a term of fifty to seventy-five years imprisonment.
II. DEFENDANT’S MOTION TO SUPPRESS
The issues before the Court involve Dr. Randall’s observation of sperm fragments in the wet swab sample taken from the victim. Before trial, Dr. Randall had not told anyone involved in the criminal investigation that he had observed sperm fragments under a microscope. Nor did he tell anyone that he had obtained a laboratory test on the wet swab sample.
Defendant filed a discovery request in which he sought material available under MCR 6.201, including exculpatory evidence, documents, reports produced by or for expert witnesses, descriptions of physical evidence to be introduced at trial, and the opportunity to inspect physical evidence. In response to this request, the prosecution furnished defendant with a copy of the emergency room report signed by Dr. Randall. The emergency room report contained a notation by Dr. Randall explaining that he had discussed the case with another physician who “suggested wet prep/ GC/ Chlamydia Culture and attemt [sic] for motile sperm slide which were obtained.” Also on the emergency room report, within a section entitled “present medications,” appeared the words “Wet prep, GC, Chlamydia Culture, Motile Sperm.” Although Dr. Randall had testified at defendant’s preliminary examination, neither the prosecution nor the defense questioned him about the meaning of the notations on the emergency room report or about whether he had observed any evidence of semen or sperm on the victim. This fact suggests that neither *757party paid particular attention to the “wet prep” and “motile sperm” notations on the emergency room report.
On the morning of the first day of defendant’s two-day trial, Dr. Randall informed the prosecutor, for the first time, that he had observed sperm fragments recovered from the victim.1 Dr. Randall and the prosecutor also reviewed the results of laboratory work that had been performed on the wet swab sample.2 Dr. Randall had seen the results of the wet swab laboratory report for the first time only three days earlier. As soon as the prosecutor learned of Dr. Randall’s observations of sperm, he immediately informed defense counsel. Until Dr. Randall’s disclosure, neither party had known of any evidence indicating the presence of sperm. Defense counsel conceded at trial and again at sentencing that the prosecutor had not been advised of the presence of sperm until the first day of trial.
At the beginning of the second day of trial, the parties informed the trial court of Dr. Randall’s disclosure, at which time defendant moved to suppress Dr. Randall’s proposed testimony regarding the sperm fragments. Defense counsel argued that it would be unfair to allow Dr. Randall to testify about the presence of sperm because defendant was not made *758aware of that evidence before trial. The trial court denied defendant’s motion to suppress, reasoning that defendant was put “on notice” of the possibility that Dr. Randall had recovered sperm from the victim by the notations on the emergency room report referencing “wet prep” and “motile sperm.” The trial court further explained that Dr. Randall had no duty to volunteer the information at the preliminary examination in the absence of a specific question, and that there was no evidence that Dr. Randall had answered any question falsely. Although neither party had actual notice before trial of the presence of sperm, neither requested a continuance on the record.
m. THE .COURT OF APPEALS OPINION
On appeal to the Court of Appeals, defendant argued that the trial court abused its discretion in denying his motion to suppress the evidence of sperm that neither party learned about until the first day of trial. Seeing the issue in a different light, the Court of Appeals reversed on the ground that the prosecutor committed specific discovery violations when it failed to make the wet swab laboratory report and the wet swab sample available to defendant immediately after Dr. Randall’s surprise disclosure. In reaching this conclusion, the Court of Appeals first rejected the trial court’s conclusion that the writing on the emergency room report put defendant “on notice” of the possible discovery of sperm. It explained that, when viewed in context, there was no reasonable way that the rather obscure words on the emergency report could have afforded defendant notice that evidence of sperm had been discovered. The Court of Appeals then con-*759eluded that the wet swab laboratory report was discoverable under MCR 6.201(A)(3), as a report prepared for an expert witness, and that the wet swab sample was discoverable under MCR 6.201(A)(6), as tangible physical evidence.
After finding the discovery violations, the Court of Appeals rejected the prosecutor’s argument that, in the absence of a specific request for a continuance, the trial court was excused from remedying the potential prejudice. The panel explained that, although the trial court was not obligated to exclude the evidence, some remedy, “such as a continuance and the opportunity to examine the evidence regarding the presence of sperm,” was required. The Court of Appeals next explained that defendant’s case was prejudiced by the discovery errors because they left him without an opportunity to “scientifically evaluate” the wet swabs, examine the laboratory report for inconsistencies, or to “intelligently” cross-examine Dr. Randall. In particular, the panel opined that defendant could not be expected to be prepared to meet Dr. Randall’s testimony on such short notice without access to the laboratory report or physical evidence itself. Finally, the Court of Appeals stated that the errors were not harmless.
IV. DISCOVERY ISSUES
The Court of Appeals found error in the prosecutor’s failure to make the wet swab laboratory report and the wet swab sample itself available to defendant immediately after Dr. Randall’s surprising trial-day disclosure regarding the presence of sperm. *760This conclusion was not warranted on the basis of defendant’s argument or the record on appeal.
Defendant did not argue in the trial court or in the Court of Appeals that the prosecution had violated MCR 6.201 by failing to turn over the wet swab laboratory report or wet swab sample. Instead, he argued only that the trial court should have suppressed Dr. Randall’s testimony regarding the sperm fragments because it came as a “surprise.” To the extent defendant complained of a discovery violation in the Court of Appeals, his argument focused on the “evidence of sperm” in general, rather than on the sample or laboratory report in particular. Defendant asserted that the prosecution had a duty to notify him of the evidence of sperm in a timely manner in order to allow him a fair chance to prepare his defense on the basis of full and accurate information. Conceding that the evidence of sperm was not technically “favorable” to him under Brady v Maryland, 373 US 83, 87; 83 S Ct 1194; 10 L Ed 2d 215 (1963), he nevertheless suggested that its “timely” disclosure might have somehow bolstered a theory of the defense.3 Defendant also contended that, at a minimum, the trial court “should have sua sponte ordered a continuance, in order to give the defense a reasonable opportunity to prepare to confront the late testimony.” Because defendant never cited MCR 6.201, and never asserted that the prosecution was specifically obliged to turn over the wet swab laboratory report or wet swab *761sample, the Court of Appeals significantly expanded defendant’s argument when it reversed his conviction on that basis.
More importantly, the record did not support the Court of Appeals “finding” that defendant was denied access to the wet swab laboratory report and the wet swab sample at any time after Dr. Randall’s disclosure. It is undisputed that neither party had actual notice of the evidence of sperm until the first day of trial. On that day, in court, Dr. Randall and the prosecutor “reviewed” the results of the wet swab laboratory test. The prosecutor then immediately advised defense counsel of the new information. Defendant’s only objection at trial, made the following day, went to his general lack of knowledge regarding the evidence of sperm before Dr. Randall’s disclosure. If there was a copy of the wet swab laboratory report in court, a question the Court of Appeals could not have answered with confidence on the basis of the record before it, there was no reason to believe that defense counsel did not have an equal opportunity to inspect it.4 The same can be said for the wet swab sample.
*762As the appellant below, defendant bore the burden of furnishing the reviewing court with a record to verify the factual basis of any argument upon which reversal was predicated. Petraszewsky v Keeth (On Remand), 201 Mich App 535, 540; 506 NW2d 890 (1993); cf. People v Lee, 391 Mich 618, 626-627; 218 NW2d 655 (1974); People v Winters, 225 Mich App 718, 729; 571 NW2d 764 (1997). In his brief below, defendant did not point to anything in the lower court record that would establish that the prosecutor failed to provide the items in question to defendant after Dr. Randall’s disclosure. Undoubtedly, this occurred in part because defendant never argued that the prosecutor erred in failing to provide these items. Defendant also did not seek to expand the record in this respect by requesting an evidentiary hearing. The record provided no factual basis upon which to conclude that the prosecutor had failed to make the wet swab laboratory report and the wet swab sample available to defendant immediately after Dr. Randall’s disclosure. Accordingly, the Court of Appeals erred in reversing defendant’s conviction on that basis.
Apart from the wet swab sample and the wet swab laboratory report, the only other “evidence of sperm” not disclosed to defendant before trial was Dr. Randall’s own personal observations. Clearly, this information was outside the scope of discovery. Because Dr. Randall did not make notes of his observations, they were not subject to mandatory disclosure under MCR 6.201(A)(3). Dr. Randall’s personal observations of sperm were not otherwise discoverable because *763evidence of sperm recovered from the victim was not “exculpatory” under MCR 6.201(B)(1), or “favorable to an accused” under Brady, supra.
V. THE DUTY TO SEEK A CONTINUANCE
Although the Court of Appeals erred in finding specific discovery violations in this case, the fact remains that neither defendant nor the prosecutor knew of the evidence of sperm until the morning of the first day of trial. Defendant might have learned of this evidence sooner if defense counsel had asked Dr. Randall more probing questions at the preliminary examination, or if the prosecutor had discovered the existence of the wet swab laboratory report before the first day of trial.5 Whatever the reason for defense counsel’s lack of knowledge before trial, it surely constituted reasonable grounds for seeking a continuance at trial. Of course, defense counsel may also have had sound reasons to avoid any delay. Defense counsel’s strategy at trial was to challenge Dr. Randall’s credibility by arguing that he lacked experience. The prosecutor argues that a delay would have allowed it to endorse and call the laboratory technicians who prepared the wet swab sample laboratory report. Testimony from the laboratory technicians confirming that the wet swab sample contained sperm fragments would have undermined defendant’s argument regarding Dr. Randall’s lack of experience. In any event, faced with the dilemma of Dr. Randall’s trial-day dis*764closure, defense counsel elected to seek suppression of the evidence on the ground that it came as a “surprise” to him, and not to seek a continuance.
The Court of Appeals conclusion that suppression of Dr. Randall’s testimony was unwarranted was correct. Because defendant failed to allege or establish a specific discovery violation, or any other sort of prosecutorial misconduct, the trial court lacked a basis upon which to punish the prosecutor by suppressing otherwise admissible evidence. Furthermore, even if defendant had established an inadvertent discovery violation, a continuance, had one been requested, would have alleviated any harm to defendant’s case by allowing both parties to prepare for the evidence of sperm without requiring the exclusion of relevant evidence. Under such circumstances, the more severe remedy of suppression would not have been appropriate. See People v Clark, 164 Mich App 224, 230; 416 NW2d 390 (1987).
We reject defendant’s alternative argument below that, in lieu of granting defendant’s motion to suppress, the trial court “should have sua sponte ordered a continuance, in order to give the defense a reasonable opportunity to prepare to confront the late testimony.” Although defense counsel had ample reason to seek a continuance at trial, he elected not to do so. The longstanding rule of this state is that, in the absence of a request for a continuance, a trial court should assume that a party does not desire a continuance. See People v Lee, 307 Mich 743, 750; 12 NW2d 418 (1943); People v Ranney, 153 Mich 293, 299; 116 NW 999 (1908); People v Kelly, 186 Mich App 524, 527; 465 NW2d 569 (1990); People v Kvam, 160 Mich App *765189, 200; 408 NW2d 71 (1987); People v McLendon, 51 Mich App 543, 546; 215 NW2d 742 (1974); People v Lakin, 30 Mich App 441, 445; 186 NW2d 867 (1971). Given this clear rule, the trial court cannot be faulted for failing to grant a continuance on its own motion. This rule makes sense because (1) it acknowledges the fact that the parties may have strategic reasons for wishing to proceed, and (2) a contrary rule would place trial courts in the difficult position of having to order unrequested delays as a prophylactic measure against reversal.
VI. HARMLESS ERROR ANALYSIS
Even if Dr. Randall’s testimony regarding the presence of sperm fragments in the “wet prep” had been tainted by a prosecutorial failure to disclose the laboratory report or wet swab sample, or by the trial court’s failure to grant a continuance on its own motion, any such error would have been harmless. The applicable standard of harmless error review depends on whether the error in question was non-constitutional or constitutional in nature. People v Carines, 460 Mich 750, 773-774; 597 NW2d 130 (1999). There is no general constitutional right to discovery in a criminal case. People v Stanaway, 446 Mich 643, 664; 521 NW2d 557 (1994), citing Weatherford v Bursey, 429 US 545, 559; 97 S Ct 837; 51 L Ed 2d 30 (1977). Accordingly, a prosecutorial violation of MCR 6.201(A) based on a failure to disclose the laboratory report or wet swab sample would have been noncon*766stitutional in nature.6 Likewise, any error attributable to the trial court for failing to remedy a discovery violation by granting a continuance would also have been nonconstitutional in nature.
In order to overcome the presumption that a preserved nonconstitutional error is harmless, a defendant must persuade the reviewing court that it is more probable than not that the error in question was outcome determinative. People v Lukity, 460 Mich 484, 495-496; 596 NW2d 607 (1999). An error is deemed to have been “outcome determinative” if it undermined the reliability of the verdict. See People v Snyder, 462 Mich 38, 45; 609 NW2d 831 (2000), citing Lukity, supra at 495-496. In making this determination, the reviewing court should focus on the nature of the error in light of the weight and strength of the untainted evidence. See Lukity, supra at 495; People v Mateo, 453 Mich 203, 215; 551 NW2d 891 (1996). In this case, there was overwhelming evidence of defendant’s guilt apart from the evidence of sperm. The victim’s mother testified that defendant was the only person present with the victim when the injury occurred. The medical evidence showed that the victim’s injury was consistent with penetration, but not consistent with a fall. The most important evidence, however, was the fact that, after initially attempting to deflect blame away from himself, defendant admitted to the police that he engaged in an intentional digital penetration of the victim. This fact alone would *767support a conviction of the crime charged. Given the extremely strong evidence of defendant’s guilt and the dearth of evidence favorable to defendant, we are confident that the late discovery of the evidence of sperm did not undermine the reliability of the verdict.7
For these reasons, we conclude that the Court of Appeals erred in reversing defendant’s convictions. We vacate the opinion of the Court of Appeals and remand to the Court of Appeals for consideration of defendant’s remaining appellate issues.
Weaver, C.J., and Taylor and Young, JJ., concurred with Corrigan, J.
It is not uncommon in the trial of a case for a witness, especially one new to the criminal justice system, to reveal information not previously disclosed. Before this case, Dr. Randall had never testified as a medical expert. Nothing in the record indicates that Dr. Randall’s late revelation was made in anything but good faith.
The contents of the wet swab laboratory report have never been made part of the record at trial or on appeal. Defendant does not suggest that the laboratory report did anything more than confirm the accuracy of Dr. Randall’s observations.
For instance, defendant suggested that, if he had been made aware of the presence of sperm before trial, then “he could have had an expert examine the alleged sperm specimen” to look for a dna match, or he could have “prepared to challenge the procedures under which any lab tests were performed.”
While acknowledging that, strictly speaking, the record does not verify that the prosecutor denied defendant access to the wet swab laboratoiy report on the first day of trial, our concurring and dissenting colleague suggests that “an inference can be drawn from the record that defense counsel never received the report.” Post at 768, n 2. We disagree that such an inference can be drawn from the fact that defense counsel never affirmatively acknowledged receiving the wet swab laboratory report. We also note that her quotation from the separate record is taken out of context. The discussion on that page involved the prosecutor’s argument that defendant was put “on notice” of the possible presence of sperm by the prosecution’s pretrial disclosure of the emergency room report. Defense counsel’s comments reveal only that the emergency room report in the trial judge’s hand was the same report that had been disclosed to defense counsel before trial. The record of this exchange has no *762bearing on the factual question whether defense counsel was denied access to the wet swab laboratory report on the first day of trial.
We reiterate that defendant did not argue to the Court of Appeals, and the Court of Appeals did not find, that the prosecutor breached a duty under MCR 6.201(A)(3) to disclose the existence of the wet swab laboratory report before his actual discovery of the existence of that report.
As our concurring and dissenting colleague notes, a violation of Brady, supra, would be an error of constitutional magnitude. We agree with her observation that no Brady violation could have occurred in this case because the evidence of sperm recovered from the victim was not “favorable to the accused.”
We note that the Court of Appeals conducted its harmless error analysis without the benefit of this Court’s opinion in Lukity, supra.

=== CASE 9737641 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:13.734739+00 ===

Kelly, J.
('concurring in part and dissenting in part). I concur with parts I, II, and in of the majority’s opinion. I disagree, however, with the majority’s conclusion that the Court of Appeals erred in finding a discovery violation.
i
The majority holds that the Court of Appeals erred in finding a discovery violation on the basis of facts the majority believes were not supported in the record. I find no error. The prosecutor violated the rules by failing to turn over to defendant the report prepared by the hospital laboratory and the physical sample taken from the victim.
The Michigan Court Rules, at MCR 6.201(A)(3), state with respect to expert witnesses:
*768A party upon request must provide all other parties: . . . any report of any kind produced by or for an expert witness whom the party intends to call at trial[.]
In this case, the Court of Appeals appropriately classified Dr. Randall as an expert witness. See People v Mikula, 84 Mich App 108; 269 NW2d 195 (1978).1 Thus, MCR 6.201(A)(3) applied to reports produced by or for Dr. Randall.
Dr. Randall testified that he observed sperm fragments under a microscope on a slide prepared from the wet swab sample taken from the victim’s rectum. He also testified that he sent the sample to the hospital laboratory for tests to be performed on it. The laboratory prepared a report which Dr. Randall reviewed before testifying at trial. Thus, the laboratory report was one produced for Dr. Randall, an expert witness whom the prosecution intended to call at trial.
Once becoming aware of the report on the morning before the first day of trial, the prosecutor should have turned it over to defendant, as required by MCR 6.201(A)(3). The prosecutor did not do so, but merely advised defense counsel of its existence. Thus, the failure of the prosecution to provide the laboratory report to defense counsel constituted a violation of MCR 6.201(A)(3).2
*769A second violation of the discovery rules occurred when the prosecutor failed to turn over to defense counsel the physical sample taken from the victim’s body. MCR 6.201(A)(6) states:
a party upon request must provide all other parties: ... a description of and an opportunity to inspect any tangible physical evidence that the party intends to introduce at trial.
Dr. Randall testified about what he observed when he examined the physical sample. Despite the fact that the physical sample was never introduced as evi*770dence at trial, I believe that Dr. Randall’s testimony implicated MCR 6.201(A)(6). His testimony brought into issue the tangible physical evidence and what it demonstrated. Accordingly, defendant should have had an opportunity to inspect the physical evidence as the court rule requires.3
n
I agree with the majority that the error was harmless. However, I reach that result by a different route. The majority quickly classifies any error that occurred here as nonconstitutional error because “[t]here is no general constitutional right to discovery in a criminal case.” Ante, p 765, citing People v Stanaway, 446 Mich 643, 664; 521 NW2d 557 (1994). It goes on to find that the error was harmless, because defendant did not establish that, more probably than not, it was outcome determinative. Ante, p 766, citing People v Lukity, 460 Mich 484, 495-496; 596 NW2d 607 (1999).
The majority’s statement is much too broad, and it fails to recognize that a discovery violation can result in constitutional error when it violates a defendant’s right to due process.
*771Defendants have a due process right to obtain evidence in the possession of the prosecutor if it is favorable to the accused and material to guilt or punishment. Brady v Maryland, 373 US 83, 87; 83 S Ct 1194; 10 L Ed 2d 215 (1963); People v Carter, 415 Mich 558, 593; 330 NW2d 314 (1982). Material has been interpreted to mean exculpatory evidence that would raise a reasonable doubt about the defendant’s guilt. United States v Agurs, 427 US 97, 104; 96 S Ct 2392; 49 L Ed 2d 342 (1976). The prosecution must turn over such evidence regardless of whether the defendant makes a request. Id. . . . The test for whether the material should have been provided ... is “whether it contains information that probably would have changed the outcome of [the] trial.” [Stanaiuay, supra at 666.]
However, in this case, defendant has not demonstrated that the physical evidence or the laboratory report would have been exculpatory. Thus, defendant is not able to establish constitutional error on the basis of the Stanaway test.
We have yet to address in a definitive manner the issue whether a constitutional due process violation can occur when a prosecutor fails to disclose inculpatory evidence.4 However, in People v Taylor, 159 Mich *772App 468; 406 NW2d 859 (1987), the Court of Appeals identified a test to use to determine the appropriate remedy to apply when a prosecutor fails to abide by a discovery order or agreement:
The question ... is first, whether the party’s interest in preparing his own case or his opportunity to test the authenticity of his opponent’s evidence has been prejudiced by a noncompliance with a discovery order or agreement, and second . . . what remedy may be appropriate giving due regard to the competing interests of the opposing party, the court, and the public. [Id. at 486-487.]
Here, the prosecutor’s failure to turn over the physical sample to defendant prejudiced defendant’s opportunity to test the sample and verify that sperm fragments were present. The prosecutor’s failure to turn over the laboratory report resulted in defendant having no opportunity to compare the report with Dr. Randall’s testimony and to search for inconsistencies. Thus, I agree with the Court of Appeals when it stated:
We cannot expect a defendant and his attorney to be prepared to meet such critical physical evidence in less than one day and without access either to key reports or to the physical evidence itself. By its nature, such physical evidence is generally so persuasive to a jury that there is an obligation on the part of the prosecutor and the court to fairly share it with defendant. And not only was defendant entitled to have a fair chance to examine the evidence *773against him, but the jury was entitled to make a decision based on all of the evidence available.
With respect to the second prong of the Taylor test, the trial court should have granted some remedy to defendant on the basis of the discovery violation perpetrated by the prosecution.5 Suppression was an option. However, the trial court should have ordered the prosecution to turn over the laboratory report and the physical sample to defendant. This would have protected defendant’s right to a fair trial, at least minimally, without implicating the competing interests of the other parties.
I agree with the majority, however, that, absent a request by defendant, the trial court was not obligated to grant a continuance to defendant. See People v Blue, 255 Mich 675, 679; 239 NW 361 (1931); People v Ranney, 153 Mich 293, 299; 116 NW 999 (1908); People v Ecarius, 124 Mich 616, 620; 83 NW 628 (1900).
While I would conclude that the error in this case was of constitutional proportion and that it was preserved by defendant’s motion to suppress,6 defendant has not raised those issues. Instead, he argues that the error was outcome determinative under Lukity, *774supra. Even applying the higher standard for preserved constitutional error, I find that the trial court’s error in not granting some relief to defendant was harmless.
Defendant was charged with first-degree criminal sexual conduct. MCL 750.520b(l)(a); MSA 28.788(2)(l)(a) defines the offense:
A person is guilty of criminal sexual conduct in the first degree if he or she engages in sexual penetration with another person and . . . [t]hat other person is under 13 years of age. [Emphasis added.]
Defendant admitted that he digitally penetrated the victim. Defendant’s admission was recorded in a signed statement and admitted into evidence at trial. Thus, even absent testimony by Dr. Randall, defendant’s admission of digital penetration sufficiently established the penetration element of first-degree sexual conduct.
Furthermore, the facts of this case support a conviction for CSC-l, only. Second-degree sexual conduct is defined in relevant part as “sexual contact” with someone under the age of thirteen. MCL 750.520c; MSA 28.788(3). There was sexual contact here, but the charge was based on penetration. The charge was not based merely on contact, touching, or fondling, and there is no evidence to support such a charge. The record demonstrates that defendant digitally penetrated the victim. There is nothing in it that would justify the jury finding defendant guilty of a lesser charge on the basis of improper sexual contact alone. Accordingly, I do not see how the alleged discovery violations could have caused the jury to convict *775defendant of a higher charge than what they otherwise might have considered.
I conclude that the trial court’s error in not providing some sort of remedy to defendant for the discovery violations perpetrated by the prosecution was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Therefore, I concur with the majority’s decision to reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals.
Cavanagh, J., concurred with Kelly, J.
Makkman, J., took no part in the decision of this case.
In Mikula, the examining doctor testified about the condition of the girl’s genital area and opined that the condition was consistent with penetration by an adult penis. Id. at 112. The Court of Appeals referred to the testimony as expert medical testimony. Id. Similarly, here, Dr. Randall testified that the injuries he observed on the victim were consistent with what an adult penis would cause.
The majority asserts that the record does not disclose whether the report was actually turned over to defense counsel. Ante, p 761, n 4. While that is strictly accurate, an inference can be drawn from the record that defense counsel never received the report.
*769Counsel stated that the prosecutor advised him that sperm was found in the sample taken from the victim. But he never stated that the prosecutor gave him the physical sample or a report identifying what was in the sample. Separate Record Tr at 16-17. The judge then obtained the emergency room report that was turned over to defense counsel, and the following exchange took place:
The Court: Report? This is the report turned over to defense counsel?
[Prosecutor]: Yes. You want the whole thing?
The Court: No, let me—I know what I’m doing here. Just trust me. I’E—I’m asking him these questions for a particular reason. . . . Do—is this the report that you got ... Mr. Robinson [defense counsel]?
[Defense Counsel]: Yes, Your honor. [Id. (emphasis added).]
The majority contends that this exchange has no bearing on whether defense counsel was provided a copy of the laboratory report. It asserts that I have taken the quotation out of context. Ante, p 761, n 4.
One can deduce from the discussion that defense counsel received only one report from the prosecutor, that being the emergency room report. The parties and the judge refer to the report that defense counsel received in the singular. No mention is made of any other report being turned over to defense counsel.
I acknowledge that the discussion did not center on the laboratory report. My point is that it was a discussion in which one would expect the laboratory report would have been mentioned, had defense counsel received it. Thus, although not dispositive, it has some bearing on the question.
A contrary finding will essentially render the court rule illusory by providing a loophole that permits avoidance of the disclosure of physical evidence. Rather than disclose the evidence, the prosecution can destroy it and simply call a witness to testify about what he saw when he inspected it, before it was destroyed. Accordingly, an important safeguard against perjured testimony will be lost.
This is especially relevant here, because we do not know if the physical evidence was actually exculpatory. It was never turned over, and the record does not indicate what happened to it.
The Court of Appeals has held that a prosecutor’s failure to comply with discovery agreements and orders results in an unconstitutional denial of due process, even if the undisclosed evidence was inculpatory. See People v Florinchi, 84 Mich App 128; 269 NW2d 500 (1978); People v Pace, 102 Mich App 522; 302 NW2d 216 (1980); People v Turner, 120 Mich App 23; 328 NW2d 5 (1982). However, in People v Taylor, 159 Mich App 468, 471; 406 NW2d 859 (1987), the Court of Appeals purported to reverse its earlier decisions and held that prosecutorial violation of discovery agreements should not be “elevated to constitutional rank.” The Court certified that its Taylor decision conflicted with its earlier decisions, yet we declined the opportunity to order further consideration of the issue. 428 Mich 913 (1987). Thus, the status of error that results from a prosecutor’s failure to abide by discovery orders or agreements remains uncertain. See Mattis, Stare decisis within Michigan’s Court of Appeals: Precedential effect of its decisions on the Court itself and on Michigan trial courts, 37 *772Wayne L R 265, 291-294 (1991). However, we did reverse a defendant’s conviction summarily and remand for a new trial in a case where a trial court erred by admitting letters written by a defendant. The prosecution had not disclosed the letters as required by a discovery order. People v McPherson, 419 Mich 951 (1984). We did not identify the error as a violation of due process, however.
The competing interests of the parties, the court, and the public, include: (1) the prosecutor’s interest in convicting criminals through the use of all relevant and admissible evidence, (2) the defendant’s due process right to a fair trial, (3) the court’s interest in expeditiously administering justice, and (4) the public’s interest in judicial integrity and the protection of society from criminals.
I would find a constitutional error on the basis of the earlier Court of Appeals decisions and our order in McPherson, supra. Preserved constitutional error is analyzed under the harmless-beyond-a-reasonable-doubt test. People v Robinson, 386 Mich 551; 194 NW2d 709 (1972). Reversal is necessary if the error was prejudicial. Id. at 562.

=== CASE 9737642 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:14.861649+00 ===

Greaney, J.
The plaintiffs are recipients of Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) who need child care in order to participate in education or training programs approved by the Department of Public Welfare (department), in connection with its “MassJOBS” program. The plaintiffs commenced an action in the Superior Court to challenge the validity of the department’s limitation of child care for AFDC recipients, who, like the plaintiffs, are in a department-approved education or training program but whose individual employment or training plan was not approved by the department before September 4, 1992. The plaintiffs claimed that the department’s policy violates the provisions of the Social Security Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended by the Family Support Act of 1988, Pub. L. No. 100-485, 102 Stat. 2343 (1988). The plaintiffs sought a preliminary injunction to enjoin the department from failing to provide child-care services to AFDC recipients who are participating in approved education or training activities.
A judge in the Superior Court granted the plaintiffs’ request for a preliminary injunction. The department appealed from the injunction to the Appeals Court pursuant to G. L. c. 231, § 118, second par. (1990 ed.), and a stay of the injunction (extending a stay granted by the Superior Court judge) was granted by a single justice of the Appeals Court. The plaintiffs then petitioned a single justice of this court pursuant to G. L. c. 211, § 3 (1990 ed.), to vacate the stay. The single justice ordered the action transferred pursuant to G. L. c. 211, § 4A (1990 ed.), and reserved and reported the merits of the case to the full court. We now affirm the grant of the preliminary injunction.
The facts are undisputed. The Social Security Act, as amended by the Family Support Act of 1988 (FSA), re*20quires every State participating in the AFDC program to create a “Job Opportunities and Basic Skills” (JOBS) program to provide training, education, and work opportunities for those receiving AFDC benefits. 42 U.S.C. §§ 681 et seq. (1988). The Massachusetts JOBS program is called Mass-JOBS. The program is designed to change the nature of the welfare system by creating opportunities for AFDC recipients to further their education and training and ultimately to remove themselves from the welfare rolls by gaining self-sufficiency through meaningful employment. 42 U.S.C. § 681 (a). 45 C.F.R. § 250.0 (1992).
Each plaintiff is an AFDC recipient with a minor child or children. Each plaintiff has voluntarily enrolled in an education or training program approved by the department and has sought child care in order to continue her education or training. Each plaintiff has been advised by the department that she will not immediately receive, child care because her education or training plan was not approved prior to September 4, 1992. That date is significant because the department has placed AFDC recipients whose employment or training plans are approved thereafter, ánd who request child care, on a waiting list. When a child-care slot becomes available, it is to be filled from the waiting list. The department’s action was taken in anticipation that the funds appropriated this fiscal year for child care may not be sufficient to provide that benefit for all AFDC recipients who meet current criteria for participation in MassJOBS. As a practical matter, the wait-listing policy operates as a denial of child care because there is no indication that child-care slots are becoming available on any regular basis, if at all.
The Superior Court judge applied the traditional test for consideration of a preliminary injunction. A trial court’s decision to issue or to deny a preliminary injunction requires “an evaluation in combination of the moving party’s claim of injury and its chance of success on the merits. If there is a substantial risk of irreparable harm to the moving party, it must be balanced against any similar risk to the other party in the light of the chance of each party to succeed on the *21merits.” Commonwealth v. County of Suffolk, 383 Mass. 286, 288 (1981), citing Packaging Indus. Group v. Cheney, 380 Mass. 609, 617 (1980). See Westinghouse Broadcasting Co. v. New England Patriots Football Club, Inc., 10 Mass. App. Ct. 70, 72 (1980). “Only where the balance between these risks cuts in favor of the moving party may a preliminary injunction properly issue.” Packaging Indus. Group v. Cheney, supra. See Planned Parenthood League of Mass., Inc. v. Operation Rescue, 406 Mass. 701, 710 (1990). We first consider whether the plaintiffs have shown a likelihood of success, namely whether they have demonstrated that applicable Federal law requires the department to provide child care to MassJOBS participants in their circumstances.
As noted, the FSA requires each State, as a condition of participation in the AFDC program, to create a JOBS program. 42 U.S.C. §§ 681 et seq. As a condition of receiving public support, AFDC recipients in turn are required to participate in a State’s JOBS program, 42 U.S.C. § 602 (a)(19),2 unless they are exempt from required participation by statute. 42 U.S.C. § 602 (a)(19)(C). Among those exempt from required participation are the caretakers of children under the age of six years. 42 U.S.C. § 602 (a) (19) (C) (iii) (II). A State’s JOBS program also must permit exempt individuals to volunteer for participation. 42 U.S.C. § 602 (a)(19)(B)(i)(II). The plaintiffs in this case *22who have volunteered to participate in MassJOBS and who are involved in the wait-listing policy, are caretakers of children under six years.
Participants in a State’s JOBS program are entitled to certain support services necessary for participation, including transportation costs and other work-related expenses. 42 U.S.C. § 602 (g)(2). A separate provision of the FSA provides that “[e]ach State agency must guarantee child care in accordance with subparagraph (B)[3] ... for each individual participating in an education and training activity ... if the State agency approves the activity and determines that the individual is satisfactorily participating in the activity” (emphasis added).4 42 U.S.C. § 602 (g)(l)(A)(i)(II). The plaintiffs are individuals participating satisfactorily in State-approved education and training activities.
In a cooperative Federal-State program such as AFDC, the States “are given the choice of complying with the conditions set forth in the [Federal legislation creating the program] or forgoing the benefits of federal funding.” Pennhurst State Sch. & Hosp. v. Halderman, 451 U.S. 1, 11 (1981). See Miller v. Youakim, 440 U.S. 125, 135 (1979); Town*23send v. Swank, 404 U.S. 282, 286 (1971). The State, however, must be able to ascertain the extent of its obligations from the terms of the Federal legislation. “[I]f Congress intends to impose a condition on the grant of federal moneys, it must do so unambiguously.” Suter v. Artist M., 112 S. Ct. 1360, 1366 (1992), quoting Pennhurst State Sch. & Hosp. v. Halderman, supra at 17. The plaintiffs maintain that the language quoted above, couched as it is in terms of a “guarantee,” unambiguously requires the Commonwealth to provide them with child care meeting FSA specifications. We agree.
A “guarantee” requires the guarantor “to become responsible for the fulfillment of’ an act, or “to undertake to do or secure something.” Webster’s New Int’l Dictionary 1110 (2d ed. 1959). A guarantee, like a contractual promise, normally is unconditional unless any limitation is stated explicitly. The FSA makes a State’s participation in the AFDC program dependent on its guarantee, or promise, that it will appropriate sufficient funds to provide child care for AFDC recipients who are satisfactorily participating in training or education programs that the State has ascertained are likely to lead to employment. The language of the Federal legislation does not in any respect purport to condition the State’s obligation to provide child care on the availability of funds.5
The plain language of the Federal law, therefore, appears sufficient to resolve the likelihood of success question which is critical to the injunction. See INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421, 431-432 (1987). It is worth noting as well that legislative history supports the conclusion that the depart-*24merit’s obligation to provide child care cannot depend on the amount of its annual appropriation. In this regard, the House conference report states: “The conference agreement provides that the State agency must guarantee child care to the extent it is determined by the agency to be necessary for an individual’s employment. The State agency must also guarantee child care for education and training activities (including participation in the JOBS program) if the State agency approves the activity and determines that the individual is satisfactorily participating in the activity” (emphasis added).6 H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 100-998, 100th Cong., 2d Sess. 160 (1988), reprinted in 1988 U.S.C.C.A.N. 2879, 2948.
The department argues, however, that the child-care “guarantee” is only a conditional one, and that the department is free to restrict the provision of child care, or to deny child care altogether, if this result is necessitated by limited State resources. In making this argument, the department points to other provisions of the legislation which provide that the State must, “to the extent that the [JOBS] program is available in the political subdivision involved and State resources otherwise permit,” require nonexempt AFDC recipients “to whom the State guarantees child care in accordance with section 602(g),” to participate in its JOBS program (emphasis added). 42 U.S.C. § 602 (a)(19)(B)(i)(I). The department contends that the italicized provisions implicitly recognize that, due to fiscal constraints, a State may not be able to guarantee child care to all nonexempt participants, and that the remedy for a State’s failure to provide child *25care is to relieve AFDC recipients from required participation in JOBS. The department further maintains that there is no basis for concluding that Congress intended to treat nonexempt JOBS participants differently from voluntary participants with respect to the provision of child care. According to the department, it is unlikely that Congress would make explicit provisions for the lack of child care if it intended to impose on the States an unconditional obligation to provide child care.
The Superior Court judge rejected this argument. She read 42 U.S.C. § 602 (a)(19), together with the FSA’s guarantee of child care to individuals in the plaintiffs’ situation, as providing: (a) that the department does not have an obligation to guarantee child care to every AFDC recipient who needs it; but (b) that the legislation unambiguously guarantees it to the plaintiffs’ class of AFDC recipients who have volunteered for participation in MassJOBS and whose participation has been accepted by the approval of their employment or training plans. The judge apparently concluded that the Federal legislation permits the department to discriminate in the provision of child care between AFDC recipients required to participate in MassJOBS (as to whom the department could deny child care and exempt the individual from required participation), and volunteers (as to whom the department is required to provide child care).
We agree with the judge that the provisions relied on by the department cannot logically be read as conditioning the plaintiffs’ right to child care on the State’s annual appropriations decision. We also discern some basis in the language of 42 U.S.C. § 602 (a)(19), see note 2, supra, for distinguishing, as the judge did, between voluntary MassJOBS participants and individuals who are required to participate, but we analyze one of the provisions differently.
Provisions of legislation addressing similar subject matter are to be construed together to make “an harmonious whole consistent with the legislative purpose,” Registrar of Motor Vehicles v. Board of Appeal on Motor Vehicle Liab. Policies & Bonds, 382 Mass. 580, 585 (1981), and to avoid rendering *26any part of the legislation meaningless. See Commonwealth v. Neiman, 396 Mass. 754, 757-759 (1986). As did the judge, we agree that the department has flexibility and discretion with respect to the MassJOBS program, and it is entitled to take into account resource limitations in ways that may affect indirectly the provision of child care to AFDC recipients. The reference in 42 U.S.C. § 602 (a)(19)(B)(i), to “the extent that . . . State resources otherwise permit,” however, is to the general composition of a State’s JOBS program, not to funding for child care. The legislation grants participating States considerable leeway in choosing the components of their JOBS programs. See 42 U.S.C. § 682 (d), (e), (f), and (g). See also 45 C.F.R. §§ 250.46, 250.47, 250.48 (1992). A State’s decision concerning the composition of its JOBS program may limit indirectly an AFDC recipient’s right to child care if the educational or training program proposed by the individual is not an approved part of the JOBS program.7
The other provision in the legislation on which the department relies provides that a State must require participation in its JOBS program by nonexempt AFDC recipients “to whom the State guarantees child care in accordance with section 602 (g).” The department suggests that this language constitutes an implicit recognition that State resources may be insufficient to provide child care to all nonexempt participants. We think this language only recognizes that the FSA does not require the State to be a direct provider of child care meeting FSA standards, if, for reasons other than a shortage of funds, such child care is not available. The FSA *27provides the State with five alternative means of “guaranteeing” child care. See note 3, supra. A State may provide the care directly, but it is not required to do so. If, for example, the State chooses to offer vouchers to caretaker relatives, or seeks to enter contracts for the provision of services (both acceptable means of guaranteeing child care), a shortage of providers meeting FSA standards might result in a State’s failure to provide care. In such instances, the legislation provides that the State may not require otherwise nonexempt participants to participate in its JOBS program.8 We think this is a reasonable interpretation of the legislation, and one that honors both the importance of the child-care guarantee and the FSA’s purposes and goals. We conclude that the plaintiffs have shown a likelihood of success on the merits of their action.
The plaintiffs have also demonstrated that “without the requested relief, [they] may suffer a loss of rights that cannot be vindicated should [they] prevail after a full hearing on the merits.” Planned Parenthood League of Mass., Inc. v. Operation Rescue, 406 Mass. 701, 710 (1990), quoting Packaging Indus. Group v. Cheney, 380 Mass. 609, 616 (1980). If the plaintiffs do not receive notice that the State will honor the FSA’s child-care guarantee in sufficient time to make childcare arrangements, their educational or training activities will be delayed for an indefinite period or may be displaced *28permanently. Some may become liable immediately for the repayment of educational loans. The department does not seriously dispute that lack of child care may impose significant harm to someone trying to attend or complete an educational or training program. Nonetheless, the department suggests that the balance of the harms does not favor the grant of a preliminary injunction because of the likelihood of harm to other recipients of public assistance whose benefits could be reduced if the department is forced to honor the plaintiffs’ asserted right to child care. We rejected a similar argument in Woods v. Executive Office of Communities & Dev., 411 Mass. 599, 606 (1992) (reasonableness of agency’s decision to reduce subsidies to all tenants in light of reduction in Legislature’s appropriation for the program insufficient to overcome statutory language). We also reject the contention here. The allocation of scarce public resources will inevitably harm some individuals, but this consideration cannot excuse the department from compliance with the categorical terms of Federal legislation governing the MassJOBS program. We are not persuaded by the argument that the injunction will harm the public interest by possibly requiring the department to overspend its budget. Cf. Commonwealth v. Mass. CRINC, 392 Mass. 79, 88-90 (1984) (in action to enjoin violation of law, preliminary injunction could enter because requested order within public interest). There are several means available to the department to comply with the injunction and avoid a fund shortage before that issue becomes critical. The balance of harms favors the plaintiffs.
A judgment is to be entered in the Supreme Judicial Court for the county of Suffolk vacating the stay of the preliminary injunction, affirming the grant of the injunction and remanding the case to the Superior Court for such further proceedings as may be appropriate based on this opinion.
So ordered.
Specifically, the Social Security Act provides that each State’s plan must have in effect a JOBS program meeting the requirements of 42 U.S.C. §§ 681 et seq., and that “the State will (except as otherwise provided in this paragraph or part F of [42 U.S.C. §§ 681 et seq.]), to the extent that the program is available in the political subdivision involved and State resources otherwise permit—
“(I) require all recipients of aid to families with dependent children in such subdivision with respect to whom the State guarantees child care in accordance with [subsection g of this section] to participate in the program; and
“(II) allow applicants for and recipients of aid to families with dependent children . . . who are not required under subclause (I) to participate in the program to do so on a voluntary basis.” 42 U.S.C. § 602 (a)(19).
Subparagraph (B) provides, in pertinent part, as follows:
“The State agency may guarantee child care by—
“(i) providing such care directly;
“(ii) arranging the care through providers by use of purchase of service contracts, or vouchers;
“(iii) providing cash or vouchers in advance to the caretaker relative in the family;
“(iv) reimbursing the caretaker relative in the family; or
“(v) adopting such other arrangements as the agency deems appropriate.” 42 U.S.C. § 602 (g)(1)(B).
This legislation also sets a ceiling on the amount a State spends for child care that will qualify for Federal matching funds, and sets minimum standards for the quality of the child care provided, including that it must meet State and local safety conditions, and that parental access must be allowed. 42 U.S.C. § 602 (g)(3)(B).
The State also must guarantee child care “for each family with a dependent child requiring such care, to the extent that such care is determined by the State agency to be necessary for an individual in the family to accept employment or remain employed.” 42 U.S.C. § 602 (g)(D(A)(i)(I).
In further support of this reading of the legislation, we note the obviously conditional language of 42 U.S.C. § 602 (i), governing the provision of child care to families at risk of becoming eligible for AFDC. In § 602 (i)(l)(C), Congress determined that “[e]ach State agency may, to the extent that it determines that resources are available, provide child care . .. to any low income family [at risk of becoming eligible for AFDC]” (emphasis added). Congress knew how to condition the obligation to provide child care on the availability of a State’s resources. See Russello v. United States, 464 U.S. 16, 23 (1983). See also INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421, 432 (1987).
The United States Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) commentary on its final regulations implementing the FSA also supports the plaintiffs’ position: “The Statute requires the State to guarantee child care for participants in a JOBS activity; individuals in other approved education or training activities; and employed individuals. We, therefore, believe that the State is obligated to guarantee care even if it has not required an individual to participate or accept employment” (emphasis added). 54 Fed. Reg. 42,217 (Oct. 13, 1989). The HHS interpretation of the FSA, if reasonable, is entitled to deference. Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 844 (1984).
The department points out that the named plaintiffs are all in post-secondary education programs, and that postsecondary education is a discretionary component of a State’s JOBS program. 42 U.S.C. § 682 (d)(1)(B). The department argues that, because it has the discretion to rewrite its JOBS program to exclude postsecondary education which would foreclose the plaintiffs' from JOBS participation and the provision of child care, it should be able simply to deny them child care based on a shortage of resources. The fact that the department could exclude certain components from MassJOBS does not mean that, having included those components, the department is free to ignore the mandates of the FSA.
Our interpretation also finds support in the HHS final regulations implementing the FSA:
“In areas where child care of the appropriate type cannot be located by JOBS participants, the State must be prepared to assist these individuals in locating care. Such assistance may take the form of referral to existing child care resource and referral services, or direct assistance based upon information gathered through the State agency’s own consultation, coordination, and research efforts. In addition, the State may provide assistance to other AFDC applicants and recipients in locating such care. However, the State is not required to provide child care directly or to otherwise create child care services. Where child care cannot be located, an individual cannot be required to participate, or to accept or retain employment.” 54 Fed. Reg. 42,217 (Oct. 13, 1989).

=== CASE 9737643 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:14.866314+00 ===

Lynch, J.
(dissenting). I agree with the court that, “if Congress intends to impose a condition on the grant of fed*29eral moneys, it must do so unambiguously.” Suter v. Artist M., 112 S. Ct. 1360, 1366 (1992), quoting Pennhurst State Sch. & Hosp. v. Halderman, 451 U.S. 1, 17 (1981). I dissent because I do not believe that the Family Support Act (Act) unambiguously requires the Commonwealth to provide child care to the plaintiffs absent legislative funding.
The Act mandates that each State create a JOBS program and that the State will “to the extent that the program is available . . . and State resources otherwise permit ... (I) require all recipients of aid to families with dependent children in such subdivision with respect to whom the State guarantees child care in accordance with [subsection g] to participate,” 42 U.S.C. § 602 (a)(19)(B) (1988), and further that the State must guarantee child care to each participating individual in accordance with subparagraph (B). 42 U.S.C. § 602 (g) (1988). I read the provision specifically mandating child care as being subject to the language of sub-paragraph (B) “to the extent . . . resources otherwise permit.” I conclude, therefore, that Congress intended child care to depend on the availability of State resources, like the rest of the program.
Furthermore, the court acknowledges that the Act gives the department discretion and flexibility with respect to the MassJOBS program, even when limiting the program indirectly affects child care. However, the court concludes that this discretion only applies to the general composition of the JOBS program, and not to funding child care. Ante at 26. I contend that, since Congress allowed the State to be flexible in funding the over-all MassJOBS programs, it presumably would also want to allow the same flexibility in funding the child care aspect.
The court agrees that there was “some basis in the language of [the statute]” to distinguish between voluntary and nonexempt participants. Ante at 25. However, the court concludes that the child-care “guarantee” extended to both groups. I disagree. A cursory reading shows that the statute distinguishes between those required to participate in the program and those who can volunteer. Those required to par*30ticipate can be nonetheless exempt if the State cannot provide child care to them. As to those who volunteer for the program, however, the statute is silent. Thus, from reading the statute as “an harmonious whole,” ante at 25-26, it appears the department need not provide child care to those who volunteer for the program.
The court acknowledges that the programs in which all the plaintiffs participate are a discretionary component of the JOBS program and could be eliminated. Ante at 26 n.7. However, the court decides that, once the department has included such a discretionary component, it must then provide “guaranteed” child care for those enrolled in that component. I do not think that Congress’s intent was to require the State to fund child care for voluntary participants in a discretionary program of MassJOBS that the State could eliminate entirely.
We were told at oral argument that, if the injunction stands, the MassJOBS program will run out of funding in May. Thus, the department will be forced to cut the program, causing both nonexempt and voluntary participants to lose services, assuming that the Legislature does not provide additional funding. I fail to see how cuts to the over-all program benefit anyone. In any case the decision to cut the program or to curtail child care seems to be a policy decision better left to the executive department rather than being decided by judicial decree.
The plaintiffs have not demonstrated that the Act requires the department to provide child care to the plaintiffs. At the most, the statute is ambiguous on the point. As such, I do not believe that the plaintiffs have shown a likelihood of success on the merits. In addition, I do not believe that the plaintiffs have shown that their harm without the injunction will be greater than the harm to other participants in the MassJOBS program with the injunction, particularly since entire programs may be cut for lack of funding. I, therefore, respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 9737644 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:15.108452+00 ===

OPINION
HALBROOKS, Judge.
In the context of a petition for improvement of County Ditch No. 86, Branch 1, appellants Blaine Phillips and Wayne Pest-ka contend that the district court erred by dismissing, first, their challenge to the adoption of the amended viewers’ report by respondent County of Blue Earth and, second, their separate action seeking a declaratory judgment and injunction to stop construction of the drainage project by respondent Krengel Brothers Construction, Inc. Appellants claim that (1) under Minn.Stat. § 103E.511 (1998), the original viewers’ report was final and the Blue Earth County Board lacked the authority to approve the amended report; (2) pursuant to MinmStat. § 103E.606, subd. 2 (1998), the construction contract could not be awarded until there was a final determination that benefits of the improvement exceeded the costs; (3) dismissal of the claim for injunctive relief was error without a factual determination as to whether or not appellants would suffer irreparable injury; and (4) the stipulation signed by the parties did not preclude appellants from subsequently appealing the effect of the drainage authority’s orders on non-owned parcels of land. We affirm.
FACTS
Two petitions, one for improvement of the lower part of Branch 1 of Blue Earth County Ditch No. 86 and one for the upper part, were consolidated by the Blue Earth County Board in its capacity as a drainage authority. The improvement was established by order dated December 23, 1997. No one appealed from the establishment order itself pursuant to MinmStat. § 103E.095 (1998). But Minn.Stat. § 103E.341 (1998) provides that:
The drainage authority must dismiss the proceedings and petition, by order, if it determines that:
(1) the benefits of the proposed drainage project are less than the total cost, including damages awarded * * *.
MinmStat. § 103E.341, subd. 1.
Appellants and some other affected individuals challenged the benefits-and-damages awards contained in the establishment order, pursuant Minn.Stat. § 103E.091 (1998). In total, the determination of benefits and damages for 13 parcels of land were appealed. Appellants, who each own four parcels of land, appealed only the benefits and damages allocated to parcels they own. Their consolidated appeals were tried to a jury in January 1999. During trial, the jury heard testimony from the viewers1 that they had made an error in the capitalization of the projected stream of income resulting from the anticipated enhanced productivity of *759the land as a result of the improvement of Branch No. 1. As a result of the error, the benefit amounts originally calculated by the viewers were increased in each class of land. Appellants were first advised of this error two weeks before trial and appellants’ counsel rigorously cross-examined the viewers on this issue at trial.
On January 20,1999, the jury returned a verdict, finding benefits in the amount of $293,720 and damages in the amount of $29,438. • The net effect of the jury’s determination was that the cost of the improvement exceeded the benefits by $28,950. Appellants filed a motion for new trial. Before the entry of judgment, the parties drafted and signed .a stipulation of settlement dated March 26, 1999, the day the hearing on appellants’ post-trial motion was scheduled. The stipulation, relating to the 13 parcels then at issue, was subsequently incorporated into the trial court’s findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order for judgment.
The stipulation contained the following provisions, among others:
The above entitled parties hereby stipulate and agree to settle and resolve all issues between the parties relating to the determination of benefits and damages in the above proceeding as follows:
1. That the jury verdict as to benefits and damages will become the benefits and damages as determined for Appellants land in the improvement for County Ditch No. 86, Branch 1, Blue Earth County, Minnesota.
⅜ ⅜ ⅜ ⅜
5. By entering into this Stipulation, the Appellants are not estopped and do not waive their right to challenge the feasibility of the ditch if the estimated costs and damages exceed the benefits.
It was also agreed that (1) the appellants would be paid for loss of crops if easements were not flagged prior to planting; (2) contractors would remove and replace the topsoil on disturbed ground; (3) appellants would be paid their damages in cash up front rather than have them offset against benefits; and (4) appellant Phillips would get an extra field crossing. The total cost of these negotiated terms was about $10,000.
Prior to this stipulated settlement, the Blue Earth County Board had accepted bids for construction of the improvement project.. Assuming the amount of the lowest bid received for construction cost, appellants filed a petition with the county board seeking dismissal of the entire proceeding on the grounds that the total cost of the improvement exceeded benefits by $22,994.86, making the project unlawful.
On June 7, 1999, one of the original petitioners for improvement to the upper part of Branch 1, who had not been a party to appellants’ original lawsuit, filed a petition with the county board. The petition sought to amend the viewers’ report to correct the errors in the original report-. The amended report increased total benefits to $324,186, making the project lawful.
A hearing on separate petitions filed by appellants and respondents was held on August 9, 1999. Following the hearing, the county board issued an order adopting the amended viewers’ report determining the benefits to be $324,186 and the projected cost of the improvement to be $313,577. The August 9,1999 order did not affect the benefits or damages for appellants’ previously appealed parcels. Based on this order, the benefits of the project exceeded the cost.
Within 30 days after the entry of the county board’s order, appellants, although they do not own any of the affected parcels, served and filed their notices of appeal to the district court pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 103E.091 with respect to each parcel of land that had an increase in benefits resulting from the order. Respondents served a motion to dismiss the appeals on September 8,1999.
At an October 5, 1999 meeting of the county board, an order was entered, over appellants’ objections, awarding the con*760struction contract to respondent Krengel Brothers Construction, Inc. The contract amount was $129,834.60. On October 15, 1999, appellants served a separate summons and complaint seeking declaratory and injunctive relief against respondents.
A combined hearing on the appellants’ motion for a temporary restraining order and respondents’ motion for dismissal was held on October 26, 1999. Respondents argued that dismissal was proper on the grounds that appellants had settled all their claims on March 26, 1999, and were precluded from appealing from an increase of the benefits on land owned by other people. Following the hearing, the district court dismissed appellants’- statutory appeal pursuant to Minn.Stat. § 103E.091. The court then dismissed appellants’ declaratory judgment and injunctive relief action as moot. No memorandum was filed. This appeal follows.
ISSUES
1. Did a stipulation of settlement entered into by the parties act as a bar to any future appeals relating to the same drainage project?
2. Is res judicata applicable to appeals from administrative-agency decisions specifically related to drainage-improvement projects?
3. Does a landowner seeking to challenge the amount of benefits or damages awarded in an establishment order for a drainage project have standing to appeal awards that relate exclusively to lands not owned by that party?
4. Was the district court’s dismissal of appellants’ action for declaratory judgment and injunctive relief proper?
ANALYSIS
1. Standard of Review
Where the trial court reviewing an agency decision makes independent factual determinations and otherwise acts as a court of first impression, this court applies the “clearly erroneous” standard of review. Where, on the other hand, the trial court is itself acting as an appellate tribunal with respect to the agency decision, this court will independently review the agency’s record.
In re Hutchinson, 440 N.W.2d 171, 175 (Minn.App.1989) (quotation and citations omitted), review denied (Minn. Aug. 9, 1989). In this instance, the district court based its decisions on legal rather than factual considerations. This court conducts a de novo review of such issues and is not bound by the legal conclusions of the district court or the agency itself. Id. Furthermore, statutory construction is a question of law, which we review de novo. Sorenson v. St Paul Ramsey Med. Ctr., 457 N.W.2d 188,190 (Minn.1990).
2. The District Court’s Dismissal of Appellants’ Second Appeal of Benefits and Damages
A. Stipulation of Settlement
Respondents maintain that appellants’ second appeal to the district court is barred by the stipulation of settlement entered into by the parties on March 26, 1999, following the jury verdict in appellants’ challenge to the benefits and costs determined for parcels they and others owned. Respondents contend that they would not have entered into the stipulation if the threat of future litigation was not precluded in a “global” fashion.
“Stipulations are treated and interpreted as binding contracts.” Emerick ex rel. Howley v. Sanchez, 547 N.W.2d 109, 112 (Minn.App.1996) (citation omitted). But the parties dispute the meaning of paragraph five of the stipulation.
A contract provision is unambiguous when its meaning can be ascertained “without any guide other than knowledge of the facts on which the language depends for meaning.” VanderLeest v. VanderLeest, 352 N.W.2d 54, 57 (Minn.App.1984) (citations omitted). Absent ambiguity, it is not proper for a court to interpret a stipu*761lation or a contract. See Starr v. Starr, 312 Minn. 561, 562-63, 251 N.W.2d 341, 342 (1977) (court cannot construe stipulation language that is plain and unambiguous); Telex Corp. v. Data Prods. Corp., 271 Minn. 288, 295, 135 N.W.2d 681, 686-87 (1965) (if a contract is clear, “it is neither necessary nor proper in construing it to go beyond the wording of the instrument itself’). Paragraph five of the parties’ stipulation is not ambiguous. It specifically reserves a right to challenge the feasibility of the ditch if the estimated costs and damages exceed the benefits. The stipulation is not “global” and could not entirely preclude a subsequent appeal the way it is drafted.
B. Res Judicata
Respondents next contend that res judicata applies as a bar to the second appeal. Determining the availability of res judicata is a legal question, which. this court reviews de novo. Paulos v. Johnson, 597 N.W.2d 316, 319-20 (Minn.App.1999) (citing Hibbing Educ. Ass’n v. Public Employment Relations Bd., 369 N.W.2d 527, 529, (Minn.1985)), review denied (Minn. Sept. 28, 1999). Ordinarily, a final judgment on the merits serves as an absolute bar to a second suit involving identical parties and the same cause of action, and conclusively determines every matter that was litigated or may have been litigated. Beutz v. A.O. Smith Harvestore Prods., Inc., 431 N.W.2d 528, 531 (Minn.1988) (citation omitted).
Respondents maintain that the benefits allocated to non-owned lands could have been litigated in the first appeal. This is correct. See Minn.Stat. § 103E.091, subd. 2(a) (1998). Appellants correctly point out, however, that the action of the county board with respect to raising the benefits on the non-owned lands had not occurred prior to the judgment being entered on the first appeal.
Res judicata is also considered an equitable doctrine that must be applied in light of the facts of each individual case. R.W. v. T.F., 528 N.W.2d 869, 872 n. 3 (Minn.1995). The court must focus on whether applying res judicata would work an injustice on the party against whom it is urged. Id. This court has previously stated that the doctrine of res judicata may not be as applicable to administrative agencies as it is to court decisions because of fundamental differences between the two:
Court decisions are reflected in a judgment which is docketed and final; the trial court’s work is at an end with regard to the matter. In the administrative process, however, agencies typically exert continuing supervisory and regulatory jurisdiction over the affected person. In addition, administrative policies are in a constant state of change, and administrative decision-makers are not only adjudicating but often policy-making. Finally, administrative agencies are charged by a legislative body with protecting public health, safety, and welfare, not merely resolving past adjudicative facts in light of existing law.
Wangen v. Commissioner of Pub. Safety, 437 N.W.2d 120, 123 (Minn.App.1989) (quoting W. Keppel & D. Gilbert, Minnesota Administrative Practice and Procedure § 624 at 119-20 (1982)), review denied (Minn. May 12, 1989). Given the facts of this case, the application of res judicata would not be equitable.
C. Non-Owned Property and Standing
Respondents contend that the statute does not allow a party to appeal only non-owned lands. This issue is one of first impression.
The procedure for appealing benefits and damages is set out as follows:
Procedure for appeals related to benefits and damages, (a) A person who appeals the amount of benefits or damages may, include benefits and damages affecting property not owned by the appellant. Notice of the appeal must be *762served to the auditor and to the owner or occupant of property included in the appeal or to the attorney representing the property owner in the proceedings.
(b) The appellant must file a notice of appeal with the auditor within 30 days after the order to be appealed is filed. The notice must state the particular benefits or damages appealed and the basis for the appeal. Within 30 days after the notice is filed, the auditor must file the original notice with the court administrator of the district court.
Minn.Stat. § 103E.091, subd. 2 (1998) (emphasis added). Respondents emphasize the language “may include * * * ” in subsection (a). They argue that appellants, in seeking to appeal only non-owned lands, are attempting to read subdivision 2 to permit bifurcation of their appeals.
“The objective of statutory interpretation is to ascertain and effectuate the intent of the legislature.” State v. Coauette, 601 N.W.2d 443, 445 (Minn.App. 1999) (citing Minn.Stat. § 645.16 (1998)), review denied (Minn. Dec. 14, 1999). As a fundamental principle of statutory interpretation, this court “should look first to the specific statutory language and be guided by its natural and most obvious meaning.” Heaslip v. Freeman, 511 N.W.2d 21, 22 (Minn.App.1994), review denied (Minn. Feb. 24, 1994).
It is clear that the legislature intended to allow for appeals when it enacted Minn. Stat. § 103E.091, subd. 2. But respondents contend that if the legislature had intended to allow an individual to appeal non-owned property only, it could have used the language “may appeal” in place of “may include.”
As indicated by Minn.Stat. § 645.16 (1998), the “consequences of a particular interpretation” is an important consideration when ascertaining legislative intent. If Minn.Stat. § 103E.091 is interpreted to allow a party to unilaterally appeal property that the party does not own, as appellant argues, the consequence of such an action would be to confer standing on that party to intrude on the affairs of others when the party has no interest of its own.
“Standing is a jurisdictional question to be determined by this court.” In re Implementation of Util. Energy Conservation Improvement Programs, 368 N.W.2d 308, 312 (Minn.App.1985) (citation omitted).
In the absence of a discernible legislative intent to the contrary, it has long been established that a person has standing to invoke judicial review of agency action only if that person suffers “injury in fact” as a consequence of that action.
In re Sandy Pappas Senate Comm., 488 N.W.2d 795, 797 (Minn.1992) (citation omitted).
[T]he fundamental aspect of standing is that it focuses on the party seeking to get his complaint before a * * * court and not on the issues he wishes to have adjudicated.
Sundberg v. Abbott, 423 N.W.2d 686, 688 (Minn.App.1988) (quoting Flast v. Cohen, 392 U.S. 83, 99, 88 S.Ct. 1942, 1952, 20 L.Ed.2d 947 (1968)), review denied (Minn. June 29, 1988). “A party must have more than an abstract concern and the injury must not be merely speculative.” State v. Knutson, 523 N.W.2d 909, 911 (Minn.App. 1994) (citation omitted), review denied (Minn. Jan. 13, 1995). “To have standing, a plaintiff * * * must allege specific, concrete facts showing [they have] been personally harmed.” Villars v. Provo, 440 N.W.2d 160, 162 (Minn.App.1989) (citation omitted). Appellants have not alleged an injury in fact because they have not demonstrated that they were personally harmed by the amended viewers’ report adopted on August 9,1999.
Appellants’ ultimate objective has been to thwart the improvement project in its entirety. To do so, appellants challenged the benefits/cost ratio in their own trial and, following settlement of those *763claims, seek to reframe the same issue in the name of other parcel owners. In this case, the county board’s actions, with regard to the non-owned property, had no impact on appellants’ benefits-and-damages assessments. The amended order adopted by the county board redetermined benefits and cost oh parcels not involved in the jury verdict. The resulting effect is to advance completion of the drainage project, to which the appellants are opposed. But there is no “injury in fact” to appellants. Therefore, appellants lack standing to appeal benefits-and-damages decisions affecting only non-owned property. The district court’s dismissal of the appeal on this basis was appropriate.
3. The District Court’s Dismissal of Appellants’ Action for Declaratory Judgment and Injunctive Relief
Appellants challenge the validity of the drainage authority’s award of the improvement contract while an appeal of benefits was still pending, based on Minn.Stat. § 103E.505, subd. 2 (1998), which provides:
If an appeal regarding the determination of benefits and damages is made within 30 days after the order establishing the drainage project has been filed, a contract may not be awarded until the appeal has been determined, unless the drainage authority orders the contract awarded.
(Emphasis added.) The drainage authority ordered the contract awarded to Kren-gel Construction at a hearing held October 5,1999.
At the October 26, 1999 hearing, appellants acknowledged that their declaratory judgment/injunctive relief claim would be moot if the appeal were dismissed. The district court included this admission in its order dismissing the declaratory judgment and injunctive relief action.
Because of our decision that dismissal of this matter was proper on the ground that appellants lack standing, we do not reach this issue.
DECISION
Appellants lack standing to challenge the drainage authority’s adoption of an amended viewers’ report that modified benefits-and-damages awards relating exclusively to property not owned by appellants.
Affirmed.
. "Viewers” are defined in Minn.Stat. § 103E.305 (1998) as three disinterested residents of the state qualified to assess benefits and damages to property.

=== CASE 2211939 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:13.71899+00 ===

11 Cal.App.2d 391 (1936)
LAURETTA M. TULLIS, Appellant,
v.
TITLE GUARANTEE AND TRUST COMPANY (a Corporation) et al., Defendants; BECKER-ARBUCKLE-WRIGHT CORPORATION (a Corporation) et al., Respondents.
Civ. No. 9998.
California Court of Appeals. First Appellate District, Division Two.
January 23, 1936.
Winterer & Ritchie for Appellant.
Jennings & Belcher and Louis E. Kearney for Respondents.
Spence, J.
Plaintiff brought this action praying that a contract for the purchase of real estate be declared null and void and rescinded because of alleged fraud; also for judgment against defendants for the total sums paid thereon amounting to $1631.12; and also that it be decreed that plaintiff had a lien on the premises described to secure the repayment of said sums and that said lien be foreclosed. The cause went to trial upon the second amended complaint and an amendment thereto. We shall hereinafter refer to said pleadings as the complaint. A copy of the written contract between defendant Title Guarantee and Trust Company and plaintiff was attached to the complaint. No demurrer was interposed. Upon the trial, all defendants, other than defendant Title Guarantee and Trust Company, objected to the introduction of any evidence as against said defendants upon the ground that the complaint did not state a cause of action against said defendants and said objection was sustained. Said defendants claimed that the action was one for rescission, that the complaint showed that they were not parties to the written contract and that therefore they were not proper parties to the action. Thereafter plaintiff made an offer of proof of all of the allegations of said complaint but said offer was rejected by the trial court. Thereupon judgment was entered reciting that "it appearing to the court that said objection on behalf of said defendants was well taken, *393 the same having been sustained, and no evidence having been introduced ... now therefore it is ordered, adjudged and decreed that plaintiff take nothing" as against said defendants. The action against defendant Title Guarantee and Trust Company was temporarily dropped from the calendar upon stipulation of counsel. Plaintiff appeals from the above mentioned judgment in favor of the remaining defendants.
[1] Some question is raised in the briefs regarding the nature of this action and the jurisdiction of the superior court in view of the amount involved, to wit, $1631.12. The first count alleged that plaintiff had served notice of rescission and had tendered a quitclaim deed to defendants but that defendants had refused, after demand made by plaintiff, to pay the $1631.12 paid by plaintiff on the contract. The second count of the complaint was one for money had and received by defendants for the use and benefit of plaintiffs in the sum of $1631.12. In view of the prayer of the complaint the substance of which is above set forth, we are of the opinion that said action was one for equitable relief and that the superior court had jurisdiction. (Stone v. Superior Court, 214 Cal. 272 [4 PaCal.2d 777, 77 A.L.R. 743]; Fair View Farms Co. v. Superior Court, 123 Cal.App. 9 [10 P. 1011]; Ingalls v. Superior Court, 121 Cal.App. 453 [9 PaCal.2d 266]; see, also, Philpot v. Superior Court, 1 Cal.2d 512 [36 PaCal.2d 635, 95 A.L.R. 990]; Jensen v. Harry H. Culver & Co., 127 Cal.App. Supp. 783 [15 PaCal.2d 907]; Taback v. Greenberg, 108 Cal.App. 759 [292 P. 279].)
As we view this appeal, the real question involved is whether the complaint was sufficient to state a cause of action against respondents. Appellant's offer of proof was full and complete and if the complaint was sufficient as to respondents, then appellant's contention that the trial court erred in making the rulings above mentioned and in entering judgment in favor of respondents must be sustained.
[2] In support of the position taken by the trial court, respondents contend that the provisions of the contract "prohibit plaintiff from rescinding". This contention is made upon the authority of Clancy v. Becker-Arbuckle-Wright Corp., 137 Cal.App. 43 [29 PaCal.2d 868], which involved a contract containing a provision identical with the provision in the contract before us. That decision was in *394 turn based upon Gridley v. Tilson, 202 Cal. 748 [262 P. 322], and other authorities. That the decisions in Clancy v. Becker-Arbuckle-Wright Corp., supra, Gridley v. Tilson, supra, and the authorities cited therein, have all been overruled or modified is apparent from a reading of the recent decision in Speck v. Wylie, 1 Cal.2d 625 [36 PaCal.2d 618, 95 A.L.R. 760]. We may dismiss respondents' contention with a citation of that authority.
[3] Respondents further contend that "If the action was one for rescission of the contract, then these respondents are not proper parties defendant." A reading of the allegations of the complaint leads us to the conclusion that there is no merit in this contention. Under said allegations, respondents were not mere agents of defendant Title Guarantee and Trust Company, which was the only defendant named in the written contract. It was alleged that defendant Title Guarantee and Trust Company held title to the premises for its own use and the use and benefit of the other defendants, with the exception of Becker-Arbuckle-Wright Corporation, and that "the said premises were sold to plaintiff by said defendants in the name of the said Title Guarantee and Trust Company for its own use and benefit and for the use and benefit of said defendants". As to defendant Becker-Arbuckle-Wright Corporation, it was alleged that at or about the time of the execution of the contract, said defendant "with full notice and knowledge of the said fraudulent representations and inducements made to plaintiff and of her right to rescind said contract on account thereof, acquired an interest in said premises, the said contract Exhibit 'A', and the moneys paid and to be paid by plaintiff thereon". It was further alleged "that the moneys which plaintiff paid for and on account of said contract were applied on the purchase price of the said premises and that said moneys were for the use and benefit of all of the said defendants and that the said defendants had and have a mutual and beneficial interest and a privity of interest in and to the said premises and the said moneys so paid by plaintiff". We need not pass on the question of whether said allegations were subject to attack by special demurrer for uncertainty. No demurrer was interposed and we are of the opinion that said allegations were sufficient to charge all defendants as principals in the vendor and purchaser relationship created by said contract. This being true, respondents *395 were at least proper if not necessary parties to the action. We find nothing to the contrary in the authorities cited by respondents. Karst v. Seller, 45 Cal.App. 623 [188 Pac 298], is cited. That case is not in point, but the language of the decision supports the view expressed herein. It was there said on page 626: "The action in which the order here appealed from was made is on the rescission, and it is contended --we think rightly--that only the parties to such contract, or those in privity with them, can be joined." (Italics ours.)
[4] Respondents further contend that appellant was in default at the time she attempted to rescind and that the attempted rescission was therefore ineffectual. They cite and rely upon Campbell v. Title Guarantee & Trust Co., 121 Cal.App. 374 [9 PaCal.2d 264], Bryan v. Baymiller, 95 Cal.App. 481 [272 P. 1106], and Russell v. Penniston, 55 Cal.App. 492 [203 P. 813]. Appellant calls attention to the fact that the alleged rescission here was based upon the ground of fraud and then cites and relies upon the opinion of the Supreme Court in denying hearing in DeBairos v. Barlin, 46 Cal.App. 665, 674 [190 P. 188]. (See, also, Eade v. Reich, 120 Cal.App. 32 [7 PaCal.2d 1043]; Lubarsky v. Chavis, 99 Cal.App. 610 [279 P. 205]; Lombardi v. Sinanides, 71 Cal.App. 272 [235 P. 455]; 25 Cal.Jur., p. 716.) We believe that any conflict in the language of the authorities cited is more apparent than real. Here we are dealing with the allegations of the complaint. While these allegations showed a technical default in payment at the time prescribed by the contract, they further showed that respondents had acquiesced in and condoned the making of previous payments under the contract "long after the same were due and payable under the terms thereof". It thus appears from said allegations that despite the default in payment at the time prescribed, said contract remained in force and effect and was enforceable by appellant at the time of the attempted rescission. The language of some of the authorities would seem to indicate that default will never defeat rescission when the right to rescission is based upon the ground of fraud, but we are not required to discuss that question here. Under the circumstances alleged in the complaint, appellant's rights under the contract had not been terminated by the default. The authorities clearly indicate that as long as appellant could enforce the contract despite the default, such default would not *396 defeat her right of rescission. (DeBairos v. Barlin, supra; Kuehl v. Scott, 66 Wash. 318 [119 P. 742]; Black on Rescission and Cancellation, 2d ed., sec. 553, p. 1365.)
[5] It is also contended by respondents that appellant's action was barred by laches is serving notice of rescission and in commencing this action. Under the allegations of the complaint, it cannot be said as a matter of law that appellant was guilty of laches, and as this appeal must be determined upon the sufficiency of the complaint, respondents' contention may not be sustained.
The judgment is reversed.
Nourse, P. J., and Sturtevant, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737766 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:15.204245+00 ===

DONIELSON, Judge.
Donald Myers had been employed by Lauridsen Foods, Inc. for nine years. He was the supervisor of maintenance. Lau-ridsen Foods is a packer of pork products.
Armour Foods was Lauridsen’s biggest customer. Jody East was the head of Armour Foods’ Quality Assurance Department. As part of her employment for Armour, East was present daily within the Laurid-sen plant.
On Tuesday, February 9, 1988, Myers was asked by East to move some cabinets. Myers became irate in response to the request. After Ms. East had left the maintenance shop, Myers told one of his subordinates to “go up and see what the dumb bitch wanted.” The subordinate, Robert Leerar, subsequently repeated this statement to Ms. East. Ms. East reported the altercation to Myers’ superior, Clark Knowles, the next day.
On Thursday, February 11th, a janitor approached Mr. Knowles. The janitor was concerned because Myers had told him not to deliver supplies to the Armour staff located in the plant. Mr. Knowles testified that while he would not regard this incident by itself as significant, he did feel that under the circumstances it indicated Myers had an attitude problem toward Laurid-sen’s best customer. Following this incident, Mr. Knowles felt he should have a talk with Myers.
Mr. Knowles met with Myers on the eleventh. They discussed the incident involving Ms. East and the report by the janitor regarding the delivery of supplies to Armour. Knowles asked Myers to take some time off and return to work on the following Tuesday and they would discuss Myers’ future with Lauridsen Foods. At this point, Myers began to discuss the possibility of quitting his job.
Fellow employee Ray Laurie testified that Myers spoke with him after he left his meeting with Knowles. Laurie stated that shortly after leaving Knowles’ office, Myers was upset and said, “Well, I’m through but I’ll be back Tuesday and when I come back Tuesday I will make it so miserable they will fire me.” Laurie subsequently repeated this statement to Mr. Knowles.
Myers returned to the workplace on Tuesday, February 16th. He was met by Knowles and was informed his employment was terminated. Myers sought unemployment benefits. Following a hearing, Myers was denied benefits. The hearing officer concluded Myers had voluntarily quit his job without good cause attributable to his employer. In the alternative, the hearing officer concluded Myers’ conduct was such that he had been discharged for misconduct in light of his threat to behave so miserably so as to force his employer to fire him.
On appeal, the Employment Appeal Board affirmed the denial of benefits but modified the decision of the hearing officer. The Board concluded this case involved a discharge resulting from employee misconduct rather than a voluntary quit. The Board determined Myers’ statement to Laurie was a threat which constituted misconduct.
Myers sought judicial review. The district court concluded substantial evidence supported the agency’s decision and it was not affected by error of law. On appeal, Myers claims the trial court erred by affirming the agency’s decision.
I. Standard of Review. Our scope of review in cases arising out of the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act is limit*737ed under Iowa Code section 17A.20 to the correction of errors at law. Foods, Inc. v. Iowa Civil Rights Commission, 318 N.W.2d 162, 165 (Iowa 1982). The review function of the district court under section 17A. 19 is to correct errors of law which are specified in section 17A. 19(8). When we review decisions of the district court which were rendered in its capacity as an appellate body under section 17A.19, the issue for our determination is whether the district court correctly applied the law. Budding v. Iowa Department of Job Service, 337 N.W.2d 219, 221 (Iowa App.1983). In order to make that determination, we apply the standards of section 17A.19(8) to the agency action to determine whether this court’s conclusions are the same as those of the district court. Jackson County Public Hospital v. Public Employment Relations Board, 280 N.W.2d 426, 429-30 (Iowa 1979).
II. Misconduct. Iowa Code section 96.-5(2) provides a claimant is disqualified from unemployment benefits “[i]f the department finds that the individual has been discharged for misconduct in connection with the individual’s employment.” The sole issue before us is whether the department erred in holding petitioner’s conduct constituted misconduct as that term is contemplated under section 96.5(2). We note at the outset that we do not question the employer’s right to terminate petitioner’s employment. The issue we address relates solely to whether or not petitioner is entitled to unemployment compensation.
Misconduct is defined by 345 Iowa Administrative Code 4.32(1) as:
[A] deliberate act or omission by a worker which constitutes a material breach of the duties and obligations arising out of such worker’s contract of employment. Misconduct as the term is used in the disqualification provision as being limited to conduct evincing such willful or wanton disregard of an employer’s interest as is found in deliberate violation or disregard of standards of behavior which the employer has a right to expect of employees, or in carelessness or negligence of such degree of recurrence as to manifest equal culpability, wrongful intent or evil design, or to show an intentional and substantial disregard of the employer’s interest or of the employee’s duties and obligations to the employer. On the other hand mere inefficiency, unsatisfactory conduct, failure in good performance as the result of inability or incapacity, inadvertencies or ordinary negligence in isolated instances, or good faith errors in judgment or discretion are not to be deemed misconduct within the meaning of the statute.
This definition has been accepted by the Iowa Supreme Court as accurately reflecting the intent of the legislature. Huntoon v. Iowa Dept. of Job Service, 275 N.W.2d 445, 448 (Iowa 1979), cert. denied, 444 U.S. 852, 100 S.Ct. 105, 62 L.Ed.2d 68 (1979).
As the definition suggests, misconduct must be substantial in nature to support a disqualification from unemployment benefits. Misconduct serious enough to warrant the discharge of an employee, is not necessarily serious enough to warrant a denial of benefits. Budding, 337 N.W.2d at 222. An employer has the burden of proving a claimant is disqualified for benefits because of misconduct. Sallis v. Empt. Appeal Board, 437 N.W.2d 895, 896 (Iowa 1989).
III. Offensive Language. The record reveals that Myers referred to an Armour Foods employee, Jody East, as a “dumb bitch.” Relying on Budding v. Iowa Dept. of Job Service, 337 N.W.2d 219 (Iowa App. 1983), Myers claims this language would not constitute misconduct. Seven years have passed since Budding was rendered, and this court has had to repeatedly make exceptions to its “minor peccadillo” analysis. We have recognized that vulgar language in front of customers can constitute misconduct, Zeches v. Iowa Dept. of Job Service, 333 N.W.2d 735, 736 (Iowa App.1983), as well as vulgarities accompanied with a refusal to obey supervisors. Warrell v. Iowa Dept. of Job Service, 356 N.W.2d 587, 589 (Iowa App.1984). Likewise, the repetition of vulgarities can elevate a minor peccadillo to an act of willful misconduct. Carpenter v. Iowa Dept. of *738Job Service, 401 N.W.2d 242, 245-46 (Iowa App.1986).
Each decision qualifying or limiting Budding is an implicit recognition of the erroneous analysis adopted in that decision. This court recognizes an employer’s right to expect decency and civility from its employees. In Myers' case, the vulgar language he used was subsequently conveyed to Ms. East and could have damaged the business relationship between Lauridsen and Armour Foods. The use of profanity or offensive language in a confrontational, disrespectful, or name-calling context, may be recognized as misconduct, even in the case of isolated incidents or situations in which the target of abusive name-calling is not present when the vulgar statements are initially made. The question of whether the use of improper language in the workplace is misconduct is nearly always a fact question. It must be considered with other relevant factors, including the context in which it is said, and the general work environment. Therefore, whether the event is misconduct is most generally a decision for the agency. To the extent Budding contradicts this position, it is overruled.
IV. Threat. The record in this case reveals the agency denied Myers unemployment benefits because of the statement he made in which he alleged he would return to work and make it “so miserable” his employer would fire him. We agree that this threatening behavior constitutes misconduct.
Our past decisions have recognized that employee threats may rise to the level of behavior so as to constitute misconduct. See Deever v. Hawkeye Window Cleaning, Inc., 447 N.W.2d 418, 421 (Iowa App.1989) (threat of physical harm); Myers v. Iowa Dept. of Job Service, 373 N.W.2d 507, 510 (Iowa App.1985) (threat not to take orders from coworker). When reviewing an alleged act of misconduct, we may consider past acts of misconduct to determine the magnitude of the current act. Kelly v. Iowa Dept. of Job Service, 386 N.W.2d 552, 554 (Iowa App.1986).
In this case, Myers conceded he “blew his stack” on February 9, 1989, when Jody East requested that some cupboards be moved. Ms. East was a representative of Armour Foods, Lauridsen’s largest customer. Maintenance of a good relationship with Armour employees was very important to Lauridsen Foods. Despite that fact, Myers became irate and abusive to Ms. East, and two days later he prevented a janitor from helping to deliver supplies to Armour staff.
These past incidents were potentially harmful to Lauridsen’s relationship with Armour Foods and provide some indication of the harm Myers could inflict if allowed to carry out his threat to make things miserable for his employer. An employer need not wait until an employee has acted on his declared intent before the threatened conduct rises to the level of misconduct. Myers, 373 N.W.2d at 510. Myers’ behavior on February 9th and 11th culminated in a reprimand by his employer. Myers then threatened to make things so miserable it would result in his termination. Without question this conduct constitutes a deliberate and willful disregard of the employer’s interests and the standards of behavior which an employer has the right to expect of employees. Myers was correctly denied unemployment benefits.
AFFIRMED.
All Judges concur except SACKETT, J., who specially concurs, and SCHLEGEL, J., and OXBERGER, C.J., who dissent.

=== CASE 9737768 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:15.214365+00 ===

SCHLEGEL, Judge
(dissenting).
For reasons I detail below and which I have discussed elsewhere, see Carpenter v. *739Iowa Dep’t of Job Serv., 401 N.W.2d 242, 246-47 (Iowa App.1986) (Schlegel, J., dissenting), I respectfully dissent.
I.
A. In 1983, in Budding v. Iowa Dep’t of Job Serv., 337 N.W.2d 219 (Iowa App.1983), this court examined the issue of whether an isolated incident of vulgar language in the workplace is sufficient misconduct to justify denial of unemployment benefits. That case addressed an incident of alleged misconduct much like the case before us. Budding had received a warning for a safety violation and another for allegedly unsafe operation of his bicycle on plant grounds. He was dismissed after a brief incident that culminated in his referring to his supervisor as a “dirty bitch.”
I concur in the majority’s statements concerning the law on misconduct. In fact, the majority adopts almost verbatim Budding’s language outlining our scope of review and case law on misconduct. It seeks, however, to overturn Budding’s holding, which states:
Where the use of vulgar language is an isolated incident in an environment where decorous language is not required and is not occasioned by a deliberate refusal to obey a reasonable directive, we are inclined to view it as a minor peccadillo. This is in accord with our oft-stated position that Code provisions which operate to work a forfeiture of benefits are strictly construed in favor of the claimant.
Budding, 337 N.W.2d at 222. The majority states instead:
The use of profanity or offensive language in a confrontational, disrespectful, or name-calling context, may be recognized as misconduct, even in the case of isolated incidents or situations in which the target of abusive name-calling is not present when the vulgar statements are initially made. The question of whether the use of improper language in the workplace is misconduct is nearly always a fact question. It must be considered with other relevant factors, including the context in which it is said, and the general work environment. Therefore, whether the event is misconduct is most generally a decision for the agency. To the extent Budding contradicts this position, it is overruled.
Supra at 738.
B. I strongly disagree with the majority and concurring opinions that Budding should be overruled. This is an unwarranted and needless attack on a precedent that has served as a backstop against zealous denial of benefits to individuals who have committed, as Budding, terms it, a “minor peccadillo,” that is, a petty sin. Not only does this decision, which easily could have been decided within the language of Budding or Carpenter, break faith with our case law, it clouds, rather than casts light, on the issue. Despite our statements “that Code provisions which operate to work a forfeiture of benefits are strictly construed in favor of the claimant,” Budding, 337 N.W.2d at 222, we turn our backs and make it easier to deny unemployment benefits — not just employment — because of a “petty sin.”
The majority concedes that “[t]he issue we address relates solely to whether or not petitioner is entitled to unemployment compensation,” supra at 737; see Budding, 337 N.W.2d at 221, and that “[mjisconduct serious enough to warrant the discharge of an employee, is not necessarily serious enough to warrant a denial of benefits.” Supra at 737 (citing Budding, 337 N.W.2d at 222). Yet, the basis for its conclusion seems to be “an employer’s right to expect decency and civility from its employees.” Supra at 738.
The majority accurately states that employers may expect their employees to act, or to refrain from acting, in certain ways. We did not condone the type of behavior at issue before us in Budding, see 337 N.W.2d at 222, and we should not condone it now. Nevertheless, in one fell swoop, the majority leaps from allowing employers to fire employees on this nebulous standard of “decency and civility,” which authority I do not dispute, to denying unemployment benefits on the basis of the ambiguous per se test quoted above.
*740As we stated in Budding and the majority reiterates here, “willful or wanton desre-gard of an employer’s interest,” 370 Iowa Administrative Code 4.32(1), requires that “the misconduct must be substantial ”, supra at 737 (emphasis supplied); Budding, 337 N.W.2d at 222, to support denial of benefits. The approach the court adopts today thoroughly confounds our longstanding practice of evaluating alleged misconduct on different scales, one for the employment relationship and one for the award or denial of unemployment benefits. Despite the majority’s statement to the contrary, gone is the idea that “[mjiscon-duct serious enough to warrant the discharge of an employee, is not necessarily serious enough to warrant a denial of benefits.” Supra at 737 (citing Budding, 337 N.W.2d at 222). As I discuss further in Division II, the effect will be to allow employers to establish the criteria for unemployment benefits.
I also take issue with the majority’s statement that what constitutes “misconduct” is a fact question. This is clearly inaccurate. We have only recently stated that such a “question ... is one of law: whether the facts fit the legal definition of misconduct under Iowa law.” Miller v. Employment Appeal Bd., 423 N.W.2d 211, 212 (Iowa App.1988). It is abundantly clear that “misconduct” is an empty vessel into which we must pour meaning, guided by statutory and administrative definitions and our case law. Although the agency presides as fact-finder — to determine whether the statutory elements exist, it remains our non-delegable duty to determine whether the law was properly applied. Iowa Code § 17A.19(8) (1989). The question whether an act or omission fits the legal definition of “misconduct” is a matter of law for the courts to decide. Although courts occasionally refer to misconduct as a fact question, they mean the presence of the basic elements of “misconduct” and inevitably reserve to themselves an evaluation of whether the legal definition was correctly applied to the facts. See, e.g., Fairfield Toyota, Inc. v. Bruegge, 449 N.W.2d 395, 397 (Iowa App.1989); Miller, 423 N.W.2d at 212; Engler v. Marshall Turkey Plant, 409 N.W.2d 570, 573 (Minn. App.1987); Garman v. State Employment Security Dep’t. 102 Nev. 563, 729 P.2d 1335, 1336 (1986); Sanchez v. New Mexico Dep’t of Labor, 109 N.M. 447, 786 P.2d 674, 677-78 (1990); Blueshield v. Job Service North Dakota, 392 N.W.2d 70, 73 (N.D.1986); Stagner v. Board of Review, 792 P.2d 94, 95 (Okla.App.1990); Peterson v. Employment Security Dep’t, 42 Wash.App. 364, 711 P.2d 1071, 1074 (1985).
C. The majority is mistaken in finding that because Budding can be distinguished, see Warrell v. Iowa Dep’t of Job Serv., 356 N.W.2d 587, 589 (Iowa App.1984) (vulgarities directed at supervisors by employee serving probationary period accompanied by refusal to obey reasonable instructions); Carpenter v. Iowa Dep’t of Job Serv., 401 N.W.2d 242, 245-46 (Iowa App.1986) (repeated incidents of abusive language directed at supervisor), its analysis is erroneous. In fact, the court uses the same analysis to reach its conclusion today, except that it ignores the requirement of “willful or wanton disregard,” which it notes “has been accepted by the Iowa Supreme Court as accurately reflecting the intent of the legislature.” Supra at 737 (citing Huntoon v. Iowa Dep’t of Job Serv., 275 N.W.2d 445, 448 (Iowa), cert. denied, 444 U.S. 852, 100 S.Ct. 105, 62 L.Ed.2d 68 (1979)).
Whether or not Budding was correctly decided on its facts, its test was easily applied. Under that test, we said we were disposed toward treating as a “minor peccadillo,” or, as the Minnesota courts have called it, a “hotheaded incident,” see Mankato Lutheran Home v. Miller, 358 N.W.2d 96, 98 (Minn.App.1984) (citing Windsperger v. Broadway Liquor Outlet, 346 N.W.2d 142, 145 (Minn.1984)), substandard employee behavior that includes vulgar language when:
(1) The use of vulgar language is an isolated incident;
(2) It occurs in an environment where decorous language is not required; and
(3) It is not occasioned by a deliberate refusal to obey a reasonable directive.
See Budding, 337 N.W.2d at 222.
Applying Budding, the majority might have found that decorous and respectful *741language was required in referring to Ms. East, thus failing the first part of the test. The majority might also have found Myers’s interference with sending supplies to the Armour staff a refusal to obey a reasonable directive. Moreover, before we decided Budding, we recognized that vulgar language in front of customers can constitute misconduct, Zeches v. Iowa Dep’t of Job Serv., 333 N.W.2d 735, 736 (Iowa App.1983).
D. If we continue down this path requiring us to discount, if not ignore, the context or isolation of an incident, we almost certainly will find ourselves faced with the new task of softening the blow of such a harsh rule. This rule makes no provision for isolated “hot-headed” incidents, see Gunn v. Gerace, 516 So.2d 1180, 1181 (La.App. 2d Cir.1987) (name-calling and profanity to comptroller did not amount to disqualifying conduct), cf. Carpenter v. Iowa Dep’t of Job Serv., 401 N.W.2d 242 (Iowa App.1986) (several times telling supervisors “kiss my ass” raised incidents to disqualifying conduct), provoked or de minimus language, see Reed v. Commonwealth, 104 Pa.Cmwlth. 373, 522 A.2d 121, 123-24 (1987) (remanded for determination of whether “vulgar and offensive language coupled with the threat of physical violence” to supervisor was provoked or de minimus); see also Mankato Lutheran Home v. Miller, 358 N.W.2d 96, 98-99 (Minn.App.1984) (nurse’s response to supervisor in presence of patients, “What the hell do you care [about my health]? ... I never had this goddamn pain until I came to this fucking hole,” was isolated incident that was partially provoked), raised voice or disrespectful tone, see Sheff v. Board of Review, 128 Ill.App.3d 347, 83 Ill.Dec. 624, 626-7, 470 N.E.2d 1044, 1046-47 (5th Dist.1984) (finding raised voice and disrespectful tone to supervisor did not rise to level sufficient “to deprive plaintiff of his statutory right to unemployment compensation.”), or a simple, nonvulgar “tantrum,” see Windsperger v. Broadway Liquor Outlet, 346 N.W.2d 142, 145 (Minn.1984) (finding nonvulgar “tantrum” directed at manager to be “ ‘a mere mistake or error in judgment — “a minor peccadillo” ’ ” (quoting Silva v. Nelson, 106 Cal.Rptr. 908, 911, 31 Cal.App.3d 136, 142 (1973))).
I do not advocate a “sticks and stones” test, but neither do I think that we should allow ourselves to go so far in the other direction that we may find ourselves or leave to the agency the task of evaluating every nuance of speech and intonation for evidence that it was “offensive” or “disrespectful,” or worse yet, within the employer’s expectations of “decency and civility.” See, e.g., Sheff, 83 Ill.Dec. at 626-7, 470 N.E.2d at 1046-47 (raised voice and disrespectful tone); Windsperger, 346 N.W.2d at 145 (nonvulgar “tantrum”). Parade of horribles to one side, this leaves too much to chance and puts too much discretion in the hands of employers.
II.
In the current atmosphere of our state where employment “at will” finds great support, the majority now places in the hands of the employer, the ability to destroy the remaining safeguard against the ravages of unemployment. Allowed to stand, the rule the majority announces today empowers employers not only to discharge employees for any reason, but to selectively deny unemployment benefits based upon the words the employee speaks. I submit that this is an interpretation of the law, which can lead to the ultimate destruction of unemployment compensation.
The statutory language of the unemployment compensation statutes dwells upon the purpose of the law to relieve the hardship of unemployment. The law is primarily aimed at the relief of the hardship to the worker and his family. The system’s genesis was for that purpose and also to act as recession proofing by sustaining the purchasing power of those whose jobs had disappeared. Without that purchasing power, employers also disappeared, resulting in still further unemployment and a depressed economy. We must use caution that we do not provide the means for the destruction of the program. The majority takes a giant step in that direction by its opinion in this case.
*742In this day of more affluence and greater consumption, the majority obviously fails to see the need for a diligent guarding of the principles of the program of unemployment insurance, and finds itself in a position to restrict its benefits. Note well, the inroad that the majority creates today will be put into effect more and more by the unscrupulous employers. Undecorous language will become the future rationale for denial of benefits. Budding was the thin line of protection of the program. I predict that with it removed, the abuse of the system will be rampant.
For the foregoing reasons, I would reverse the appeal board’s denial of benefits and would remand the case to the agency for the determination of the amount of benefits.
OXBERGER, C.J., joins this dissent.

=== CASE 9737645 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:15.112862+00 ===

DAVIES, Judge
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent.
Although I agree with the majority in all other respects, the majority gives an unreasonably narrow reading to Minn.Stat. § 103E.091 (1998). Subdivision 1 of that section is a broad grant of authority to landowners to
appeal to the district court from a recorded . order of a drainage authority made in a drainage proceeding that determines:
(1) the amount of benefits;
(2) the amount of damages;
(3) fees or expenses allowed; or
(4) whether the environmental and land use requirements and criteria * * * are met.
Despite this broad authority to appeal, the majority finds in subdivision 2 a limitation on this authority deriving from the word “include.” They read it as if it said the person who appeals “may include benefits and damages affecting property not owned by the appellant” only in conjunction with an appeal of the amount of benefits or damages to their own property. I read the provision differently; I believe it authorizes an appeal limited to the benefits and damages to the property of others, or to the total benefits and costs, so long as the appellant has. standing because the project affects the appellant directly. The majority focuses on the word “include,” but it ignores the larger context in which it is used.
There are many situations in which a landowner may have a reason to appeal a *764drainage decision, yet have no reason to challenge the benefit allocation to its own land. One that comes to mind is when the landowner is satisfied with the amount of benefits allocated to its own property, but feels that the benefits allocated to other properties (and the assessments against them) are inappropriately low. The issue the party wants to raise in that circumstance relates to other people’s properties, rather than its own. Why should an appellant not be able to bring to the district court the issue of benefit to other properties, without complicating the case with a phony claim relating to the appellant’s own property?
Another example is when landowners do not want a project to go ahead and will themselves bear some of the cost if it does. Why should they not be able to pursue their claim of overall imbalance between benefit and cost, an imbalance that destroys the legality of the project, without complicating the case with a baseless claim about their own benefits?
The action of the appellants should be allowed to proceed. They are directly affected by this project. If they were not, contrary to the concern expressed by the majority, the ordinary judicial rules of standing would apply to prevent them from intruding into the affairs of others.

=== CASE 2211504 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:07.718363+00 ===

183 Cal.App.2d 562 (1960)
THE PEOPLE, Respondent,
v.
ARTHUR JACKSON et al., Defendants; WILLIE GENE McGEE, Appellant.
Crim. No. 6627.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Aug. 5, 1960.
Willie Gene McGee, in pro. per., for Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, for Respondent.
LILLIE, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment of conviction and order denying a motion for new trial. Defendant, appellant herein, and two codefendants, Jackson and Roberts, were charged with five counts of robbery in violation of section 211, Penal Code; and it was alleged in connection with each that they were armed with deadly weapons. A jury found them guilty of first degree robbery on all counts and armed as charged. Only defendant McGee appeals.
Appellant has appeared in propria persona. The text of his brief consists of a disorganized running account of certain incriminating testimony, interspersed with numerous suggestions of error and various citations of authority; however, we have ascertained his main points on appeal to be that--the evidence is insufficient to connect him with the commission of the robberies, it was error for the trial court to admit in evidence *565 a knife (Exhibit 1), certain instructions relating to circumstantial evidence should have been given, and he was denied due process by virtue of a six-day detention before having been taken before a magistrate.
[1] Relative to his first claim, we accept as established all evidence, and all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom, in favor of the judgment of conviction (People v. Jackson, 152 Cal.App.2d 397 [313 P.2d 931]). The evidence discloses the commission of five first degree robberies--the first four on June 24, 1958, at Alben Sales, Inc., and the fifth at the Avalon Gift Shop on July 2, 1958. Around 10:10 a.m. on June 24, at least three men, including this appellant, Jackson and Roberts, entered the premises of Alben Sales, Inc. armed with a knife and gun. Jackson made inquiry at the cashier's window while appellant entered the office pulling a knife from his coat and ordering the manager, Alexander Spitzer, and a secretary, Mary Diblosi, to lie down. Jackson tied Spitzer and later took his wallet containing $1,600 (Count 1). A man entered the bookkeeping office where Ben Hersh, a salesman, was counting money. When asked for the money, Hersh, thinking it was a joke, did not turn around, whereupon he was knocked unconscious and $400 was taken from him (Count 4); $20 was taken from the bookkeeper, Emanuel Rosenberg (Count 3). Roberts stuck a gun into the side of Jesse White, a truck driver who was putting up a sign at the door, and told him to go to the rear of the store. At that time, another salesman, Bernard Friedman, returning from a warehouse outside and finding the door locked, rattled the knob and was admitted by Roberts who, with a gun, forced him to the rear of the store, passing appellant who was watching the office. White and Friedman were ordered to lie on the floor and $160 was taken from Friedman (Count 2).
On July 2, three men entered the Avalon Gift Shop and looked around; the owner, Mrs. Davis, was present with two customers, Wilma Curry and Festeva Mathis. Mrs. Davis walked over to wait on Jackson. He seized her, poking a gun into her stomach, and directed the two men to take the women customers to the rear of the store. As he pushed Mrs. Davis from the shop into the rear living quarters, she saw the back of appellant as he was locking Mrs. Mathis in the bathroom. Appellant then came up behind Mrs. Davis, grasped her against him and started to open a straight-edge razor; he pushed her into the bedroom where Mrs. Curry was being *566 held. Mrs. Davis escaped out of another door and called police. $9.35 was missing from the cash register (Count 5).
On August 7, police, acting on information obtained from Detective Wright, went to the home of Alva Williams with a photograph of appellant. After knocking on the door for some time they were finally admitted by Mrs. Williams. While talking to her in the living room, one of the officers, through an open door, observed appellant in bed. He, then Mrs. Williams, were arrested and a search disclosed a knife under appellant's mattress which they left there, unaware that a knife had been used in the first robbery. The next day appellant went with officers to the home of Mrs. Bolton, Mrs. Williams' sister, from where they all proceeded back to Mrs. Williams' house where Mrs. Bolton opened the door and officers removed the knife.
In his defense appellant testified at the trial denying that he was in any way involved in the robberies, but admitted that Exhibit 1 was found under his mattress at the time he was arrested.
In considering appellant's claim that the evidence was insufficient to connect him with the robberies, we relate certain identification testimony placing him at the scene as a participant. Relative to those occurring on June 24 at Alben Sales, Inc. (Counts 1 through 4), Mr. Friedman testified that during the robbery he saw appellant McGee "standing with his back to the front door, watching the office" and that he "passed by him maybe a foot" away when ordered to go to the rear of the store by codefendant Roberts. He described appellant's appearance and testified "(T)he only thing I saw when I passed by is the face. In fact, he looked at me. Our eyes really met. He looked at me at the same time I looked at him." On cross-examination it was suggested to him by defense counsel that appellant might have been there on business, but Mr. Friedman testified further that it did not look to him "like he was there on business." This query obviously did not go to the identification of appellant but to his purpose in being in the store. Mary Diblosi, although unable to make positive identification of appellant as one of the robbers, testified that "the (his) profile is similar" to that of the man who held the knife (which she identified as looking like Exhibit 1) on her during the robbery, although she could not be sure. As to the robbery on July 2 (Count 5) at the Avalon Gift Shop, Mrs. Davis testified that when Jackson pushed her through the living room into the kitchen she saw a man who "was either him *567 (appellant) or someone that looked exactly like him" locking the other woman into the bathroom and that he said to Jackson: "Shut her up, even if you have to kill her"; that Jackson then shoved her over to this man (appellant) and he came up behind her and pinned her against him. Mrs. Mathis testified that she was not sure, but that appellant looked like the man. On cross-examination she was reminded that at the preliminary hearing she did not testify that "this fellow with the razor looked like Mr. McGee" to which she replied: "No, I didn't, but since then it seems to me that his face has come to me, because during that time I was so excited, and after seeing him it seems to me that I can remember that face more clearly now than I did at the time I was here before."
[2a] Appellant argues that inasmuch as not all of the witnesses were able to testify that he was at the scene of the robberies, other witnesses were uncertain in their identification of him and some could only testify that he resembled one of the robbers, the evidence was insufficient to connect him with the commission of the crimes. At the outset, the record fails to support such a factual argument for one of the witnesses (Friedman) definitely identified appellant; and although several could not make positive identification, they described the robber as "similar" to appellant, or one "who looked exactly like him" or "like him"; and legally, such a position has no merit, for weakness of identification and uncertainty of memory do not render evidence of identity worthless but merely constitute factors for the consideration of the trier of fact. [3] And any factual finding on the issue of identification this court may not disturb unless it can be said that the evidence thereon is so weak as to constitute no evidence at all (People v. Farrington, 213 Cal. 459, 464 [2 P.2d 814]; People v. Erno, 195 Cal. 272 [232 P. 710]; People v. Newman, 102 Cal.App.2d 302 [227 P.2d 470]; People v. Shaheen, 120 Cal.App.2d 629 [261 P.2d 752]; People v. Waller, 14 Cal.2d 693 [96 P.2d 344]; People v. Braun, 14 Cal.2d 1 [92 P.2d 402]; People v. Kittrelle, 102 Cal.App.2d 149 [227 P.2d 38]; People v. Mahoney, 146 Cal.App.2d 485 [304 P.2d 73]). [4] "The strength or weakness of the identification, the incompatibility of and discrepancies in the testimony, if there were any, and the uncertainties of witnesses in giving their testimony were matters solely for the observation and consideration of the jurors in the first instance, and for the consideration of the trial court on motion for a new trial." (People v. Farrington, 213 Cal. 459, 463 [2 P.2d 814].) *568
[5, 6] Positive identification free from doubt, often difficult under the best circumstances, is not required (People v. Waller, 14 Cal.2d 693 [96 P.2d 344]; People v. Shaheen, 120 Cal.App.2d 629 [261 P.2d 752]; People v. Yates, 165 Cal.App.2d 489 [332 P.2d 314]); nor is it necessary that all those involved in a robbery identify the participants, for not all persons may have been in a position to adequately see or hear and, further, fear and nervousness often cause faulty memory or confusion. [7-9] No judgment will be reversed because of a failure of memory of one or more witnesses where there is substantial testimony in support of identity (People v. Newman, 102 Cal.App.2d 302 [227 P.2d 470]); the testimony of one witness is sufficient to support a verdict if such testimony is not inherently incredible (People v. Alexander, 92 Cal.App.2d 230 [206 P.2d 657]; People v. Newman, supra, 102 Cal.App.2d 302); and testimony that a defendant resembles the robber (People v. Waller, 14 Cal.2d 693 [96 P.2d 344]; People v. Fleming, 58 Cal.App.2d 37 [136 P.2d 88]; People v. Richardson, 81 Cal.App.2d 866 [185 P.2d 47]), or looks like the same (People v. Spellings, 141 Cal.App.2d 457 [296 P.2d 889]; People v. Yates, 165 Cal.App.2d 489 [332 P.2d 314]), has been held sufficient. [10] The uncertainty of recollection, qualification of identity and lack of positiveness in the testimony of the several witnesses complained of by appellant were matters going to the weight of the evidence and the credibility of witnesses (People v. Avery, 35 Cal.2d 487 [218 P.2d 527]; People v. Arenas, 128 Cal.App.2d 594 [275 P.2d 811]) and for the observation and consideration, and directed solely to the attention, of the jury in the first instance and then the trial court upon the motion for new trial (People v. Shaheen, 120 Cal.App.2d 629 [261 P.2d 752]).
[2b] Tested by the foregoing rules the evidence of the identification of appellant McGee as one of those present at the scene of the robberies is sufficient to support the verdict of guilt on all counts.
Relative to appellant's contention that the trial court erred in admitting in evidence Exhibit 1, we briefly refer to testimony relating to the identification of the knife and its discovery in the possession of appellant. Mary Diblosi testified that Exhibit 1 "looks like" the knife held on her during the robbery by the person whose profile is similar to that of appellant; and Officer Gelb testified to finding it under the mattress of a bed appellant was occupying in the house of a Mrs. Williams at the time of his arrest. The evidence discloses *569 closes that Officer Gelb and his partner, armed with appellant's photograph and information from Detective Wright that the victims had identified the photograph as "the man" who robbed them, and that a red haired woman with whom appellant was residing was observed driving the "getaway" car after the Alben Sales robbery, went to the address of Alva Williams; that after persistent knocking on the door, Mrs. Williams, who fitted the description given to the officers by Detective Wright, finally responded; that they told her they wanted to talk to her and she replied she would talk to them if they would "stop banging on the door," thereupon admitting them to the house; that while they were talking to her in the living room, one of the officers through an open door observed appellant in bed in a bedroom and recognized him; that they immediately went into the bedroom where appellant gave his name as Williams but finally admitted it was McGee; that he ordered them out and a scuffle ensued; and that they subdued him, arrested and handcuffed him and then arrested Mrs. Williams, after which they searched the bed he had occupied and found the knife (Exhibit 1) under the mattress.
Appellant claims the search and seizure were illegal for the officers were without right to enter the premises of Mrs. Williams; there was no probable cause for her or his arrest; and the knife found under the mattress, even if the result of a valid search, was left on the premises and not taken until later.
[11] Acting on information that both Mrs. Williams and appellant were robbery suspects and living together at her home, police went there to talk to them. It is not improper for officers to seek interviews with suspects, and there appears to be nothing unreasonable about police going to a person's home to question him (People v. Michael, 45 Cal.2d 751 [290 P.2d 852]; People v. Jaurequi, 142 Cal.App.2d 555 [298 P.2d 896]; People v. Mendoza, 145 Cal.App.2d 279 [302 P.2d 340]). Officers knocked on the door and, upon seeing her, they recognized her as the person who fit the description of the red haired woman accomplice. When they told her that they "would like to come in and talk to her" she said that they could if they "would stop banging on the door." She opened the door and let them in. When the officers entered the living room they neither arrested her nor searched the premises, but simply engaged her in a conversation during which one of the officers recognized appellant, through an open door, in bed in the bedroom. At first he denied his identity, then admitted the same, ordered the officers out of the house and became involved *570 in a scuffle with them. When they subdued him, they arrested and handcuffed him. Then Mrs. Williams was arrested and the officers made the search, finding Exhibit 1.
The officers had neither a warrant of arrest nor a search warrant in their possession. The evidence factually supports neither a finding that the officers lacked propriety in coming to Mrs. Williams' home or unlawfully entered, nor one that she was arrested prior to the arrest of appellant. Inasmuch as officers testified that they had knowledge that two robberies had been committed, that a red haired woman who fitted the description of Mrs. Williams was known to have driven the car in the Alben Sales robbery, that appellant had been identified from his photograph by the victim as a participant in the robbery; that appellant resembled the photograph they had in their possession; that he denied his identity then admitted it and a scuffle resulted, we conclude that the trial court properly found that police had reasonable cause to believe appellant had committed a felony. (Pen. Code,  835; People v. Boyles, 45 Cal.2d 652 [290 P.2d 535]; People v. Malone, 173 Cal.App.2d 234 [343 P.2d 333].)
Most of the information relied upon by the officers was obtained from Detective Wright, who received the same from the victims and Sergeant Williams. On cross-examination Detective Wright testified that Sergeant Williams told him the victims had identified appellant from his photograph, but no attempt was made by defense counsel to develop anything further in this connection or to have him identify any other informant; and no objection to his testimony or motion to strike the same was made. Nor does the record show that appellant made any attempt to call either Sergeant Williams or any other person whom he might have believed was an informant. Appellant is now hardly in a position to complain that "an informant" was not identified, or called to testify (People v. Williams, 172 Cal.App.2d 345 [341 P.2d 741]). In any event, whether police officers had a reasonable ground for arresting appellant is a question of fact for the trial court (People v. Boyles, 45 Cal.2d 652 [290 P.2d 535]), the determination of which is not here subject to reversal (People v. Newland, 15 Cal.2d 678 [104 P.2d 778]; People v. Dawson, 150 Cal.App.2d 119 [310 P.2d 162]).
It having been determined, and properly so, by the trial court that the information held by the arresting officers upon their arrival at the dwelling of Mrs. Williams and what occurred after their voluntary admittance into her home, was sufficient to constitute reasonable cause for the arrest *571 of the appellant, and that the arrest was lawful; then the search, even though without a warrant, was valid as incident to the arrest, reasonable and made in good faith, and the evidence seized related to the crime (People v. Winston, 46 Cal.2d 151 [293 P.2d 40]; People v. Coleman, 134 Cal.App.2d 594 [286 P.2d 582]).
Returning briefly to the original entry on the premises and appellant's claim that it was improper, our attention is called to the case of People v. Colonna, 140 Cal.App.2d 705 [295 P.2d 490]. It is argued that if the civil rights of the occupant of the premises where the arrest took place are violated, the violation renders the search and seizure invalid whether or not appellant's constitutional guarantees were violated. We deem People v. Colonna, 140 Cal.App.2d 705 [295 P.2d 490], not here applicable, for the manner in which the officers entered the apartment in that case was far different than in the one at bar. Arresting officers let themselves into the premises with a pass key and entered a room in which appellant, the occupant and evidence were located; and there was no showing that the officers were invited on the premises, were in pursuit of a suspect or were acting on any information. In the instant case the trial court, as it had a right to do, accepted as true the officers' testimony relative to their admittance to Mrs. Williams' home and rejected the defense version of what occurred. The trial judge found that she voluntarily let the officers into her home and that she was not arrested until after appellant's arrest; and the record supports such a finding. Neither her constitutional rights, nor those of the appellant were in any way violated.
[12a] Appellant asserts that inasmuch as the officers failed to take Exhibit 1 at the time of his arrest, that even though the original search may have been valid, it was improper for them to return to the premises and remove the knife, for entry into the house constituted an illegal search and the seizure of the weapon was not made pursuant to any arrest. After the officers found Exhibit 1 under defendant's mattress, pursuant to a valid search as incidental to and following his lawful arrest and that of Mrs. Williams, they did not take the knife because they were then not aware that such a weapon had been used in the Alben Sales robbery. However, they subsequently learned about the knife and that it was related directly to the crime. The following day appellant went with police officers to the home of Mrs. Williams' sister, Mrs. Bolton, from where they all proceeded to Mrs. Williams' *572 house. When Mrs. Bolton arrived she opened the door and admitted the officers who took the knife. [13] It is a rule that when an article or a piece of evidence is related to the crime and officers could have taken it with them when they took the accused into custody, the fact that they did not do so but later recovered the item will not constitute a seizure arising out of an illegal search. In People v. Stewart, 144 Cal.App.2d 555 [301 P.2d 301], a similar situation arose and the court held at page 559: "The eyedropper, needle and spoon containing heroin were related to the crime charged. Sergeant Gibbs could have lawfully taken these articles with him when he took the defendant to the city jail and the fact that he went back to the defendant's residence, where he was again admitted by the landlady, and retrieved them did not in our opinion constitute an unreasonable and unlawful search and seizure."
[12b] Inasmuch as the officers legally found the knife in the first instance after a lawful arrest, they later learned that the knife was related to the robbery and that it had been identified by one of the victims as looking like the one held on her, we find no cause for complaint regarding the admission of the knife.
[14] Appellant's claim that the trial court erred in refusing to give circumstantial evidence instructions and that those given were inadequate, affords no ground for reversal for several reasons. Neither the instructions given nor refused are included in the record before us, and in any event such instructions were not necessary because direct evidence of appellant's guilt is clear. [15] Seeking a reversal for instructions rejected, it is incumbent on appellant to cause them to be included in the record (People v. Pierre, 178 Cal.App.2d 585 [3 Cal.Rptr. 290]; People v. Rivera, 123 Cal.App.2d 358 [266 P.2d 810]; People v. McClure, 133 Cal.App.2d 631 [284 P.2d 887]). Further, the proof was not entirely circumstantial and in such a case it is not error to refuse such instructions. [16] "... (W)here the proof is not entirely circumstantial, it is not error to refuse an instruction requiring the jury to adopt that interpretation which would 'admit of defendant's innocence and to reject that which would point to the guilt of the accused.' (People v. Savage, 66 Cal.App.2d 237, 247 (152 P.2d 240).)" (People v. Rivera, 123 Cal.App.2d 358, 360 [266 P.2d 810]; People v. Shaheen, 120 Cal.App.2d 629 [261 P.2d 752]; People v. Alexander, 92 Cal.App.2d 230 [206 P.2d 657]). The rule relating to instructions on circumstantial evidence *573 authorizes their use only where substantially all of the evidence is circumstantial (People v. Schwab, 136 Cal.App.2d 280 [288 P.2d 627]); and such is not true of the controversy here involved.
[17] Considerable mention is made by appellant in both his opening and closing brief that he was held for six days before being taken before a magistrate which violated his constitutional guarantee of due process. During the trial, counsel for appellant made an offer of proof that he was arrested on August 7 but was not taken before a magistrate until August 13. Although counsel contended that due process had been violated he offered nothing further in this regard. The offer was rejected by the trial court. Upon consideration of the entire record we deem both the trial court's rejection of this offer of proof and the exercise of its discretion in denying appellant's motion for new trial proper. Although section 825, Penal Code, provides that the defendant must in all cases be taken before a magistrate without unnecessary delay and in any event within two days after his arrest, excluding Sundays and holidays, before a violation of this section can require a reversal of a judgment of conviction it is incumbent upon appellant to show that through this wrongful conduct he was deprived of a fair trial (People v. Guarino, 132 Cal.App.2d 554 [282 P.2d 538]), or otherwise suffered prejudice as a result thereof (People v. McCrasky, 149 Cal.App.2d 630 [309 P.2d 115]; People v. Blankenship, 171 Cal.App.2d 66 [340 P.2d 282]; People v. Smith, 175 Cal.App.2d 396 [346 P.2d 484]). The record before us affords no basis for an inference of any such prejudice or that appellant was deprived of a fair trial; nor is there anything in appellant's offer of proof in the trial court showing other than that he was detained six days. A mere violation of section 825, Penal Code, will not aid appellant without a further showing of prejudice suffered by him as a result of his detention.
Both appellant's opening and closing briefs contain various other suggestions of error which bear no reference to the record, elaboration or argument. After a careful consideration of the record we find no support for his various claims (People v. Justice, 167 Cal.App.2d 616 [334 P.2d 1031]; People v. Cuthbertson, 176 Cal.App.2d 393 [1 Cal.Rptr. 435]) and deem them to be wholly without merit.
For the foregoing reasons the judgment and the order denying motion for new trial are affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Fourt, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2211514 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:07.884638+00 ===

183 Cal.App.2d 137 (1960)
CLARENCE R. ARMAS et al., Appellants,
v.
CITY OF OAKLAND et al., Defendants and Respondents; THE PEOPLE ex rel. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS, Intervener and Respondent.
Civ. No. 19023.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
July 26, 1960.
Harry D. Miller for Appellants.
John W. Collier, City Attorney, and Mark B. Shragge, Deputy City Attorney, for Defendants and Respondents.
Holloway Jones, Jack M. Howard, John D. Rogers, Norval Fairman, Charles W. Thissell and Robert E. Reed for Intervener and Respondent.
DRAPER, J.
This is a taxpayer's suit to have a freeway agreement between defendant city and the State of California declared void, and to enjoin the city and its officers from performance thereof. Defendants' motion for judgment on the pleadings was granted, and plaintiffs appeal.
By the agreement in question, the city "agrees and consents to the closing of city streets" incident to the construction of a freeway. The 33 streets to be closed are shown on a map attached to the agreement, which was executed by the Department of Public Works in behalf of the state. The agreement was signed on behalf of the city pursuant to a resolution of the city council approving the agreement and directing its execution by named officials.
[1] Plaintiffs' argument is that the resolution and the agreement executed under it are void because of failure to comply with the requirements of notice, opportunity to protest, and hearing which are specified by the Street Opening Act of 1889 (Sts. & Hy. Code,  3220- 3226) or the Street Vacation Act of 1941 (Sts. & Hy. Code,  8300-8374). Plaintiffs rely upon the established rule that under a statute granting a power but establishing a limited means of exercising it the mode is the measure of the power. If the only authority to close city streets bisected by a freeway were to be found in the acts cited, their argument would be sound. But we have concluded that another section establishes the power to provide by agreement for such closing as is incident to freeway construction.
The parties devote substantial portions of their arguments to the question whether the closing of streets incident to construction of a freeway is a state or a municipal function. We find it unnecessary to determine this question. Although Oakland is a charter city, plaintiffs concede that its charter and *139 ordinances prescribe no procedure for street closing and that thus the procedural provisions of state law must be followed, even if the function be municipal in character (see Hyde v. Wilde, 51 Cal.App. 82, 86 [196 P. 118].) The question then, is whether the procedure here followed conforms to a statutory scheme.
The Code (Sts. & Hy. Code,  100.2) specifically provides that the Department of Public Works is authorized to "enter into an agreement with the city council ... and, as may be provided in such agreement, to close any city street ... at or near the point of its interception with any freeway. ..." Whatever may have been its effect when first adopted (Stats. 1939, p. 2204), its 1953 amendment clearly shows that it is not in derogation of the rights of the municipality. By that amendment (Stats. 1953, p. 2719) it was provided that "no city street ... shall be closed, either directly or indirectly, by the construction of a freeway except pursuant to such an agreement. ..." This amendment has been construed to afford the city a veto of street closing for construction of a freeway by the state (27 Ops. Atty. Gen. 173).
Section 100.2 clearly, directly and specifically authorizes the precise type of agreement here in issue, and permits the State Department of Public Works to close streets pursuant to such agreement. It does not require the notice and hearing specified in the two acts relied upon by plaintiffs. It authorizes the city council to make the agreement on behalf of the city. In doing so, it specifically preserves "home rule" by denying the state the right to close streets for a freeway except with council consent.
But the section accomplishes this result without requiring the formalities of other acts. Concededly there is no express incorporation of the requirements of the Street Opening Act of 1889. That act was adopted long before freeways were thought of. The failure to refer to it when section 100.2 was adopted in 1939 is significant. The Street Vacation Act of 1941 specifically states that it provides only "an alternative system of proceedings," and that its provisions "shall not apply to or affect any other provisions of this code" (Sts. & Hy. Code,  8308).
[2] Section 100.2 sets up an integrated and complete means of closing city streets as an incident to construction of freeways. A city council which elects to follow this method acts within authority of law in doing so. [3] It may elect to refuse execution of an agreement with the state, and itself *140 proceed under the Street Opening Act of 1889. But we find nothing in the statute which compels such procedure. Rather, the election of method is left to the city council. Its members are elected by the city's voters, including those who own property at or near the proposed freeway. The decision is, by the statute, left to the council and not to individual property owners. The property rights of such owners are expressly protected (Sts. & Hy. Code,  100.3). Other considerations are left to the council, which by its approval of the agreement has resolved them against plaintiffs.
Judgment affirmed.
Kaufman, P. J., and Stone, J. pro tem.,  [fn. *] concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 2211527 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:08.078484+00 ===

614 N.W.2d 718 (2000)
In the Matter of the WELFARE OF G.L.H., G.E.H., Jr.
No. C8-99-1345.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
July 20, 2000.
Susan Gaertner, Ramsey County Atty., Gwen Werner, Asst. Ramsey County Atty., Kelli Duehning, Certified Student Atty., St. Paul, for appellant.
Lochlan T. Stuart, St. Paul, for respondent.
*719 Karen Garvin, St. Paul, Guardian Ad Litem.
Kenneth A. Malvey, Asst. Dakota County Atty., Hastings, for amicus curiae Minn. County Attys. Assn.
Considered and decided by the court en banc without oral argument.
OPINION
BLATZ, Chief Justice.
Respondent dismissed her court-appointed counsel on the day of her termination of parental rights (TPR) trial, and argues that her decision to do so did not constitute a voluntary and intelligent waiver of her statutory right to counsel. Because we conclude that determining the validity of a parent's waiver of counsel does not require application of the waiver procedure in the Minnesota Rules of Criminal Procedure, and can be determined by examining the circumstances surrounding the case, we hold that the district court did not abuse its discretion by not applying the criminal rule's waiver procedure. Further, we hold that the circumstances surrounding respondent's case demonstrate that her waiver was valid.
Respondent Tasha Patrice Jackson's two children, G.L.H., now twelve years old, and G.E.H., Jr., now ten years old, were adjudicated Children in need of Protection or Services (CHIPS) as to respondent in October 1997, and placed in foster care. Prior to the CHIPS adjudication, respondent's mother had brought the children to Children's Hospital in St. Paul, informing child protection services that respondent had been missing for a week, and that respondent was using cocaine.
In November 1997, the juvenile court approved a case plan outlining appropriate and available services to be offered to the family. At that time, respondent was on probation for a second-degree assault conviction involving a knife. In November 1998, a probation revocation hearing was held concerning respondent's testing positive for use of cocaine and failing to submit to additional drug testing.[1] After completion of a psychological evaluation of respondent in December 1998, the district court revoked respondent's probation and she was sent to the Minnesota Correctional FacilityShakopee to serve her 42-month executed sentence for assault.
During the time between the CHIPS adjudication and the revocation of respondent's probation, respondent's social worker from the Ramsey County Community Human Services Department (RCCHSD) repeatedly attempted to reunite respondent and her children, but to no avail. The social worker finally concluded in September 1998 that even a trial home placement would not work after respondent failed on numerous occasions to pick up her children so that they might resume living with her and begin school. Efforts to reunite respondent with her children therefore ceased. On November 2, 1998, RCCHSD filed a TPR petition. A month later, respondent's 42-month sentence was executed.
Immediately before respondent's TPR trial commenced on February 1, 1999, respondent "fired" the Assistant Ramsey County Public Defender who had represented her for the previous one and one-half years. The court repeatedly asked respondent if she was certain about firing her attorney and she responded affirmatively. At one point, respondent stated that she wanted to employ her children's father's attorney, and was informed by the court that this would create a conflict of interest. Subsequently, she stated that the Assistant State Public Defender representing her on her assault appeal could also represent her at the TPR trial.
At the direction of the court, the prosecutor contacted respondent's state public defender, who told the prosecutor that "It *720 makes me very angry that [respondent said that I would represent her], because I had told her time and time again that I am not representing her on the termination case and will not be representing her." Both the state and the court then asked respondent if she was certain that she did not want the county public defender as standby counsel, to which she responded, "Correct." Immediately thereafter, the court commenced the TPR trial.
On the first afternoon of the trial, one witness was called, who gave partial testimony. The trial was then continued for a week so that respondent could contact witnesses on her behalf. The court subpoenaed respondent's witnesses for her. After the trial, in its Conclusions of Law filed February 25, 1999, the court concluded upon multiple statutory bases that it was in the best interests of respondent's children that respondent's parental rights be terminated.
A divided court of appeals panel reversed the district court without remanding for a new trial. See In re G.L.H., G.E.H., Jr., 604 N.W.2d 97, 102 (Minn. App.1999). In its opinion, the court stated that the statutory right to counsel possessed by parents in TPR proceedings is analogous to the constitutional right to counsel possessed by criminal defendants. See id. at 100. Accordingly, the court applied a modified version of the waiver procedure as defined in Minn. R.Crim. P. 5.02, subd. 1(4), to the record. See id. The court of appeals determined that in order for respondent's waiver of counsel to be voluntary and intelligent, the district court was required to advise respondent as to (a) the nature of the charges; (b) the possible consequences of waiver; (c) the advantages and disadvantages of counsel in TPR proceedings; and (d) other "essential facts," including the need to define "standby counsel" to respondent. See id. at 100-01. Because the district court did not apply this procedure to determine if respondent's waiver was voluntary and intelligent, the court of appeals held that the district court abused its discretion. See id. at 101-02. RCCHSD then petitioned to this court for further review.
I.
Minnesota Statutes set forth a statutory right to counsel for parents and children in juvenile proceedings.[2]See Minn.Stat. § 260.155, subd. 2 (1998) (now codified, as amended, at section 260B.163, subd. 4 (Supp.1999)). Statutory interpretation is a question of law which we review de novo. See Kornberg v. Kornberg, 542 N.W.2d 379, 384 (Minn.1996). The statute provides in pertinent part that "[t]he child, parent, guardian or custodian has the right to effective assistance of counsel in connection with a proceeding in juvenile court." Minn.Stat. § 260.155, subd. 2. The Rules of Juvenile Procedure in effect on the date of the TPR hearing also recognize that children and parents in juvenile proceedings have a statutory right to counsel. See Minn. R. Juv. P. 40.01, subd. 1 (1999).[3]
In addition to creating the right to counsel, the legislature has enacted procedures for children to waive their right to counsel. Minnesota Statutes § 260.155, subd. 8(b) (1998) (now codified at section 260B.163, subd. 10(b) (Supp.1999)), provides that:
Waiver of a child's right to be represented by counsel provided under the juvenile court rules must be an express waiver voluntarily and intelligently made *721 by the child after the child has been fully and effectively informed of the right being waived. In determining whether a child has voluntarily and intelligently waived the right to counsel, the court shall look to the totality of the circumstances which includes but is not limited to the child's age, maturity, intelligence, education, experience, and ability to comprehend, and the presence and competence of the child's parents, guardian, or guardian ad litem. If the court accepts the child's waiver, it shall state on the record the findings and conclusions that form the basis for its decision to accept the waiver.
The 1999 Juvenile Rules of Procedure also contain a provision addressing waiver which is set forth in Rule 50.01, subds. 1, 2:[4]
1. A person entitled to counsel pursuant to Rule 40 and to any other right pursuant to these rules may waive the right to counsel and any other right only if the waiver is voluntarily and intelligently made. * * *
2. A waiver of counsel or any other right shall be on the record.
While both the statute and the rule address waiver of the right to counsel, they differ in several important respects. First, the statute, by its terms, applies only to a child's waiver of counsel. See Minn.Stat. § 260.155, subd. 8(b). As to other persons, the statute is silent in regard to the procedure to waive counsel. See id. In contrast, the rule recognizes that the right to waive counsel applies to any person entitled to counsel in juvenile proceedings. See Minn. R. Juv. P. 50.01, subds. 1, 2 (1999). Finally, unlike the statute's specific guidance to courts on how to determine if a child's waiver is voluntary and intelligent, the rule simply requires that a person's waiver of counsel in a juvenile proceeding must be "voluntarily and intelligently made." See Minn.Stat. § 260.155, subd. 8(b); Minn. R. Juv. P. 50.01, subd. 1 (1999).
Like the juvenile statute and rule, the modified Rule of Criminal Procedure applied by the court of appeals also requires waivers of counsel to be "voluntary and intelligent." See Minn. R.Crim. P. 5.02, subd. 1(4). However, unlike the rule at issue, the criminal rule goes on to outline a specific waiver procedure. See id. Minnesota Rule of Criminal Procedure 5.02, subd. 1(4), provides:
If a defendant appearing without counsel charged with a felony or gross misdemeanor does not request counsel and wishes to represent himself or herself, the court shall ensure that a voluntary and intelligent written waiver of the right to counsel is entered in the record. * * * Prior to accepting any waiver, the trial court shall advise the defendant of the following: the nature of the charges, the statutory offenses included within the charges, the range of allowable punishments, that there may be defenses, that there may be mitigating circumstances, and all other facts essential to a broad understanding of the consequences of the waiver of the right to counsel, including the advantages and disadvantages of the decision to waive counsel. The court may appoint the public defender for the limited purpose of advising and consulting with the defendant as to the waiver.
Here, in concluding that the district court abused its discretion in allowing respondent to proceed pro se, the court of appeals applied a modified version of this criminal rule waiver procedure to the record. See G.L.H., 604 N.W.2d at 101-02. However, because the court of appeals' opinion provides no reasoning for its conclusion that the criminal rule of procedure and juvenile rule of procedure are analogous, *722 we address respondent's argument that attempts to justify this analogy. Respondent claims that the Rules of Juvenile Procedure were established in accordance with the Rules of Criminal Procedure. Respondent asserts that this is evidenced by the fact that the enabling statute for the Rules of Juvenile Procedure, Minn. Stat. § 480.0595 (1998), references the enabling statute for the Rules of Criminal Procedure, Minn.Stat. § 480.059 (1998). On this basis, respondent argues that the court of appeals was correct in analogizing between the statutory right to counsel provided parents in TPR proceedings and a criminal defendant's constitutional right to counsel.
Respondent's contention is unavailing, however, because the reference relied on by respondent merely instructs this court to create and promulgate the Rules of Juvenile Procedure as the legislature had previously instructed the court to create and promulgate the Rules of Criminal Procedure. Compare Minn.Stat. § 480.0595 and § 480.059. Section 480.059, which is referenced in the enabling statute for the Rules of Juvenile Procedure, states that this court is to adopt rules of criminal procedure and states that the rules are not to enlarge or modify the substantive rights of any person. See Minn.Stat. § 480.059. In addition, section 480.059 establishes the makeup of the drafting committee, the distribution of the proposed rules, and how they are to be promulgated. See Minn. Stat. § 480.059, subds. 2, 4, 6. The statute is silent as to any substantive correlation between the juvenile and criminal rules.[5]
An analogy between waiver of the right to counsel in TPR proceedings and in criminal proceedings fails to recognize that the creation of a statutory right, while deserving of protection, is not necessarily the equivalent of a constitutional right. See Libretti v. United States, 516 U.S. 29, 48-49, 116 S.Ct. 356, 133 L.Ed.2d 271 (1995). Further, the United States Supreme Court has noted that its precedents establish a "presumption that an indigent litigant has a right to appointed counsel only when, if he loses, he may be deprived of his physical liberty." Lassiter v. Department of Social Services, 452 U.S. 18, 26-27, 101 S.Ct. 2153 (1981) (citing Scott v. Illinois, 440 U.S. 367, 99 S.Ct. 1158, 59 L.Ed.2d 383 (1979); Gagnon v. Scarpelli, 411 U.S. 778, 93 S.Ct. 1756, 36 L.Ed.2d 656 (1973); In re Gault, 387 U.S. 1, 87 S.Ct. 1428 (1967); Argersinger v. Hamlin, 407 U.S. 25, 92 S.Ct. 2006, 32 L.Ed.2d 530 (1972); Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335, 83 S.Ct. 792, 9 L.Ed.2d 799 (1963)). Unlike criminal proceedings, TPR proceedings cannot deprive the parent of her physical liberty.
The rule of criminal procedure cited and relied upon by the court of appeals in its opinion is a codification of our opinion in State v. Camacho, 561 N.W.2d 160 (Minn. 1997). In Camacho, we addressed the waiver procedure required to assure that a criminal defendant's waiver of his constitutional right to counsel is knowing, voluntary, and intelligent. See id. at 173. The waiver procedure we outlined in Camacho was based on our interpretation of United States Supreme Court precedent recognizing the constitutional right to self-representation and the constitutional right to counsel in criminal cases. See Camacho, 561 N.W.2d at 170-73; (citing Godinez v. Moran, 509 U.S. 389, 113 S.Ct. 2680, 125 L.Ed.2d 321 (1993) and Johnson v. Zerbst, *723 304 U.S. 458, 58 S.Ct. 1019, 82 L.Ed. 1461 (1938)). Zerbst held that
[s]ince the Sixth Amendment constitutionally entitles one charged with crime to the assistance of counsel, compliance with this constitutional mandate is an essential jurisdictional prerequisite to a federal court's authority to deprive an accused of his life or liberty. * * * If the accused, however, is not represented by counsel and has not competently and intelligently waived his constitutional right, the Sixth Amendment stands as a jurisdictional bar to a valid conviction and sentence depriving him of his life or his liberty.
Zerbst, 304 U.S. at 467-68, 58 S.Ct. 1019. In Godinez the U.S. Supreme Court further articulated the standard for waiver of the constitutional right to counsel in criminal cases:
In addition to determining that a defendant who seeks to plead guilty or waive counsel is competent, a trial court must satisfy itself that the waiver of his constitutional rights is knowing and voluntary. In this sense, there is a "heightened" standard for pleading guilty and for waiving the right to counsel * * *.
Godinez, 509 U.S. at 400-01, 113 S.Ct. 2680 (citations omitted). It is clear from these cases that waiver of the constitutional right to counsel in criminal cases, where an individual's personal liberty is at stake, requires a heightened degree of caution in waiver procedure. We recognized this in Camacho and outlined the necessary waiver procedure accordingly.
Further, even in the context of a criminal defendant's waiver of his constitutional right to counsel, we have held waivers valid even though the district court failed to follow a particular procedure. See State v. Worthy, 583 N.W.2d 270, 275-76 (Minn. 1998); State v. Brodie, 532 N.W.2d 557, 557 (Minn.1995). In doing so, we have considered "`the particular facts and circumstances surrounding [a] case, including the background, experience, and conduct of the accused.'" Worthy, 583 N.W.2d at 275-76 (quoting Zerbst, 304 U.S. at 464, 58 S.Ct. 1019); see Brodie, 532 N.W.2d at 557 (Minn.1995). While Brodie preceded Camacho and the adoption of Minn. R.Crim. P. 5.02, subd. 1(4), it occurred after the United States Supreme Court decided Zerbst and Godinez, and Worthy was decided subsequent to Camacho.
Based on the inherent and historical differences between constitutional and statutory rights, and case precedent relating to each, we conclude that the determination of a parent's valid waiver of the statutory right to counsel in TPR proceedings does not necessitate the application of the procedure set forth in Minn. R.Crim. P. 5.02, subd. 1(4). We therefore hold that the district court did not abuse its discretion by not applying the waiver of counsel procedures of the criminal rule. In addition, we are guided by our holdings in Worthy and Brodie, and hold that the determination of whether a parent's waiver of counsel in a TPR proceeding is voluntary and intelligent can be based on the surrounding circumstances of the case.
II.
Having determined that the validity of a parent's waiver of her statutory right to counsel in TPR proceedings can be determined by examining the surrounding circumstances of the case, we now examine the record to determine whether respondent's waiver was voluntary and intelligent. We will overturn a district's court's finding of a valid waiver of the right to counsel only if that finding is clearly erroneous. Cf. Worthy, 583 N.W.2d at 276 (applying the clearly erroneous standard for appellate review of a district court's finding of valid waiver in a criminal proceeding).
Although this case involves a statutory right to counsel in a civil matter, the circumstances surrounding respondent's case are similar to those in Brodie. 532 N.W.2d at 557. In Brodie, the defendant "fired" his public defender and then appealed *724 his conviction, arguing that his waiver of counsel was not knowing and intelligent. See id. This court rejected the defendant's argument, stating that
[t]his is not a case in which the record is silent on whether defendant knowingly and voluntarily waived his right to counsel. Defendant was in fact given counsel and he then "fired" counsel. The record is clear that defendant knew that he did not have a right to a different public defender but would have to represent himself if he did not accept the services of the public defender.
Id. Like the defendant in Brodie, here respondent was appointed counsel and "fired" him on the morning of her TPR trial. The district court repeatedly asked respondent if she was certain she wanted to dismiss her counsel and represent herself, and she repeatedly stated that she did.
In addition, respondent had the benefit of counsel for one and one-half years before firing him. In Worthy, we found the co-defendants' waiver of counsel valid even though they were represented by counsel for only one and one-half months before the date of trial. See Worthy, 583 N.W.2d at 276. Also, similar to the co-defendants in Worthy, respondent had previous experience in the criminal justice system, and had been represented at six prior hearings in juvenile court. Finally, like the Worthy co-defendants, respondent was informed that if she fired her attorney she would have to proceed pro se and cross-examine her own witnesses. See id.
The questions respondent asked during her examination of witnesses provide further evidence of her awareness of the nature and consequences of the TPR trial. Moreover, respondent's express statements to the court indicate that she was aware that neglect and drug abuse were the grounds for the petition to terminate her parental rights and that the loss of her parental rights was the possible consequence of the TPR trial.
Accordingly, we hold that the district court's determination that respondent waived her statutory right to counsel is supported by the record. The circumstances surrounding her waiver demonstrate that it was voluntary and intelligent, and therefore valid.
Reversed.
NOTES
[1]  There had been two previous probation revocation hearings: July 21, 1997 and June 8, 1998, both prior to when the CHIPS petition was filed.
[2]  We note that the United States Supreme Court held in Lassiter v. Department of Social Services, 452 U.S. 18, 31-32, 101 S.Ct. 2153, 68 L.Ed.2d 640 (1981), that there is no presumptive due process right to counsel for indigent parents in TPR proceedings. However, Minnesota has provided parents a statutory right to counsel. See Minn.Stat. § 260.155, subd. 2 (1998).
[3]  Minnesota Rule of Juvenile Procedure 40.01, subd. 1 (1999), provides in pertinent part: "The parent(s) and guardian of the child have the right to be represented by an attorney who shall act as their counsel."
[4]  We note that the juvenile rules have been amended since this case was appealed, and no longer include the language contained in Minn. R. Juv. P. 50.01 (1999). See Order of Dec. 20, 1999, No. C4-97-1693 (effective January 1, 2000); Order of Dec. 29, 1999, No. C4-97-1693 (changing effective date to March 1, 2000).
[5]  Respondent's reliance on the authors' comments in the first edition of the Juvenile Law and Practice volumes is also misplaced. Commentary is nonbinding. See First Constr. Co. v. Tri-South Mortgage Investors, 308 N.W.2d 298, 300 (Minn.1981). Moreover, the majority of comments cited by respondent are parallels drawn by the authors between children's rights in delinquency proceedings and adults' rights in criminal proceedings. See, e.g., John O. Sonsteng & Robert Scott, Minnesota PracticeJuvenile Law and Practice, § 4.01, at 49 (1985). Like criminal defendants, juveniles in delinquency proceedings have a constitutional right to counsel. See In re Gault, 387 U.S. 1, 41, 87 S.Ct. 1428, 18 L.Ed.2d 527 (1967).

=== CASE 2211538 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:08.228786+00 ===

605 N.E.2d 1209 (1993)
Dennis E. GUNTER, Appellant-Defendant
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 46A03-9203-CR-079.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
January 20, 1993.
Transfer Denied March 5, 1993.
*1210 Don E. Harner, Michigan City, for appellant-defendant.
Linley E. Pearson, Atty. Gen., Mary Dreyer, Deputy Atty. Gen., Office of Atty. Gen., Indianapolis, for appellee-plaintiff.
GARRARD, Judge.
Gunter was tried by jury and was convicted of burglary and was determined to be an habitual offender. He was sentenced to eight years and the sentence was enhanced by thirty years for being an habitual offender.
In essence he assigns four errors on appeal. The central feature, however, concerns the fact that the regular judge tried the burglary phase, took the verdict and imposed sentence, while a special judge tried the habitual phase, took the verdict and imposed the sentence enhancement. Gunter contends it was error for different judges to try the different phases and for different judges to participate in sentencing.
We agree that our criminal law contemplates that the same judge will preside throughout a criminal trial and that it was error for the regular judge to disqualify himself for only the second phase of the trial. See, e.g., Eagan v. State (1985) Ind., 480 N.E.2d 946. The issue is whether the error was sufficiently prejudicial to require a reversal in this case. We conclude that it was not.
Prior to trial Gunter moved for a change of judge asserting that he could not have a fair trial because the regular judge had formerly been the prosecuting attorney and (1) the present prosecuting attorney *1211 who was going to conduct the prosecution had been his deputy, and (2) the judge had been prosecutor when Gunter was convicted of the two felonies which the state was asserting to establish his habitual offender status. Thus while Gunter objected to having two different judges for the proceeding, it was nevertheless he that initiated consideration of the matter. While the second ground asserted by his motion does not constitute cause for disqualification, (Rankin v. State (1990) Ind., 563 N.E.2d 533) we believe it likely that the regular judge acted as he did in an effort to accommodate what he perceived as the appearance of propriety to Gunter.
Secondly, the rule is not absolute. Substitute judges have been allowed where the tasks performed by them are simply ministerial, (Eagan supra) or where the parties consent or the appealing party fails to object. Bailey v. State (1980) Ind. App., 397 N.E.2d 1024. The purpose of the rule is to insure to both parties the fairness and evenhandedness that arises from having the same person preside over the various facets of a trial. In that context we must necessarily note the essentially discrete segments of an habitual offender proceeding. The principal offense and the habitual offender allegation are separately charged and separately tried. Our supreme court has even determined that the phases are so distinct as to permit a different jury to try the habitual phase. Funk v. State (1982) Ind., 427 N.E.2d 1081. The consequence is that the impact of the error in permitting a different judge to preside over the habitual phase is minimized. That appears to be especially true since the judge who presided over the trial of each phase imposed the sentence (or enhancement) for that phase.
Finally, Gunter's argument relies exclusively on the technical nature of the error. No suggestion is contained in the briefs of any actual prejudice suffered by Gunter because of the special judge presiding over the habitual offender phase.
We therefore conclude that in Gunter's case the error was harmless.
Gunter next contends that the state failed to establish a sufficient chain of custody to permit a pair of garden shears to be introduced into evidence. Any error in admitting the exhibit was harmless since the police testified without objection that Gunter threw something into the back of his truck when he left the scene, a pair of shears was found in the back of the truck when Gunter was arrested, and the points on the blades matched marks on the frame of the window of the building that had been pried open. The pair of shears was merely cumulative evidence.
Gunter contends the jury was improperly instructed during the habitual phase because the prosecuting attorney tendered an additional instruction which the court gave to the jury. He does not contend the contents of the instruction were erroneous or prejudicial. Indeed, he does not even mention what the instruction concerned, although we learn from the transcript that it advised the jury concerning Gunter's alleged prior felonies that he must have been convicted and sentenced for one felony before he committed the second felony.
Gunter relies on Crowdus v. State (1982) Ind., 431 N.E.2d 796 for the proposition that instructions the parties wish given to the jury must be reduced to writing and tendered to the court before the commencement of final argument. Crowdus teaches that once the jury has commenced its deliberations the court may not recall it for the giving of supplemental instructions, at least in the absence of a very narrow exception concerning an error or legal lacuna in the instructions already given. It has no application in the present case because it is undisputed that the instruction in question was given as a part of the court's charge to the jury before it retired.
IC XX-XX-X-X(6) does concern special instructions requested by the parties and provides inter alia that such instructions must be written and delivered to the court before the commencement of argument. This section concerns the order of trial, and our decisions have long held that the trial court is inherently responsible for the conduct and progress of the trial so this court should liberally construe the statute in favor *1212 of the trial judge. Hollowell v. State (1971) 256 Ind. 467, 269 N.E.2d 755; Griffith v. State (1959) 239 Ind. 321, 157 N.E.2d 191.
It is readily apparent that the statutory purpose is to have the court instruct the jury concerning the law as the last item of business before the jury retires so that it may commence its deliberations with the court's instructions fresh in memory. It is equally important, however, that counsel be aware of what those instructions will be, in order that they may craft their final arguments to take proper account of the instructions in attempting to persuade the jury of the justice of their client's cause. To that end the statutory (and historical) scheme calls for any tendered instructions to be submitted, objections thereto stated and the final charge to be settled before counsel make their final arguments.
Were Gunter before us asserting with specificity that the court's action in accepting an additional instruction to the charge actually prejudiced his defense because he was unable to address some critical feature therein in his final argument, or was precluded from opportunity to state his objection thereto, if he thought the instruction erroneous, the court's action would likely constitute reversible error. That, however, is not the case. No such claims have even been suggested. Instead, only the technical noncompliance is argued. We must, therefore, conclude that the error was harmless. Griffith, supra.
Gunter's final assignment asserts that the court erred in failing to list the aggravating and mitigating circumstances in the sentencing order. The argument appears to have two prongs. Gunter acknowledges that at the sentencing hearing the judge specifically found two aggravating circumstances and no mitigating circumstances.
He contends the court should have listed possible mitigating circumstances such as that the offense was committed when the business was closed and posed no injury to persons. It is well settled, however, that the court is not bound to explain why it has chosen not to make a finding of mitigation. McCollum v. State (1991) Ind., 582 N.E.2d 804.
He contends that although the court announced its findings of aggravating circumstances at the sentencing, it fatally erred by omitting them from the sentencing order. We agree that the statute contemplates that such findings should be set forth in the order; when the trial court fails to do so we will ordinarily remand with instructions to either set forth the aggravating circumstances or impose the presumptive sentence. See, e.g., Riddle v. State (1986) Ind., 491 N.E.2d 527. On the other hand, numerous decisions stand for the proposition that where the facts are not in dispute and the issues are sufficiently presented for meaningful review, remand solely to require the trial court to enter its findings more specifically is unnecessary. See, e.g., Robinson v. State (1986) Ind., 493 N.E.2d 765.
In the present case Gunter made no objection to the form of the court's order. The transcript of the sentencing hearing is in the record before us. In it the judge specifically designated the aggravating factors he found and the record discloses their factual basis. We must therefore again conclude that the error of omission in the order was harmless. cf. Beasley v. State (1983) Ind., 445 N.E.2d 1372.
The judgment is affirmed.
HOFFMAN and BUCHANAN, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9737646 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:27.222409+00 ===

JUSTICE HEIPLE delivered the opinion of the court: Scott DiBenedetto died as a result of a one-car accident which occurred on or about January 25, 1989. Plaintiff, Sandra DiBenedetto, as special administrator of Scott DiBenedetto’s estate, filed a complaint against defendant, Flora Township, to recover damages for Scott’s death. Plaintiff alleges in her amended complaint, inter alia: that Scott DiBenedetto, decedent, was southbound on Wheeler Road in Flora Township on or about January 25, 1989; his car crossed over the northbound lane, entered the 5- to 7-foot wide shoulder area on the east edge of the paved roadway, crossed over the shoulder, landed in the drainage ditch and immediately overturned killing decedent; the driving conditions were wet, dense fog and complete darkness with no street lighting; the drainage ditch runs parallel to the road, is 5 to 6 feet deep, slopes at a 45- to 90-degree angle off the shoulder of the road, and is within the Wheeler Road right-of-way. The complaint further alleged that defendant was negligent in that it: “a. Maintained its right-of-way on Wheeler Road in such a manner as to place or permit to be placed a ditch on its said right-of-way which ditch is a danger to traffic using Wheeler Road by reason of its severe dropoff [sic\ and extreme close proximity to the east edge of the pavement of Wheeler Road. b. Failed to remedy or correct the condition created in its right-of-way along said Wheeler Road by the existence of said ditch.” Defendant filed a motion to dismiss the complaint pursuant to section 2 — 615 of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 110, par. 2 — 615). The trial court concluded that the burden which would be imposed upon defendant to make roadside drainage ditches safe for motorists who stray from the traveled way was of such a great magnitude that no duty was owed to plaintiff. The appellate court reversed, with Justice Geiger dissenting, holding that, given the public policy concerns for safe roadways and that it is foreseeable that a motorist will deviate from the roadway, a duty was owed to plaintiff by the defendant township. Additionally, the majority stated that the proximate cause of the accident was a jury question. The Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act insulates local public entities from liability arising from injuries caused by the effect of weather conditions on streets, highways, and other public ways. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 85, par. 3 — 105(a).) The majority noted that in the present case the Tort Immunity Act does not insulate defendant from liability since the complaint does not allege that adverse weather conditions were the sole cause of the accident. (219 Ill. App. 3d 1091.) Justice Geiger, dissenting, concluded that given that decedent’s automobile crossed over the oncoming lane of traffic and a 5- to 7-foot wide shoulder before coming into contact with the drainage ditch, as a matter of law the ditch was not a proximate cause of the accident and the automobile was out of control before reaching the ditch. (219 Ill. App. 3d at 1102 (Geiger, J., dissenting).) We reverse the appellate court and affirm the trial court. When the legal sufficiency of all or part of a complaint is challenged by a section 2 — 615 motion to strike or dismiss, all well-pleaded facts in the challenged portions of the complaint are to be taken as true and a reviewing court must determine whether the allegations of the complaint, when interpreted in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, are sufficient to set forth a cause of action upon which relief may be granted. A complaint based upon negligence must set forth the existence of a duty owed by the defendant to the plaintiff, a breach of that duty, and an injury proximately resulting from that breach. Whether or not a duty exists is a question of law which will be determined by the courts. The gist of the complaint in this case was that the ditch along the road was not safe to be driven in. Few would dispute that allegation. The question is, Does the defendant township have a duty to the motoring public to make its drainage ditches which run parallel to the traveled way to be safe for vehicular traffic? We hold not. There is no claim here that the traveled portion of the road, including the shoulder, was anything but safe. The drainage ditch was there for the purpose of receiving surface water and thereby protecting the traveled way from flooding. It was not designed to carry vehicular traffic. The right-of-way had three component parts, namely, the traveled way, the shoulder and the drainage ditch. Each of the parts was fulfilling its intended function. What happened in this case was that decedent, for whatever reason, lost control of his car, drove across an oncoming lane of the roadway, on across the shoulder and into the ditch where his car overturned and he was killed. It is axiomatic that a driver who leaves the traveled way and continues with his automobile across country is bound to strike something sooner or later. In this case, as there were no oncoming vehicles when he crossed over the opposite lane, the driver plunged into a roadside ditch and tipped over. Had the ditch not been there, the car would have likely struck something else, be it a utility pole, a fence, a tree or whatever. When an out of control automobile is brought to an abrupt stop by an immovable object, damage, injury or even death may be the result. That is what happened in this case. The proximate cause of the accident in this case was not the ditch. The proximate cause of the accident was the loss of control of the vehicle and its being driven off the traveled way. Drainage ditches along streets and highways are both commonplace and necessary. People are not expected to drive in them and the public cannot be an insurer of those who do. Although there is a paucity of cases on this issue, we interpret that lack to the fact that the conclusion is obvious and that the opposite result would be contrary to normal expectations and experience in the affairs of life. In 1932, the Kansas Supreme Court determined that the duty of a township to maintain its rural roads and highways in a condition reasonably safe for travel extends only to the improved or traveled portions of such roads and highways. (Arnold v. Board of Commissioners (1932), 135 Kan. 551, 11 P.2d 729.) As the Kansas court noted, it is not incumbent upon a county to keep the full width of its roads open and fit for travel. If a road is open and improved for a sufficient width as to make it reasonably safe and convenient for ordinary travel there is no duty to keep the sides of the traveled way free from obstructions. As long as a sufficient portion of the right-of-way is maintained in a safe and passable condition to serve the reasonable needs of the public in that locality, the fact that outlying and unused portions of the road are impassable or dangerous does not constitute the sort of defect for which a local governmental unit is liable. Neither a township nor a municipality is an insurer against all accidents occurring on the public way. Just as a municipality is only required to maintain its streets and sidewalks for their normal and intended uses, a township is only required to maintain the traveled way, shoulders, and drainage ditches according to their normal and intended uses. Warchol v. City of Chicago (1979), 75 Ill. App. 3d 289, 294. Foreseeability is but one of the factors to be weighed in determining the existence of a duty. Even if an accident is foreseeable, the resulting burdens and consequences must also be considered before a legal duty will be recognized. While this accident was foreseeable to the extent that, in retrospect, all accidents are foreseeable, this is not sufficient to enlarge the township’s duty. It is, of course, both foreseeable and commonplace that cars will occasionally run into ditches. The instant case, however, is not the type of accident one would expect to occur under normal driving circumstances. (Ross v. City of Chicago (1988), 168 Ill. App. 3d 83, 89-90.) The fact that it was a dark, wet, and foggy night is immaterial. Even in considering foreseeability, the relevant inquiry focuses on the likelihood that an injury will result from a condition upon the land and not the likelihood that an injury will result from a particular set of circumstances. (Ziemba v. Mierzwa (1991), 142 Ill. 2d 42, 49.) This case, however, turns not on the question of foreseeability but, rather, whether the drainage ditch posed an unreasonable hazard to the motoring public and whether the defendant thereby violated a duty it owed to the motoring public. We hold that it did not. Accordingly, we reverse the appellate court and affirm the circuit court. Appellate court reversed; circuit court affirmed.

=== CASE 9737647 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:27.227216+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE MILLER, concurring: I agree with the court that the trial judge properly dismissed the instant complaint. Because the basis for my concurrence is different from the majority’s reasoning, however, I write separately to express my views. The majority provides two separate grounds in support of its holding. First, the majority concludes that the drainage ditch could not have been a proximate cause of the decedent’s injury because the decedent’s vehicle “would have likely struck something else” if the ditch had not been there. (153 Ill. 2d at 70.) Second, without expressly relying on the provisions of the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 85, pars. 1 — 101 through 9— 107), the majority believes that the township did not violate the duty of care it owes to the public, apparently because motorists “are not expected to drive in [ditches] and the public cannot be an insurer of those who do.” (153 Ill. 2d at 71.) Although I agree with the majority’s ultimate holding, my agreement is premised on grounds different from those contained in the majority opinion. As a preliminary matter, it must be said that, contrary to the majority’s view, the plaintiff’s amended complaint does not allege simply that “the ditch along the road was not safe to be driven in,” and the issue in this case is not merely whether the township has a duty to make drainage ditches “safe for vehicular traffic.” (153 Ill. 2d at 70.) Those characterizations ignore the gravamen of the plaintiff’s amended complaint, which asserts that the township breached its duty of due care to motorists using Wheeler Road by maintaining a ditch of this slope and depth so close to the roadway. According to the complaint, the ditch lies five to seven feet from the edge of the pavement, is five to six feet deep, and slopes downward at an angle of 45 to 90 degrees. The plaintiff alleges that the vehicle being driven by the decedent entered the ditch and then flipped over, causing his death. Section 3 — 102(a) of the Tort Immunity Act states: “Except as otherwise provided in this Article, a local public entity has the duty to exercise ordinary care to maintain its property in a reasonably safe condition for the use in the exercise of ordinary care of people whom the entity intended and permitted to use the property in a manner in which and at such times as it was reasonably foreseeable that it would be used ***.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 85, par. 3-102(a).) This provision codifies, for the benefit of “intended and permitted” users, the common law duty of a public body with respect to maintaining its roads and highways. Janssen v. City of Springfield (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 435, 450; see Curtis v. County of Cook (1983), 98 Ill. 2d 158, 164-65. I do not agree with the majority’s initial conclusion that the decedent’s vehicle was bound to collide with something once it left the roadway and therefore the condition of the roadside ditch could not have been a proximate cause of the decedent’s injuries. First, the premise of this argument is incorrect. It is not uncommon for vehicles that leave the road to come to a stop in an open field or other cleared area, without colliding with any obstacle. Second, and more important, this logic seemingly eliminates all public liability for roadside conditions, a result that I believe is contrary to both section 3 — 102 of the Tort Immunity Act and relevant case law (see Janssen v. City of Springfield (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 435; Michalak v. County of La Salle (1984), 121 Ill. App. 3d 574). Similarly, I am unable to agree with the majority’s further holding that, because motorists are not expected to drive in ditches and the public cannot be an insurer of those who do, the township could not have violated the duty of care it owed the plaintiff’s decedent. Again, this reasoning threatens to eliminate all public liability for accidents or injuries attributable to roadside conditions, a result that cannot be squared with the requirements imposed on public entities by both statute and case law. I concur, however, in the majority’s judgment in the present case, which upholds the dismissal of the plaintiff’s complaint. The scope of a party’s duty of care is shaped in large measure by matters of public policy, and these concerns strongly militate against recognizing a cause of action in the circumstances shown here. “In considering whether a duty exists in a particular case, a court must weigh the foreseeability of the injury, the likelihood of the injury, the magnitude of the burden of guarding against it and the consequences of placing that burden on the defendant. [Citations.]” (Gouge v. Central Illinois Public Service Co. (1991), 144 Ill. 2d 535, 542.) The last two criteria are particularly significant in this case. There is nothing unusual or unique about the ditch in question, and it appears to be similar in configuration to the drainage ditches that run for miles along thousands of roads throughout the State. Imposing on the public authorities the burden of eliminating the type of hazard alleged to exist here would be an unduly oppressive obligation, as the trial judge found. For these reasons, I concur in the court’s judgment upholding the dismissal of the plaintiff’s amended complaint. Finally, I would note that the plaintiff’s cause of action can find no assistance here in the failure of the township to provide any pavement markings, warning signs, or guardrails in the area where the accident occurred. The plaintiff’s complaint originally contained allegations to that effect, charging the township with negligence because of the complete absence of any warnings or barriers. The plaintiff later withdrew those allegations, however, apparently in light of section 3 — 104 of the Tort Immunity Act. That provision immunizes a local public entity for its failure “to initially provide *** distinctive roadway markings or any other traffic regulating or warning sign, device or marking, *** traffic separating or restraining devices or barriers.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 85, par. 3 — 104; see West v. Kirkham (1992), 147 Ill. 2d 1. We need not decide in this case whether the township may be required to undertake the more onerous step of eliminating the alleged hazard when section 3 — 104 specifically absolves the township of the less onerous task of providing warnings or barriers in its vicinity. It is enough to say that the duty owed by the township to the plaintiff’s decedent did not extend to the harm that occurred here. For the reasons stated, I concur in the court’s judgment. JUSTICE FREEMAN joins in this concurrence.

=== CASE 2211543 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:08.31313+00 ===

183 Cal.App.2d 523 (1960)
HARRY SLATER, as Executor, etc., Respondent,
v.
RUTH BIELSKY et al., Appellants.
Civ. No. 24242.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Aug. 4, 1960.
Paul Pearlin for Appellants.
Walter B. Gieselman for Respondent.
LILLIE, J.
Plaintiff, surviving husband of Mary Slater, deceased, sued her estate and her incompetent daughter, Rena *525 Wolfson (a child of a prior marriage), to set aside certain deeds he had executed to his wife during her lifetime and a purported gift of community property. His first cause of action alleged that a deed dated November 8, 1948, transferring to her as her separate property a lot on Brooks Avenue, was given by him upon her fraudulent representation that plaintiff should convey it to her to protect them from possible claims of creditors, and that it would still remain community property an on her death he would inherit the same free of cost of probate and taxes; the second charged that on February 2, 1944, he executed a deed in both of their names to a lot on Avenue 19 as community property and that the deed was procured from him through her fraudulent representation that upon the death of either the property would automatically go to the survivor without cost of probate and taxes; and the third cause of action was to set aside as to one-half, certain savings bonds that, unknown to him and without his consent, were purchased by the deceased during their married life with community funds and placed either in her name alone or in her name and that of Rena Wolfson, as joint tenants. The matter was heard by a jury which returned a special verdict in favor of plaintiff, upon which the court settled findings.
The court found that a confidential relationship existed between plaintiff and decedent as husband and wife; that as to the first cause of action, the Brooks Avenue property "was not transferred to plaintiff's deceased wife by the plaintiff to defraud creditors" but that decedent fraudulently induced plaintiff to deed the same to her as her separate property by representing to him that upon her death the property would become plaintiff's; that with reference to the second cause of action, the consent of plaintiff to transfer the Avenue 19 property to their names "without being in joint tenancy" was obtained through the exercise of fraud upon him by decedent; and in connection with the third, the court found that certain United States savings bonds were purchased by the decedent from community funds which were held without consent of plaintiff in her name alone and in the names of decedent and Rena Wolfson. Judgment was entered on the findings cancelling the deeds of November 8, 1948, and February 2, 1944, and adjudicating all of the United States savings bonds as community property. Defendants appeal from the judgment contending that the findings are not supported by the evidence, particularly with reference to--the transfer of the Brooks Avenue property to protect the parties from creditors' claims, *526 the transfer of the Avenue 19 property in reliance on decedent's false representations, and the status of the funds from which the United States savings bonds were purchased by decedent.
[1] Predicating their first claim of error--that the evidence does not support the lower court's finding that the Brooks Avenue property was not transferred to plaintiff to defraud creditors--upon plaintiff's testimony that in 1948 his furniture business needed money and decedent suggested he transfer the property to her for "convenience sake," and the testimony of Jean Finn that plaintiff thought her suggestion that he transfer the property to his wife "in the event any creditor went after" him, was a good idea, appellants argue that the evidence of fraud is clear and the general rule that a conveyance in fraud of creditors vests title to the property transferred in the grantee except as against the creditors of the grantor (Estate of Xydias, 92 Cal.App.2d 857 [208 P.2d 378]; Ramirez v. Hartford Acc. & Indem. Co., 29 Cal.App.2d 193 [84 P.2d 172]; Tognazzi v. Wilhelm, 6 Cal.2d 123 [56 P.2d 1227]) applies.
It is not clear from appellants' brief what kind of fraudulent conveyance with relation to creditors they claim exists. In most cases, actual intent to defraud creditors must be proved (Civ. Code,  3439.07) which, because of difficulty of direct proof, consists of inferences from circumstances surrounding the transaction and the relationship and interests of the parties; solvency is not material if the intent of the debtor to hinder or delay creditors is shown (Fross v. Wotton, 3 Cal.2d 384 [44 P.2d 350]; Maguire v. Corbett, 119 Cal.App.2d 244 [259 P.2d 507]). However, a transfer without a fair consideration by an insolvent person, or one who will thereby be rendered insolvent, is fraudulent as to creditors without regard to his actual intent to defraud (Civ. Code,  3439.04), in which case insolvency is not only material but defined in section 3439.02, Civil Code. Other types of fraudulent conveyances recognized by statute include transfers made by one engaged in a business for which his remaining capital is "unreasonably small" (Civ. Code,  3439.02), or when the transferor intends to, or believes, that he will incur debts beyond his ability to pay as they mature (Civ. Code,  3439.06). Appellants have failed to develop their argument beyond advancing the application of the general rule that a transfer in fraud of creditors binds the transferor. However, the record before us contains no evidence of insolvency of plaintiff as defined in section *527 3439.02, or near insolvency, or that plaintiff intended to hinder or delay creditors or indeed that he even had any creditors. Plaintiff's mere acknowledgment at the trial that "we had to have some money for the furniture business" is far removed from any inference that plaintiff's financial status in 1948 was any less than sound, or that his remaining capital after the transfer would be unreasonably small or that he would incur debts beyond his ability to pay as they mature; in fact, it appears that his need for funds was not only not pressing but whenever plaintiff asked his wife for money she gave it to him from time to time from their bank account, which always seemed to produce available funds. Nor does the fact that they had to "have some money" for the business appear to have much bearing on any intent to defraud creditors, for it is clear from the plaintiff's testimony that his wife at previous times when requested, gave him money from the community funds for the business, and then she suggested "(S)upposing you turn over the property to me for convenience sake, ..." What the plaintiff or his wife meant by the term "convenience" has not been explained, but from her then already established practice of taking care of the finances, banking the money, investing the funds and paying all obligations, and from her statements to plaintiff relative to this and other property, that, in transferring the same to her, upon the death of either the survivor would be saved "a lot of trouble to get ... the other one-half ownership" and the necessity of going to court and paying taxes and costs, it is reasonable to assume that plaintiff, inspired by her suggestions and representations, believed that the execution of such a deed would be a convenient method of taking care of the property and avoiding the expenses of probate. This, too, no doubt, is what decedent wanted plaintiff to believe, for the record bespeaks her real undisclosed reason for soliciting the transfers from plaintiff--to accumulate in her name as much of their property as she could to care for her daughter upon her death.
[2] The question of intent on the part of the grantor which makes a conveyance in fraud of creditors void, is one for the trier of the fact (Knapp v. Elliott, 81 Cal.App.2d 667 [184 P.2d 934]; Fross v. Wotton, 3 Cal.2d 384 [44 P.2d 350]; Abbey v. Zimmermann, 12 Cal.App.2d 311 [55 P.2d 903]; Maguire v. Corbett, 119 Cal.App.2d 244 [259 P.2d 507]; Heffernan v. Bennett & Armour, 110 Cal.App.2d 564 [243 P.2d 846]; Menick v. Goldy, 131 Cal.App.2d 542 [280 P.2d 844]). The evidence does not show, and the findings properly *528 disclaim, any such intent on the part of the plaintiff, or any reliance by him on anyone's suggestion that he execute the deed on the Brooks Avenue property on November 8, 1948, for that purpose. On the contrary, it is apparent that the motivating factor in the plaintiff's transfer, and that upon which he relied, was decedent's representation that the conveyance to her should be made for convenience, to expedite the vesting of the property in the survivor upon the death of either without cost and necessity of probate; and as long as they were married she could not do anything with it "without his name."
At the trial various witnesses testified on both sides creating factual conflicts in the evidence. Its weight and the credibility of the witnesses were for the trier of fact; with its determination in these matters we will not interfere. As they had a right to do, the jury, and ultimately the trial court, accepted the testimony of plaintiff's witnesses as against that of those testifying on behalf of the estate.
[3] The evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the judgment discloses complete reliance by plaintiff upon his wife and trust and confidence in her handling of the community funds during the 19 years of their marriage; and a well designed and executed secret scheme on her part to gain control of their property that she might dispose of it as she saw fit upon her death. The exact moment at which she conceived this scheme and actively put it into operation is, of course, a question of fact, the determination of which depends upon all of the circumstances surrounding the relationship of the parties during their marriage. Her intent in this connection in 1944 and 1948 when plaintiff executed two deeds, since she is now deceased, must be inferred from her acts, declarations and conduct before, at the time of and subsequent to the transfers of the properties by plaintiff. The decedent, a divorced woman, and plaintiff a widower were married in 1937. For two years thereafter, Rena Wolfson, a child of decedent's previous marriage, lived with the parties but was later placed in a private sanitarium. At the outset of the marriage the parties owned nothing; decedent was not employed, but plaintiff, through his efforts in an ice cream distributing business, gradually accumulated a little money. They had a discussion about their finances and decedent suggested to plaintiff that she should handle the money and take complete charge of their financial affairs so she could see to it that they would always be provided for, never again be dependent on charity and that no depression *529 would recur in their future. She further suggested that henceforth he turn over to her all of his earnings for her to deposit and she would pay all of the bills. Relying upon her "100%" and having trust and confidence in her, he permitted her to take care of all of their finances and investments. Decedent started a bank account with the funds they had accumulated and proceeded to invest some of them through the purchase of Avenue 19 and Brooks Avenue properties, the deeds to which originally vested title in their names as joint tenants, the legal effect of which was not known by plaintiff. Each parcel was income property, and the rent therefrom and other income, including plaintiff's earnings, were used to pay encumbrances thereon. In this manner, both parcels were eventually paid off. From time to time decedent told plaintiff she was saving the money for their future and old age, for independence so they would never have "to go on charity any more like we (they) did during the depression." At all times they were getting on "very nicely" together and plaintiff trusted her "just 100%." When both properties were finally paid off, plaintiff and his wife had another discussion about finances; decedent, handling the funds as before, continued to tell him she was banking the money. He never asked to see the bank book because he trusted her, and testified "if you can't trust your wife, who would you trust."
Without question a confidential relationship over and above that arising out of the normal marital relationship existed between the parties; and it was in this climate in 1944 and 1948 decedent talked to plaintiff about the Avenue 19 and Brooks Avenue properties. Both had been taken in their names as joint tenants; but plaintiff was not aware of the legal effect of joint tenancy when decedent suggested to plaintiff he execute the deeds in question, taking the properties out of joint tenancy and placing one in their names as tenants in common and the other in decedent's name as her separate property. Prior to his execution of the deed to the Avenue 19 property and for the purpose of inducing plaintiff to deed it to them both, as community property, decedent told him "(I)n case one of us dies, and we got to go to a lot of trouble to get the ownership, the other half ownership, and on the community property we wouldn't have to do this, see, (it) immediately becomes, we become, whichever survivor becomes the owner of the whole place" and that Sam Hozman (lawyer and first husband of Ruth Bielsky, coexecutor of her estate) *530 had told her the same. Plaintiff believed her and relying upon her statements, agreed to and did execute the deed in February, 1944, to the Avenue 19 property to both as tenants in common. He testified he told her "(I)f you want it that way, its okay with me"; but that he neither intended to give plaintiff, nor understood that he was relinquishing to her, his interest in the property, at all times believing that he still retained the same and would inherit it all upon her death without the expense of probate; and further that he executed the deed to expedite the vesting of the property in him in the event he survived her.
Under much the same circumstances, plaintiff deeded the Brooks Avenue property to decedent as her separate property on November 8, 1948. At that time he was engaged in the furniture business and "needed some money." He told her this, and at various times she gave him funds from the community assets. She was still handling all of the finances and banking the money and paying the bills. Again discussing their affairs, she suggested "(s)upposing you turn over the property to me for convenience sake ..." She told him that Sam (whom she knew plaintiff also trusted) said she should suggest to him that "she should get the property in her name only"; that as long as they were still married she would be able to do nothing with the property without his name (signature) and he would receive it as survivor at her death; and that Sam told her that according to California law the property would belong to plaintiff if she died first, without expense of probate. Believing her statements plaintiff deeded the property to her, and himself wrote into the deed "Mary Slater, married woman, as her separate property." Plaintiff did not check on any of her statements to him because he trusted her and relied on her. At no time until after his wife's death did plaintiff realize the legal effect of these transactions; and he at no time intended to release to her his interest in either property. That decedent knew her representations were false and she made them to induce plaintiff to execute the deeds as part of her scheme to acquire the property for her own purposes is borne out by her discussions and confidences with others concerning the property and a will, her subsequent secret execution of a will leaving the same to her daughter and, unknown to plaintiff, the purchase of bonds in her name and that of her daughter from community monies. During all of this time and without his knowledge and permission, decedent was secretly purchasing, with community funds which plaintiff had entrusted to her *531 care, United States savings bonds, approximately $2,000 of which she, unknown to plaintiff, placed in her name alone, and $10,000 in her name and that of Rena Wolfson, in joint tenancy. She at no time discussed this with plaintiff who had no knowledge of the existence of the bonds until her death. However, decedent did discuss the purchase of the bonds with others, left them with a third person for safekeeping, discussed with others the execution of a will and made her last will and testament in 1951 wherein she left both pieces of property and the bonds in her name to Rena Wolfson. It was not until her funeral plaintiff learned of the true state of his affairs, that decedent had diverted community assets and that at the times the deeds were executed she intended upon her death to leave the property to her daughter.
It is apparent from the evidence that the confidential relationship existing between plaintiff and decedent arose out of more than the mere fact they were married and living together. [4] As to transactions between husband and wife "the rule with respect to confidential relationships obtains and precludes either from obtaining unfair advantage of the other through fraud, mistake or undue influence." (Dale v. Dale, 87 Cal.App. 359 [262 P. 339].) The unfair advantage of plaintiff taken by decedent in this atmosphere of trust and confidence is obvious from the evidence; as is the undue influence she exerted upon him.
Appellants argue that in connection with the transfer of the Avenue 19 property, decedent's misrepresentations were made after plaintiff executed the deed and thus could not serve as an inducement for the conveyance. Neither the record as a whole, nor that portion of plaintiff's testimony referred to by appellants, alone or read in conjunction with his other testimony, bears this out. The most the latter discloses is that a few days after the deed was executed by plaintiff, decedent told him that she had been advised to have him do so by Sam Hozman. This certainly does not preclude a finding from the other evidence in the record that before he executed the deed she told him that, if he would convey the property to them as tenants in common, it would still remain community property and it would expedite the transfer of the property to the survivor without the expense of probate and taxes.
[5] With reference to the savings bonds the evidence is apparent that when the parties were married they owned nothing; that they had previously been on charity. After working hard in the ice cream distributing business earning *532 a small profit each day, plaintiff finally accumulated a little money. He supported the family, provided for the care of Rena Wolfson and paid his bills from his daily earnings and the income in rents their two places of property yielded. The latter were finally paid in full from the rent, their savings and plaintiff's earnings. During this time, decedent was handling all of the money and, without plaintiff's knowledge, from the funds coming into her possession from these sources, she purchased savings bonds totalling approximately $12,000. Although decedent received $4,000 by reason of the death of her former husband the disposition, if any, of the money cannot be traced--there was no evidence concerning how the funds were used and no proof that they purchased savings bonds, paid off the properties, or were spent for living expenses. However, the evidence shows that for two years after the marriage the incompetent daughter of decedent by a prior marriage lived with the parties and thereafter was placed by them in a sanitarium. On the record before us, it is more reasonable to assume that the money was spent for her care than to assume it was spent in any other manner. Moreover, the $4,000 has not been, and cannot, under the evidence, be traced. We can only conclude therefrom that community funds went into the purchase of the properties.
Proof of her deceit and fraud is borne out by testimony that decedent, upon purchasing the bonds did so secretly and without knowledge of plaintiff, placed them, at one time, with the owner of the sanitarium where her daughter was staying and on other occasions with the Bielskys, the coexecutors of her estate, and put none of them in plaintiff's name. She took other persons into her confidence concerning the bonds, the transfer of the two properties and her will, but she at no time discussed these matters with plaintiff. It is plain that the welfare of her daughter was foremost in her mind and that it was her desire to see that she was cared for after her death even at the expense of her husband. It is likewise apparent that plaintiff, believing he was making the conveyances for convenience in handling and disposing of the property upon death, at no time intended to relinquish his rights to any of the property.
For the foregoing reasons the judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Fourt, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737648 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:29.991577+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Douglas King, together with other Nebraska State Patrol employees (the troopers), filed a lawsuit against the State of Nebraska alleging that the State’s overtime policy violated the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq. (1994). In a separate lawsuit, John G. Carrigan, a corrections lieutenant in the Nebraska Department of Correctional Services (Department), similarly claimed that the State’s overtime policy violated the FLSA. The troopers and Carrigan (hereinafter collectively the appellants) moved for partial summary judgment, asking that the district court find in their favor on the issue of the State’s liability and that the State’s policies are willful violations of the FLSA. Carrigan also requested that the court find in his favor on the issue of whether he is an exempt employee under the FLSA.
The district court for Lancaster County denied the appellants’ motions for partial summary judgment and dismissed their respective petitions for lack of jurisdiction based on the State’s sovereign immunity. These appeals followed and have been consolidated for disposition. The question presented is whether the State has waived its sovereign immunity in suits brought to invalidate certain contractual provisions as violative of the FLSA. We hold that the State has not waived its sovereign immunity in the instant cases and, therefore, dismiss the appeals for lack of jurisdiction.
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
State Patrol Troopers
Appellant King and all other named plaintiffs in his suit are Nebraska State Patrol employees. In their first petition of December 10,1996, the troopers alleged that State Patrol troopers were required to work overtime and that the State provided them with compensatory time off for overtime work instead of *16cash overtime pay. The troopers further alleged that to keep compensatory time balances at a minimum, the State would unilaterally schedule time off for the troopers if the troopers themselves did not do so. The troopers alleged that as a result, compensatory time balances were reduced by the State’s requiring involuntary use of compensatory time without monetary compensation. Additionally, the troopers claimed that for one or more of the troopers, the State would set off overtime hours worked against compensatory time used at the rate of an hour and a half compensatory time for each hour of overtime worked during the same pay period. As a result, the troopers’ compensatory time banks were not increased even though they worked overtime without monetary compensation.
Further, the troopers alleged that three of the troopers were promoted within the last 3 years to the rank of lieutenant and were informed that they would be ineligible for overtime pay or for a compensatory time bank of accrued overtime. The troopers claimed that the State directed these three troopers to use all of their earned compensatory time banks within 1 year of their promotion or lose this earned time.
The troopers asserted that the State’s unilateral policy of forcing them to use compensatory time violated 29 U.S.C. §§ 206 and 207. They alleged that the failure to compensate them for the forced use of compensatory time was a willful violation of these sections within the scope of 29 U.S.C § 255(a) (1994).
The troopers prayed for damages in the form of backpay for the prior 3 years, injunctive relief to enjoin the State from requiring the employees to schedule compensatory time off, liquidated damages equal to the amount of any backpay awarded, costs, attorney fees, and prejudgment interest. Additionally, the troopers asked the court to declare that the State’s policies are unlawful and constitute a willful violation of 29 U.S.C. §§ 206 and 207 and that the lieutenants are eligible to earn overtime compensation.
The State filed a demurrer on December 16, 1996, asserting that the court lacked jurisdiction over the State or over the subject matter, since the State had not waived its sovereign immunity, that there was a defect of party defendant, and that the petition did not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action. The district *17court overruled this demurrer on February 7, 1997, determining that the subject matter of the suit was an employment relationship between the troopers and the State, which was a contractual matter. The court concluded that the State had waived its sovereign immunity for actions arising from a contract, citing Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-21,206 (Reissue 1995), and Hoiengs v. County of Adams, 245 Neb. 877, 516 N.W.2d 223 (1994).
The troopers amended their petition, with a few significant changes. Specifically, one individual was added to the list of troopers who were promoted to the rank of lieutenant and subject to the State’s overtime policies. The troopers also alleged that § 10.5 of the labor contract between the State and the State Law Enforcement Bargaining Council, which governed the use of compensatory time, is null and void as violative of 29 U.S.C. §§ 206 and 207. The troopers also alleged that the State had retaliated and discriminated against several of them by taking actions in conjunction with its policies and procedures which denied these troopers the opportunity to work overtime, including regularly scheduled hours on holidays, in violation of 29 U.S.C. §§ 215(a)(3) and 216(b). In the troopers’ prayer for relief, they requested that the court declare § 10.5 of the labor contract null and void as being in violation of federal laws, including 29 U.S.C. §§ 206 and 207.
Appellant Carrigan
Appellant Carrigan was employed by the Department as a corrections lieutenant at the Nebraska Correctional Center for Women in York. Carrigan died during the pendency of this appeal, and his personal representative was substituted as the appellant. Similarly to the troopers, Carrigan alleged that he was required to work overtime and that the State provided him with compensatory time off for overtime work performed instead of cash overtime pay. To keep the compensatory time bank balances at a minimum, the State would unilaterally schedule time off for Carrigan if he did not do so, or would unilaterally decrease his compensatory time bank balance. As a result, Carrigan alleged that his compensatory time balance was reduced by the State, requiring involuntary use of compensatory time without monetary compensation, which he alleged was a *18violation of 29 U.S.C. §§ 206 and 207 and was a willful violation of these sections within the scope of 29 U.S.C. § 255(a). Carrigan prayed for damages in the form of backpay for the prior 3 years, injunctive relief to enjoin the State from requiring him to schedule compensatory time off, a declaration that the State’s policies are unlawful and constitute willful violations, liquidated damages equal to the amount of any backpay awarded, costs, attorney fees, and prejudgment interest.
On January 3, 1997, the State filed a demurrer to Carrigan’s petition, reiterating the grounds upon which it based its demurrer to the troopers’ petition. This demurrer was also overruled on February 7, as part of the same order overruling the demurrer to the troopers’ petition.
Summary Judgment
The appellants moved for partial summary judgment on March 24,1998. These motions sought an order in their favor on the issue of liability. On August 27, the district court overruled the motions for partial summary judgment and dismissed the appellants’ petitions. The district court stated that its prior rulings on the State’s demurrers were incorrect and that these actions seeking to subject the State to the FLSA provisions are barred by sovereign immunity. The district court reasoned:
The plaintiffs contend that the State has waived its sovereign immunity under Neb. Rev. Stat. §25-21,206 (Reissue 1995), citing Hoiengs v. County of Adams, 245 Neb. 877, 516 N.W.2d 223 (1994). In Hoiengs the plaintiffs claimed that the various counties had failed to make proper contributions to the retirement accounts of the employees in accordance with the applicable retirement statutes. The court found that the claims to retirement benefits by the public employees were contract rights and that the employees’ expectations with respect to their pensions were protected by the law of contracts. Therefore, because the Legislature had provided in Section 25-21,206 that the State can be sued on any matter arising from a contract authorized or ratified by the Legislature, this constituted a waiver of sovereign immunity with respect to these retirement benefits.
*19Such is not the case here. The plaintiffs are not suing to enforce their contract with the State or to have it interpreted. Rather they seek to have portions of that contract invalidated as violative of the FLSA and to have the FLSA applied to the State of Nebraska. Although a contract is involved, clearly this is not a suit on a contract but a suit to subject the State to the FLSA. Such an action is barred by the doctrine of sovereign immunity in that there has been no waiver by the State.
The appellants timely appealed the dismissal of their petitions and the overruling of their motions for partial summary judgment.
The appellants filed a motion to consolidate their appeals, which was granted. We then granted the appellants’ petition to bypass the Nebraska Court of Appeals.
ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
The appellants allege that the district court erred (1) in finding that it lacked jurisdiction over the State in a suit to enforce provisions of the FLSA and (2) as a matter of law in denying the appellants’ motions for partial summary judgment.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
A jurisdictional question which does not involve a factual dispute is determined by an appellate court as a matter of law, which requires the appellate court to reach a conclusion independent from the lower court’s decision. Custom Fabricators v. Lenarduzzi, 259 Neb. 453, 610 N.W.2d 391 (2000); Beachy v. Becerra, 259 Neb. 299, 609 N.W.2d 648 (2000).
ANALYSIS
Sovereign Immunity: Alden v. Maine
During the pendency of these appeals, but prior to oral argument, the U.S. Supreme Court decided Alden v. Maine, 527 U.S. 706, 119 S. Ct. 2240, 144 L. Ed. 2d 636 (1999). The Supreme Court’s reasoning in Alden v. Maine will be examined in detail in order to explain why our review is limited to whether the State waived its sovereign immunity. In the Alden case, a group of probation officers filed suit in state court against their employer, the State of Maine, alleging that it had violated the *20overtime provisions of the FLSA. The state trial court dismissed the suit on the basis of sovereign immunity, the Maine Supreme Judicial Court affirmed, and the Supreme Court granted certiorari.
In affirming the lower court’s decision, the Supreme Court conducted an extensive historical analysis of the principles of sovereign immunity and the 11th Amendment. The Court stressed the importance of state sovereignty to the founders and stated that the text and history of the 11th Amendment suggest that Congress sought to restore the original constitutional design through its adoption. The Court reasoned that “sovereign immunity of the States neither derives from, nor is limited by, the terms of the Eleventh Amendment.” 527 U.S. at 713. Rather, “[t]he Eleventh Amendment confirmed, rather than established, sovereign immunity as a constitutional principle.” 527 U.S. at 728-29.
The Court then analyzed whether Article I gave Congress the power to subject nonconsenting states to private suits in their own courts. The Court stated, “In exercising its Article I powers Congress may subject the States to private suits in their own courts only if there is ‘compelling evidence’ that the States were required to surrender this power to Congress pursuant to the constitutional design.” 527 U.S. at 730-31. The Court looked for this “compelling evidence” through an examination of history, practice, precedent, and the Constitutional structure.
The Court first rejected the notion that substantive federal law by its own force necessarily overrides the states’ sovereign immunity; rather, “[w]hen a State asserts its immunity to suit, the question is not the primacy of federal law but the implementation of the law in a manner consistent with the constitutional sovereignty of the States.” 527 U.S. at 732. The Court then read the relevant history as an indication that the Constitution might not have been adopted “if it had been understood to strip the States of immunity from suit in their own courts and cede to the Federal Government a power to subject nonconsenting States to private suits in these fora.” 527 U.S. at 743. The Court did not discover any instance where the early Congresses enacted statutes which purported to authorize suits against nonconsenting states in state courts.
*21The Court noted that it had “often described the States’ immunity in sweeping terms, without reference to whether the suit was prosecuted in state or federal court.” Alden v. Maine, 527 U.S. 706, 745, 119 S. Ct. 2240, 144 L. Ed. 2d 636 (1999). Finally, the Court reasoned that the principles of federalism and its concomitant respect for state sovereignty compel the conclusion that “States retain immunity from private suit in their own courts, an immunity beyond the congressional power to abrogate by Article I legislation.” 527 U.S. at 754.
The Court ultimately held that Congress did not have the power to subject nonconsenting states to private suits for damages in state courts. Id. Thus, the provision of the FLSA which purported to authorize private actions against a state in state courts without its consent was an unconstitutional abrogation of state sovereign immunity.
The Court then pointed out that sovereign immunity bars suits only in the absence of consent; states can consent to suits through the enactment of various state statutes or pursuant to the plan of the constitutional convention or by subsequent constitutional amendment. Additionally, the Court stated that sovereign immunity bars suits against states but not lesser entities. The Court then concluded that the State of Maine had not waived its sovereign immunity.
In light of Alden v. Maine, supra, the primary issue on appeal is whether the State has waived its sovereign immunity in these suits brought to enforce certain provisions of the FLSA. Our analysis begins with the relevant constitutional and statutory provisions. Article V, § 22, of the Nebraska Constitution provides, “The state may sue and be sued, and the Legislature shall provide by law in what manner and in what courts suits shall be brought.” This constitutional provision, however, is not self-executing and requires legislative action to waive the State’s sovereign immunity. See, Logan v. Department of Corr. Servs., 254 Neb. 646, 578 N.W.2d 44 (1998); Riley v. State, 244 Neb. 250, 506 N.W.2d 45 (1993).
The appellants urge that this requisite legislative action is found in § 25-21,206. In relevant part, § 25-21,206 provides: “The state may be sued in the district court of the county wherein the capital is situated in any matter founded upon or *22growing out of a contract, express or implied, originally authorized or subsequently ratified by the Legislature, or founded upon any law of the state.” (Emphasis supplied.)
In the absence of anything to the contrary, statutory language is to be given its plain and ordinary meaning; an appellate court will not resort to interpretation to ascertain the meaning of statutory words which are plain, direct, and unambiguous. Sack v. State, 259 Neb. 463, 610 N.W.2d 385 (2000); Schrader v. Farmers Mut. Ins. Co., 259 Neb. 87, 608 N.W.2d 194 (2000). If the language of a statute is clear, the words of such statute are the end of any judicial inquiry regarding its meaning. Id.
Statutes that purport to waive the State’s sovereign immunity must be clear in their intent. Woollen v. State, 256 Neb. 865, 593 N.W.2d 729 (1999). They are strictly construed in favor of the sovereign and against the waiver. Id. See, also, Hoiengs v. County of Adams, 245 Neb. 877, 516 N.W.2d 223 (1994); Wiseman v. Keller, 218 Neb. 717, 358 N.W.2d 768 (1984). A waiver of sovereign immunity will only be found where stated by the most express language or by such overwhelming implications from the text as will leave no room for any other reasonable construction. Id. Thus, our analysis of § 25-21,206 is guided by its plain language and the presumption against a waiver of sovereign immunity.
The plain language of § 25-21,206 clearly encompasses only those matters founded upon or growing out of a contract. Therefore, our analysis is governed by the language in the operative contracts. The labor contract in the troopers’ case provides that the employees can accumulate up to 120 hours of compensatory time; when the balance exceeds 120 hours, employees are required to use the excess time within 6 months. If the employees fail or refuse to schedule the excess time off, they will be ordered to take compensatory time off as scheduled by their employer. In Carrigan’s case, there are no contractual agreements between the Department and the lieutenants regarding the overtime compensation banks, as detailed in the deposition testimony of the Department’s personnel administrator. Instead, the Department developed a policy relating to the use of the compensatory time banks.
*23Notably, the FLSA is not incorporated into either contract; rather, overtime provisions were constructed and policies were developed. The labor contract in the troopers’ case contains absolutely no mention of the FLSA. Carrigan contends that the FLSA has been incorporated into his contract, because the applicable Nebraska Classified System Personnel Rules & Regulations refer to the FLSA. However, Carrigan’s contract is not contained in the record, and we are, therefore, unable to determine if, and to what extent, the personnel rules are incorporated therein. Regardless, Carrigan’s position is undermined by the personnel administrator’s testimony that there are no contractual agreements between the Department and the lieutenants regarding the overtime compensation banks.
An examination of the record in the instant case reveals that the matters at issue in these suits are not “founded upon or growing out of’ the employment contract with the State, but, rather, are matters involving rights created by federal law. The appellants’ petitions demonstrate the nature of their actions, as they are brought “to address violations of the [FLSA],” and not rights arising from their contracts with the State. In other words, the appellants’ suits seek to invalidate provisions of employment contracts based upon rights created by the federal FLSA; they are not suits based upon rights created by the contracts themselves.
Further, we are required to strictly construe any waiver of sovereign immunity. We cannot conclude that the State waived its sovereign immunity by the most express language or by such overwhelming implications from the text as will leave no room for any other reasonable construction for suits such as these, which bear only a tangential relation to a contract. See, Hoiengs v. County of Adams, 245 Neb. 877, 516 N.W.2d 223 (1994); Wiseman v. Keller, 218 Neb. 717, 358 N.W.2d 768 (1984). The plain language and the requisite strict construction can dictate only one result: § 25-21,206 does not waive the State’s sovereign immunity from a suit brought against it for alleged FLSA violations when the FLSA claims are not founded upon or growing out of the contracts themselves.
Hoiengs v. County of Adams, supra, and Omer v. Tagg, 235 Neb. 527, 455 N.W.2d 815 (1990), are inapposite to the case at *24bar because the claims against the State in those cases arose out of the contracts. In Hoiengs v. County of Adams, the plaintiff brought suit on his own behalf and on behalf of others similarly situated, seeking a declaration that the defendant counties were required by the County Employees Retirement Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 23-2301 et seq. (Reissue 1991), to make additional contributions to their retirement systems. The system, as a state agency, asserted that it was immune from suit. We rejected its claim of sovereign immunity, reasoning that Hoiengs’ claim arose from his right to retirement benefits by virtue of his employment by a county participating in the retirement system. We relied on Halpin v. Nebraska State Patrolmen’s Retirement System, 211 Neb. 892, 320 N.W.2d 910 (1982), for the proposition that state retirement systems create contracts between the State and its employees who are members of the system. We then concluded that Hoiengs’ retirement rights were contractual in nature and that the system had waived its sovereign immunity under § 25-21,206.
In Omer v. Tagg, supra, a retired State Patrol member sought to participate in a state employees’ group health insurance program, pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 44-1620 et seq. (Reissue 1984) (now found at Neb. Rev. Stat. § 84-1601 et seq. (Reissue 1999)). The district court entered judgment for the retired employee, and the State appealed, alleging, inter alia, that the district court lacked jurisdiction because the State had not waived its sovereign immunity. We rejected this argument, noting that “the promises made at the time of employment were for compensation to be enjoyed at retirement and constituted a contract enforceable against the State” and that the State had waived sovereign immunity through § 25-21,206. Omer v. Tagg, 235 Neb. at 530, 455 N.W.2d at 817.
Hoiengs v. County of Adams, supra, and Omer v. Tagg, supra, are readily distinguishable from the case at bar because those cases both involve “matters founded upon or growing out of a contract.” In those cases, both the County Employees Retirement Act and the Nebraska State Insurance Program, respectively, were deemed to be part of the operative contract. In the instant case, however, the appellants’ claims are not “founded upon or growing out of [the] contract^]” themselves, but, rather, are an *25attempt to invalidate the contract and subject the State to the FLSA, which is a matter that is external to the bargained-for agreement between the parties. The appellants do not claim nor is there evidence before us that the State has breached any contractual provision by purportedly violating the mandates of the FLSA. Because the appellants’ claims are not founded upon or growing out of their contracts with the State, § 25-21,206 is inapplicable and, consequently, does not waive the State’s sovereign immunity for a suit for FLSA violations in this case. Thus, we conclude that the district court did not have jurisdiction over the State and properly dismissed the appellants’ petitions.
Denial of Partial Summary Judgment Motion
The appellants also contend that the district court erred in denying their motions for partial summary judgment. Because we have determined that the district court was without jurisdiction over the State, it did not have jurisdiction to consider the merits of the appellants’ motions for partial summary judgment. When a lower court does not have jurisdiction over the case before it, an appellate court also lacks jurisdiction to review the merits of the claim, issue, or question presented to the lower court. See, Sack v. State, 259 Neb. 463, 610 N.W.2d 385 (2000); Ferguson v. Union Pacific RR. Co., 258 Neb. 78, 601 N.W.2d 907 (1999).
CONCLUSION
Alden v. Maine, 527 U.S. 706, 119 S. Ct. 2240, 144 L. Ed. 2d 636 (1999), dictates that we limit our review to whether the State has waived its sovereign immunity for a suit involving FLSA violations. The district court correctly reasoned that the instant lawsuits did not involve matters “founded upon or growing out of a contract,” see § 25-21,206, but, rather, the suits were brought to subject the State to the FLSA. The presumption against waiver and the plain language of § 25-21,206 lead us to conclude that the State has not waived its sovereign immunity for these FLSA lawsuits, and therefore, the district court properly determined that it lacked jurisdiction. We consequently lack jurisdiction and dismiss the appeals.
Appeals dismissed.

=== CASE 9737650 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:30.259532+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE MILLER delivered the opinion of the court: This case requires us to examine alleged irregularities in a grand jury proceeding, including violations of grand jury secrecy and accusations of prosecutorial misconduct. On September 30, 1988, a Union County grand jury indicted the defendant for aggravated criminal sexual abuse and battery. The charges alleged that the defendant, a school teacher, fondled a 13-year-old female student during class. In February 1989, a trial judge in the circuit court of Union County dismissed the two-count indictment on several grounds. The appellate court affirmed the dismissal on the sole basis that, contrary to section 112— 6(a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (the Code), the victim’s mother was present when her daughter testified before the grand jury. (213 Ill. App. 3d 43.) We granted the State’s petition for leave to appeal (134 Ill. 2d R. 315). Section 112 — 6(a) provides, “Only the State’s Attorney, his reporter and any other person authorized by the court or by law may attend the sessions of the Grand Jury.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 112 — 6(a).) In this case, the victim’s mother was not authorized to attend the grand jury session. A transcript of the proceedings shows that the mother did not address the grand jury, but at one point told the victim to “calm down.” She was present only during her daughter’s testimony, and was not present during grand jury deliberations. The trial judge, in the portion of his order addressing this violation of section 112 — 6(a), dismissed the indictment against the defendant pursuant to section 114— 1(a)(5) of the Code, which allows a court to dismiss an indictment “returned by a Grand Jury which acted contrary to Article 112 of this Code and which results in substantial injustice to the defendant.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 114 — 1(a)(5).) The appellate court, without mentioning section 114 — 1(a)(5) in its opinion, held that the presence of an unauthorized person in the grand jury room is in itself grounds to dismiss an indictment. 213 Ill. App. 3d at 44. The State, citing People v. Arnold (1910), 248 Ill. 169, and People v. Munson (1925), 319 Ill. 596, argues that an otherwise valid indictment should not be dismissed unless the defendant can establish that he was prejudiced by the presence of an unauthorized person during grand jury proceedings. In Arnold, a teenage rape victim’s mother and father accompanied her into the grand jury room while she testified. This court held that the trial judge properly refused to quash the indictment where there was no prejudice to the defendant from their presence. (Arnold, 248 Ill. at 171-72.) The Munson court reiterated the rule that “while unauthorized persons are never to be permitted to be present in the grand jury room, the presence of such a person is not sufficient to vitiate the indictment unless it appears that the defendant was prejudiced by such presence.” (Munson, 319 Ill. at 604.) The State maintains that section 114 — 1(a)(5), with its reference to “substantial injustice,” codified this standard, and argues that, because the defendant cannot show that the mere presence of the victim’s mother in the grand jury room prejudiced him in any way, the trial court improperly dismissed the indictment. The defendant, urging us to adopt the per se rule of dismissal embraced by the appellate court, argues alternatively that section 114 — 1(a)(5) does not apply to this case, or that if it does, substantial injustice is inherent in a violation of section 112 — 6(a) and should be presumed. We shall address the latter argument first. The defendant maintains that section 114 — 1(a)(5) is not a codification of prior case law because Arnold and Munson, which predate the Code of Criminal Procedure, required a showing of “prejudice” when grand jury secrecy is violated, while the legislature used the term “substantial injustice” instead. He argues that these words do not have the same meaning, in that, while “prejudice” refers to an act or omission that affects the outcome of a decision, “injustice” refers to the deprivation of a substantial legal right. (See Black’s Law Dictionary 787, 1179 (6th ed. 1990).) The principal aim of the secrecy requirement, the defendant claims, is to protect individuals against charges that are the product of coercion and undue influence. (People v. Hunter (1978), 61 Ill. App. 3d 588, 593.) He therefore concludes that violation of a statute designed to afford protection to an accused is sufficiently grievous to constitute “substantial injustice.” In support of his argument that substantial injustice is inherent in a violation of section 112 — 6(a), the defendant distinguishes People v. Toolen (1983), 116 Ill. App. 3d 632, People v. Jackson (1978), 64 Ill. App. 3d 307, and People v. Hunter (1978), 61 Ill. App. 3d 588, which hold that undue influence or coercion will not be presumed from the authorized presence in the grand jury room of someone other than the State’s Attorney and his or her reporter. The defendant notes that the victim’s mother in this case, unlike the persons involved in Toolen, Jackson, and Hunter, was not authorized to attend the session of the grand jury. He believes that “substantial injustice” should be presumed when the State fails to comply with section 112 — 6(a). Requiring an accused to demonstrate prejudice whether or not the State obtains prior court authorization, he argues, renders the statute meaningless. We agree with the defendant that section 112 — 6(a) clearly mandates that only authorized persons attend grand jury proceedings. It does not by itself, however, require the dismissal of an indictment or provide any other penalty for its violation. Section 114 — 1(a)(5) provides that an indictment obtained in violation of article 112 may be dismissed if the violation results in substantial injustice to the defendant. Thus, sections 112 — 6(a) and 114 — 1(a)(5) must be read together. Interpreting section 114 — 1(a)(5) in the manner suggested by the defendant would require us to read the words “substantial injustice” out of the statute or to read into it an exception for violations of section 112— 6(a). We believe the legislature intended that a defendant demonstrate substantial injustice before he or she may secure dismissal of an indictment for a violation of section 112 — 6(a). If the legislature had intended that a violation of section 112 — 6(a) should result in dismissal of an indictment without a showing of injustice, it could have omitted that requirement from section 114 — 1(a)(5). Regardless of whether “substantial injustice” may be equated with “prejudice,” it requires something more than mere violation of the statute, such as a showing that the purposes of the secrecy requirement were not met, or that, in fact, the indictment was obtained as the result of undue influence or coercion. The State’s failure to obtain court authorization for the attendance of the victim’s mother at this session of the grand jury was improper and is not to be condoned. Under section 114 — 1(a)(5), however, the State’s violation of section 112 — 6(a) must also result in substantial injustice to the defendant before a court may dismiss the indictment against him for this reason. The defendant has not shown that the unauthorized presence of the victim’s mother in the grand jury room, in violation of section 112 — 6(a), resulted in substantial injustice to him. There has been no showing that the presence of the victim’s mother endangered the secrecy of these proceedings, and there is no evidence that her presence influenced her daughter’s testimony or the grand jury’s decision. The mother of the 13-year-old victim was present only to provide emotional support to her daughter and to put her more at ease while she testified before a group of strangers about a sensitive matter. The record shows that she spoke to the girl only to tell her to “calm down.” Thus, the purposes of section 112— 6(a) were not undermined by the mother’s presence, and the defendant has not demonstrated that her presence prejudiced him or resulted in substantial injustice. Alternatively, the defendant, who in the trial court asked that the indictment be dismissed pursuant to section 114 — 1(a)(5), now argues here that the statute is not relevant to this case because the State’s Attorney, and not the grand jury, acted contrary to section 112 — 6(a) by failing to obtain prior court authorization for the victim’s mother to attend the proceedings. The defendant has not suggested the conclusion to be drawn from a distinction, assuming it to be valid, between the wrongful acts of a grand jury and those of a prosecutor under these circumstances. Implicit in his argument, however, is the notion that, in the absence of section 114 — 1(a)(5), a trial judge has inherent authority to dismiss an indictment for the State’s Attorney’s violation of section 112 — 6(a) without requiring the accused to establish prejudice or substantial injustice. This argument is without merit. Initially, we note that section 112 — 6(a) does not indicate who is responsible for seeking court authorization for the presence of a person other than the State’s Attorney and his or her reporter. (Cf. People v. Haag (1979), 80 Ill. App. 3d 135, 139 (where duty to advise grand jury of its right to subpoena target of investigation is explicitly imposed on the State’s Attorney by statute, dismissal of indictment under section 114 — 1(a)(5) is improper).) We note further that section 112 — 4(c) provides that the grand jury foreman “shall preside over all hearings” and may “determine rules of procedure” except where otherwise provided in article 112. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 112 — 4(c).) The record in this case shows that the State’s Attorney advised the grand jury that the presence of anyone other than himself, his reporter, and the testifying witness was “unusual.” The record also shows that no member of the grand jury responded when the State’s Attorney asked whether anyone objected to the mother’s presence. The question whether section 114 — 1(a)(5) applies to violations of section 112 — 6(a) is not of consequence here. The defendant’s argument that section 114 — 1(a)(5) does not apply because the State’s Attorney, rather than the grand jury, violated section 112 — 6(a) amounts to an aliegation of prosecutorial misconduct. This allegation, even if true, does not alter the focus of our analysis. The defendant correctly notes that a trial judge has inherent authority to dismiss an indictment for reasons other than those listed in section 114 — 1(a). (People v. Lawson (1977), 67 Ill. 2d 449, 455.) “The preservation of the historic independence of the grand jury, however, requires that such supervisory power be exercised only when failure to do so will effect a deprivation of due process or result in a miscarriage of justice.” (People v. Sears (1971), 49 Ill. 2d 14, 31.) A court has authority to dismiss an indictment procured through prosecutorial misconduct only when the accused can show that such misconduct results in actual and substantial prejudice to him. Bank of Nova Scotia v. United States (1988), 487 U.S. 250, 256-57, 101 L. Ed. 2d 228, 238-39, 108 S. Ct. 2369, 2374-75; People v. J.H. (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 1, 18; Lawson, 67 Ill. 2d at 459-60. As we have already found, the defendant has failed to demonstrate that the presence of the victim’s mother prejudiced him in any way. Thus, even if section 114— 1(a)(5) were not applicable here, dismissal of the indictment against the defendant for the prosecutor’s violation of section 112 — 6(a) would not be warranted. Under these circumstances, we hold that the trial judge’s dismissal of the indictment against the defendant based on the unauthorized presence of the victim’s mother in the grand jury room was improper. The appellate court’s resolution of this case did not require it to address the other grounds upon which the trial judge dismissed the indictment, all of which were contested by the State. As the appellee in the appellate court, the defendant here may make any argument to sustain the circuit court judgment. (In re Splett (1991), 143 Ill. 2d 225; Hammond v. North American Asbestos Corp. (1983), 97 Ill. 2d 195, 209.) The defendant has chosen to raise only one of the issues not reached by the appellate court, and we will address it now. The defendant argues that the State’s Attorney, by intentionally soliciting hearsay testimony before the grand jury about “other bad acts” allegedly committed by the defendant and rumor and innuendo concerning his reputation, engaged in prosecutorial misconduct, which violated his due process rights (U.S. Const., amend. XIV; Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §2). He therefore maintains that the trial judge could properly dismiss the indictment against him pursuant to the court’s supervisory power over the grand jury. Citing no authority for this proposition, the defendant claims that grand jury testimony pertaining to “other bad acts” by the defendant are highly prejudicial as a matter of law in a prosecution for sexual misconduct, and that such testimony is no less objectionable under these circumstances than it is at trial. The “unfairness” of other allegations of sexual misconduct, he argues, was compounded by testimony concerning rumors that the defendant had “done this sort of thing before.” In sum, the defendant argues that the prosecutor, by soliciting such testimony, exceeded the bounds of “proper courtroom decorum and fairness” that should apply in the grand jury setting just as they do at trial. Contrary to the defendant’s assertion, grand jury proceedings are not intended to approximate a trial on the merits. (People v. J.H. (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 1, 12.) The grand jury’s power to conduct criminal investigations should be accorded the broadest possible scope consistent with constitutional limitations. (People v. Florendo (1983), 95 Ill. 2d 155, 159.) In determining what matters to investigate, members of a grand jury “ ‘may act on tips, rumors, evidence offered by the prosecution, or their own personal knowledge.’ ” (People v. Creque (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 515, 521-22, quoting United States v. Dionisio (1973), 410 U.S. 1, 15, 35 L. Ed. 2d 67, 80, 93 S. Ct. 764, 772.) Because a grand jury does not determine guilt or innocence, it may pursue its investigation unrestrained by the technical evidentiary and procedural restrictions that govern criminal trials. J.H., 136 Ill. 2d at 10. Nevertheless, the defendant argues that even if noncompliance with the evidentiary rules applicable to criminal trials was permissible in any particular instance, the State’s Attorney’s “persistent production of a pattern of prejudicial testimony constituted prosecutorial misconduct depriving the defendant of due process.” We disagree. It is the prosecutor’s duty to present to the grand jury information that tends to establish probable cause that the accused has committed a crime. “Generally speaking, ‘the validity of an indictment is not affected by the character of the evidence considered.’ ” (J.H., 136 Ill. 2d at 10, quoting United States v. Calandra (1974), 414 U.S. 338, 343-45, 38 L. Ed. 2d 561, 568-69, 94 S. Ct. 613, 617-18.) “[A]n indictment valid on its face is not subject to challenge on the ground that the grand jury acted on the basis of inadequate or incompetent evidence [citations] ***.” (Calandra, 414 U.S. at 345, 38 L. Ed. 2d at 569, 94 S. Ct. at 618; Creque, 72 Ill. 2d at 522.) Indeed, a valid indictment may be based entirely on hearsay. (Costello v. United States (1956), 350 U.S. 359, 100 L. Ed. 397, 76 S. Ct. 406; Creque, 72 Ill. 2d at 523.) In the present case there was ample evidence, including the testimony of the victim that she had been fondled by the defendant, on which the grand jury could base its indictment. As for testimony about “other bad acts,” two female students, in addition to the complaining witness, told the grand jury that the defendant had touched their breasts. Testimony about these alleged offenses, however, did not become evidence of “other” bad acts until after the indictment charging that the defendant sexually abused the complaining witness was returned. A grand jury is to investigate all criminal activity suggested by the evidence. (People v. Polk (1961), 21 Ill. 2d 594; People v. Jackson (1978), 64 Ill. App. 3d 307.) It is not restricted to considering a particular offense alleged to have been committed by an accused, but may also bring charges other than those originally sought by the State’s Attorney. (Jackson, 64 Ill. App. 3d at 310-11.) The defendant, therefore, will not be heard to complain that he was prejudiced by the grand jury’s decision not to indict him for other alleged offenses. We note further that much of the defendant’s argument on this issue is misplaced. The defendant repeatedly characterizes the testimony presented before the grand jury as being “weak,” “vague,” “implausible,” and “full of inherent contradictions.” He also claims that the State’s Attorney misled the grand jury as to the quantity of evidence that would be presented during the proceedings. An accused may not challenge an indictment on the ground that it is not supported by sufficient evidence where there is any evidence to support the indictment. (People v. Rodgers (1982), 92 Ill. 2d 283, 290.) Guilt or innocence is to be determined at a fair trial. Creque, 72 Ill. 2d at 527. We find nothing in the record of these grand jury proceedings that rises to the level necessary to constitute a deprivation of due process. (See Lawson, 67 Ill. 2d at 457 (courts must ascertain pre-indictment denial of due process with certainty).) The prosecutor’s conduct in this case neither prejudiced the defendant’s right to a fair trial nor undermined the integrity of the judicial process. (See J.H., 136 Ill. 2d at 12-13 (citing requirements for finding a due process violation under these circumstances).) The trial court’s dismissal of the indictment for prosecutorial misconduct was therefore improper. The defendant has not argued or briefed the remaining grounds upon which the trial judge dismissed the indictment; neither has he requested that the cause be remanded to the appellate court for consideration of these issues. Any additional arguments are therefore waived. (See County of Cook v. Lloyd A. Fry Roofing Co. (1974), 59 Ill. 2d 131, 139; People v. Haag (1979), 80 Ill. App. 3d 135, 137.) Accordingly, we reverse the judgments of the appellate and circuit courts, and remand the cause to the trial court for further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion. Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9737651 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:30.264694+00 ===

JUSTICE CLARK, dissenting: I respectfully dissent. The majority concludes that a violation of section 112 — 6(a) is insufficient to dismiss an indictment absent a special showing of prejudice to the defendant. Specifically, the defendant must show evidence that the purposes of the secrecy requirement were not met, or that the indictment was obtained as a result of undue influence or coercion (153 Ill. 2d at 55-56). Because I feel that a violation of section 112 — 6(a) inherently results in substantial injustice to a defendant, I disagree and favor a per se rule of dismissal. I intimate no view upon whether such a rule is applicable to a violation of any of the other subsections of article 112 and confine my thoughts to section 112 — 6(a) only. At the outset, it must be appreciated that the veil of secrecy surrounding a grand jury proceeding is a fundamental element of a grand jury investigation. (People v. Munson (1925), 319 Ill. 596, 603.) To this end the law refuses to permit one in the presence of the grand jury during the investigation who is not legally and properly before it. Most certainly the veil is not impenetrable. Section 112 — 6(a) provides that a court may authorize the presence of someone other than the State’s Attorney or a court reporter at the proceedings. In such instances, the court has heard a request for authorization and has weighed the possibility of undue influence or coercion and has made the tacit finding that the danger of either occurring is not present. 213 Ill. App. 3d at 45-46. Where an unauthorized person is present at the proceedings, however, no such finding has been made. The unauthorized individual’s presence alone is a violation of the secrecy required in a grand jury proceeding, and to require that the records of the proceeding establish undue influence “kills the very statute that prohibits the unauthorized presence of persons other than a State’s Attorney and a court reporter.” 213 Ill. App. 3d at 46. The majority relies on two of this court’s opinions in support of refusing to dismiss the indictment against defendant. I believe that both opinions are distinguishable. In People v. Munson (1925), 319 Ill. 596, this court reversed a circuit court order denying a motion to quash an indictment in which the State’s Attorney appearing before the grand jury was not a licensed attorney. The opinion concludes that the State’s Attorney’s participation in the grand jury proceeding prejudiced the defendant in that the indictment was “procured directly” by the unlicensed attorney. Munson, 319 Ill. at 604. The prejudice to the defendant’s interests was a consequence of the proceeding itself, conducted by one unqualified to do so. The State’s Attorney did not have the power to bring the indictment. The interests of the defendant were prejudiced, therefore, by the conduct of the State’s Attorney, not simply his presence at the proceeding. In Munson, therefore, this court concluded that because the indictment was improperly procured, the entire proceeding was vitiated. This conclusion was reached without any demonstration of actual prejudice to the defendant. Although language in Munson appears to support the majority opinion (Munson, 319 Ill. at 604; 153 Ill. 2d at 53-54), I note that this language was simply dicta and did not control the outcome of the case. In People v. Arnold (1910), 248 Ill. 169, the second opinion relied on by the majority, the defendant was charged by indictment with raping a 15-year-old girl. The girl and her parents were witnesses at the grand jury proceeding. All three were present in the grand jury room at the time each was being examined. Arnold, 248 Ill. at 171-72. There again, this court observed that among the most important protections provided by the grand jury proceeding is the guarantee of secrecy. “The proceedings before a grand jury must be kept strictly secret, and that could not be done if witnesses should be present during examination of each other. The rule, therefore, is, that one witness must never be permitted to be present at the examination of another.” (Emphasis added.) (Arnold, 248 Ill. at 171-72.) Although this court stated that the witness’ simultaneous presence in the grand jury room was in violation of the rule that one witness must never be permitted to -be present at the examination of the other, it concluded that the violation was not “substantial,” as the charge was proven through the testimony of other witnesses. Any influence the testimony of the parents or the girl had on the other was harmless in light of the testimony of the remaining witnesses. While the circumstances in Arnold are relatively similar to the ones presently before this court, the issues addressed are entirely distinct. The parents of the young girl in Arnold were witnesses in the grand jury proceeding and were present at the proceedings. The issue in Arnold was not whether the witness’ presence was authorized, but was simply the timing of the individuals’ presence — Was the fact that these three witnesses were present during examination of each other sufficient to quash the indictment? In the present matter, the victim’s mother was not authorized to attend the grand jury session, yet she was present during her daughter’s examination. The rule that was violated, therefore, was not the same as that in Arnold. Here, the concern is not the presence of a witness during the examination of another but, rather, the presence of an unauthorized individual during a grand jury session. In my opinion, substantial injustice is inherent and should be presumed where there is a violation of section 112 — 6(a). The majority concludes otherwise and notes that there was no showing that the presence of the victim’s mother endangered the secrecy of the proceeding or that her presence influenced her daughter’s testimony or the grand jury’s decision. As to the former argument, I believe that defendant’s interests were prejudiced by reason of the appearance of the mother. As I have stated above, grand jury proceedings are surrounded by secrecy. The protections afforded by this precaution are forfeited by the mere presence of an unauthorized individual at the proceeding. I believe that the unauthorized presence of an individual at a grand jury proceeding, without more, is enough to vitiate the indictment. As to the evidence of undue influence or coercion, the majority concludes that the mother provided only emotional support. (153 Ill. 2d at 56.) However, to the extent that the presence of the mother demonstrated a tacit substantiation of her daughter’s testimony, I believe the jury could not help but be silently influenced. Although it may be expected or, at least, not unusual for a mother to believe the word of her child and offer that child her support, it is not insignificant that the daughter’s testimony was that of the complainant, not simply a witness for the prosecution. The daughter’s testimony was crucial to the indictment; therefore, the danger of the mother’s presence as an influence on the jury was all the more significant. I would hold that the unauthorized presence of any person before a grand jury requires that the indictment handed down by that jury be quashed. JUSTICES BILANDIC and FREEMAN join in this dissent.

=== CASE 9737652 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:35.863458+00 ===

AFTER REMAND
Corrigan, J.
We granted leave in this criminal sexual conduct case arising from defendant’s alleged sexual assault of his thirteen-year-old daughter to consider whether the trial court abused its discretion in admitting evidence that defendant sexually assaulted his *48former stepdaughter1 and that an order existed prohibiting defendant from having contact with children under the age of seventeen. We conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the evidence. We therefore reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals, and remand this case to the Court of Appeals for consideration of defendant’s remaining arguments.
I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND AND PROCEDURAL POSTURE
The complainant alleged that defendant sexually assaulted her in late September 1994. She testified that she and defendant were alone in the family home in the afternoon. Defendant began “acting . . . weird” and left the living room, where the complainant was watching television. He returned after removing his t-shirt. He sat next to the complainant and began rubbing her leg. He then stood up, locked the front door, turned off the television, and unplugged the telephone. The complainant attempted to leave through the back door, but defendant led her by the arm back into the living room.
The complainant testified that defendant pushed her to the ground and, while holding her down, removed her clothes. Defendant then had sexual intercourse with the complainant. After the assault, defendant told the complainant that if she reported the incident to her mother, her mother would “be *49really upset with [her] for breaking her family up again . . . The complainant, however, told a friend about the assault approximately two weeks later. That disclosure led to a Department of Social Services investigation, and ultimately prompted a prosecutor to charge defendant with first-degree criminal sexual conduct, MCL 750.520b; MSA 28.788(2).
The prosecution moved before trial under MRE 404(b) to admit evidence that defendant had repeatedly sexually assaulted his stepdaughter. The prosecution argued at the hearing on the pretrial motion that the evidence would show defendant’s motive and intent, and show the absence of mistake. The trial court tentatively admitted the evidence on the ground that it demonstrated defendant’s intent, but requested that defendant’s stepdaughter testify outside the presence of the jury before the court would make a final ruling on the admissibility of the evidence.
At trial, defendant’s stepdaughter testified outside the presence of the jury that defendant sexually abused her during the period beginning when she was in kindergarten and ending in 1985, when she was in the seventh grade. The abuse stopped because defendant “went away.” The stepdaughter testified that defendant performed oral sex on her three to seven times weekly during the period. She also recalled one incident during which defendant had her lay on her side and he placed his penis between her legs. She recalled another incident during which defendant’s daughters from a prior marriage2 were at the family home for the weekend. The stepdaughter *50testified that, as the three girls slept on the living room floor, defendant performed oral sex on her. She heard defendant performing oral sex on the other girls. The stepdaughter testified that defendant instructed her not to tell anyone about his conduct because “it would hurt the family, that mom would be mad at [defendant and her].”
In argument, the prosecution stressed the similarities between the charged incident and the abuse of the stepdaughter. The prosecution argued that the evidence was relevant to show the absence of mistake, to support the complainant’s credibility, and to aid the jurors in their evaluation of the evidence by demonstrating that an adult can be sexually attracted to, and actually accomplish a sex act with, a child.
The trial court admitted the evidence, reasoning as follows:
Here, I think the evidence tends to show that the Defendant has committed other wrongful acts involving a child, or a juvenile, who was a member of the same household, which is the exact situation we have in the allegations in this trial.
Furthermore, we have the Defendant indicating that that conduct should not be reported for fear of breaking up the family or getting people in trouble. And, I think that is all consistent with the — the way in which he is alleged to have engaged in sex or sexual penetration in this case.
Therefore, I think it is, indeed, relevant, particularly where the Defense is a general denial.
Therefore, I believe it is offered for a proper purpose.
The second facet which I must consider is whether it is relevant. In light of the general denial I think it is relevant.
Third, whether the probative value is substantially outweighed by unfair prejudice under MRE 403. I find that it— it is not, in light of the testimony presented here today, particularly because I will give a limiting instruction as pro*51vided for in [People v VanderVliet, 444 Mich 52; 508 NW2d 114 (1993)] and I will give it not only in advance of [the stepdaughter’s] testimony, but if so requested I will give a limiting instruction at the conclusion of the trial in my general instructions to the jury.
The trial court gave a preliminary instruction to the jury regarding the stepdaughter’s testimony, cautioning the jury regarding its consideration of the evidence. The court explained that “the relevancy of this testimony is to show . . . the Defendant’s scheme, plan or system of how he does certain things. It is not — you must not conclude, and you cannot conclude or infer that because he may have done something wrong in the past that he, therefore, did something wrong in the incident for which he is on trial.” The stepdaughter then testified before the jury regarding the alleged abuse.
The prosecution also moved before trial to admit evidence of the existence of an order prohibiting defendant from having contact with children under the age of seventeen. In the spring of 1994, the parole board had released defendant after having served nine years in prison for a 1985 first-degree criminal sexual conduct conviction arising from his having had sexual intercourse with one of his daughters from his first marriage. A condition of defendant’s parole was that he not have contact with anyone under the age of seventeen.
The prosecution argued that the existence of the order was relevant because it would explain the complainant’s actions after the assault. The prosecution proposed that witnesses and counsel refer to the condition of parole as a “state agency” order to guard *52against the jury learning about the prior conviction. The trial court granted the motion.
The jury convicted defendant of first-degree criminal sexual conduct. The trial court sentenced defendant to a term of life imprisonment. The Court of Appeals reversed defendant’s conviction on the ground that the trial court erred in admitting evidence regarding defendant’s abuse of his stepdaughter and the existence of the state agency order.3 The Court construed the trial court’s remarks as admitting the evidence for the improper purpose of establishing defendant’s propensity to sexually abuse his children. The Court further determined that the evidence was not admissible to prove defendant’s common scheme, plan, or system because the only similarity between the acts was that defendant allegedly told each victim that disclosing the abuse would break up the family. The Court concluded that the prejudicial effect of the evidence greatly outweighed its probative value.
Regarding the state agency order, the Court of Appeals held that the unfair prejudice resulting from the evidence substantially outweighed its probative value. It further concluded that the evidence likely misled the jury and confused the issues. The Court reasoned that the jury likely drew a connection between evidence that defendant had been separated from his family for ten years, a state agency had determined that defendant posed a risk to children, and defendant had molested his stepdaughter. The evidence, the Court concluded, seriously prejudiced defendant by informing the jury that defendant could not be trusted near his own children. The Court *53determined that the probative value of the evidence did not justify the prejudicial testimony because the reason for the complainant’s delay in reporting the assault was not an issue at trial and defense counsel did not argue that the delay affected the complainant’s credibility. Further, the Court reasoned, the evidence was not necessary to explain defendant’s alleged threat because, if the police believed the complainant’s accusation, the family would have been separated regardless of the terms of defendant’s parole.
The Court of Appeals determined that the trial court’s errors were not harmless. It rejected, however, defendant’s claim that the prosecution’s failure to specify the exact date of the offense in the information denied him due process of law. The Court declined to address defendant’s remaining arguments in light of its decision to reverse and remand for a new trial.
The prosecution applied for leave to appeal to this Court. We initially held the application in abeyance for People v Starr, 457 Mich 490; 577 NW2d 673 (1998). After deciding Starr, we remanded this case to the Court of Appeals for reconsideration in light of Starr, supra, and People v Crawford, 458 Mich 376; 582 NW2d 785 (1998). 459 Mich 924 (1998).
On remand, the Court of Appeals reaffirmed its prior decision.4 The Court concluded that Crawford supported its prior decision because defendant’s alleged abuse of his stepdaughter was “substantially dissimilar” from the charged conduct. 236 Mich App 9. On examination of Starr, supra, the Court deter*54mined that Starr merely emphasized the third prong of People v VanderVliet, 444 Mich 52; 508 NW2d 114 (1993). The Court then concluded that it had properly applied VanderVliet in its prior opinion. Regarding the “agency order” evidence, the Court observed that it “implied that defendant was on parole at the time of the present offense,” and concluded that the evidence was not relevant to any issue in the case. 236 Mich App 11. The Court alternatively held that the probative value of the evidence, if any, was substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.
Judge Whitbeck dissented. The dissent criticized the Court of Appeals majority for relying too heavily on a similar acts rationale because MRE 404(b) does not require a high level of similarity. The dissent reasoned that defendant’s intent and alleged sexual attraction to children, while not directly relevant, were arguably part of a “logical thread” linking the other acts to the ultimate inference — that the charged act actually occurred. It further determined that the evidence was probative of the issues of absence of mistake and the complainant’s credibility. Regarding the agency order, the dissent reviewed the trial court’s determination of relevancy by considering the information available to the trial court at the time it ruled on the prosecution’s motion. The dissent concluded that, at that time, the prosecution did not know that defense counsel would not emphasize the complainant’s delay in reporting the assault. The dissent further concluded that, weighing unfair prejudice against the probative value of the evidence, the scales tipped toward admission.
*55We granted the prosecution’s application for leave to appeal. 461 Mich 896 (1999).
n. evidence of DEFENDANT’S abuse OF HIS STEPDAUGHTER
We conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting evidence concerning defendant’s alleged abuse of his stepdaughter.
A. MRE 404(b)
MRE 404(b)(1) provides:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show action in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for other purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, scheme, plan, or system in doing an act, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or accident when the same is material, whether such other crimes, wrongs, or acts are contemporaneous with, or prior or subsequent to the conduct at issue in the case.
In VanderVliet, supra at 74-75, we adopted the approach to other acts evidence enunciated by the United States Supreme Court in Huddleston v United States, 485 US 681, 691-692; 108 S Ct 1496; 99 L Ed 2d 771 (1988). That approach employs the evidentiary safeguards already present in the rules of evidence. First, the prosecutor must offer the other acts evidence under something other than a character to conduct or propensity theory. MRE 404(b). Second, the evidence must be relevant under MRE 402, as enforced through MRE 104(b), to an issue of fact of consequence at trial. Third, under MRE 403, a “ ‘determination must be made whether the danger of undue *56prejudice [substantially] outweighs the probative value of the evidence in view of the availability of other means of proof and other facts appropriate for making decision of this kind under Rule 403.’ ” Van-derVliet, supra at 75, quoting advisory committee notes to FRE 404(b). Finally, the trial court, upon request, may provide a limiting instruction under MRE 105.
The VanderVliet analytical framework reflects the theory of multiple admissibility on which MRE 404(b) is founded. MRE 404(b)(1) does not require exclusion of otherwise admissible evidence. Rather, the first sentence of MRE 404(b)(1) reiterates the general rule, embodied in MRE 404(a) and MRE 405, prohibiting the use of evidence of specific acts to prove a person’s character to show that the person acted in conformity with character on a particular occasion. The second sentence of MRE 404(b)(1) then emphasizes that this prohibition does not preclude using the evidence for other relevant purposes. MRE 404(b)(1) lists some of the permissible uses. The list is not, however, exhaustive. MRE 404(b)(1) thus reiterates that, under MRE 402, all relevant evidence is admissible, except as otherwise provided by the United States and Michigan Constitutions and other rules. That our Rules of Evidence preclude the use of evidence for one purpose simply does not render the evidence inadmissible for other purposes. Rather, the evidence is admissible for a proper purpose, subject to a limiting instruction under MRE 105.
Under VanderVliet, the trial court’s initial determination in deciding whether to admit other acts evidence is one of relevance. MRE 401 defines relevant evidence as “evidence having any tendency to make *57the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence.” Relevant evidence thus is evidence that is material (related to any fact that is of consequence to the action) and has probative force (any tendency to make the existence of a fact of consequence more or less probable than it would be without the evidence). People v Mills, 450 Mich 61, 66-68; 537 NW2d 909 (1995). Materiality, however, “does not mean that the evidence must be directed at an element of a crime or an applicable defense.” Id. at 67-68. A material fact is one that is “ ‘in issue’ in the sense that it is within the range of litigated matters in controversy.” Id. at 68, quoting United States v Dunn, 805 F2d 1275, 1281 (CA 6, 1986).5
*58On determining that the evidence is admissible under a permissible theory of logical relevance, the trial court must consider whether to exclude the evidence nonetheless under MRE 403. The trial court may exclude the admissible evidence of other acts “if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by consideration of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.” MRE 403.
In VanderVliet, supra at 90-91, we encouraged trial courts to utilize a flexible approach for determining admissibility to facilitate the informed exercise of their discretion under MRE 403. We explained:
The probative value of other acts evidence and its true potential for prejudice is often unclear until the proofs are actually presented. Other acts evidence relevant to elements technically at issue because of a not guilty plea may initially have only marginal probative value in comparison to the potential prejudice generated by the evidence. Where, for example, the real issue contested is whether the act was committed, and the prosecution’s claim is that the disputed issue of mens rea requires admission of other acts evidence in the case in chief, the trial court should defer the ruling on admissibility where the jury would be likely to determine criminal state of mind from the doing of the act, allowing admission in the case in chief only if the evidence of other acts meets the standards for admission as proof of actus reus. On the other hand, in some cases the cross-examination of witnesses in the case in chief may make it clear that the intent with which the act was committed is likely to be a matter of significant concern to the factfinder. The prosecutor should not be allowed to introduce other acts evidence only because it is technically relevant, nor should the defendant be allowed to interdict proofs that are highly probative of a truly contested issue. By waiting to determine the admissibility of other acts evidence relevant *59to an element only technically at issue, the trial court is able to forestall gamesmanship by the parties and insure the admission of evidence that possesses significant probative value. The ultimate goal is an enlightened basis for the trial court’s conclusion of relevance and for the attendant inquiry under MRE 403.
We again encourage trial courts to use this approach.
B. RELEVANCE
In this case, the prosecution argues that the other acts evidence was admissible to show defendant’s scheme, plan, or system in doing an act, to show defendant’s motive and intent, to show an absence of mistake, and to bolster the complainant’s credibility.6 *60We review the trial court’s evidentiary rulings under MRE 401 and MRE 403 for an abuse of discretion. People v Bahoda, 448 Mich 261, 289; 531 NW2d 659 (1995); see Crawford, supra at 383; Starr, supra at 494.
As we have often stated, a defendant’s general denial places all the elements of the charge at issue. Starr, supra at 501; VanderVliet, supra at 78. That the prosecution has identified a permissible theory of admissibility and the defendant has entered a general denial, however, does not automatically render the other acts evidence relevant in a particular case. The trial court must still determine whether the evidence, under a proper theory, has a tendency to make the existence of a fact of consequence in the case more or less probable than it would be without the evidence. MRE 401; Mills, supra at 66-68.
We recognize that determining relevance is often difficult because it necessarily involves drawing subtle distinctions. Although we sympathize with the trial courts in their struggle with evidentiary rulings in sexual abuse cases involving children, our evidentiary rules require that trial courts engage in the inquiry. Unlike the courts of other jurisdictions, we have never adopted the so-called “lustful disposition” rule,7 *61which allows the use of other acts for propensity purposes in sex offense cases. Nor do the Michigan Rules of Evidence contain a rule analogous to FRE 414.8 Under our rules of evidence, the trial court must make an individualized determination of relevance in each case. Accordingly, we examine the prosecution’s theories of logical relevance in this case.
1. scheme, plan, or system
In this case, the trial court apparently held that the evidence was relevant under a theory that it showed defendant’s plan, scheme, or system in doing an act. In People v Engelman, 434 Mich 204; 453 NW2d 656 (1990), this Court rejected the notion that use of *62other acts evidence is limited to proof of identity or intent. We held that evidence of other instances of sexual misconduct that establish a scheme, plan, or system may be material in the sense that the evidence proves that the charged act was committed.
Engelman, supra at 220-221, explained:
If it could be shown in this case that defendant did indeed follow a common scheme or plan in committing such acts against young children, it would defy logic to limit the use of that evidence to proof of identify or state of mind. The former will never be in dispute where the defendant and the victim know each other, and the defendant’s state of mind is not an element of many of the offenses set forth in the criminal sexual conduct act. Yet, in many cases such evidence might be not only relevant to the determination of defendant’s guilt or innocence, but also material in the sense required by [People v Golochowicz, 413 Mich 298; 319 NW2d 518 (1982)], as proof that the act was committed. As explained in 2 Wigmore, Evidence (Chadboum rev), § 304, p 249, “[w]hen the very doing of the act charged is yet to be proved, one of the evidential facts receivable is the person’s design or plan to do it . . . .”
Engelman, however, provided little guidance for lower courts in determining the existence of a plan, scheme, or system. This Court suggested that to establish a “true plan,” the evidence must show “ ‘that the defendant in fact and in mind formed a plan including the charged and uncharged crimes as stages in the plan’s execution.’ ” Id. at 221, quoting Imwinkelried, Uncharged Misconduct Evidence, § 3:21, p 53. We also quoted a passage from 1 Wharton, Criminal Evidence (14th ed), § 186, pp 786-787, stating that evidence “ ‘is admissible when it tends to establish a common plan, design, or scheme embracing a series of crimes, including the crime charged, so *63related to each other that proof of one tends to prove the other.’ ” Engelman, supra at 221, n 25.
Engelman thus focused on one of the two situations that fall within this theory of logical relevance. The situation identified in Engelman is where the charged and uncharged acts are constituent parts of a plan in which each act is a piece of the larger plan. That situation is not present in this case. Instead, this case is one where the defendant allegedly “devisfed] a plan and us[ed] it repeatedly to perpetrate separate but very similar crimes.” State v Lough, 125 Wash 2d 847, 855; 889 P2d 487 (1995).9
Today, we clarify that evidence of similar misconduct is logically relevant to show that the charged act occurred where the uncharged misconduct and the charged offense are sufficiently similar to support an inference that they are manifestations of a common plan, scheme, or system.10 See People v Ewoldt, 7 Cal *644th 380; 867 P2d 757 (1994). Logical relevance is not limited to circumstances in which the charged and uncharged acts are part of a single continuing conception or plot.
General similarity between the charged and uncharged acts does not, however, by itself, establish a plan, scheme, or system used to commit the acts. 2 Wigmore, Evidence (Chadboum rev), § 304, p 249, explains:
But where the conduct offered consists merely in the doing of other similar acts, it is obvious that something more is required than that mere similarity, which suffices for evidencing intent .... The object here is not merely to negative an innocent intent at the time of the act charged, but to prove a preexisting design, system, plan, or scheme, directed forwards to the doing of that act. In the former case (of intent) the attempt is merely to negative the innocent state of mind at the time of the act charged; in the present case the effort is to establish a definite prior design or system which included the doing of the act charged as part of its consummation. In the former case, the result is to give a complexion to a conceded act, and ends with that; in the present case, the result is to show (by probability) a precedent design which in its turn is to evidence (by probability) the doing of the act designed.
The added element, then, must be, not merely a similarity in the results, but such a concurrence of common features *65that the various acts are naturally to be explained as caused by a general plan of which they are the individual manifestations. [Emphasis in original.]
Wigmore, supra at 250-251, expounds on the common features between the uncharged and charged act necessary to support an inference of a plan, scheme, or system:
[T]he difference between requiring similarity, for acts negativing innocent intent, and requiring common features indicating common design, for acts showing design, is a difference of degree rather than of kind; for to be similar involves having common features, and to have common features is merely to have a high degree of similarity. . . .
The clue to the difference is best gained by remembering that in the one class of cases the act charged is assumed as done, and the mind asks only for something that will negative innocent intent; and the mere prior occurrence of an act similar in its gross features — i.e., the same doer, and the same sort of act, but not necessarily the same mode of acting nor the same sufferer — may suffice for that purpose. But where the very act is the object of proof, and is desired to be inferred from a plan or system, the combination of common features that will suggest a common plan as their explanation involves so much higher a grade of similarity as to constitute a substantially new and distinct test. [Emphasis in original.]
In Ewoldt, supra at 402-403, the Supreme Court of California provided guidance for ascertaining the existence of a common plan used by the defendant to commit the charged and uncharged acts. As Ewoldt explains, the necessary degree of similarity is greater than that needed to prove intent, but less than that needed to prove identity.
To establish the existence of a common design or plan, the common features must indicate the existence of a plan *66rather than a series of similar spontaneous acts, but the plan thus revealed need not be distinctive or unusual. For example, evidence that a search of the residence of a person suspected of rape produced a written plan to invite the victim to his residence and, once alone, to force her to engage in sexual intercourse would be highly relevant even if the plan lacked originality. In the same manner, evidence that the defendant has committed uncharged criminal acts that are similar to the charged offense may be relevant if these acts demonstrate circumstantially that the defendant committed the charged offense pursuant to the same design or plan he or she used in committing the uncharged acts. Unlike evidence of uncharged acts used to prove identity, the plan need not be unusual or distinctive; it need only exist to support the inference that the defendant employed that plan in committing the charged offense. [Ewoldt, supra at 403.]
In this case, we conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in determining that defendant’s alleged assault of the complainant and alleged abuse of his stepdaughter shared sufficient common features to infer a plan, scheme, or system to do the acts. The charged and uncharged acts contained common features beyond mere commission of acts of sexual abuse. Defendant and the alleged victims had a father-daughter relationship. The victims were of similar age at the time of the abuse. Defendant allegedly played on his daughters’ fear of breaking up the family to silence them. One could infer from these common features that defendant had a system that involved taking advantage of the parent-child relationship, particularly his control over his daughters, to perpetrate abuse.11
*67We acknowledge that the uncharged and charged acts were dissimilar in many respects. Defendant’s stepdaughter testified that, over the course of seven or eight years beginning when she was in kindergarten, defendant performed oral sex on her three to seven times weekly. The abuse took place at night in her bedroom. She recalled one incident when she was in the fifth grade during which defendant had her lay on her side and he placed his penis between her legs. The charged act in. this case, in contrast, was the only time defendant assaulted the complainant. The complainant did not allege prolonged sexual abuse. The incident occurred during a weekday afternoon, not at night while the complainant slept. The sexual act was intercourse, not oral sex. On the basis of this evidence, one could infer that the uncharged and charged acts involved different modes of acting, both in terms of sexual acts and the manner in which defendant allegedly perpetrated the abuse.
This case thus is one in which reasonable persons could disagree on whether the charged and uncharged acts contained sufficient common features to infer the existence of a common system used by defendant in committing the acts. As we have often observed, the trial court’s decision on a close eviden-tiary question such as this one ordinarily cannot be an abuse of discretion. E.g., People v Smith, 456 Mich 543, 550; 581 NW2d 654 (1998); Bahoda, supra at 289. We therefore conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in determining, under the circum*68stances of this case, that the evidence was admissible under this theory of logical relevance.
2. MOTIVE AND INTENT
The prosecution next argues that the evidence was admissible to prove defendant’s motive and intent. “A motive is the inducement for doing some act; it gives birth to a purpose.” People v Kuhn, 232 Mich 310, 312; 205 NW 188 (1925). Evidence of the defendant’s motive to commit the charged crime lends itself to three theories of logical relevance: (1) identity; (2) actus reus, and (3) mens rea. Imwinkekied, supra, §§ 3:15, 4:19, and 5:35.
In this case, the prosecution argues that defendant’s motive was to have sex with young girls who were related to him and that the existence of this motive, as evidenced by other sexual misconduct with his stepdaughter, tended to prove that the sexual assault alleged by the complainant actually occurred. This proffered purpose is undistinguishable from the so-called “lustful disposition” rule. However, as stated, this Court has never adopted that rule, and we decline to do so here. To accept the prosecutor’s theory of logical relevance would allow use of the evidence for the prohibited purpose of proving defendant’s character to show that he acted in conformity therewith during the events underlying the charged offense.
We likewise conclude that the evidence was not logically relevant under a theory that it proved defendant’s intent. First-degree criminal sexual conduct is a general intent crime. People v Langworthy, 416 Mich 630, 645; 331 NW2d 171 (1982). “ ‘[N]o intent is requi*69site other than that evidenced by the doing of the acts constituting the offense.’ ” Id. at 644. In this case, because the charged act was sexual intercourse and accident was not an issue, the evidence was not relevant to prove defendant’s general intent.
3. ABSENCE OF MISTAKE
We reject the prosecution’s argument that the evidence was relevant to show the absence of mistake in the victim’s perception of the incident underlying the charges. We agree that the ultimate fact — that sexual penetration occurred — was a fact of consequence at trial. Nevertheless, the thirteen-year-old complainant’s perception of the incident, i.e., whether she mistakenly believed that sexual penetration occurred when, in fact, it did not, was not “in issue.” The complainant’s perception of the incident was not within the range of litigated matters in controversy. Mills, supra at 68. “The relationship of the elements of the charge, the theories of admissibility, and the defenses asserted governs what is relevant and material.” Van-derVliet, supra at 75. In this case, defendant’s theory of defense was not that the complainant mistakenly perceived his actions, but that the entire incident did not take place. We therefore conclude that the evidence was not relevant under a theory of absence of mistake.
4. THE COMPLAINANT’S CREDIBILITY
The prosecution lastly argues that the evidence was relevant to bolster the complainant’s credibility. In People DerMartzex, 390 Mich 410; 213 NW2d 97 (1973), this Court held that evidence of uncharged *70acts of sexual misconduct perpetrated by the defendant on the complainant was admissible for the purpose of corroborating the complainant’s testimony. In People v Jones, 417 Mich 285, 289; 335 NW2d 465 (1983), this Court described the rationale for Der-Martzex, supra, as follows: “the prior sexual acts between the victim and the defendant were a part of the ‘principal transaction’ necessary for the jury to weigh the victim’s testimony about the principal transaction.” In Jones, supra at 289-290, this Court held that evidence of sexual acts between the defendant and persons other than the complainant is not relevant to bolster the complainant’s credibility because the acts are not part of the principal transaction. Today, as we did in Engelman, supra at 222, we decline to reconsider our decision in Jones.12
C. MRE 403
We turn to the trial court’s determination under MRE 403 because the other act evidence was relevant under a permissible theory of logical relevance. We conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in declining to exclude the evidence under MRE 403. The evidence was admissible to show the actus *71reus of the offense. The probative value of the evidence was not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.
In VanderVliet, supra at 81, this Court observed that the MRE 403 determination is “best left to a contemporaneous assessment of the presentation, credibility, and effect of testimony.” In this case, the defense contended that the complainant fabricated the entire incident to remove defendant from her life. The evidence was thus probative of a disputed element of the offense — that sexual penetration occurred. Although the potential for prejudice existed, the evidence was probative in showing a system that defendant may have used to sexually assault his daughters, and consequently, in rebutting defendant’s claim of fabrication. Under these circumstances, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in determining that the danger of unfair prejudice did not substantially outweigh the probative value of the evidence.
m. AGENCY ORDER
We agree with the prosecution that the Court of Appeals erred in concluding that the trial court abused its discretion in admitting evidence of the existence of the agency order. In this case, the prosecution did not offer the evidence for the purpose of demonstrating defendant’s bad character by means of an inference from his having violated the order. The evidence was instead clearly relevant because it explained the complainant’s testimony regarding the threat used by defendant in an effort to secure her silence. The complainant testified that defendant told her that if she reported the incident to her mother, *72her mother would “be really upset with [her] for breaking her family up again . . . Evidence regarding the existence of an agency order that effectively separated the family filled a conceptual void regarding the events by providing information that the jury needed to understand defendant’s reference to breaking up the family again. See Starr, supra at 502.
We conclude that the evidence was also relevant to the issue of the complainant’s delay in reporting the assault, even though defendant ultimately chose not to vigorously argue that the delay signified that the assault did not occur. Materiality “does not mean that the evidence must be directed at an element of a crime or an applicable defense.” Mills, supra at 67-68. Rather, a material fact is one that is “ ‘in issue’ in the sense that it is within the range of litigated matters in controversy.” Id. at 68, quoting United States v Dunn, supra at 1281. Evidence regarding the existence of the agency order shed light on the family secret that possibly caused the complainant to hesitate before reporting the abuse for fear that the report would get her parents in trouble. Therefore, viewed from the trial court’s perspective at the time it ruled on the prosecution’s motion, the evidence was admissible to explain the complainant’s delay in reporting the assault in order to rebut defendant’s claim that the complainant fabricated the allegation of a sexual assault.
We further conclude that the probative value of the evidence was not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. MRE 403. We disagree with the Court of Appeals that the evidence implied that defendant was on parole at the time of the instant offense. The trial court took great care to *73reduce the likelihood that the jury would draw an unfairly prejudicial inference from the evidence by precluding any reference to the origins of the order. Under these circumstances, we conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the evidence.
rv. conclusion
We hold that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting evidence that defendant sexually assaulted his stepdaughter and that an agency order existed prohibiting defendant from having contact with children under the age of seventeen. Accordingly, we reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals, and remand this case to the Court of Appeals for consideration of defendant’s remaining arguments.
Weaver, C.J., and Taylor, Young, and Markman, JJ., concurred with Corrigan, J.
Defendant’s former stepdaughter is the complainant’s half sister. Their mother divorced defendant in 1985, nine years before the incident underlying this case. Defendant’s alleged abuse of his former stepdaughter occurred before the divorce. Therefore, for ease of reference, we will simply refer to defendant’s former stepdaughter as his stepdaughter.
Defendant has two daughters from his first marriage. He married the complainant’s mother in 1978. They have three children together. They divorced in 1985.
223 Mich App 530; 566 NW2d 677 (1997).
236 Mich App 1; 600 NW2d 98 (1999).
In Crawford, supra at 388, this Court stated that “[i]n order to ensure the defendant’s right to a fair trial, courts must vigilantly weed out character evidence that is disguised as something else. The logical relationship between the proffered evidence and the ultimate fact sought to be proven must be closely scrutinized.” Although strongly worded, one should not construe Crawford as creating a heightened standard of relevance for other acts evidence. Rather, Crawford recognizes that determining the admissibility of other acts evidence is often difficult. The trial court must ascertain whether the proffered theories of logical relevance apply under the circumstances of a particular case.
After VanderVliet, we amended MRE 404(b)(2) to assist the trial court in its evidentiary ruling. That rule provides:
The prosecution in a criminal case shall provide reasonable notice in advance of trial, or during trial if the court excuses pretrial notice on good cause shown, of the general nature of any such evidence it intends to introduce at trial and the rationale, whether or not mentioned in subparagraph (b)(1), for admitting the evidence. If necessary to a determination of the admissibility of the evidence under this rule, the defendant shall be required to state the theory or theories of defense, limited only by the defendant’s privilege against self-incrimination.
This case reveals that, even with this notice provision, the trial court’s task is not an easy one.
The prosecution argued in the trial court that the other acts evidence would show defendant’s motive and intent, show the absence of mistake, demonstrate the possibility that adults can be sexually attracted to, and engage in sex acts with, children, and bolster the complainant’s credibility. Under the first leg of VanderVliet, the prosecution must “offer” the evidence for a proper purpose. Here, the prosecution clearly offered the evidence for permissible purposes. The key question is whether, under the circumstances of this case, the evidence was relevant under those theories of logical relevance.
In Crawford, supra at 386, n 6, this Court emphasized that the prosecution bears the burden of articulating a proper purpose for the admission of prior acts evidence under MRE 404(b). Crawford, however, should not be read as imposing a heightened requirement for establishing the theory of admissibility or suggesting that the prosecution’s failure to identify at trial the purpose that supports admissibility requires reversal. The requirement under MRE 404(b)(2) that the prosecution provide notice of the general nature of the other acts evidence and rationale for admitting the evidence is designed to ensure that the defendant is aware of the evidence and to provide an enlightened basis for the trial court’s determination of relevance and decision whether to exclude the evidence under MRE 403. See VanderVliet, supra at 89, n 51. The prosecution’s recitation of purposes at trial does not restrict appellate courts in reviewing a trial court’s decision to admit the evidence.
We simply do not share the dissent's view that the failure of the prosecution to speak the words “plan, scheme, or system” requires reversal of defendant’s conviction. First, in this case, one could arguably construe the prosecution’s emphasis on the similarities between the charged and *60uncharged acts as raising this theory of logical relevance. More importantly, however, the trial court admitted the evidence under this theoiy and specifically instructed the jury to limit its consideration of the evidence to showing defendant’s scheme, plan, or system in doing an act. To reverse a conviction under these circumstances would do little to further the ends of justice.
Reed, Reading Gaol revisited: Admission of uncharged misconduct evidence in sex offender cases, 21 Am J Crim L 127, 192 (1993), explains that courts following the lustful disposition rule in sex offense cases “allow uncharged similar sexual misconduct evidence to be used by the trier of fact in determining the defendant’s lustful disposition by circum*61stantial proof of a general character trait, followed by an inference from that inductively proved general character trait that the defendant committed the crime charged in the indictment.” It appears that the courts of twenty-nine states employ the rule to admit sexual misconduct evidence. Id. at 189.
FRE 414(a) provides that “[i]n a criminal case in which the defendant is accused of an offense of child molestation, evidence of the defendant’s commission of another offense or offenses of child molestation is admissible, and may be considered for its bearing on any matter to which it is relevant.” Before promulgating FUE 413, 414, and 415, Congress considered the policy questions underlying the proposed rules and resolved those questions in favor of allowing the use of evidence of similar acts for propensity purposes in sexual assault and child molestation cases. See 140 Cong Rec H8991 and 140 Cong Rec S12990 (statements of Representative Susan Molinari and Senator Robert Dole, the respective principal House and Senate sponsors, referencing the section-by-section analysis accompanying § 801 of S 635, 137 Cong Rec S3238-3242, and incorporating the text of an address presented by senior counsel David J. Karp of the Office of Policy Development of the United States Department of Justice (Karp, Evidence of propensity and probability in sex offense oases and other cases, 70 Chi-Kent L R 15 [1994]). Only after a thorough debate over the underlying policy questions, using our notice and public comment procedure, would we consider adopting evidentiary rules that would allow the use of other acts for propensity purposes in sexual assault and child molestation cases.
Unlike the dissent, we do not read Engelman as rejecting the notion that this theory of logical relevance can apply under circumstances that do not establish a “true plan.” In Engelman, the defendant was convicted of third-degree criminal sexual conduct involving the sexual penetration of a fifteen-year-old boy. The trial court admitted a photograph of the nude defendant with a minor female who was exposing herself. Without testimony from the girl regarding the circumstances surrounding the taking of the photograph, this Court simply could not infer the existence of a common plan, scheme, or system used by the defendant to commit acts of sexual penetration.
Further, the dissent’s reading of Engelman would conflict with People v Oliphant, 399 Mich 472; 250 NW2d 443 (1976), in which this Court held that evidence that the defendant sexually assaulted other women in a similar manner was properly admitted to show the defendant’s plan or scheme. Although this Court determined that the evidence was probative of the issue of consent, it clearly viewed the plan, scheme, or system theory as encompassing situations where the charged and uncharged acts are sufficiently similar to support an inference that they are manifestations of a common plan, scheme, or system.
Contrary to the assertion of the dissent, we have identified a proper intermediate inference that is probative of whether the charged act was *64committed — the existence of a common plan, scheme, or system in doing an act. The jury is not required to draw an inference regarding the defendant’s character. Rather, the jury is asked to infer the existence of a common system and consider evidence that the defendant used that system in committing the charged act as proof that the charged act occurred. The logical relevance of the evidence is based on the system, as shown through the similarities between the charged and uncharged acts, rather than on defendant’s character, as shown by the uncharged act. In the end, therefore, the dissent simply does not recognize the existence of a common scheme or system as a permissible intermediate inference. Both Engelman and MRE 404(b)(1) clearly reject that view.
That these facts also prove the elements of a criminal offense is not pertinent to our inquiry. The question is whether the circumstances sur*67rounding the charged and other acts support an inference of a common system.
Our decision in Starr, supra, does not call Jones into question. In Starr, the defendant’s theory was that the complainant’s mother orchestrated the allegations of sexual abuse to prevent defendant, the complainant’s father, from having any contact with the complainant. The testimony of the defendant’s half sister that defendant had sexually abused her was relevant to rebut the defendant’s allegation of fabrication because it explained why the complainant’s mother questioned the complainant about her relationship with the defendant. The half sister’s disclosure of the abuse to the mother prompted the mother to question the complainant about possible abuse. Starr, supra at 502, quoting VanderVliet, supra at 81, concluded that “[w]ithout such evidence, the factfinder would be left with a chronological and conceptual void regarding the events . . . .”