=== CASE 9742100 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:06:46.763323+00 ===

Levin, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I concur with the majority’s conclusion that Richard Rood presented sufficient evidence to withstand General Dynamics’ motion for summary disposition under what the majority terms "the legitimate expectations theory of Toussaint [v Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Michigan, 408 Mich 579; 292 NW2d 880 (1980)],” ante, p 137. I write separately because Rood also presented sufficient evidence to withstand summary disposition under the "contract theory of Toussaint” and also because Joseph Schippers presented sufficient evidence to withstand summary disposition under both prongs of Toussaint.
The issue presented is whether, considering the evidence in a light most favorable to Rood and Schippers, there is any question of material fact for presentation to the jury concerning the nature of the employment relationship. It appears on review of the records that there is a material question of fact whether a just-cause employment relationship existed between the parties. I would therefore reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals in Rood, affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals in Schippers, and remand both cases for trial.
*146I
Schippers relies on three categories of evidence to substantiate his claim that a just-cause employment relationship existed between him and spx: the Sealed Power employee handbook, the custom and practice of Hy-Lift regarding employee discharge, and oral assurances by his supervisors at Hy-Lift regarding "job security.”
Spx’s employee "Information Handbook” provides:
We are proud of our people and recognize their value through steady employment, fair wages, good working conditions, unusually broad benefit programs, and recognition as individuals.
Sealed Power has adopted overall policies of employment and standards of conduct which are fair to all employees and in the best interest of the company. These policies and standards spell out your responsibilities to the company and the company’s responsibility and obligations to you.
The handbook also contains the following disclaimer:
The contents of this manual are presented as a matter of information only. While Sealed Power believes wholeheartedly in the plans, policies and procedures described here, they are not conditions of employment. Sealed Power reserves the right to modify, revoke, suspend, terminate, or change any or all such plans, policies, or procedures, in whole or in part, at any time, with or without notice. The language used in this manual is not intended to create, nor is it to be construed a contract between Sealed Power and any one or all of its employees.
The handbook provides further that "The company, by its actions and attitudes, will endeavor to *147maintain a spirit of good will, loyalty and harmony among all persons in the organization.” Finally, the handbook establishes a sixty-day probation period and a list of shop rules and regulations.
Schippers also presented the deposition testimony of Roy Overway, the general manager of the Hy-Lift division, that — at least since 1961 when Overway began working for the company — it was the custom and practice of the Hy-Lift division to discharge employees only for cause.
Schippers testified on deposition to oral assurances regarding job security made to him while he was considering whether to transfer from spx’s Sealed Power division to its Hy-Lift division. As noted by the majority, Schippers was concerned whether Hy-Lift — which had previously contracted its trucking operations — was committed to maintaining its own trucking operation. He made inquiries about "job security” before accepting the transfer. According to his deposition testimony, he was assured by Roy Overway, in response to these inquiries, that "unless something was really wrong, [he] would be there for retirement.” Similarly, Schippers testified that his direct supervisor, Larry Bozik told him that "as long as they had a truck, I would be the driver.”
The majority finds that "a reasonable jüror could not find that the spx’s handbook [probationary period or shop rules and regulations] gave rise to legitimate expectations of just-cause employment.” Ante, p 141. At the risk of appearing unreasonable, I conclude that, reasonable minds can differ whether the provisions of the handbook, the probationary period, the shop rules and regulations, and the custom and practice of Hy-Lift to terminate only for cause, considered individually or together, create a reasonable expectation of *148termination only for cause under the contract theory of Toussaint Summary disposition of this claim is inappropriate.
The majority also disagrees with Schippers’ characterization of the oral assurances made to him regarding job security with Hy-Lift. According to the majority, these statements only meant that Hy-Lift was resolved to maintain its trucking function, and, therefore, no reasonable juror could interpret these statements as promises to terminate Schippers " 'only if something was really wrong,’ i.e., for just cause.” Ante, p 124. Again, I disagree. Whether these statements of assurance regarding Schippers job security created a reasonable expectation of just-cause employment under the legitimate expectation prong of Toussaint is a question of fact on which reasonable minds could differ. Therefore, it is properly for the jury.
ii
The majority finds that General Dynamics’ Guide to Good Conduct, annual employee evaluation policy, merit pay increase policy, and Standard Practice 2-415, taken together, would allow ''a reasonable juror [to] find that the overall employee policies could reasonably instill a legitimate expectation of just-cause employment in gdls management and management support personnel.” Ante, p 143.1 agree.
In addition, however, Dr. Rood asserts that oral representations he received, coupled with gdls’ policies and procedures and his favorable evaluations1 and merit pay increases, gave rise to an implied just-cause employment contract under the *149contract theory of Toussaint. The first such assurance was given to Rood by William Persky, gdls’ director of corporate health and safety, during a discussion regarding job security,2 that his "job is fine, it’s secure.” Similarly, Rood’s immediate supervisor, Mr. Spiller, assured him that his job was secure and that he was "a key player” and "one of the basic components of the organization.”
The majority concludes:
A reasonable juror simply could not find that a reasonable employee in Dr. Rood’s position would have interpreted the statement "[y]our job is fine, it’s secure,” in context, as a promise of just-cause employment. . . .
Mr. Spiller’s statements to Dr. Rood that his "job [was] secure” and that he was "a key player” and "one of the basic components of the organization” are likewise insufficient to permit a reasonable juror to find that a reasonable promisee would interpret these statements as a promise of just-cause employment. [Ante, p 134.]
I conclude, however, that, considered with the policies and procedures of the company, which the majority finds to be sufficient to sustain a claim under the legitimate expectations prong of Tous-saint, the assurances given to Rood are sufficient to create a question of fact whether a just-cause employment relationship existed between Rood and General Dynamics under the contract theory prong of Toussaint.
in
In sum, the evidence presented by Rood and *150Schippers is sufficient to create a question of material fact for the jury whether oral assurances, written company policies, and company procedures and practices gave rise to a contract of just-cause employment under either prong of Toussaint. It cannot properly be said that all reasonable persons would agree that no such contract was created between the parties.
I would reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals in Rood and affirm in Schippers, and remand both cases for trial.
As noted by the majority, Dr. Rood consistently received good evaluations and his promotional potential was well rated. He received no negative feedback.
Dr. Rood was the plant physician at Chrysler’s tank plant at the time it was sold to General Dynamics Land Systems division. After the plant was sold, Dr. Rood was concerned about his status with the new company and began to inquire concerning job security.

=== CASE 9742101 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:06:48.143128+00 ===

SACKETT, Judge.
Steinkuehler was convicted for first-degree murder for the shotgun killing of DeWayne Mohr. Steinkuehler’s conviction was affirmed on direct appeal. In this postconviction relief action, Steinkuehler contends he was denied effective assistance of counsel in a number of particulars. We affirm.
Steinkuehler does not deny he shot De-Wayne Mohr, the former husband of Stein-kuehler’s live-in girl friend. Steinkuehler contends, however, he was intoxicated at the time of the killing which should negate his criminal intent. The eleven challenges he made to his attorney’s performance deal primarily with the manner the intoxication defense was presented.
To prevail on a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, Steinkuehler must show he was denied reasonably effective assistance of counsel as guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment and that his right to a fair trial was prejudiced. Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 687, 104 S.Ct. 2052, 2064, 80 L.Ed.2d 674, 693 (1984). Steinkuehler must show there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine the confidence in the outcome. Munz v. State, 382 N.W.2d 693, 697 (Iowa App.1985). Steinkuehler has the burden to prove breach of an essential duty, State v. Risdal, 404 N.W.2d 130, 131 (Iowa 1987), and establish prejudice by proving there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different. State v. Hildebrant, 405 N.W.2d 839, 841 (Iowa 1987); Strickland, 466 U.S. at 694, 104 S.Ct. at 2068, 80 L.Ed.2d at 698.
The State agrees with Steinkuehler that the standard of review of a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel is de novo, see Polly v. State, 355 N.W.2d 849, 854 (Iowa 1984), and the issues raised in the appellate brief have been preserved for review.
Steinkuehler drank heavily on the day of the shooting. One hour after Steinkuehler shot Mohr, Steinkuehler turned himself in at the police station. Steinkuehler was jailed. Sharon Shields was working as a jailer at the time. When Steinkuehler turned himself in, he was advised of his right to remain silent and consult an attorney. When asked where the shotgun was, he said, “I’m a jealous son of a bitch.” He was questioned. An attorney was not named to represent Steinkuehler until over a week later.
Before trial, Steinkuehler filed notice of an intoxication defense.
Steinkuehler first contends his trial counsel should have examined Shields and Sheriff Stehr about pressure put on Shields to change her testimony about Steinkuehler’s intoxication when jailed on the night of the shooting.
Prior to Steinkuehler’s trial, Shields testified in a deposition she had a brief contact with Steinkuehler at the law enforcement center on the night of the offense. She said Steinkuehler appeared dazed and she smelled alcohol on his breath. She also testified Steinkuehler acted like he did not know what was going on. She said she knew Steinkuehler and had booked him into jail about three times. She said Steinkuehler looked at her like he did not even recognize her when he saw her and his face was just kind of blank and he did not show a lot of emotion and was dazed or disoriented. She testified Steinkuehler cried when he was told Mohr had died. Shields testified she believed Steinkuehler was drunk and his statement, if any, would be thrown out of court.
Shields testified that after her deposition, she received a letter from the county attorney regarding her deposition testimony and that a copy of that letter was sent to her employer. The letter was critical of her deposition testimony that she “could not understand how [Steinkuehler] could give a statement because [she] thought he was drunk and because he did not have an attorney.” She testified that Sheriff Stehr then spoke to her about her testimony. Shields *720alleged that Sheriff Stehr told her “he wasn’t happy about my testimony. He asked me why I said — why I didn’t say that I forgot.” She testified that the sheriff went on to state that, “he forgets in court all the time.”
At the postconviction hearing, Shields testified, in her opinion, the pressure she was feeling affected her trial testimony regarding Steinkuehler’s intoxication. She stated that, “I felt like I had to measure my words and generally did not put very much emphasis on my testimony.” She clarified by stating that, “I measured my words. I was more nervous. Basically that’s it.” Further, Shields testified she made every effort to resist the pressure she felt from the sheriff and she testified truthfully at trial.
Steinkuehler claims his trial attorney was ineffective because he failed to cross-examine Shields about this alleged pressure she received to forget what she had seen.
The State says Steinkuehler cannot show prejudice because Shields’ trial testimony was identical to her deposition testimony.
Steinkuehler’s trial attorney testified at the postconviction proceeding that he did not attempt to raise this issue at trial because he believed he had done a thorough job with respect to Steinkuehler’s intoxication level and because Shields had required him to maintain a certain amount of confidentiality about the fact Shields had told the defense counsel about the pressure she perceived from the sheriff.
The State argues this tactic was reasonable because Shields had provided testimony helpful to the defense and testimony consistent with the testimony that she gave before she was allegedly pressured to change her testimony. Further, the decision not to cross-examine was a reasonable decision by defense counsel because had he chosen to disregard Shields’ request he keep confidential the fact she had reported receiving pressure to change her testimony, Shields may have changed from a sympathetic witness to a hostile one. The State also argues Shields’ possible reluctance to help Steinkuehler’s defense would have been apparent from the fact she was employed by the sheriffs department and defense counsel could reasonably determine he had little to gain by raising the issue of whéther the sheriff had pressured Shields to change her testimony regarding Steinkuehler’s level of intoxication.
Defense attorney made a reasonable strategic decision. Where an attorney makes a reasonable strategic decision, even if it is not successful, we will not find the attorney ineffective. See State v. Newman, 326 N.W.2d 788, 795 (Iowa 1982).
Steinkuehler next argues his trial counsel was not effective because he did not impeach the testimony of the sheriff. Stein-kuehler contends statements the sheriff allegedly made to Shields that the sheriff frequently forgets at trial when asked about factors unfavorable to the State and that he suggested Shields do the same should have been used to impeach the sheriffs testimony. The State advances Steinkuehler cannot show the failure to impeach the sheriff on this issue prejudiced him.
The sheriff testified at Steinkuehler’s trial. First, the sheriff provided the foundation for introduction of a photograph of the murder weapon. He testified that on the night of the offense he went where the gun was said to be located and he was present when an officer found the gun. He identified two photographs that showed the location where the gun was found.
The sheriff also testified he ordered Stein-kuehler held in the drunk tank the night of the shooting because he was concerned Steinkuehler might be suicidal and the area of the jail where the drunk tank is located is monitored and more secure than other areas. The sheriff testified on direct examination that Steinkuehler’s level of intoxication did not enter into his decision to hold Steinkueh-ler in the drunk tank.
Defense counsel cross-examined the sheriff regarding signs of intoxication that he may have observed in Steinkuehler. The sheriff admitted on cross-examination that he could smell alcohol on Steinkuehler and he believed Steinkuehler had been drinking. The sheriff also admitted had he stopped Steinkuehler *721while driving, he would have probably tested Steinkuehler for intoxication.
The State contends the cross-examination conducted was reasonably effective because the sheriff admitted he saw signs showing Steinkuehler might be intoxicated. The State notes during direct examination the sheriff did not claim to be unable to remember information, therefore, the State advances the court might not have let defense counsel cross-examine the sheriff regarding his alleged statement to Shields that he would frequently forget information when he testifies. The State also says Steinkuehler cannot demonstrate any prejudice as a result of defense counsel’s decision not to raise the issue of the sheriffs statements to Shields.
A statement by the sheriff that he frequently forgets evidence when he testifies relates to his credibility and his honesty in conducting an investigation.
We have a serious problem with law enforcement personnel who may chose to forget their obligation to be truthful and fair. The confidence entrusted to law enforcement in our society demands that breaches of that confidence should not be tolerated. However, the issue before us is not whether the sheriff acted improperly, the issue is has Steinkuehler shown the required prejudice. We find he has not.
Steinkuehler contends his trial counsel should have made additional requests for instructions relating to the intoxication issue. First, Steinkuehler argues trial counsel should have requested a jury instruction stating the jury could consider Steinkuehler’s intoxication in determining the weight to give to Steinkuehler’s statement that, “I’m a jealous son of a bitch.” Steinkuehler argues his alleged intoxication could have affected the jury’s determination of the weight to be given that statement.
Defense counsel testified at the postconviction hearing he did not request an instruction regarding Steinkuehler’s statement because he did not believe the statement amounted to a confession, and having an instruction relating to that statement would only draw attention to it. That strategy was reasonable, and we will not second guess trial counsel’s decision. See Newman, 326 N.W.2d at 796.
Steinkuehler submits his trial attorney was not effective because he did not request a jury instruction that impairment due to intoxicants would never reduce first-degree murder to manslaughter but would reduce the crime to second-degree murder.
Trial counsel testified at Steinkuehler’s postconviction hearing that he did not ask for an instruction like that now proposed by Steinkuehler because he thought without the instruction, the jury might find Steinkuehler guilty of manslaughter rather than either first-degree murder or second-degree murder. This was a reasonable tactic. Newman, 326 N.W.2d at 795.
Steinkuehler next argues Jury Instruction No. 25 did not say intoxication was a defense but only a material issue and, therefore, this instruction did not tell the jury what to do if it found Steinkuehler was so intoxicated at the time of the shooting he did not form requisite specific intent.
Jury Instruction number 25 stated:
[Randall] N. Steinkuehler has claimed that at the time and place of the commission of the offense he was intoxicated. The fact that a person is under the influence of intoxicants (drugs) does not excuse nor does it aggravate his guilt. However, intoxication may be shown where it is relevant to the person’s specific intent at the time of the act charged.
However, even though a person is under the influence of an intoxicant, if he still possesses a mental capacity sufficient to form the intent requisite to the offense charged; or, if he has the intent present in his mind before he falls under the influence of the intoxicant and then commits the act, he will not be absolved of the responsibility for the act. Thus, intoxication is a material issue only when it produces a mental disability such as will render the person incapable of forming the intent which is an element of the offense charged.
*722In considering the question of [Stein-kuehler’s] intoxication, it should be considered along with all the other evidence in the case which bears on the question of specific intent which is explained in Instruction No. 23.
The issue of [Steinkuehler’s] intoxication does not change or alter the burden resting upon the State to prove by evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that [Stein-kuehler] was able to and did form the specific intent required.
Steinkuehler says the instruction should have told the jury intoxication was a defense. We disagree.
It is the rule in Iowa that while voluntary intoxication cannot constitute a defense to a crime, it may negate criminal intent if intent is an element of the crime charged. State v. Caldwell, 385 N.W.2d 553, 557 (Iowa 1986); State v. Watts, 244 N.W.2d 586, 590 (Iowa 1976); State v. Linzmeyer, 248 Iowa 31, 35, 79 N.W.2d 206, 208 (1956).
Steinkuehler also argues the words material issue used in the instruction, though taken from State v. Collins, 305 N.W.2d 434, 437 (Iowa 1981), failed to give the jury a clear understanding of the intoxication issue.
Steinkuehler also says the instruction did not direct the jury what to do if they found Steinkuehler was so intoxicated he could not form a specific intent. Steinkuehler advances the jury was not clearly directed that a finding of intoxication could mitigate the forming of the requisite specific intent necessary for a finding of first-degree murder. The question before us is not whether the instructions could have been more clearly drafted. The only question is whether Stein-kuehler’s attorney was ineffective in failing to request a clearer draft. The instructions conform closely to the uniform instructions. We affirm on this issue. Steinkuehler has not made the required showing on this issue to succeed on his ineffective assistance of counsel claim.
Steinkuehler next contends his trial attorney should have objected to the admission of the gun and photographs of the scene and victim.
We have carefully considered all arguments advanced by Steinkuehler on this issue and find Steinkuehler has not made the requisite showing his trial counsel was not effective.
Steinkuehler next contends his counsel should have raised the issue he was kept from seeing an attorney on the night of the shooting and, as a result, no chemical test was given to establish the extent of his intoxication.
Officer Schraeder testified at the postcon-viction hearing that the shooting was reported at about 9:30 p.m. and shortly after 9:30 p.m., Steinkuehler walked into the law enforcement center and Schraeder followed him. Schraeder said he then advised Stein-kuehler of his right to an attorney and Stein-kuehler did not ask to talk to an attorney at that time. At 10:07 that night, Steinkuehler talked to County Attorney Thomas Gustaf-son. That conversation was recorded and transcribed. At the beginning of the conversation, Gustafson asked Steinkuehler if he wished to speak with an attorney. Stein-kuehler said he wanted to talk to his brother. Steinkuehler spoke to his brother, John, and asked him to contact attorney Steve Engel-hardt. John phoned Engelhardt’s home and talked to his wife and was told her husband was in California and she would contact him. John did not contact any other attorney.
A complaint was filed at about 3:00 a.m. on December 10, 1987. Steinkuehler was taken before a magistrate between 4:00 and 5:00 a.m. and made an application for a court-appointed attorney. The application was granted and the magistrate gave Steinkueh-ler a list of local attorneys. It was nearly ten days before an attorney was named to defend Steinkuehler. We affirm on this issue. Steinkuehler has failed to show the required prejudice to succeed on this claim.
Steinkuehler next contends his counsel should have objected to the amendment of the trial information eight days before trial. Steinkuehler was charged by a trial information with first-degree murder. His trial was set for March 22, 1988. Steinkueh-ler did not waive a speedy trial, although on March 10, 1988, Steinkuehler asked the trial *723be continued and he executed a limited waiver of his speedy trial rights. Steinkuehler’s trial was then set for May 17,1988. On May 11, 1988, the State filed a motion to continue the trial. The county attorney’s father had died May 2, 1988, and his mother had been hospitalized in Arizona since May 5. The county attorney contended he was primarily responsible for making his father’s funeral arrangements and for providing for the care and treatment of his mother. The trial court granted a continuance and set trial for May 24, 1988.
On May 16, 1988, the State amended the trial information to include the original first-degree murder allegation and to add an alternative allegation that Steinkuehler committed first-degree murder under the felony-murder rule. The underlying felony for the felony-murder allegation was willful injury.
Steinkuehler argues his trial and appellate counsel were ineffective for failing to object to the State’s amendment of the trial information eight days prior to trial. Trial counsel did object to the amendment on speedy trial grounds; however, this ground was not raised in Steinkuehler’s direct appeal.
Iowa Rule of Criminal Procedure 4(8), in relevant part, states:
The court may, on motion of the state, either before or during the trial, order the indictment amended so as to correct errors or admissions in matters of form or substance. Amendment is not allowed if substantial rights of the defendant are prejudiced by the amendment, or if a wholly new and different offense is charged.
Iowa R.Crim.P. 4(8)(a).
Iowa Rule of Criminal Procedure 4(8) is made applicable to amendment of trial information by Iowa Rule of Criminal Procedure 5(5). The amendment made by the State complies with the requirements of Rule 4(8). The trial court properly denied Steinkueh-ler’s motion to dismiss the charge against him, and appellate counsel was not ineffective for failing to challenge on appeal the trial court’s denial of Steinkuehler’s motion to dismiss.
The amendment in the case at bar did not charge a wholly new or different offense and did not prejudice any substantial rights of Steinkuehler. Rule 4(8)(a) permits the State to amend an information by charging a different means of committing an offense. State v. Williams, 305 N.W.2d 428, 430 (Iowa 1981).
The decision whether to grant a continuance to allow defendant time to prepare after an amendment to a trial information is discretionary with the trial court. State v. Schertz, 330 N.W.2d 1, 3 (Iowa 1983). The court found no abuse of discretion where the trial court denied defendant’s request for a continuance after the trial information charging first-degree kidnapping was amended three days prior to trial to add an additional alternative means of committing the offense. Schertz, 330 N.W.2d at 2-3. Similarly, the court has found no prejudice where a motion to amend the indictment was made ten days before trial and the motion was granted one week before trial. State v. Brown, 253 Iowa 658, 663, 113 N.W.2d 286, 289-90 (1962).
The facts to support the additional allegation did not change, and Steinkuehler’s chosen defense of intoxication applied to the felony-murder alternative as well as the premeditated murder alternative as both are specific intent crimes. Steinkuehler was not prejudiced by the amendment. See State v. Fuhrmann, 257 N.W.2d 619, 624 (Iowa 1977).
We have carefully examined Steinkuehler’s other challenges to the continuance and his counsel’s failure to ask for an additional continuance and find them to be without merit.
Steinkuehler next contends defense counsel was ineffective for failing to raise the issue the submission of felony murder was barred under the merger doctrine.
The felony merger doctrine does not apply to felonious assaults. The legislature intended felonious assaults, including willful injury under section 708.4, be felonies that may serve as the basis of a felony-murder and that the merger doctrine discussed in State v. Hinkle, 229 N.W.2d 744, 750 (Iowa 1975), not apply to such assaults. State v. Beeman, 315 N.W.2d 770, 776-77 (Iowa 1982). The felony-murder statute does not preclude using willful injury as the un*724derlying felony. State v. Ragland, 420 N.W.2d 791, 793 (Iowa 1988). Defense counsel was not ineffective for failing to raise this issue in the trial court.
Steinkuehler next contends defense counsel was ineffective for failing to argue if felony-murder was to be submitted to the jury, then the lesser-included offenses of willful injury should also have been submitted.
Trial counsel was not ineffective for failing to argue in the trial court if felony-murder was to be submitted to the jury, then the lesser-included offenses of the underlying feony if willful injury also should have been submitted. The court has held the felony underlying a felony-murder charge is not a lesser-included offense of felony-murder. State v. Walters, 426 N.W.2d 136, 141 (Iowa 1988); State v. Aswegan, 331 N.W.2d 93, 98 (Iowa 1983). Therefore, the trial court had no duty to submit the crime of willful injury to the jury. Because it would have been improper to submit willful injury to the jury, it would also be improper to submit the lesser-included offenses of willful injury. Aswegan, 331 N.W.2d at 98. Defense counsel was not ineffective for failing to raise a futile claim. Hildebrant, 405 N.W.2d at 841.
Steinkuehler next contends defense counsel was ineffective for failing to argue the jury instructions did not distinguish general intent from specific intent.
Steinkuehler argues the jury instructions used in this case were confusing. Specifically, Steinkuehler asserts the instructions fail to distinguish specific intent from general intent. The instructions used by the trial court in this case are Uniform Jury Instructions. We will only reluctantly disapprove the instructions. State v. Doss, 355 N.W.2d 874, 881 (Iowa 1984). An examination of the jury instructions in this case shows the instructions are clear as to which crimes are specific intent crimes and which are general intent crimes. Therefore, defense counsel did not render ineffective assistance of counsel when he failed to object to the jury instructions on this ground.
Steinkuehler’s last contention is defense counsel was ineffective for failing to raise the issue the totality of the errors alleged denied Steinkuehler a fair trial.
The evidence of Steinkuehler’s guilt was very strong. Several witnesses observed Steinkuehler shoot Mohr at close range. The victim in this case was the former husband of the woman Steinkuehler was living with at the time of the offense. There was also evidence that on the night Steinkuehler shot Mohr, Mohr had spent several hours with Steinkuehler’s girl friend in local taverns. Mohr had also accused Steinkuehler of mistreating Steinkuehler’s girl friend, and told him his girl friend wanted him to move out of her apartment. Mohr also told Stein-kuehler he would be over to assist Steinkueh-ler in moving out of the apartment. In light of this evidence, Steinkuehler cannot demonstrate the outcome of his trial was changed as a result of the alleged breaches of duty of his trial and appellate attorneys.
AFFIRMED.
OXBERGER, C.J., concurs.
SCHLEGEL, J., dissents.

=== CASE 9742102 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:06:48.147502+00 ===

SCHLEGEL, Judge
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent.
I believe the failure of defense counsel to bring out the sheriffs admission that he falsifies evidence because “he forgets in court all the time,” and the county attorney’s letter critical of Shields’ deposition testimony with a copy to her employer was ineffective assistance of trial counsel and was prejudicial. Furthermore, such conduct by both the sheriff and the county attorney should be sternly condemned. Since the jury was not told of this pressure upon Shields, it was deprived of evidence bearing upon the intoxication defense being asserted.
I believe there was a failure of defense counsel to provide effective assistance in this respect which resulted in prejudice to the defendant. I would reverse for a new trial. I would hope that doing so would send the message that questionable conduct by law enforcement officials and prosecutors, which constitutes a violation of the law, will be *725subjected to strict scrutiny in cases of improper acts in the suppression of truth.

=== CASE 9742103 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:06:50.554367+00 ===

Mallett, J.
The dispositive issues in this case are whether the presidential selection procedure adopted by the University of Michigan Board of Regents violated the Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; MSA 4.1800(11) et seq., or the Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et seq.; MSA 4.1801(1) et seq.
We find that defendant violated the oma and the foia. Therefore, we affirm in part and reverse in part the Court of Appeals decision.
i
On April 28, 1987, Harold Shapiro announced his resignation as President of the University of Michigan, effective January 3, 1988. In May of 1987, the Board of Regents, consisting of eight members, appointed itself as the Presidential Selection Committee and began the process of choosing a new university president. The committee appointed Regent Paul W. Brown as chairman and formed three advisory committees to assist it: a *216student committee, a faculty committee, and an alumni committee.
By the fall of 1987, the Presidential Selection Committee had compiled an informal list of 250 potential candidates to replace President Shapiro. No formal applications were submitted by the candidates themselves. Rather, most of the candidates were recommended by third parties, who advised the committee of the candidates’ qualifications. The committee’s administrative secretary compiled a notebook of information relating to each candidate, and the board members reviewed these materials to evaluate the various individuals. To reduce the field of candidates, the committee made a series of "cuts,” narrowing the list from 250 to one.
The first cut reduced the number of candidates from 250 to 70. The Presidential Selection Committee entrusted Regent Brown with sole authority to make the first cut, and he did so after numerous telephone calls and meetings with the advisory committees and informal subquorum groups of regents.1 The acknowledged purpose of the telephone calls and the subquorum meetings was to achieve the same intercommunication that could have been achieved in a full board meeting.2 During this process, the board avoided quorum meetings because it would have been required to conduct a public meeting under the oma. In fact, Regent Roach told an Ann Arbor News reporter on November 15, 1987, that if it had not been for the oma and the desire not to discuss these matters in public,
we would [have been] able to sit down with all the regents present, discuss the problems and talk *217about all the candidates at a much earlier point. [Instead], it [took] three or four hours to go around the horn on the telephones and find out what everybody is thinking.[3]
After gaining thorough input from all the regents, Brown’s first decision was largely an arithmetic function rather than a matter of judgment.4 How-ever, any regent could review Brown’s list of seventy candidates and request the retention of a particular candidate, despite his decision to eliminate the candidate from consideration.
The second phase of cuts employed essentially the same procedure as the first. During this phase, the Presidential Selection Committee narrowed the candidate list from seventy to thirty. Again, Regent Brown telephoned individual regents, and all regents participated in the reduction process. Subquorum-sized groups of regents met to discuss the candidates and to reach a consensus regarding the desired individuals. One regent testified that candidates were rated, the ratings were tallied and circulated, and Brown discussed the results priovately with each regent to insure that the list of thirty would be acceptable to the entire committee.5
The candidates themselves made the third cut. *218Brown called the thirty remaining candidates and asked if they would be interested in the position. At this point, more than half the candidates removed themselves from consideration, but twelve candidates expressed their desire to remain on the list.
In March and April of 1988, groups of two, three, or four regents conducted private interviews in the candidates’ home cities. Although the Presidential Selection Committee referred to these meetings as "visits,” at least one regent conceded that, like any interview, these meetings were to assess and possibly recruit candidates.6
Before these interviews, candidates informed the regents that they desired their candidacy to remain confidential by signing a form letter that the board had prepared in advance. Subsequently, the candidates and the groups of visiting regents met to discuss the position and the candidates’ interests and qualifications. After these meetings, some regents submitted written reports of their impressions of the candidates to the other regents, while others telephoned Brown with their impressions.
The fourth cut followed a number of closed meetings held by the board to discuss the remaining twelve candidates, those "most seriously considered” by the Presidential Selection Committee.7 The board believed that it could now justifiably convene in closed sessions because of the candidates’ request for confidentiality. Following these closed sessions, Brown reduced the list of candidates from twelve to five. Although the regents contended that no voting occurred at these closed meetings, they agreed that they reached a general consensus and that Brown’s list of five candidates *219reflected the views of the entire Presidential Selection Committee.8
On May 20, 1988, the board resolved to form a "nominating committee” to decide which candidates would be placed in nomination for action by the board. On May 24, 1988, before the nominating committee met, seven of the regents held a closed meeting to discuss the results of the interviews and to reveal their opinions regarding each of the remaining candidates. The board insisted that no voting took place at this time. It conceded, however, that, on the basis of a consensus, two of the candidates were preferred over the other three.
Immediately following this closed meeting, the nominating committee met, considered the entire candidate list, and decided that only two preferred candidates would remain. This was the fifth cut. After this decision and various informal discussions between committee members and the two remaining candidates, the nominating committee unanimously decided to recommend one candidate, Dr. James Duderstadt, to the board.9 Dr. Duder-stadt was interviewed in an open session by the regents and by selected student, faculty, and alumni representatives. Following this open inter*220view, the nominating committee met in a closed session, and recommended the nomination of Dr. Duderstadt. The board subsequently reconvened in a public session and voted to elect Dr. Duderstadt president of the University of Michigan.
Booth Newspapers, Inc., doing business as the Ann Arbor News, and the Detroit Free Press, Inc., brought an action in Washtenaw Circuit Court, alleging that the Board of Regents had violated the Open Meetings Act and the Freedom of Information Act. Plaintiffs sought declaratory and in-junctive relief against the procedures employed by the Presidential Selection Committee. Plaintiff sought to have the court compel the board to make available the information regarding persons considered for the presidency, the discussions among the regents of the respective qualifications of each individual, and the decisions of certain nonquorum committees as they narrowed the candidates. It also sought disclosure under the foia of the destinations to which individual regents traveled for the purpose of interviewing candidates.
The trial court denied all requested relief and granted defendant summary disposition. The Court of Appeals reversed in part and affirmed in part, finding that defendant had violated the oma, but not the foia. 192 Mich App 574; 481 NW2d 778 (1992). Further, the panel enjoined defendant from further use of the procedure that had been utilized in selecting the university president and awarded plaintiff attorney fees and costs to be determined by the trial court on remand. Defendant filed an application for leave to appeal and plaintiffs filed an application for leave to appeal as cross-appellant. This Court granted both applications. 441 Mich 881 (1992).
*221II
A. OPEN MEETINGS ACT
1. THE LEGISLATIVE INTENT
Courts are bound to discover and to apply the Legislature’s intent, when interpreting statutory mandates. In re Certified Question, 433 Mich 710, 722; 449 NW2d 660 (1989). The legislative intent questioned in the instant case concerns the degree of accessibility the Legislature intended to afford the general public in observing the decision-making processes of public bodies.
During the late 1960s, Michigan’s Constitution and a patchwork of statutes required accountability and openness in government.10 In 1968, the Legislature directly addressed this issue by enacting an open meetings statute applicable to most public bodies. 1968 PA 261. The statute required only that public entities conduct final votes on certain subjects at meetings open to the public. Consequently, all other decisions and deliberations by public bodies could lawfully be held in closed sessions. Most importantly, because the 1968 statute failed to impose an enforcement mechanism and penalties to deter noncompliance, nothing prevented the wholesale evasion of the act’s provisions. See 1970 CL 15.251-15.253. In 1973, the Michigan Senate established the Special Senate Study Committee on Political Ethics to study a variety of topics, including the 1968 statute. See Senate Resolution No. 7, 1973 Journal of the Senate 36-37. The committee concluded that revisions to the open meetings law were necessary. It stated:
*222"The fact that only the meetings, or parts of meetings, at which votes are actually taken are considered public effectively insulates members of these bodies from public pressure.
"Since final decisions of a public body are the only items that must be made public, nothing in Michigan law prevents members of any public body, even including school boards, from discussing a proposal, adjourning to an executive session where members can agree privately on the action to be taken and then reconvene the 'public’ meeting for the one or two minutes required to formally vote on their privately-arranged agreement. Actually, under existing law it is really not necessary for a public body in Michigan to go through even this semblance of openness if it doesn’t want to.” [Osmon, Sunshine or shadows: One state’s decision, 1977 Det Col L R 613, 620, n 54, quoting Preliminary Final Report 10-11 (August, 1973).]
To rectify the ineffectiveness of the 1968 statute, legislators introduced bills to comprehensively revise and substantially improve the law. The current Open Meetings Act resulted from these legislative efforts.
2. THE OMA’S PURPOSE
Yet another fundamental rule of statutory construction is to examine a statute’s purpose as evidenced by the Legislature. In re Certified Question, supra at 722. In the instant case, the oma’s legislative purposes were to remedy the ineffectiveness of the 1968 statute and to promote a new era in governmental accountability. Legislators hailed the act as "a major step forward in opening the political process to public scrutiny.” 1976 Journal of the House 2242 (June 24, 1976, remarks of *223Representative Wolpe).11 During this period, lawmakers perceived openness in government as a means of promoting responsible decision making. Moreover, it also provided a way to educate the general public about policy decisions and issues. It fostered belief in the efficacy of the system. Legal commentators noted that "[o]pen government is believed to serve as both a light and disinfectant in exposing potential abuse and misuse of power. The deliberation of public policy in the public forum is an important check and balance on self-government.”12 The prodisclosure nature of the oma prompted one of its sponsors to describe the law, prior to enactment, as "a strong bill now which provides very limited closed meetings” and "very tight, limited exceptions . . . .” See 1976 Journal of the House 2242 (June 24, 1976, remarks of Representative Hollister). To further the oma’s legislative purposes, the Court of Appeals has historically interpreted the statute broadly, while strictly construing its exemptions and imposing on public bodies the burden of proving that an exemption exists.13_
*2243. THE OMA’S PLAIN MEANING
A thorough examination of the legislative intent and purpose places a statute in its historical context and aids a court in interpreting the statute’s text. When courts interpret this or any other statute, they must look to the plain meaning of the particular law in question. Owendale-Gagetown School Dist v State Bd of Ed, 413 Mich 1; 317 NW2d 529 (1982). In the instant case, the legislative reforms during the 1970s resulted in an oma with broad inclusive language that required a public meeting for "all decisions of a public body” and "[a]ll deliberations of a public body constituting a quorum of its members . . . .”14
The gist of our analysis is whether, on the basis of the oma’s plain meaning, the Presidential Selection Committee (a) constituted a public body that (b) made closed-session decisions and deliberations, and (c) conducted closed-session interviews in violation of the act.
(A) PUBLIC BODIES
The oma defines a "public body” to include a *225"committee, subcommittee, authority, or council, which is empowered by state constitution, statute, charter, ordinance, resolution, or rule to exercise governmental or proprietary authority . . . .”15
Consequently, a key determination of the oma’s applicability is whether the body in question exercises governmental or proprietary authority. Goode v Dep’t of Social Services, 143 Mich App 756, 759; 373 NW2d 210 (1985). In this case, it is beyond question that the University of Michigan Board of Regents is a public body charged by law and financed by Michigan taxpayers to govern an institute of higher education.16 The selection of a university president is one of the board’s most important exercises of governmental authority. If it establishes any form of subcommittee and empowers that subcommittee by "resolution or rule” to exercise this particular governmental authority, then that subcommittee is also a "public body” within the meaning of the act.17
The board, however, argues that Regent Brown’s actions do not constitute that of a subcommittee *226and, therefore, his activities as chair of the Presidential Selection Committee fall outside the oma’s reach. We do not find this argument persuasive. Essentially, the board argues form over substance. The Legislature did not grant any exception to specific types or forms of committees. Therefore, delegating the task of choosing a public university president to a one-man committee, such as Regent Brown, would warrant the finding that this one-man task force was in fact a public body. As the Goode Court observed, "[w]e do not find the question of whether a multi-member panel or a single person presides to be dispositive. Such a distinction carries with it the potential for undermining the Open Meetings Act . . ; Id., 143 Mich App 759.
Therefore, we hold that the selection of a public university president constitutes the exercise of governmental authority, regardless of whether such authority was exercised by Regent Brown, the nominating committee, the full board, or even subcommittees. Accordingly, this individual or these entities must be deemed "public bodies” within the scope of the oma. Having established the "public” nature of these bodies, we must now examine the precise actions taken by them and their disposition under the oma.
(b) DECISIONS
Section 2(d) of the oma provides:
"Decision” means a determination, action, vote, or disposition upon a motion, proposal, recommendation, resolution, order, ordinance, bill, or measure on which a vote by members of a public body is required and by which a public body effectuates or formulates public policy. [MCL 15.262(d); MSA 4.1800(12)(d).]
*227The board insists that the process of reducing the candidate list resulted from recommendations by subquorum groups of regents, the nominating committee of board members, or by Regent Brown acting alone after consultation with individual regents. It maintains that none of these actions constituted formal "decisions” that bound the board because the possibility existed that the board might reconsider their candidate evaluations and reexamine a previously rejected candidate. On each occasion, the board claims that they merely reached a consensus regarding the action that they would take or the candidates that they preferred. In short, the board insists that their actions, in reducing the list of viable candidates, were not subject to the oma because it did not take action by a "vote” as required under the act’s definition of "decision.” It maintains that the only decision that required a public meeting was held on June 10, 1988, when the board actually voted to elect Dr. Duderstadt.
The board bases its argument on the misconception that every term within the definition of "decision” is modified by the last two phrases ("on which a vote ... is required and by which a public body effectuates . . . policy”) (emphasis added). In other words, the board erroneously concludes that a determination or an action, for example, will only constitute a "decision” under the oma if that activity is one "on which a vote ... is required and by which a public body effectuates . . . policy.”
This interpretation is substantially flawed, however, when one considers the third activity included within the definition — a vote. Under the board’s construction, the definition of "decision” would include a matter "on which a vote ... is required and by which a public body effectuates *228. . . policy.” Defendant’s disjointed and strained reading of the statute is nonsensical. It is a general rule of statutory construction that courts must construe statutes to avoid rendering words in the statute mere surplusage or nonsense. Stowers v Wolodzko, 386 Mich 119, 133; 191 NW2d 355 (1971). A reasonable construction of the definition interprets the last phrase ("by which a public body effectuates ... policy”) as modifying the whole definition. The preceding phrase ("on which a vote ... is required”) modifies only those clauses that follow the term "disposition.”18
The board also contends that open meetings are only required when "formal” voting occurs. The defendant has once again misconstrued the statute. As currently worded, the oma’s plain meaning clearly applies to "all decisions” by public bodies. The act does not modify the word "vote” by the term "formal.” If this provision were now read into the current oma, it would resurrect the amended 1968 statute, which has been discredited by the Legislature. The board cannot read into the statute what the Legislature has seen fit to exclude.
Regardless of how the Presidential Selection *229Committee wishes to categorize its actions, the fact remains that the board adopted a procedure that violated the oma. The oma does not contain a "voting requirement” or any form of "formal voting requirement.” Consequently, arguments that the Presidential Selection Committee’s actions were a consensus building process, rather than a mere vote or "formal” vote, are irrelevant. Furthermore, any alleged distinction between the committee’s consensus building and a determination or action, as advanced in the oma’s definition of "decision,” is a distinction without a difference. Even members of the committee acknowledged that its "round-the-horn” decisions and conferences achieved the same effect as if the entire board had met publicly, received candidate ballots, and "formally” cast their votes.19 Moreover, testimony of various regents even raises the question whether the board did in fact vote through the use of tallies and a rating system.
The only part of the decision-making process that occurred in public was the final step: Dr. Duderstadt’s selection from a list of one. The Presidential Selection Committee did not make the decision to appoint Dr. Duderstadt publicly, it merely announced the decision publicly. Dr. Du-derstadt’s elevation to the position of university president was a fait accompli by the commencement of the public meeting held on June 10, 1988.
In sum, the board’s actions must be considered closed session decisions under the oma. Any other interpretation of its actions would contradict the act’s letter and spirit. This Court’s failure to recognize this fact would undermine the legislative intent to promote responsible and open government.
*230(C) DELIBERATIONS
Although § 3(3) of the oma requires a public body to hold all deliberations at an open meeting, § 8(f) does permit closed session deliberations "[t]o review the specific contents of an application for employment or appointment to a public office if the candidate requests that the application remain confidential.”20 The oma further provides, however, that "all interviews by a public body for employment or appointment to a public office shall be held in an open meeting pursuant to this act.”21
The board maintains that this "application exception” permitted it to withhold the candidates’ identities and to justify closure of discussions comparing the candidates’ qualifications for the purpose of reducing the list of viable individuals. The board’s deliberation, however, far exceeded the exemption’s scope. The oma exception permitting closed sessions to review the "specific contents” of an application would entail discussions about the applicant’s qualifications on the basis of information contained in the application.
In the instant case, the Court of Appeals construed the "specific contents” exemption narrowly and held that the oma permitted closed sessions only to review personal matters contained in a candidate’s application. We agree. Considering the oma’s prodisclosure nature, the requirement to strictly construe exemptions and the mandate for open candidate interviews, it is reasonable to assume that the Legislature intended this exemption to be a limited compromise, allowing privacy rights to dictate in instances where boards were *231not engaged in decision-making activities.22 Here we agree with the panel that the board went beyond this limitation and made reduction decisions under the guise of this exemption. Clearly, however, the oma requires that "all decisions of a public body” be made in public. Consequently, the act mandates that the Presidential Selection Committee make any reduction decisions in public.
With regard to the interviews, or "visits” as termed by the board, there is no statutory exception permitting a subcommittee to conduct closed interviews. On the contrary, the Legislature expressly mandated open interviews. In doing so, the Legislature must have recognized that candidates’ identities would become public, and that it was in the greater public interest to know the qualifications of candidates for public positions and the hiring procedures of public officials.
Therefore, we hold that the Board of Regents is a public body that made closed session deliberations and decisions and held private interviews in violation of the oma.
B. FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
The Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et seq.; MSA 4.1801(1) et seq., protects a citizen’s right to examine and to participate in the political process. It requires public disclosure of information regarding the formal acts of public officials and employees. This Court has stated that the act mandates "[a] policy of full disclosure . . . .” Swickard v Wayne Co Medical Examiner, 438 Mich 536, 543; 475 NW2d 304 (1991).
However, the foia provisions requiring disclosure are not absolute. The act outlines several *232instances in which public records may be exempt from disclosure. MCL 15.243; MSA 4.1801(13). These exemptions must be narrowly construed. See Swickard, supra at 544; Evening News Ass’n v Troy, 417 Mich 481, 503; 339 NW2d 421 (1983). In addition, the burden of proving the need for an exemption rests on the public body asserting its application. Swickard at 544; see Nowack v Auditor General, 243 Mich 200, 203-204, 208-209; 219 NW 749 (1928); Booth Newspapers, Inc v Mus-kegon Probate Judge, 15 Mich App 203, 205; 166 NW2d 546 (1968).
When interpreting the various foia provisions, we must again follow the statute’s plain meaning. Owendale-Gagetown School Dist, supra. In the instant case, the Presidential Selection Committee asserts that the travel expense records of regents who met with various presidential candidates should be privileged under § 13(l)(a) of the foia. This exemption allows a public body to conceal public records containing "[information of a personal nature where the public disclosure of the information would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of an individual’s privacy.” MCL 15.243(l)(a); MSA 4.1801(13)(l)(a).
As evident from the statute, under a plain-meaning analysis of § (13)(l)(a), two factors must exist to exempt information from public exposure. First, the information sought must be of a "personal nature,” and, second, the disclosure of such information must constitute a "clearly unwarranted” invasion of privacy. Swickard, supra.
1. PERSONAL NATURE
In determining whether the information withheld is of a "personal nature,” "the customs, mores, or ordinary views of the community” must be *233taken into account. Swickard, supra at 547. The Court of Appeals failed to consider this "personal nature” test as a separate inquiry as mandated by Swickard. Had it done so, it would have been compelled to determine that the information being sought by plaintiff was not "personal” in nature.
There exists no custom, mores, or ordinary view of the community that would warrant a finding that the travel expense records of a public body constitute records of a personal nature. The board, however, asserts that the travel expense reports of the regents might lead to information concerning the candidates that is in fact personal (i.e., the actual names of those individuals considered in the presidential search). We find that the foia "personal nature” exemption does not prohibit the disclosure of information that could conceivably lead to the revelation of personal information. As the United States Supreme Court stated, when examining a disclosure exemption in the federal Freedom of Information Act similar to § 13(l)(a), the exception is "directed at threats to privacy interests more palpable them mere possibilities.” Dep’t of Air Force v Rose, 425 US 352, 380, n 19; 96 S Ct 1592; 48 L Ed 2d 11 (1976).
If the board’s arguments are upheld, they could lead to undesired consequences and precedents. Its arguments welcome abuse of this prodisclosure legislation by misconstruing the statutory exemptions. In short, the standard advanced by the board permits a party to assert a myriad of scenarios under which the disclosure of one particular type of information might lead someone to discover other material deemed "personal.” By expanding the exemption to protect information that may or may not lead to the exposure of personal material, the board ignored the requirement that courts must construe foia exceptions narrowly.
*234Therefore, under our analysis, we hold that the foia’s § (13)(l)(a) exemption does not apply in the instant case because the travel expense records fail to survive scrutiny under the first prong of the two-part test required by this provision.
C. CONSTITUTIONAL CLAIM
The board contends that application of the oma to governing boards of public universities in the manner prescribed by the Court of Appeals violates the autonomy vested in such bodies by the Michigan Constitution. Const 1963, art 8, § 5. For the reasons discussed below, we reject that argument.
1. FAILURE TO PRESERVE CLAIM
The board first raised its constitutional claim in its appeal to this Court; the issue was neither presented to nor evaluated either by the trial court or the Court of Appeals. Issues raised for the first time on appeal are not ordinarily subject to review.23 In addition, there exists a general presumption by this Court that we will not reach constitutional issues that are not necessary to resolve a case. Taylor v Michigan, 360 Mich 146, 154; 103 NW2d 769 (1960).
*235On the basis of the arguments articulated above, we refuse to consider the board’s constitutional argument.
hi
On the basis of an examination of the Open Meetings Act and the Freedom of Information Act, we rule that both acts were violated. Presidential searches at the state’s public universities must be conducted with due regard to the oma’s requirement of open meetings for all public body deliberations, decisions, and interviews. Travel expense records connected with these searches are not exempt from an foia request.
Therefore, we remand this case to the circuit court for entry of a judgment providing injunctive relief and compelling disclosure in conformity with this opinion.
Cavanagh, C.J., and Levin and Brickley, JJ., concurred with Mallett, J.
Five regents constituted a quorum of the Board of Regents.
Deposition of Regent Power, pp 52-53.
See Ann Arbor News, November 15, 1987, "Privacy complicates U-M search” (quoting Regent Roach).
Deposition of Regent Power, p 13.
In testimony regarding this first and second cut, there were conflicting statements taken from various regents concerning whether formal "rating sheets” were circulated and used by the Presidential Selection Committee to vote on a particular candidacy. Regent Roach, for example, stated that ranking sheets were provided for advisory committees and that they were given to the committee members for their review. See deposition of Regent Roach, p 49. Regent Varner described rating sheets and a complete ranking system. See deposition of Regent Varner, pp 10-14. Regent Brown, however, denied using any “tally” or "score” sheets mentioned by other members of the committee. See affidavit of Regent Paul W. Brown, June 12, 1989.
See deposition of Regent Nielsen, pp 31-32.
See affidavit of Regent Paul W. Brown, May 25, 1988.
See deposition of Regent Nielsen, p 41 ("[t]he regents [made the decision about who the five were]”); deposition of Regent Brown, p 60 (“that was the list that was most acceptable to the regents”); see also deposition of Regent Varner, pp 34-37; deposition of Regent Power, pp 38-39, 42-44; deposition of Regent Roach, pp 26-30; deposition of Regent Baker, pp 39-40 ("a consensus process is what it is all the way through”).
The other candidate, widely known to be Dr. Vartan Gregorian, actually withdrew his name from consideration after a telephone call from Regent Baker in which he had expressed reservations about Dr. Gregorian’s candidacy. See deposition of Regent Baker, pp 44-46; October 18, 1988 letter from Regent Baker to Ed Petykiewicz, editor of the Ann Arbor News. According to Dr. Gregorian, Regent Baker threatened to "politicize” his candidacy if Dr. Gregorian continued to pursue the presidency. See Ann Arbor News, "Candidate says U-M conducted search in climate of distrust,” November 3,1988.
See, e.g; Const 1963, art 4, § 20 (state legislative "doors of each house shall be open”); MCL 117.3(1); MSA 5.2073, MCL 78.23(j); MSA 5.1533(j) (sessions of city legislative and village bodies "shall be available to the public”).
Accord 1976 Journal of the Senate 1868 (September 16, 1976, remarks of Senator Welbom); 1976 Journal of the House 2243-2244 (June 24, 1976, remarks of Representative Brown); 1975 Journal of the Senate 2645 (December 16, 1975, remarks of Senator Kildee); 1976 Journal of the House 2242 (June 24, 1976, remarks of Representative Padden).
Osmon, supra at 617.
See, e.g., Wexford Co Prosecutor v Pranger, 83 Mich App 197, 201, 204; 268 NW2d 344 (1978) (the legislative history indicates that the statute is to be interpreted liberally, while exceptions are to be strictly construed, limiting situations where meetings are not open to the public); Esperance v Chesterfield Twp, 89 Mich App 456, 463; 280 NW2d 559 (1979) (the statute must be interpreted to accomplish the legislative goal of openness and accountability); Ridenour v Dearborn Bd of Ed, 111 Mich App 798, 802; 314 NW2d 760 (1981) ("the Open Meetings Act must be strictly construed against exemptions to public meetings”); Booth Newspapers, Inc v Wyoming City Council, 168 Mich App 459, 466-467; 425 NW2d 695 (1988) (oma exceptions must be interpreted strictly to meet the legislative goal of openness and *224accountability in government); Detroit News v Detroit, 185 Mich App 296, 302; 460 NW2d 312 (1990) ("A strict construction must be given to closed-door exceptions in order to limit the situations in which meetings are not opened to the public”).
The oma provides, in pertinent part:
(1) All meetings of a public body shall be open to the public and shall be held in a place available to the general public. All persons shall be permitted to attend any meeting except as otherwise provided in this act. . . .
(2) All decisions of a public body shall be made at a meeting open to the public.
(3) All deliberations of a public body constituting a quorum of its members shall take place at a meeting open to the public except as provided in this section and sections 7 and 8. [MCL 15.263; MSA 4.1800(13).]
MCL 15.262(a); MSA 4.1800(12)(a).
Michigan courts have repeatedly held that our state-financed universities are public institutions that come within the confines of state laws, despite constitutional provisions granting them some degree of autonomy regarding financial and educational matters. See Const 1963, art 8, § 5; see also Univ of Michigan Regents v Employment Relations Comm, 389 Mich 96, 107; 204 NW2d 218 (1973) (the constitutional grant of autonomy to the Board of Regents is to be applied to educational matters. "This concern for the educational process . . . does not and cannot mean that they are exempt from all the laws of the state”); Peters v Michigan State College, 320 Mich 243; 30 NW2d 854 (1948) (a state university is considered an "incorporated public board,” and, as such, subject to the workers’ compensation act in spite of the constitutional provisions giving the board control of college funds); Branum v Univ of Michigan Bd of Regents, 5 Mich App 134, 138-139; 145 NW2d 860 (1966) (the Board of Regents, in spite of its independence, is a part of state government and subject to the waiver of governmental immunity by the state).
MCL 15.262(a); MSA 4.1800(12)(a). Herald Co v Davis, 7 Med L Rptr 2164, 2165 (Saginaw Circuit Court, 1981); see also OAG, 1981-1982, No 6057, p 622 (April 20,1982).
Under this interpretation, each of the following activities are deemed a "decision” under the oma:
[a.] a determination ... by which a public body effectuates . . . policy;
[b.] [an] action ... by which a public body effectuates . . . policy;
[c.] [a] vote ... by which a public body effectuates . . . policy;
[d.] [a] disposition upon a motion, proposal, recommendation, resolution, order, ordinance, bill, or measure on which a vote by members of a public body is required and by which a public body effectuates or formulates public policy. [MCL 15.262(d); MSA 4.1800(12)(d).]
See deposition of Regent Power, pp 52-53.
MCL 15.268(f); MSA 4.1800(18)00.
Id.
This exemption remains in force even after public disclosure is required under other sections of the act.
This Court has repeatedly declined to consider arguments not presented at a lower level, including those relating to constitutional claims. In re Forfeiture of Certain Personal Property, 441 Mich 77, 84; 490 NW2d 322 (1992); Butcher v Treasury Dep’t, 425 Mich 262, 276; 389 NW2d 412 (1986); Dagenhardt v Special Machine & Engineering, Inc, 418 Mich 520; 345 NW2d 164 (1984); Ohio Dep’t of Taxation v Kleitch Bros, Inc, 357 Mich 504, 516; 98 NW2d 636 (1959). We have only deviated from that rule in the face of exceptional circumstances. Perin v Peuler, 373 Mich 531, 534; 130 NW2d 4 (1964) (issue resolution was necessary to quell confusion generated by the Court’s earlier opinions); People v Snow, 386 Mich 586, 591; 194 NW2d 314 (1972) (addressed the issue to prevent a miscarriage of justice). There exist no exigent circumstances in this case that require our review of the board’s constitutional argument.

=== CASE 9742104 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:06:50.561995+00 ===

Boyle, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I concur with the Court’s conclusion that the University of Michigan Board of Regents violated the Open Meetings Act in its search for a new president.1 I write separately, however, because I cannot agree with the majority’s determination that the Open Meetings Act requires that the entire presidential selection process be conducted in public view.21 would hold that the oma does not compel that information gathered in the initial *236candidate screening process be disclosed to the public, nor does it dictate the revelation of a candidate’s identity without consent or before the scheduling of a public interview.
Finally, I do not agree that the Freedom of Information Act was violated by redacting the final destination on the search committee’s travel expense forms.
i
It is beyond question that the Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; MSA 4.1800(11) et seq., and the Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et seq.; MSA 4.1801(1) et seq., were enacted by the Legislature to promote openness and accountability in government. As noted by the majority, the ultimate goal of the Legislature in enacting the oma was to educate the general public regarding government decision making, while at the same time creating a responsible and competent public body. The success of the act is reflected in its high rate of support and compliance among a majority of public bodies at both the state and local level.3 Before concluding, however, that every endeavor of a public body in the context of hiring must be conducted in full view of the public under the auspices of the oma and the foia, it is essential to examine the purpose and boundaries of those acts.
A
The Open Meetings Act requires that all meetings, decisions, and quorum deliberations of a public body take place at a forum open to the *237public.4 I agree with the Court that, in this case, the President Selection Committee was a "public body” as defined by the act because it was empowered to select the university’s new president.5 The Board of Regents appointed "itself ” the President Selection Committee. The committee was, in reality, the Board of Regents and thus could not deliberate and recommend to itself, the board, a list of final candidates for public interview without violating the oma provision requiring that all "decisions” of a quorum of a public body be conducted at a public meeting. In my judgment, how*238ever, despite the intent to read the oma broadly, and with limited exceptions, 1976 Journal of the House 2242; Wexford Co Prosecutor v Pranger, 83 Mich App 197, 201; 268 NW2d 344 (1978), the Legislature did not intend that the act apply to every venture undertaken by a public body in the context of hiring.
The compiling of a list of names, reviewing qualifications, and identifying a limited number of persons for interviews to further assess their capability and interest in the position, are tasks that are ministerial in nature and not "public business” within the purview of the oma. Screening from the original inventory of 250 names, a list of thirty potential candidates who were more qualified than the others was not a public body meeting, deliberation, or decision effectuating public policy. Whether performed by administrative staff, a third party, or the Board of Regents itself, does not change the technical and qualitative nature of the task. At no time during this initial screening process was there any "decision” by any person or public body to eliminate or remove any person from the list of 250 potential candidates. Rather, the assignment involved the gathering and sorting of submitted names to locate those persons who might be best qualified for the position of president of the university.
Tapering the list from the thirty most qualified "potential” candidates to twelve "actual” candidates was executed by the candidates themselves and not through any action of a public body or official. These twelve candidates expressed an interest in the position and, when asked, requested that their preliminary candidacy remain confidential. Although no "applications” per se were submitted, a logical inference follows that when the potential candidates affirmed an interest in pursu*239ing the position, they became "applicants” within the meaning of the oma. Pursuant to MCL 15.268(f); MSA 4.1800(18)(f), authorizing closed meetings by the full public body to deliberate and review applications for appointment when the applicant requests confidentiality, the board met in a private session to evaluate the twelve candidates’ curricula vitae. Hence, no violation of the oma by the President Selection Committee or the board occurred at this stage of the selection process.
Although § 8(f) enables a public body to meet in closed session to review the specific contents of an employment application, the second sentence of the same provision provides that all interviews by a public body for employment shall be held in an open meeting.6 The tension between the sentences is apparent when a public body, authorized to review and discuss a candidate’s application at a closed meeting, is unable to render any "decision”7 concerning the candidate without violating the open meeting requirement that all "decisions” of the public body be made in an open forum. In an attempt to reconcile this conflict, it has been sug*240gested that the public body create a committee composed of outside members or a subquorum of public officials, and charge the group with recommending a final list of candidates who are most qualified and suited for the position. As a nonpublic body without authority to exercise a government function, it has been contended that the committee would be free to meet in private and to conduct confidential interviews with some or all of the candidates to facilitate the development of its recommendation of final candidates to the full public body. See Wernet, A guide to the hiring process for public bodies under Michigan’s Open Meetings Act, 63 Mich B J 1040 (1984); OAG, 1977-1978, No 5183, pp 21, 40 (March 8, 1977).
The President Selection Committee was not a committee empowered solely with authority to advise or make a recommendation to the full board because, as indicated above, the committee was "itself” the board. The committee therefore could not accomplish in subquorum groups what it was prohibited by the oma from performing as a quorum public body. At the juncture in the process when the board conducted subquorum private interviews, deliberations, and decisions concerning the twelve applicants for employment, it violated the mandates of the oma.8 The board does not deny, and it is unclear from the record, whether a quorum of the regents as President Selection Committee members may have interviewed any single applicant, albeit at different times. Nevertheless, even absent a quorum of regents interviewing any *241one candidate, the board violated the oma’s public interview requirement. The Attorney General has determined that the Open Meetings Act
is violated when a committee comprised of [a] quorum of the public body, or subcommittees of a public body, which constructively constitute a quorum of the public body, collectively deliberate on or render decisions on public policy in a closed session on matters which do not fall within the provisions of the Open Meetings Act, supra, § 8, allowing a closed meeting. The fact that these committees are physically separated while they deliberate on public business does not insulate them from the requirements of the Open Meetings Act, supra. [OAG, 1979-1980, No 5788, pp 1015, 1017 (September 23, 1980).]
Thus,
[w]hile a committee or subcommittee of a public body which constitutes less than [a] quorum of the public body, and is purely advisory in nature, is not subject to the Open Meetings Act, supra, a public body which divides itself into subcommittees of less than quorum to collectively deliberate towards the resolution of public business, is in fact, acting as a "public body.” A public body may not avoid violating the Act by clothing itself as a sham advisory committee or subcommittee of less than a quorum. [Id. at 1016.]
Similar to the Attorney General opinions concerning the division of a public body into subquorum committees, the Court of Appeals in Booth Newspapers, Inc v Wyoming City Council, 168 Mich App 459, 472; 425 NW2d 695 (1988), upheld the trial court’s finding that the city council violated the oma when it divided into subquorum groups to deliberate matters of public policy it normally would have been required to discuss at an open *242meeting. The Court found that a "constructive quorum” actually existed, and, thus, its deliberations and actual decisions were subject to the act. The act would also be violated if a public body simply labeled a meeting a "conference” and refrained from engaging in any actual deliberations or discussion in an attempt to utilize the conference exemption contained in §3(10).9 OAG, 1981-1982, No 6074, pp 662, 664 (June 11, 1982); OAG, 1979-1980, No 5433, p 29 (January 31,1979).
In this case, there was no express finding of fact by the trial court that the regents’ subquorum interviews and discussions were designed to circumvent the oma’s requirements. Conversely, several regents, including Regent Brown, testified that the interviews and subsequent feedback discussions were conducted in this format to comply with the act’s subquorum mandates.10 Whether viewed as "avoiding” the act or "complying” with the act, is, in this factual presentation, a distinction without a difference. The overall purpose of the interviews and follow-up discussions were to narrow the list of candidates for final consideration.11 Unable to make an advisory recommendation to itself because its membership included the entire public body, the President Selection Committee, as a public body, was required by the oma to conduct open interviews and decisions. The recommendation by Regent Brown, as chair of the committee, to further interview five candidates in private with participation from the three advisory groups and, finally, to interview two candidates in public was, in reality, the general consensus and *243view of the entire board after discussing the candidates in several closed meetings and phone conversations with all the regents.12 Such decision making violated the act by not taking place in a public forum. MCL 15.263(2); MSA 4.1800(13X2). See also OAG 1979-1980, No 5445, p 57 (February 22, 1979).
Read literally, the act entitles a public body to meet in closed sessions to review an advisory committee’s recommendation of finalists or a candidate’s application.13 In any event, the decision concerning the disposition of a final candidate must be conducted at a forum open to the general public. However, while I agree with the conclusion that the process selected by the Board of Regents in this case ultimately violated the mandates of the oma, the identity of candidates recommended by a true advisory committee need not be disclosed until a final list of candidates is recommended to the full public body.
The majority opinion rests on the explicit premise that the prodisclosure purpose of the act requires broad application of the oma to all phases of the public hiring process.14 This approach overlooks the fact that, as enacted, the oma is actually less comprehensive than the act originally proposed. The initial draft of the act would have included within the definition of a public body "any . . . state or local government entity to make recommendations concerning the exercise of *244governmental authority.” SB 920, § 2(a). The applicability of the act to such recommending entities was stricken by the first amendment of the bill. See 1975 Journal of the Senate 2400. The Attorney General subsequently concluded that the oma
does not apply to committees and subcommittees of public bodies which are merely advisory or only capable of making "recommendations concerning the exercise of governmental authority.” These bodies are not legally capable of rendering a "final decision.” In other words, a subcommittee which can only make recommendations to the public body for final decision is not required to hold its committee meetings in public hearings. . . . [W]here such [a] subcommittee contains the entire body of the "public body” which it serves, it would be a violation of the Act to allow such subcommittees to meet in closed session. [OAG, 1977-1978, No 5183, supra, p 40. See also OAG, 1979-1980, No 5505, pp 221-222 (July 3, 1979).]
Having specifically considered and rejected the idea that "recommendations” by a committee or subcommittee of a public body concerning the exercise of government authority be included in the act’s definition of a "public body,” it can safely be concluded that the Legislature intended to exempt such entities from the oma’s public forum requirements. The public body could create such an advisory committee to maintain the confidentiality of preliminary candidates and to recommend a pool of finalists for its consideration. Although the oma imposes no literal restrictions or reporting requirements on advisory committees, to effectuate the purpose of the oma, the committee should provide with its recommendation reasons for its recommendation and the procedures and methods used in reaching it. OAG, 1979-1980, No 5788, supra, pp 1017-1018. As always, the public *245body would be free to reject, accept, or modify the committee’s nonbinding recommendation.
B
I also disagree with the majority’s conclusion that the oma requires that a public body disclose the identity of a candidate yet allows it to meet in a closed session to review "personal matters contained in a candidate’s application.” Ante at 230.15 To read the oma in this manner is nonsensical. First, it is a violation of an applicant’s civil rights under the Civil Rights Act for an employer to consider a prospective employee’s "religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, height, weight, or marital status” with respect to employment. MCL 37.2202(l)(a); MSA 3.548(202)(l)(a). Additionally, an employer is prohibited from soliciting such information on the employment application. MCL 37.2206; MSA 3.548(206). Thus, it is incomprehensible to read the oma as permitting the regents to conduct a closed meeting to consider personal information that it can neither obtain on an employment application nor consider in making its decision, absent a violation of the candidate’s civil rights. Second, the position of president of a major public university customarily attracts well-qualified, prominent, and distinguished persons. The information submitted and reviewed generally includes the candidate’s curriculum vitae, rather *246than an employment "application” per se filled out by a hopeful applicant. It is only logical to assume that the Legislature understood that in hiring situations for high level positions, the most sensitive information, and that most in need of being defined as confidential, is the candidate’s identity. The Legislature’s highly sophisticated experience in such matters must be deemed to have contemplated that once the identity of a candidate who is generally well-known and respected within a given community is made public, the candidate’s biographical resume is often an open book and easily obtainable. Given that the result of such disclosure is to serve notice upon the candidate’s current employer that the person is contemplating other employment and to discourage the best candidates from pursuing an interest in the position, it strains credulity to believe that the Legislature intended a result so inconsistent with public interest and the hiring needs of public bodies.
For the above reasons, the oma should be construed to grant a public body the power to refuse to disclose the identity of a preliminary candidate when confidentiality is requested and to permit the review and deliberation of the candidate’s qualifications to occur in a closed meeting. If recommended as a finalist for the position, the candidate should be afforded the opportunity to withdraw before a formal public recommendation to the hiring body. Any candidate who consents to further consideration by the full public body must be deemed to have waived the right to privacy, yielding to the public’s right to know the qualifications of the candidate and satisfying the act’s requirement that where the public body reserves to itself the final decision for appointment to certain levels of employment, without exception, those interviews must be conducted in public. *247OAG, 1977-1978, supra, pp 38-39; Wernet, supra, p 1042.
The balancing of the public’s interest in the qualities of candidates and in the process by which they are chosen, against the interest of the university in attracting the finest candidate for the position is best achieved by reading the act in the manner suggested.
c
The Freedom of Information Act, MCL 15.231 et seq.; MSA 4.1801(1) et seq., provides:
It is the public policy of this state that all persons are entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs of government and the official acts of those who represent them as public officials and public employees, consistent with this act. The people shall be informed so that they may fully participate in the democratic process.
The act promotes a policy of full disclosure, Swick-ard v Wayne Co Medical Examiner, 438 Mich 536, 543; 475 NW2d 304 (1991). However, the foia is not absolute and affords an exception from disclosure of "Conformation of a personal nature where the public disclosure of the information would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of an individual’s privacy.” MCL 15.243(l)(a); MSA 4.1801(13)(l)(a). I agree with the majority that the exemptions must be narrowly construed and that the public body bears the burden of proving the need for the exemption. Ante at 232. However, I cannot agree with the determination that the information sought by the plaintiff newspaper was not of a personal nature and thus not exempt from disclosure in this situation.
The plaintiffs requested copies of all travel ex*248pense vouchers submitted for reimbursement for travel expenses by the regents or other personnel for presidential interview expenses. The university complied and forwarded copies of its records concerning the dates of travel, the name of the regent traveling, the hub-city destination,16 and the total amount and breakdown of expenses for each trip. Citing § 13(l)(a), the final destinations were redacted from the travel expense forms in an effort to protect the confidentiality of the candidates’ identities.
As noted by Justice Cavanagh in the lead opinion in State Employees Ass’n v Dep’t of Management & Budget, 428 Mich 104, 123; 404 NW2d 606 (1987), and quoted with approval by Justice Riley in Swickard, supra at 546:
The Legislature made no attempt to define the right of privacy [in § 13(l)(a)]. We are left to apply the principles of privacy developed under the common law and our constitution. The contours and limits are thus to be determined by the court, as the trier of fact, on a case-by-case basis in the tradition of the common law. Such an approach permits, and indeed requires, scrutiny of the particular facts of each case, to identify those in which ordinarily impersonal information takes on "an intensely personal character” justifying nondisclosure under the privacy exemption.
Although the release of a person’s name, without more, is generally not considered an invasion of privacy, Justice Ryan in Kestenbaum v Michigan State Univ, 414 Mich 510, 547; 327 NW2d 783 (1982), observed that such a predicament may exist and left "for another day the question whether, in certain unusual circumstances, ordinarily impersonal information might take on an intensely per*249sonal character.” This case presents such a situation.
The Court of Appeals upheld the trial court’s finding that "disclosure of the regents’ travel destinations would, with little further investigation, reveal the candidates’ identities, thereby constituting a clearly unwarranted invasion of their privacy.” 192 Mich App 574, 586; 481 NW2d 778 (1992). I agree. As previously recognized by this Court in Kestenbaum, State Employees Ass’n, and Swickard, the foia does not require blanket application without regard to the factual context.
Each of the twelve candidates, comprised of presidents of other universities and persons holding equally responsible positions, requested that their preliminary consideration as president of the University of Michigan remain confidential. The trial court found that disclosure of the regents’ final travel destination was tantamount to revealing the identity of the specific candidate under consideration. Divulging information that easily led to the identity of the prospective employee was equivalent to releasing information that was "personal, intimate, or embarrassing” to the applicant, Swickard at 547. The fear of reprisal from a current employer or trepidation that "public knowledge of nonselection would stigmatize them as having been weighed and found wanting and thereby blight their future careers as educational administrators,” 192 Mich App 587, was exactly the type of unwarranted invasion of privacy causing injury that the candidates sought to avoid. Thus, revealing information that would easily lead to the candidate’s identity as an applicant for the position constituted a clearly unwarranted invasion of promised privacy. See Core v United States Postal Service, 730 F2d 946 (CA 4, 1984).
The majority’s fear that to rule otherwise in this *250case could lead to "undesired consequences and precedents” fostering a "myriad of scenarios under which the disclosure of one particular type of information might lead someone to discover other material deemed 'personal’ ” to an individual, is both unwarranted and unfounded. Ante at 233. The potential risk or opportunity for abuse has never alone been a sufficient and valid reason for interpreting a statute in a particular manner. The intent of the Legislature in exempting from the foia information of a personal nature that would clearly invade an individual’s privacy was to protect individuals from suffering injury or embarrassment from such disclosure. In this case, the information that was personal and intimate to the individuals was their identities as employment applicants. I see no clear error in the Court of Appeals affirmance of the trial court’s denial of the plaintiffs’ foia request and would hold that the redacting of the final destination on the university’s travel expense forms was not a violation of the act. Moreover, there has been no suggestion that the expenses were not justified, a matter which, if claimed, would permit in camera inspection by the trial court to balance the taxpayers’ interest in the validity of tax dollars expended against privacy exemptions under the foia. Nicita v Detroit, 194 Mich App 657; 487 NW2d 814 (1992).
ii
In sum, I would hold that the Open Meetings Act does not compel that information gathered in the initial presidential screening process be disclosed to the public, nor does it dictate the revelation of a candidate’s identity without consent or before the scheduling of a public interview. Additionally, I would uphold the lower courts’ finding *251that the Freedom of Information Act was not violated by redacting the final destinations on the regents’ travel expense forms.
Levin, J., concurred with Boyle, J., except with respect to part i(c).
I also concur with the majority that the Board of Regents’ constitutional argument, which was raised for the first time in this Court, has not been properly preserved for appellate review. Ante at 234.
Similarly, I cannot agree with Justice Riley’s finding that the Board of Regents is entirely exempt from the Open Meetings Act and that, pursuant to the Michigan Constitution, only its "formal” sessions need be open to the public. The board does not assert that it is *236exempt from the oma, but, rather, that the act "as applied and construed by the Court of Appeals to require premature disclosure of candidate names . . . will prevent the Board from exercising its best Constitutional judgment as to how to elect a president.”
Wernet, A guide to the hiring process for public bodies under Michigan’s Open Meetings Act, 63 Mich B J 1040 (1984).
MCL 15.263; MSA 4.1800(13) provides in pertinent part:
(1) All meetings of a public body shall be open to the public and shall be held in a place available to the general public. All persons shall be permitted to attend any meeting except as otherwise provided in this act. . . .
(2) All decisions of a public body shall be made at a meeting open to the public.
(3) All deliberations of a public body constituting a quorum of its members shall take place at a meeting open to the public except as provided in this section and sections 7 and 8.
The significance of § 3 is realized by examining § 2(a), which defines "public body” as
any state or local legislative or governing body, including a board, commission, committee, subcommittee, authority, or council, which is empowered by state constitution, statute, charter, ordinance, resolution, or rule to exercise governmental or proprietary authority or perform a governmental or proprietary function .... [MCL 15.262(a); MSA 4.1800(12)(a).]
Regent Brown, the chair of the President Selection Committee, testified that although the committee did not receive an express charge from the board, its purpose "was understood. We were supposed to find a president.” The committee, "delegated” with the task of, in Chairman Brown’s words, finding a president for the university, became a "public body” within the meaning of the oma because its membership was comprised of the entire Board of Regents. Thus, any convening of the committee at which a quorum of its members was present or participated for the purpose of deliberating toward or rendering a decision on the selection of a president, was required by the act to be open to the public unless it fell within a § 8 closed-session exemption. See OAG, 1977-1978, No 5183, pp 21, 40 (March 8, 1977).
Section 8(f) provides that a public body may meet in closed session
[t]o- review the specific contents of an application for employment or appointment to a public office if the candidate requests that the application remain confidential. However, all interviews by a public body for employment or appointment to a public office shall be held in an open meeting pursuant to this act.
The act defines a "decision” of a public body subject to the open meetings requirement as
a determination, action, vote, or disposition upon a motion, proposal, recommendation, resolution, order, ordinance, bill, or measure on which a vote by members of a public body is required and by which a public body effectuates or formulates public policy. [MCL 15.262(d); MSA 4.1800(12)(d). Emphasis added.]
To conform with the oma’s requirements, after reviewing the twelve applications in the closed meeting, the board could have created an advisory committee composed of a subquorum of regents to recommend from that list, a number of finalists for the position. As noted above, the advisory committee could conduct private interviews with the candidates and meet in closed forums to facilitate their recommendation process.
MCL 15.263(10); MSA 4.1800(13X10) provides that the act "does not apply to a meeting which is a social or chance gathering or conference not designed to avoid this act.”
See, for example, Brown deposition, p 60 and Roach deposition, p 9.
Brown deposition, p 44.
Id.
A public body may meet in a closed session even after a public interview to evaluate the candidate’s application, although the purpose behind the exemption, confidentiality, no longer exists at that point. Wernet, supra at 1042.
To read the oma in the way the plaintiff suggests would require that every person involved in the procedure conduct a public meeting to discuss each thought process. It is difficult indeed to define a "public purpose” in the disclosure of all 250 names.
Section 8(f) provides that a public body may meet in closed session
[t]o review the specific contents of an application for employment or appointment to a public office if the candidate requests that the application remain confidential. However, all interviews by a public body for employment or appointment to a public office shall be held in an open meeting pursuant to this act.
New York and Chicago were two such axis cities.

=== CASE 9742105 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:06:50.569438+00 ===

Riley, J.
(dissenting). Because I find the application of the Open Meetings Act1 and the Freedom of Information Act2 to governing boards of public universities during the selection of university presidents violates the autonomy vested in the boards by the Michigan Constitution and warrants review by this Court, I respectfully dissent.
i
The majority refuses to examine the clear constitutional issue presented in the instant case because defendant did not raise the issue until appeal. The majority correctly notes that "[i]ssues raised for the first time on appeal are not ordinarily subject to review.” Ante at 234. Nevertheless, the instant case presents a significant issue, which is necessary to the correct resolution of the case and may be resolved without further action. Hence, this Court has the discretion to review the constitutional issue. See, e.g., Dation v Ford Motor Co, 314 Mich 152, 161; 22 NW2d 252 (1946); Perin v Peuler, 373 Mich 531, 534-535; 130 NW2d 4 (1964); Felcoskie v Lakey Foundry Corp, 382 Mich 438, . 442; 170 NW2d 129 (1969).3 The Court is not obliged to stand idle when a controversy before it *252involves vital issues regarding the very structure of state government. Indeed, this Court did not hesitate to declare, without a case or controversy and sua sponte, that the oma would be unconstitutional if applied to this Court. In re 1976 PA 267, 400 Mich 660; 255 NW2d 635 (1977).4
ii
The Michigan Constitution confers an independent governmental status on its public universities and their boards of education, and grants the boards the exclusive power to elect their presidents:
The regents of the University of Michigan and their successors in office shall constitute a body corporate known as the Eegents of the University of Michigan .... Each board shall have general supervision of its institution and the control and direction of all expenditures from the institution’s funds. Each board shall, as often as necessary, elect a president of the institution under its supervision. [Const 1963, art 8, § 5.][5]
This Court has long held that "[t]he object of construction, as applied to a written constitution, is to give effect to the intent of the people adopting it.” 1 Cooley, Constitutional Limitations (8th ed), p *253124. The primary source for ascertaining the original understanding of the constitution is its plain meaning as understood by its ratifiers at the time of its adoption. Committee for Constitutional Reform v Secretary of State, 425 Mich 336, 342; 389 NW2d 430 (1986).6 This is so because the fundamental charter " 'is made for the people and by the people,’ ” Traverse City School Dist v Attorney General, 384 Mich 390, 405; 185 NW2d 9 (1971), and " 'does not derive its force from the convention which framed, but from the people who ratified it . . . .’” Id., quoting Cooley, supra (6th ed), p 81.
Often, however, "[w]e cannot understand these provisions unless we understand their history . . . .” Cooley, supra, p 132. If so, "to clarify meaning, the circumstances surrounding the adoption of a constitutional provision and the purpose sought to be accomplished may be considered.” Traverse City School Dist, supra at 405.7 Thus, we should expound the constitution "according to its own tenor, in the light of such previous historical facts as may legitimately aid to elucidate it.” People ex rel Twitchell v Blodgett, 13 Mich 127, 142 (1865) (Campbell, J.). Therefore, we may " 'endeavour to place ourselves in the position of the framers of the Constitution, and ascertain what was meant at the time ....’” Committee for Constitutional Reform, supra at 342, quoting Pfeiffer v Detroit Bd of Ed, 118 Mich 560, 564; 77 NW 250 (1898). See also People v Thompson, 424
*254Mich 118, 125-126; 379 NW2d 49 (1985).8 Furthermore, due deference to contemporaneous or longstanding interpretations of the constitution by this Court is warranted.9
These traditional rules of constitutional construction are essential: "The literal construction of the words, without regard to their obvious purpose of protection, is to make the constitutional safeguard no more than a shabby hoax, a barrier of words, easily destroyed by other words. ... A constitutional limitation must be construed to effectuate, not to abolish, the protection sought by it to be afforded.” Lockwood v Comm’r of Revenue, 357 Mich 517, 556-557; 98 NW2d 753 (1959). Thus, a thorough examination of the historical origins of the constitutional provision in question is indispensable to the proper disposition of the instant case and the integrity of the constitution.
hi
The supreme law of the State of Michigan has long conferred a unique constitutional status upon *255its public universities. In 1837, the Legislature established the state’s first public institution of higher learning, the University of Michigan, in Ann Arbor.10 Upon its founding, the university was managed by the Legislature, and this arrangement was incorporated into the state’s first constitution. Const 1835, art 10, § 5. Legislative regulation of the university was generally understood as disastrous, however, and a major focus of the Constitutional Convention of 1850 was the elimination of such supervision over the institution:
Under the Constitution of 1835, the legislature had the entire control and management of the University and the University fund. They could appoint regents and professors, and establish departments. The University was not a success under this supervision by the legislature .... Such was the condition of affairs when [the Constitutional Convention of 1850] met. It is apparent to any reader of the debates in this convention in regard to the constitutional provision for the University that they had in mind the idea of permanency of location, to place it beyond mere political influence, and to intrust it to those who should be directly responsible and amenable to the people. [Sterling v Univ of Michigan Regents, 110 Mich 369, 374; 68 NW 253 (1896).[11]
*256Thus, the Constitutional Convention of 1850 divested the Legislature of its picayune and unsuccessful regulation of education, and placed control of public universities in an independent body of government directly responsible to the people:
The public men of those times were greatly interested in the University. . . . The general consensus of opinion was that it should be under the control and management of a permanent board, who should be responsible for its management.
Obviously, it was not the intention of the framers of the Constitution to take away from the people the government of this institution. On the *257contrary, they designed to, and did, provide for its management and control by a body of eight men elected . . . for long terms, and whose sole official duty it should be to look after its interests, and who should have the opportunity to investigate its needs, and carefully deliberate and determine what things would best promote its usefulness for the benefit of the people. [Id. at 375-379J[12]
Hence, the Constitution of 1850 and its progeny13 specifically granted the board of regents of the University of Michigan independent constitutional status. This Court, therefore, has long recognized that the Legislature and boards of education are distinct and coequal governmental bodies vested with separate powers:
The board of regents and the legislature derive their power from the same supreme authority, namely, the Constitution. In so far as the powers of each are defined by that instrument, limitations are imposed, and a direct power conferred upon one necessarily excludes its existence in the other, in the absence of language showing the contrary intent. . . . They are separate and distinct constitutional bodies, with the powers of the regents defined. By no rule of construction can it be held that either can encroach upon or exercise the powers conferred upon the other. [Id. at 382.]
In other words, "the board of regents is made *258the highest form of juristic person known to the law, a constitutional corporation of independent authority, which, within the scope of its functions, is co-ordinate with and equal to that of the legislature.” Bd of Regents of Univ of Michigan v Auditor General, 167 Mich 444, 450; 132 NW 1037 (1911).14
Hence, "the Legislature may not interfere with the management and control of ” universities, Regents of Univ of Michigan v Michigan, 395 Mich 52, 65; 235 NW2d 1 (1975), nor may it "control the action of the Regents.” Weinberg v Regents of Univ of Michigan, 97 Mich 246, 254; 56 NW 605 (1893). Justice Williams distilled from our constitution and precedent that "[t]he Legislature cannot interfere in the management of the university. [Nor may it] prohibit [or] require the universities to take any particular action.” 395 Mich 92. In fact, "[t]he powers and prerogatives of Michigan universities have been jealously guarded not only by the boards of those universities but by this Court in a series of opinions running as far back as 1856.” Eastern Michigan Univ Bd of Control v Labor Mediation Bd, 384 Mich 561, 565; 184 NW2d 921 (1971).15
*259Nevertheless, this Court has noted that its historically strong protection of regental autonomy is not without exceptions. The Court has acknowledged that legislative regulation of the universities is not improper if legislation focuses upon the general welfare and does not interfere with the university’s operations, finances, or mission:
"It is the opinion of this Court that the legislature can validly exercise its police power for the welfare of the people of this State, and a constitutional corporation such as the board of regents of the University of Michigan can lawfully be affected thereby. The University of Michigan is an independent branch of the government of the State of Michigan, but it is not an island. Within the confines of the operation and the allocation of funds of the University, it is supreme. Without these confines, however, there is no reason to allow the regents to use their independence to thwart the clearly established public policy of the people of Michigan.” [Univ of Michigan Regents v Employment Relations Comm, 389 Mich 96, 108; 204 NW2d 218 (1973), quoting Branum v Bd of Regents of Univ of Michigan, 5 Mich App 134, 138-139; 145 NW2d 860 (1966).][16]
*260This reading of the constitution is in accord with its language as well as the original intentions of the ratifiers and framers of the constitution when granting autonomous regental power. The thrust of the adoption of the constitutional provisions was to ensure university autonomy with regard to management and supervision of the educational process and related matters, but not with the general welfare of the community. The provision, for instance, clearly was not intended to permit a board of regents to decriminalize drugs for recreational use or violate child labor laws, nor was it intended to permit the regents to refuse compliance with other general welfare laws unless they interfered with their constitutionally conferred duties.17
On the other hand, the constitution clearly prohibits infringement of constitutionally enumerated regental power by the Legislature. Hence, this Court has held that although defendant was subject to the public employees relations act,18 such regulation could not extend into the regents’ constitutionally granted powers:
Because of the unique nature of the University of Michigan . . . the scope of bargaining by [an *261association of medical interns, residents, and postdoctoral fellows] may be limited if the subject matter falls clearly within the educational sphere. Some conditions of employment may not be subject to collective bargaining because those particular facets of employment would interfere with the autonomy of the Regents. [389 Mich 109.]
Similarly, in Bd of Agriculture v Auditor General, 226 Mich 417, 425; 197 NW 160 (1924), the Court ruled that although the Legislature may attach conditions to funding, not only may the regents reject such appropriations, but those conditions that infringed upon the regents’ management and control of the institution were unconstitutional:
Clearly, in saying that the legislature can attach to an appropriation any condition which it may deem expedient and wise, the court had in mind only such a condition as the legislature had power to make. It did not mean that a condition could be imposed that would be an invasion of the constitutional rights and powers of the governing board of the college. It did not mean to say that, in order to avail itself of the money appropriated, the State board of agriculture must turn over to the legislature management and control of the college, or of any of its activities.[19]
Moreover, those cases permitting legislative interference with the regental power pitted one constitutional provision against another, and resolved the disputes by holding that the more specific power granted to the other branches of gov*262ernment overrode the general power of university autonomy.20
The Legislature, therefore, may not impose conditions on a board of regents that interfere with the supervision, management, or control of a university or that are related to its finances, property, or educational mission, and may only regulate university-related activities that have bearing on the general welfare and that arise from a constitutionally granted power.
IV
In the instant case, the plain meaning of the constitution, combined with the historical circumstances surrounding its adoption, reveal that the intentions of its ratifiers and framers were to grant autonomous regental power over the selection of the university president. The constitution endows the regents with the exclusive power to "elect a president of the institution under its supervision,”21 and confers upon the regents "general supervision of its institution and the control and direction of all expenditures . . . .” Const 1963, art 8, § 5. That the ratifiers and framers of the constitution intended to prohibit legislative intervention in the fundamental operations of public universities may not be doubted. The historical circumstances that bore the constitutional provi*263sion evidence that regental autonomy in core educational functions, such as selecting a president, was the paramount concern of the ratifiers and framers of the section. Indeed, acknowledging that the selection of the president of a university is perhaps the most important function of the board of regents, the constitution explicitly granted the power to the regents,22 who historically were unencumbered in their presidential selection process by the Legislature.23 In short, legislative oversight of the presidential selection process strikes at the core of regental autonomy.
This is so because the procedures followed by defendant to select a president are a vital aspect of the "management and control of” the university. 395 Mich 65. As this Court is well aware, procedure often determines result. The oma and the foia certainly attempt to "control the action of the Regents” by dramatically altering the method by which the board must fulfill its constitutionally vested duty. Weinberg, supra at 254.24 Indeed, our well-established precedent manifests that most legislative efforts to control the university unconstitutionally have occurred when the "legislature attempted to impose its will upon the internal operations of a university.” 384 Mich 565. The acts at issue are such attempts._
*264In In re 1976 PA 267, 400 Mich 660, 663; 255 NW2d 635 (1977), the Court recognized that the separation of powers doctrine prohibits the application of the oma to the internal operations of the judiciary:
The judicial powers derived from the Constitution . . . have been exclusively entrusted to the judiciary by the Constitution and may not be diminished, exercised by, nor interfered with by the other branches of government without constitutional authorization. . . . 1976 PA 267 is an impermissible intrusion into the most basic day-today exercise of the constitutionally derived judicial powers.[25]
Similarly, the oma and the foia strongly infringe upon the internal workings of a university by demanding the regents entirely rework their presidential selection procedures to meet their requirements. The regents vigorously argue that an open selection process will reduce both the quantity and the quality of available candidates. The record reveals that other regents from major Michigan universities concur. Not unlike this Court, the application of the oma and the foia to the regents is simply beyond the realm of legislative authority.
Moreover, the constitution rejects legislative attempts to open the presidential selection process because it fails to include the informal presidential search process in its mandatory disclosure provision. Const 1963, art 8, § 4. Ratified concurrently with art 8, § 5, art 8, § 4 mandates limited public oversight over the universities: "Formal sessions of governing boards of such institutions shall be open to the public.”_
*265At the Constitutional Convention, the author of the provision explained its history and purpose:
Meetings of governing boards of the 3 major universities have been open to the public and news media for the past Vi dozen years and that has been accomplished only after a long period of negotiations. As it stands, the public and news media are present only as a matter of sufferance. They are invited guests of the governing board, an invitation which could be, conceivably, withdrawn at any time. . . . [N]ow that we are creating by constitutional enactment 7 more such governing boards, it would be appropriate that their formal meetings should be conducted in public sessions. [Delegate White, 1 Official Record, Constitutional Convention 1961, p 1187.]
Similarly, the Address to the People stated that this provision was enacted to "insure[ ] that formal sessions of the governing boards of such institutions will be open to the public.” 2 Official Record, Constitutional Convention 1961, p 3396.
Unmistakenly, the purpose of the provision was to bring within the constitution the then-recent practice of permitting public access to formal meetings. No evidence, however, suggests that the provision was intended or understood to mandate the exposure of the entire presidential selection process to public view, or to empower the Legislature to do so.26 Indeed, the exclusionary language of "formal” reveals the decision whether informal meetings shall be held publicly is vested in the regents. As noted at the Constitutional Convention of 1961, before the adoption of art 8, § 4, regental power permitted the exclusion of the public from *266all of its meetings; after the ratification of that provision, the same power rested with the regents except with relation to formal meetings. Indeed, that the convention considered a constitutional amendment necessary to ensure that the recent practice of open formal meetings continued strongly suggests that the framers understood that the regents possessed plenary power with regard to the issue. The presidential selection process, therefore, need not be disclosed except when conducted in a formal meeting, such as the election of the officer,27
*267The plain understanding of the constitution, enlightened by the circumstances from which it arose, protects regental power from the Legislature’s oversight in the instant case. The Legislature, therefore, possesses no power to force defendant to comply with the oma and the foia28 during the presidential selection process.29
*268Griffin, J., concurred with Riley, J.
MCL 15.261 et seq.; MSA 4.1800(11) et seq.
MCL 15.231 et seq.; MSA 4.1801(1) et seq.
Furthermore, in my view, the exercise of the Court’s discretion is compelled in this case because the Court is presented with "a significant constitutional question . . . .” People v Blunt, 189 Mich App 643, 646; 473 NW2d 792 (1991). See also Dation, supra (examining a claim that the workers’ compensation act violated due process for first *252time on appeal); People v DeGraffenreid, 19 Mich App 702, 715; 173 NW2d 317 (1969) (holding that in some cases a court is "obliged to” grant a criminal defendant relief if a constitutional error occurred at trial even if the defendant did not assert such a right at trial); People v Davis, 181 Mich App 354, 355; 448 NW2d 842 (1989) (examining an ex-post-facto claim for the first time on appeal).
Furthermore, because as found by both the majority and Justice Boyle, the regents undoubtedly violated the oma and the foia in some fashion, the doctrine that the Court should not reach constitutional issues that are unnecessary to the resolution of a case is not invoked.
See also Const 1963, art 8, § 6.
In other words, " '[t]he interpretation that should be given it is that which reasonable minds, the great mass of the people themselves, would give it.’ ” Committee for Constitutional Reform, supra at 342, quoting Traverse City School Dist v Attorney General, 384 Mich 390, 405; 185 NW2d 9 (1971).
See also People v Harding, 53 Mich 481, 485; 19 NW 155 (1884); Kearney v Bd of State Auditors, 189 Mich 666, 673; 155 NW 510 (1915); Committee for Constitutional Reform, supra at 405.
That the Court, with some hesitation, may examine "the proceedings of the constitutional convention [to] endeavor to discover the probable intention of the framers of the constitution as we now find it, is well settled . . . .” Blodgett, supra at 165 (Cooley, J.). Strong reliance on such records, however, is appropriate only in the absence of clear constitutional language or "when we find in the debates a recurring thread of explanation binding together the whole of a constitutional concept.” Regents of Univ of Michigan v Michigan, 395 Mich 52, 60; 235 NW2d 1 (1975). See also Committee for Constitutional Reform, supra at 341.
"Indeed, where a particular construction has been generally accepted as correct, and especially when this has occurred contemporaneously with the adoption of the constitution, and by those who had opportunity to understand the intention of the instrument, it is not to be denied that a strong presumption exists that the construction rightly interprets the intention.” [McPherson v Secretary of State, 92 Mich 377, 383; 52 NW 469 (1892), quoting Cooley, supra, p 67, aff’d 146 US 1; 13 S Ct 3; 36 L Ed 869 (1892).]
The University of Michigan was founded under an act of Congress making an appropriation of lands for the support of a university in this State, approved May 20, 1826. [Sterling v Univ of Michigan Regents, 110 Mich 369, 373; 68 NW 253 (1896).]
A select committee was appointed by the legislature in 1840 to inquire into the condition of the University. . . . [This] report[ ] and discussion[ ] undoubtedly [was] known to the members of the convention, and their action should be construed in the light of such knowledge. [Id. at 375-377.]
The committee reported the dismal failure of the state-run public universities and the advantages of autonomous boards of education:
*256"No State institution in America has prospered as well as independent colleges with equal, and often with less, means. Why they have not may be ascribed, in part, to the following causes: They have not been guided by that oneness of purpose and singleness of aim (essential to their prosperity) that others have whose trustees are a permanent body, — men chosen for their supposed fitness for that very office, and who, having become acquainted with their duties, can and are disposed to pursue a steady course, which inspires confidence and insures success .... State institutions, on the contrary, have fallen into the hands of the several legislatures, fluctuating bodies of men, chosen with reference to their supposed qualifications for other duties than cherishing literary institutions. When legislatures have legislated directly for colleges, their measures have been as fluctuating as the changing materials of which the legislatures were composed.
"The argument by which legislatures have hitherto convinced themselves that it was their duty to legislate universities to death is this: 'It is a State institution, and we are the direct representatives of the people, and therefore it is expected of us; it is our right. The people have an interest in this thing, and we must attend to it.’ As if, because a university belongs to the people, that were reason why it should be dosed to death for fear it would be sick, if left to be nursed, like other institutions, by its immediate guardians. Thus has State after State, in this American Union, endowed universities, and then, by repeated contradictory and over legislation, torn them to pieces with the same facility as they do the statute book, and for the same reason, because they have the right.” [Sterling, supra at 375-377, quoting 2 House Documents 1840, p 470.]
So clear was the convention’s intent, this Court has confidently reported that there was not "a single utterance by any member of that convention from which it could be inferred that the members believed or supposed that they were leaving the control of that institution to the legislature.” Sterling, supra at 377. As one conventioneer stated, " 'the convention will observe that the concerns of this University are to be placed in the hands of the regents.’ ” Delegate Whipple, quoted id. at 375.
Const 1850, art 13, reads in essence the same as the 1908 provision and subsequently the 1963 provision. [395 Mich 64, n 8 supra.]
See also People ex rel Drake v Regents of Univ of Michigan, 4 Mich 98, 104 (1856); Weinberg v Regents of Univ of Michigan, 97 Mich 246, 254-255; 56 NW 605 (1893); Bd of Agriculture v Auditor General, 226 Mich 417, 423; 197 NW 160 (1924).
See, e.g., People ex rel Drake, n 14 supra; People v Regents of the Univ, 18 Mich 469 (1869) (the Legislature may not mandate at least one professor of homeopathy in the department of education of defendant); Weinberg, supra at 254-255 (the public bonding statute does not apply to universities); Sterling, supra (the public act directing regents to establish a homeopathic medical college is unconstitutional); Bauer v State Bd of Agriculture, 164 Mich 415, 418-419; 129 NW 7Í3 (1911) (universities possess exclusive control of appropriated funds, and may construct a building on college grounds to be leased as a post office); Regents v Auditor General, 167 Mich 450-451 (regents are not bound by the general accounting laws of the state unless they so consent); Bd of Agriculture v Auditor General, 180 Mich 349, 359; 147 NW 529 (1914) ("the legislature exceeded its *259powers in attempting to deprive the relator of its constitutional control of agricultural college funds derived from the Federal government”); Bd of Agriculture, n 14 supra, 226 Mich 426-427 (conditions attached to appropriations were an unconstitutional infringement of regental autonomy); Bd of Regents of Univ of Michigan v Michigan, 166 Mich App 314; 419 NW2d 773 (1988) (the statute mandating divestment from corporations operating in South Africa by public educational institutions unconstitutionally infringed upon the defendant’s grant of exclusive control and direction of expenditures to the university); Michigan United Conservation Clubs v Bd of Trustees of Michigan State Univ, 172 Mich App 189; 431 NW2d 217 (1988) (a university ordinance designating all lands and water under its control as a wildlife, fish, and bird sanctuary was within the constitutional and statutory authority of the board of trustees to control and manage university property); Dynamic Heating & Pumping Co v Ins Co of North America, 912 F2d 123 (CA 6, 1990) (the defendant was exempt from the Bonding Act requirements as a constitutionally created entity).
Plaintiffs suggest that because the foia states that "[i]t is the *260public policy of this state that all persons are entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs of government and the official acts of those who represent them as public officials and public employees,” MCL 15.231(2); MSA 4.1801(1)(2), the foia may apply in the instant case. However, the Legislature may not violate the constitution in pursuit of its own designated "public policy.”
Glass v Dudley Paper Co, 365 Mich 227; 112 NW2d 489 (1961) (holding that the specific constitutional authority of the Legislature to create courts and define their jurisdiction was sufficient to fix the jurisdiction of the Court of Claims and include Michigan State University within its exclusive jurisdiction); Peters v Michigan State College, 320 Mich 243; 30 NW2d 854 (1948) (upholding, by an equally divided vote, the Court of Appeals ruling that the Michigan State College was not exempt from the workers’ compensation act),
MCL 423.201 et seq.; MSA 17.455(1) et seq.
Hence, the Legislature may not invade a university’s management and control over its property, Weinberg, supra at 254-255; Dynamic Heating & Pumping Co, n Í5 supra, or curriculum. Sterling, supra at 375, or finances. 226 Mich 426-427.
In Univ of Michigan Regents v Employment Relations Comm, supra, the Court noted that the resolution of public employee disputes was a matter of public policy as provided in art 4, § 48. In Glass, n 17 supra, the general autonomy of the university was pitted against the other branches’ constitutional powers to establish and operate courts as conferred by art 7, § 1. Similarly, in Peters, n 17 supra, the dispute involved the provision of Const Í908, art 5, § 29, permitting the Legislature to create laws relating to employment versus the college’s general constitutional autonomy.
Regents may not delegate this power. See Sittler v Bd of Control, 333 Mich 681, 686; 53 NW2d 681 (1952).
Indeed, the Address to the People unambiguously declared that "[e]ach of the boards is permitted to choose the president of its university as presently provided.” 2 Official Record, Constitutional Convention 1961, p 3396.
Nearly all regental meetings were closed to the public except at the leisure of the board. See, e.g., Delegate White, 1 Official Record, Constitutional Convention 1961, p 1187.
Moreover, defendant credibly maintains that it perceives that presidential searches would be hampered by compliance with the oma. Whether this assertion is true is irrelevant, because defendant’s determination in this policymaking arena may not be questioned by this Court. At issue is the clash between two lawmakers; I only resolve that defendant is entitled to autonomy in this area. See also n 28.
So clear was the unconstitutionality of the application of the oma to the judiciary, that this Court was compelled to issue an extremely rare advisory opinion informing the Legislature of the unconstitutionality of proposed oma provisions.
Plaintiffs do not suggest that the then-existing practice was to allow the press to accompany regents on interviews for possible presidential candidates, nor do they suggest that such practice was even considered at the adoption of the constitution.
Unlike other provisions of the constitution, "formal sessions” are undefined and are not delegated to the Legislature to define. Hence, the constitution may leave the definition, if not patently unreasonable, to the boards. Cf. Bd of Regents of Univ of Michigan v Auditor General, supra at 449 (holding that regents could determine if their expenditures were "for lawful purposes”).
In any event, the plain meaning of the constitutional provision prohibits the application of the oma and the foia in the instant case. Unlike the oma, the constitution only mandates that "[formal sessions” be open to the public. Sources contemporary with the adoption of the amendment reveal that "formal” is defined as "belonging to or being the essential constitution or structure . . . following or according with established form, custom, or rule . . . based on conventional forms and rules,” while "session” is defined as "a meeting or series of meetings of a body (as a court or legislature) for the transaction of business . . . .” Webster’s Seventh New Collegiate Dictionary (1969), p 328; id. at 793. See also 37 CJS, formal, p 115 ("[o]f or pertaining to form, characterized by due form or order”).
This definition comports with one drafted by the Attorney General:
"[F]ormal sessions” [is defined] as meetings or sittings of the respective governing bodies held in accordance with established rules of such bodies for the transaction of business. . . .
[W]henever the governing board of an educational institution of higher learning is convened in accordance with established rules of such body for the transaction of business, it must convene in public session .... [OAG, 1969-1970, No 4676, pp 73, 75 (August 13, 1969).]
Cf. Severson v Sueppel, 260 Iowa 1169, 1173-1174; 152 NW2d 281 (1967).
Meetings at which the regents follow established rules in order to formally transact business, therefore, must be open to the public. OAG, No 4676, supra. On the other hand, informal meetings need not *267be. The meetings at issue, therefore, were informal and need not have been open to the public.
The Michigan Constitution also mandates that the financial records of public entities be open to public scrutiny:
All financial records, accountings, audit reports and other reports of public moneys shall be public records and open to inspection. [Const 1963, art 9, § 23.]
"The manifest purpose of article 9, §23 is to allow the public to keep their finger on the pulse of government spending.” Grayson v Bd of Accountancy, 27 Mich App 26, 34; 183 NW2d 424 (1970). In the instant case, there is no doubt that the records of the expenditures by defendant must be open to public scrutiny in some manner. Hence, defendant must disclose that it purchased airline tickets, the price of the tickets, and other pertinent financial information. Defendant must release at least "summaries, balance sheets, and other such compilations which map out and correlate a myriad of financial transactions into a meaningful account.” Id. On the other hand, whether a constitutional mandate exists which compels defendant to disclose the location of its travels is open to question. Cf. id. at 34-35 ("[i]t strains one’s credulity to think that the framers of the Constitution meant to allow the public to inspect every receipt . . . and every writing evidencing a receipt or expenditure”).
In any event, where the board, while exercising its exclusive authority to select a president, reasonably determines that such disclosure significantly hinders its ability to fulfill its constitutional duty, then the longstanding constitutional protection of regental autonomy should outweigh the minimal interest of financial record disclosure of the destination of such trips. Hence, in the conflict between these two constitutional provisions regental autonomy triumphs.
Both sides vigorously contest the efficacy of a closed versus an open presidential selection process. These arguments, however, are irrelevant to the resolution of the instant case because the constitution has settled the issue:
[T]he Court is not called upon to give its opinion as to whether the legislation in question is good public policy and the best part of wisdom for the Legislature and the universities to follow. We are asked only whether the legislative conditions *268invade the constitutional jurisdiction of the universities. Therefore, our conclusions based on the Constitution and the foregoing precedents and our analysis of the lessons they teach can be seen only in that perspective. [395 Mich 76.]

=== CASE 9742106 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:06:50.870327+00 ===

JUSTICE NICKELS delivered the opinion of the court: We here decide the constitutionality of the statutory penalty for felons who violate the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act (430 ILCS 65/0.01 et seq. (West 1994)). The circuit court of Cook County found that the statutory penalty for felons in possession of a firearm without proper registration (730 ILCS 5/5 — 5 — 3(c)(2)(N) (West Supp. 1995)), when compared to the penalty for the offense of unlawful use of a weapon by a felon (720 ILCS 5/24 — 1.1 (West 1994)), is disproportionate under section 11 of article I of the 1970 Illinois Constitution. The circuit court also found that the sentencing disparity violated due process under both the Illinois and United States Constitutions. Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 2; U.S. Const., amend. XIV. The State appealed directly to this court. 134 Ill. 2d R 603.1 For reasons that follow, we agree that the statutory penalty for felons convicted of failing to register a firearm pursuant to the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act violates the Illinois Constitution. We therefore affirm the trial court. BACKGROUND Defendant, Darryl Davis, was charged by information with two counts of unlawful use of a weapon by a felon (720 ILCS 5/24 — 1.1(a) (West 1994) (one count each for a firearm and ammunition)), one count of unlawful use of a .weapon (720 ILCS 5/24 — 1(a)(4) (West 1994)), and one count of failing to have a firearm owner’s card in violation of the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act (430 ILCS 65/2(a)(l) (West 1994)). Prior to trial, defendant filed a motion to dismiss the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act charge. In his motion, defendant noted that possessing a firearm without a firearm owner’s card is a nonprobationable Class 3 felony that is subject to a minimum two-year prison sentence. See 730 ILCS 5/5 — 5 — 3(c)(2)(N) (West Supp. 1995). In contrast, the offense of unlawful use of a weapon by a felon is a probationable Class 3 felony. See 730 ILCS 5/5 — 8 — 1(a)(6) (West 1994). Defendant’s motion alleged that it was irrational to make the penalty for the registration offense nonprobationable while the penalty for the offense of unlawful use of a weapon by a felon is probationable. Thus, defendant contended that the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act sentencing provision for felons violated due process under both the Illinois and United States Constitutions. See 111. Const. 1970, art. I, § 2; U.S. Const., amend. XIV. Defendant also argued that giving the registration offense a more serious penalty violates section 11 of article I of the 1970 Illinois Constitution. This provision, referred to as the proportionate penalties clause or the limitation-of-penalties provision, provides in part: "All penalties shall be determined *** according to the seriousness of the offense ***.” Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 11. Defendant’s motion alleged that the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act sentencing provision violates this constitutional guarantee by providing a more severe penalty for that offense than for the more serious offense of unlawful use of a weapon by a felon. Last, defendant’s motion alleged that the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act charge constituted a double enhancement. Defendant essentially suggested that his status as a felon should not be used twice to enhance the punishment for his criminal conduct. In this regard, defendant noted that because he is a felon he could not obtain a firearm owner’s card. Defendant therefore reasoned that he cannot commit the lesser punished unlawful use of a weapon by a felon offense without committing the more harshly punished registration offense. Thus, defendant contended that the Fire-, arm Owners Identification Card Act charge constituted a double enhancement based on his status as a felon. After a hearing, the circuit court granted defendant’s motion to dismiss the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act charge. The circuit court held that the penalty provision for felons convicted of violating the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act offended both due process and the proportionate penalties clause. The court reasoned that "there is no rational basis for *** making it non-probationable not to have the card and probation-able to have the gun that requires you to have the card.” The circuit court rejected defendant’s contention that the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act penalty provision constituted a double enhancement. The State then appealed the dismissal of the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act charge directly to this court. During the briefing of this case, this court decided People v. Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d 412 (1996), which addressed the scope of the proportionate penalties clause. The State repeats here many arguments it made in Lewis. Therefore, we briefly address those arguments prior to turning attention to the merits of the present claim. Furthermore, as we find the proportionate penalties issue dispositive, the following analysis does not address the due process or double enhancement claims. ANALYSIS Pretrial Dismissal The State first argues that the circuit court erred on procedural grounds. The State contends that the circuit court erred in dismissing the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act charge prior to trial because such a ruling is premature and invades prosecutorial discretion concerning what offenses to charge. This court rejected these exact challenges in People v. Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d 412, 423 (1996). In Lewis, this court observed that proportionate penalty challenges are routinely considered in a pretrial posture. See, e.g., People v. Bailey, 167 Ill. 2d 210, 234-37 (1995); People v. Farmer, 165 Ill. 2d 194, 209-10 (1995); People v. Johns, 153 Ill. 2d 436, 447-49 (1992); People v. Hamm, 149 Ill. 2d 201, 218-20 (1992); People v. Simmons, 145 Ill. 2d 264, 269-72 (1991). Relying on People v. Christy, 139 Ill. 2d 172 (1990), this court in Lewis also rejected the contention that such a pretrial dismissal improperly usurps prosecutorial discretion. Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d at 417. The court reasoned that where the penalty for a given offense violates the proportionate penalties clause, the prosecutor has no discretion to charge that offense. Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d at 422. Thus, we address the merits of the proportionate penalties issue. Proportionate Penalties In examining the constitutionality of a statute, we are guided by familiar standards. Legislative enactments are presumed to be constitutional and all reasonable doubts must be resolved in favor of upholding their validity. People v. La Pointe, 88 Ill. 2d 482, 499 (1985). For this reason, the party challenging a statute bears the burden of clearly establishing the alleged constitutional violation. Johns, 153 Ill. 2d at 442. In Lewis, this court addressed the scope of section 11 of article I of the 1970 Illinois Constitution. At issue was whether the statutory penalties for armed robbery (720 ILCS 5/18 — 2 (West 1994)) and armed violence predicated on robbery with a category I weapon (720 ILCS 5/33A — 2 (West 1994)) constituted proportionate penalties. The two offenses had identical elements, but were subject to different sentencing ranges. In addressing this issue, the Lewis court rejected two arguments concerning the proper scope of proportionality review that are repeated in the present appeal. First, the State argued that the proportionate penalties clause was not intended by the drafters of the Illinois Constitution to apply to the legislature. Instead, the State asserted that the true purpose of the provision was to provide a check on judicially imposed sentences. This court rejected that view and held that the proportionate penalties clause restricts the power of the legislature in establishing statutory criminal penalties. Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d at 420. Second, the State argued in Lewis that, even if the proportionate penalties clause applies to the legislature, it does not provide for the comparison of penalties for different offenses. Instead, the State sought to limit review under the proportionate penalties clause to an examination of the gravity of a particular offense with the severity of its sentence. See Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d at 425 (Miller, J., dissenting, joined by Nickels, J.). Under this review, the proportionate penalties clause is violated only where a legislative punishment for a particular offense is cruel, degrading, or so wholly disproportionate to the offense as to shock the moral sense of the community. See, e.g., People v. Gonzales, 25 Ill. 2d 235, 240 (1962); Farmer, 165 Ill. 2d at 209-10. The Lewis court found that review under the proportionate penalties clause is not limited to examining the gravity of a particular offense and the severity of the penalty. Instead, the court determined that comparing different offenses and their penalties is an accepted part of proportionality review. Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d at 420 (citing cases). The court explained that "[t]he comparison of similar statutes and their penalties helps impose a measure of objectivity upon the process of proportionality review which, if restricted to comparing a single offense and its penalty, would otherwise be lacking.” Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d at 421. "Where a comparison of different offenses is at issue, a penalty "violates the proportionate penalties clause where conduct that creates a less serious threat to the public health and safety than other conduct is punished more harshly.” People v. Hickman, 163 Ill. 2d 250, 259 (1994), citing People v. Johns, 153 Ill. 2d 436, 447 (1992); see also People v. Morris, 136 Ill. 2d 157, 168 (1990). However, this court has recognized that, "[t]he legislature, institutionally, is more aware than the courts of the evils confronting our society and, therefore, is more capable of gouging the seriousness of various offenses.” People v. Steppan, 105 Ill. 2d 310, 319 (1985). Thus, courts will generally defer to a legislative judgment that a particular offense is more serious than another. See People v. Lee, 167 Ill. 2d 140, 147 (1995). Lewis did not involve the comparison of two different offenses, but instead involved the comparison of the penalties for two identical offenses. The court determined that the different sentencing ranges for the offenses of armed robbery (six-year mandatory minimum) and armed violence predicated on robbery with a category I weapon (15-year mandatory minimum) violated the proportionate penalties clause. Relying on People v. Christy, 139 Ill. 2d 172 (1990), the court held that the proportionate penalties clause is violated where two offenses have identical elements, but are subject to different sentencing ranges. Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d at 423. Thus, the defendant could only be charged with the less severely punished armed robbery offense. The Lewis court noted that this comparison of identical offenses is "less troublesome than the general cross-comparison type of review” of two different offenses. Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d at 421. Comparison of identical offenses is less troublesome because a court is not forced to make difficult determinations regarding the relative seriousness of the offense or the severity of the penalty. Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d at 421. Thus, review under the proportionate penalties clause can take three different forms. First, the proportionate penalties clause is violated where the punishment for a particular offense is cruel, degrading, or so . wholly disproportionate to the offense as to shock the moral sense of the community. Gonzales, 25 Ill. 2d at 240; Farmer, 165 Ill. 2d at 209-10. Second, the proportionate penalties clause is violated where similar offenses are compared and conduct that creates a less serious threat to the public health and safety is punished more harshly. Hickman, 163 Ill. 2d at 259; Morris, 136 Ill. 2d at 168; Johns, 153 Ill. 2d at 447; People v. Wisslead, 94 Ill. 2d 190, 196-97 (1983). Third, the proportionate penalties clause is violated where identical offenses are given different sentences. Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d 412; Christy, 139 Ill. 2d 172. Defendant does not suggest that a mandatory prison sentence for a felon who violates the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act is cruel or wholly disproportionate to that offense. Nor could he. However, defendant does argue that the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act offense and the unlawful use of a weapon by a felon offense are identical. Defendant reasons that the offenses are identical because a felon cannot obtain a firearm owner’s identification card. Thus, a felon carrying a firearm will always violate both provisions. If the offenses are identical, the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act offense violates the proportionate penalties clause because that offense has a more severe sentence, a mandatory prison term. The State disputes that the offenses are identical. The State notes that the offense of unlawful use of a weapon by a felon requires only the knowing possession of a weapon by a felon. In contrast, the elements of the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act offense are possession of a firearm without proper registration. 430 ILCS 65/2 (West 1994). The defendant’s felony status is not an element of the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act offense, but is only a factor relevant to sentencing. 430 ILCS 65/14(c) (West Supp. 1995). As the offenses have different elements, the State asserts they are not identical offenses even though a felon with a firearm will violate both. Assuming the offenses are not identical, the general cross-comparison analysis applies. Under this analysis, the proportionate penalties clause is violated where different offenses are compared and conduct that creates a less serious threat to the public health and safety is punished more harshly. Cf. People v. Bradley, 79 Ill. 2d 410 (1980) (finding a violation of Illinois due process clause where possession of controlled substance was punished more severely than delivery); People v. Wagner, 89 Ill. 2d 308 (1982) (finding a violation of Illinois due process clause where delivery of look-alike controlled substance was punished more severely than delivery of an actual controlled substance). For example, in People v. Wisslead, 94 Ill. 2d 190 (1983), this court compared the penalties for the offenses of armed violence predicated on unlawful restraint (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 38, par. 33A — 2) and aggravated kidnapping (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 38, par. 10 — 2(a)(5)). The court determined that aggravated kidnapping is a more serious offense than armed violence based on unlawful restraint, but the latter was sentenced more harshly. Thus, the court found that the armed violence penalty violated the proportionate penalties clause. Wisslead, 94 Ill. 2d at 195-96. In other cases, this court has rejected challenges under the proportionate penalties clause even though the offenses at issue prohibited similar conduct but carried different penalties. In People v. Steppan, 105 Ill. 2d 310 (1985), defendant argued that it was disproportionate to have a more severe punishment for burglary of the contents of a motor vehicle than for the theft of the vehicle and all its contents. This court determined that the burglary of a motor vehicle may be punished more severely than the theft of a vehicle without offending the proportionate penalties clause. The court reasoned that the burglary statute and the theft statute have different purposes and the legislature may have increased the burglary penalty out of a desire to halt the increase of that particular crime. Steppan, 105 Ill. 2d at 320-21; see also Johns, 153 Ill. 2d at 449. Similarly, in People v. Hickman, 163 Ill. 2d 250 (1994), this court compared the penalties for the offenses of criminal drug conspiracy (720 ILCS 570/405.1 (West 1992)) with the offense of calculated criminal drug conspiracy (720 ILCS 570/405 (West 1992)). This court determined that each offense targeted a specific evil and neither offense was "less serious” than the other. Hickman, 163 Ill. 2d at 260. The criminal drug, conspiracy offense was intended to punish large-scale traffickers whereas the offense of calculated drug conspiracy was intended to punish the organizer of the conspiracy more severely than less culpable members of the conspiracy. Hickman, 163 Ill. 2d at 260. Therefore, each offense served a different purpose and each could be subject to a different sentence. Hickman, 163 Ill. 2d at 260. Applying this precedent, we are left with two inquiries. The first inquiry is whether the purposes of the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act offense and the unlawful use of a weapon by a felon offense are distinct such that comparative proportionality review is not appropriate. See Steppan, 105 Ill. 2d at 321-22; Hickman, 163 Ill. 2d at 260. If the purposes are related, the second inquiry is whether the nonprobationable Firearm Owners Identification Card Act offense is more serious than the probationable offense of unlawful use of a weapon by a felon. We find that comparative proportionality review is appropriate for these offenses. It cannot be seriously contended that the legislature made violations of the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act by felons nonprobationable without intending to prevent the possession of weapons by felons. The purposes of both the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act sentencing provision and the unlawful use of a weapon by a felon offense are the same and Steppan and Hickman are therefore inapposite. Thus, our sole remaining inquiry is whether the nonprobationable Firearm Owners Identification Card Act offense is a more serious offense than the probationable offense of unlawful use of a weapon by a felon. The State argues that a felon’s failure to register a firearm is a more serious offense than unlawful use of a weapon by a felon. The State suggests that it is for the legislature to determine the best way to prevent felons from obtaining firearms, and the legislature has determined that the best way to do so is to require registration. Thus, the State reasons that the legislature may treat the failure to register as a more serious offense than the unlawful use of a weapon by a felon. Defendant responds that where a felon is not involved, the legislature treats the unlawful use of a weapon as a more serious offense and gives that offense a more severe penalty than the failure to have proper registration. Where an individual is not a felon, the unlawful use of a weapon (720 ILCS 5/24 — 1(a)(4) (West 1994)) is classified as a Class 4 felony (720 ILCS 5/24— 1(b) (West 1994)). Where a nonfelon fails to register a firearm under the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act, the offense is generally punished as a Class A misdemeanor. 430 ILCS 65/14 (West Supp. 1995). Defendant therefore argues that where a felon is involved, the unlawful use of a weapon must similarly be considered a more serious offense than having a firearm without proper registration. We agree with the defendant that the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act offense must be considered a less serious offense than unlawful use of a weapon by a felon. In People v. Morris, 136 Ill. 2d 157 (1990), this court compared the penalty for altering a temporary vehicle registration permit with the penalty for possession of a stolen motor vehicle. The court found that altering the temporary registration on a vehicle which one owns is a less serious offense than possession of a stolen motor vehicle. Morris, 136 Ill. 2d at 163-68. In so finding, the court rejected the State’s argument that, because both provisions were designed to prevent possession of stolen motor vehicles, both could have the same penalty. Instead, the court found that treating the offense of altering one’s vehicle registration, which is a prophylactic offense designed to prevent possession of stolen vehicles, the same as other theft related offenses violates the proportionate penalties clause. Morris, 136 Ill. 2d at 163. Similarly, even though both the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act offense and the unlawful use of a weapon by a felon offense are designed to prevent the possession of firearms by felons, a violation of the registration requirement is a less serious offense. The registration requirement is part of a prophylactic administrative scheme designed "to provide a system of identifying persons who are not qualified to acquire or possess firearms.” 430 ILCS 65/1 (West 1994). As stated by the trial court, it is disproportionate to make the failure to have the card a more serious offense than having the firearm that requires you to have the card. We note that it is the firearm that creates the serious risk to health and safety. Unlike the firearm, the card cannot be loaded. CONCLUSION We find that the penalty for violations of the Firearm Owners Identification Card Act by a felon (730 ILCS 5 — 5 — 3(c)(2)(N) (West Supp. 1995)) violates section 11 of article I of the 1970 Illinois Constitution when compared to the penalty for the offense of unlawful use of a weapon by a felon. Accordingly, we affirm the trial court and remand to that court for further proceedings. The Firearm Owners Identification Card Act charge is dismissed; on remand, the State may prosecute the remaining charges. Affirmed and remanded.  Hhe State mistakenly cites to Supreme Court Rule 302(a)(1) as the basis for jurisdiction. However, Rule 802(a)(1) involves direct appeals where a statute has been held invalid in a civil case. 134 Ill. 2d R. 302(a)(1). In a criminal case, direct appellate jurisdiction lies in this court under Rule 603. See also People v. Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d 412, 414 (1996).

=== CASE 9742107 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:06:50.874543+00 ===

JUSTICE MILLER, dissenting: The majority finds an unconstitutional disproportionality in the imposition of a stricter penalty for a felon’s possession of a firearm without proper registration than for the offense of unlawful use of weapons by a felon. I disagree. The two crimes are distinct offenses with different elements, and the legislature is entitled to say that one is more serious than the other. It should be noted that the weapon required for the offense of unlawful use of weapons need not be a firearm, and to that extent the legislature could justifiably conclude that the possession of a firearm without proper registration is the more serious crime. In circumstances in which the conduct underlying the two offenses overlaps — that is, when a firearm is involved — I believe that the prosecutor should be free to decide whether to seek the greater penalty authorized by the more serious charge. I dissented in People v. Lewis, 175 Ill. 2d 412 (1996), and People v. Christy, 139 Ill. 2d 172 (1990), cited by the majority, and I continue to believe that the earlier decisions are in error. In the present case, the majority acknowledges that the mandatory prison term for a felon who possesses a firearm without proper registration is not disproportionate to the offense. 177 Ill. 2d at 504. That should mark the end, not the beginning, of our inquiry under the proportionate penalties clause, found in article I, section 11, of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 11). See People v. Farmer, 165 Ill. 2d 194, 209-10 (1995). The propriety of the penalty for an offense should be assessed in relation to the conduct underlying that particular charge, and not in relation to the conduct prohibited by other offenses. The majority’s analysis, a wide-ranging comparative proportionality review, conflicts with the legislature’s power to define offenses and prescribe penalties {People v. Wade, 131 Ill. 2d 370, 379 (1989); People v. Taylor, 102 Ill. 2d 201, 205 (1984)), and diminishes the prosecutor’s authority to decide which offenses to charge (see United States v. Batchelder, 442 U.S. 114, 123, 60 L. Ed. 2d 755, 764, 99 S. Ct. 2198, 2204 (1979); People v. McCollough, 57 Ill. 2d 440, 444 (1974)). The court’s continuing effort to catalog and organize the entire body of our criminal law according to one grand scheme of comparative proportionality review exceeds the mandate of the proportionate penalties clause of our constitution and ultimately threatens to usurp the legislative and prosecutorial functions. JUSTICE HARRISON joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2229987 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:33.517034+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 82 (1997)
292 Ill. App. 3d 1036
227 Ill. Dec. 159
EMPLOYERS INSURANCE OF WAUSAU, a Mutual Company, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
EHLCO LIQUIDATING TRUST, Noel H. Goodman, and C.H. Heath Compensation and Liability Insurance Company, Defendants-Appellees.
No. 1-95-1337.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District.
September 10, 1997.
Rehearing Denied March 3, 1998.
*83 Kaplan & Begy, Chicago (Larry S. Kaplan, Neal J. Moglin, Jeffrey E. Margulis, of counsel); Zelle & Larson, Minneapolis, MN *84 (Richard M. Hagstrom, David C. Linder, of counsel), for plaintiff-appellant.
Robin R. Lynn, Stanley C. Nardoni, John S. Vishneski III, Stephen R. Meinertzhage, Keck, Mahin & Cate, Chicago, for defendants-appellees.
Justice GORDON delivered the opinion of the court:
This insurance coverage dispute involves two underlying proceedings against Ehlco Liquidating Trust (Ehlco) and affiliated entities for environmental property damages allegedly caused by those parties at two industrial sites, one located in Wyoming and the other in Mena, Arkansas. Apparently, Ehlco Liquidating Trust is a trust created by order of the Delaware Chancery Court to resolve the contingent liabilities of Edward Hines Lumber Company (Hines), a dissolved Delaware corporation. The instant appeal arises from a declaratory judgment action filed by plaintiff Employers Insurance of Wausau, A Mutual Company (Wausau) against Ehlco; Ehlco's trustee, Noel H. Goodman; and C.H. Heath Compensation and Liability Insurance Company (Heath), which is identified as the successor to Employers Surplus Lines Insurance Company, Hines' excess liability carrier. Wausau's original declaratory complaint also named 15 other insurance carriers in addition to Heath as defendants, who with the exception of Heath were each dismissed from this action prior to the entry of the orders from which this appeal was taken. In its first-amended complaint filed in this action, Wausau sought a declaration that it owed no duty to defend or indemnify Ehlco in an underlying suit concerning environmental property damage at an Ehlco-affiliated industrial site in Wyoming. Ehlco filed its answer and a motion for judgment on the pleadings pursuant to section 2-615(e) of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2-615(e) (West 1994)), seeking defense and indemnification coverage with respect to the underlying Wyoming action. While that motion was pending, Ehlco moved for leave to file a counterclaim for declaratory judgment against Wausau and Heath seeking defense and indemnification coverage with respect to underlying administrative proceedings and a subsequent consent decree action initiated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) concerning environmental property damage at an Ehlco-affiliated site in Mena, Arkansas. The underlying proceedings in Mena, Arkansas concerned allegations of environmental property damage similar to that which allegedly occurred at the Wyoming site. On February 28, 1994, the court granted Ehlco leave to file its Mena counterclaim.
Contemporaneously on that date, Wausau obtained leave of court to file its second-amended complaint (in lieu of filing an answer to Ehlco's Mena counterclaim), in which it reiterated its allegations regarding the Wyoming site and additionally sought declaratory relief with respect to the Mena site. Thereafter, Wausau moved to dismiss Ehlco's Mena counterclaim pursuant to sections 2-615(e) and 2-619(a)(5) of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2-615(e), 2-619(a)(5) (West 1994)) on statute of limitations grounds and on the grounds that Hines' notice to Wausau regarding the Mena contamination had been untimely. Ehlco then filed a cross-motion for judgment on the pleadings with respect to the Mena counterclaim. Prior to any ruling on these motions, Wausau filed a motion seeking leave of court to file its third-amended complaint. The trial court granted Wausau leave to file its third-amended complaint without prejudice to Ehlco's right to oppose the legal and factual sufficiency thereof and without waiver of any defenses to it. That order also provided that Ehlco's pending motions for judgment on the pleadings as to both sites would stand as to the third-amended complaint, and that Ehlco's answer, affirmative defenses and counterclaim would stand to the extent that Wausau's third-amended complaint repeated the allegations and claims of its second-amended complaint. In its third-amended complaint, Wausau repeated the allegations in its previous complaint and added several new counts seeking a determination of noncoverage under the subject policies. In response, Ehlco filed a motion to strike all of the new counts of the third-amended complaint, arguing that the new claims were unsupported by sufficient factual allegations. In addition, Ehlco sought to strike Wausau's jury demand.
*85 On November 7, 1994, the trial court granted both of Ehlco's motions for judgment on the pleadings, finding that there was coverage in favor of Ehlco as to both sites. In its order, the trial court held that Wausau had a duty to defend Ehlco in both underlying actions, and that Ehlco had breached that duty. The trial court therefore held that Ehlco was estopped from raising any policy defenses to coverage and from arguing that Ehlco had failed to satisfy conditions precedent to coverage such as timely notice. The trial court also granted Ehlco's motion to strike the new counts and allegations of Wausau's third-amended complaint, apparently on the grounds that the new allegations therein were conclusory and unsupported by allegations of fact, and because in any event, Wausau was estopped from asserting any of the policy defenses in those new counts because of its breach of its duty to defend. In sustaining that motion, the court also said that "the court agrees with all of Ehlco's arguments presented in this motion," which Wausau now construes to be a determination that the court struck its jury demand as well. After the denial of various post-trial motions to reconsider filed by Wausau (addressed more fully below in our discussion of our jurisdiction to hear this appeal), Wausau appealed.
I. THE UNDERLYING ACTIONS
As noted above, this case involves two underlying proceedings, one in Wyoming and one in Mena, Arkansas. The Wyoming action was initiated against Ehlco by the Union Pacific Railroad Company (Union Pacific), and the Arkansas proceedings were initiated against Hines by the USEPA. Each underlying proceeding involved allegations of contamination and property damage caused by Ehlco-affiliated entities which operated industrial wood-treatment facilities in Wyoming and in Arkansas and which allegedly dispersed hazardous wastes into the environment.[1]
[Editor's Note: Text Omitted pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 23.]
The question concerning Wausau's duty to defend with respect to the USEPA's proceedings against Hines relating to the *86 Mena site requires a more complex analysis. Wausau would urge that it had no duty to defend in those proceedings since they did not constitute a "suit" as defined by the subject policies and under Illinois law. We agree. Our supreme court's decision in Lapham-Hickey Steel Corp. v. Protection Mutual Insurance Co., 166 Ill. 2d 520, 211 Ill. Dec. 459, 655 N.E.2d 842 (1995) is directly in point. In Lapham-Hickey, the relevant coverage provisions required the insurer to defend "suits" against the insured. In that case, the insured received a letter from the USEPA stating that it was potentially responsible for the costs of an environmental cleanup, and also received a draft consent order and a "no action" letter informing the insured that it probably would not be held responsible for the costs of any cleanup. None of those written documents led to the filing of any suit against the insured. The Lapham-Hickey court reasoned that since the subject policy employed the term "suit" in discussing the carrier's duty to defend, no such duty would be invoked absent the filing of a suit against the insured in "actual court proceedings." 166 Ill. 2d at 532, 211 Ill.Dec. at 464, 655 N.E.2d at 847. On that basis, the Lapham-Hickey court held that no duty to defend was triggered since a "suit" exists in an environmental coverage context only when there has been a proceeding against the insured filed in a court of law. The Lapham-Hickey court stated that its holding was consistent with the manner in which courts determine whether a duty to defend exists, i.e., by comparing the allegations of the underlying complaint to the relevant policy provisions to see if coverage is even potentially alleged by the pleadings. Without the filing of a suit in a judicial proceeding, there would be no such complaint, and therefore, no duty to defend would arise.
In the instant case, as in Lapham-Hickey, the Wausau policies state that Wausau
"shall have the right and duty to defend any suit against the insured seeking damages * * * [for] property damage, even if the allegations of the suit are groundless, false or fraudulent* * *."
As in Lapham-Hickey, here, because no suit was filed with respect to the underlying USEPA proceedings concerning the Mena site prior to 1988, Wausau's duty to defend was not triggered prior to that time. See also Fruit of the Loom, Inc. v. Travelers Indemnity Co., 284 Ill.App.3d 485, 219 Ill. Dec. 770, 672 N.E.2d 278 (1996) (no duty to defend because no suit was filed in that no judicial proceeding was commenced); Forest Preserve District of DuPage County v. Pacific Indemnity Co., 279 Ill.App.3d 728, 216 Ill. Dec. 245,665 N.E.2d 305 (1996).
Ehlco would urge that Lapham-Hickey should not be applied retroactively to the facts here since that case was decided after this action was filed and after judgment was entered. However, it is well-settled that Lapham-Hickey is to be given retroactive application. See Benoy Motor Sales, Inc. v. Universal Underwriters Insurance Co, 287 Ill.App.3d 942, 945-46, 223 Ill. Dec. 229, 231-32, 679 N.E.2d 414, 416-17 (1997) ("Lapham-Hickey's requirement of a lawsuit to trigger the insurance company's duty to defend is to be applied retroactively."); Fruit of the Loom, 284 Ill.App.3d at 496, 219 Ill. Dec. at 778, 672 N.E.2d at 286 ("Lapham-Hickey is to be given retroactive application because the Supreme Court's opinion in Lapham-Hickey did not state that it was prospective, and the opinion on its face applies to the litigants in the Lapham-Hickey case."); Forest Preserve, 279 Ill.App.3d 728, 216 Ill. Dec. 245, 665 N.E.2d 305. See generally Lannom v. Kosco, 158 Ill. 2d 535, 199 Ill. Dec. 743, 634 N.E.2d 1097 (1994) (supreme court has power to declare when a decision will apply prospectively only, and in the past has said so expressly when it intended for prospective application alone; supreme court's decisions apply retroactively to cases pending at time decision is announced).
In addition, Ehlco apparently contends that by virtue of the filing of the federal consent decree action, Wausau became retroactively responsible for Hines' defense costs incurred in response to the USEPA's administrative proceedings and investigation of the Mena site, dating back to the USEPA's letter to Hines of March 18, 1982. In support, Ehlco relies upon the decision of Detrex Chemical Industries, Inc. v. Employers Insurance of Wausau, 681 *87 F.Supp. 438 (N.D.Ohio 1987) (federal district court decision, applying Ohio law, stating that even if a "potentially responsible party" ("PRP") letter does not constitute a suit, once a court action is filed pursuant thereto, the insured becomes entitled to all defense costs retroactively, dating back to the date of the PRP letter). We disagree.
It would seem that a pro forma lawsuit, which only serves to reduce to judgment by agreement of the parties a settlement to which the parties had already consented in an administrative proceeding, is but an extension or implementation of that administrative proceeding. Consequently, to invoke coverage for the filing of a lawsuit already consented to in a settlement agreement in the underlying administrative action, where the outcome of that lawsuit is pre-ordained by that agreement, would contravene the thrust of the holding of Lapham-Hickey, which precludes any duty to defend against administrative proceedings. Once a consent decree is fully agreed upon in the underlying administrative settlement, a suit which is filed pursuant thereto as a mere formality provides nothing to defend upon which to invoke any duty to defend. Although Lapham-Hickey did not expressly address this issue, we do not believe that in that case the court intended to extend the duty to defend to non-adversarial suits in which the insured had already fully agreed with the liabilities ultimately imposed by the court, which as a mere formality legitimatized the agreement prepared by the parties prior to the filing of the action.
In the instant case, Wausau avers in its brief that the consent decree was entered into and fully executed prior to the filing of the federal action, and that the decree was filed contemporaneously with the federal complaint. Ehlco does not anywhere controvert these averments. Moreover, the signature page of the consent decree bears the date of May 16, 1987, which purports to be well in advance of the filing of the federal action in March 1988.[6] The consent decree, when agreed upon, contemplated the filing of a federal lawsuit in which the consent decree would be filed. Thus, the entry into the consent decree prior to the filing of the federal suit completely neutralized the anticipated federal action and rendered it non-adversarial in nature.
There is nothing on the face of the decree that is inconsistent with the non-adversarial nature of the federal action in which it was contemporaneously filed. The provisions of the decree wholly define and predetermine the full nature and extent of the judicial action to be taken pursuant to the filing of the lawsuit and the entry of the decree. As noted, the consent decree provides in pertinent part as follows:
"This Consent Decree shall be lodged with the Court for a period of 30 days for public comment pursuant to the provisions of 28 C.F.R. § 50.7 and Section 122(i) of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, Pub.L. No. 99-499, 100 Stat 1613 (1986)."
The decree further provided that
"the parties agree and the Court finds that settlement of these matters without further litigation is in the public interest and that the entry of this Decree is the most appropriate means of resolving these matters."
In addition, the consent decree contained penalties for violations of the decree to which the parties had stipulated. The decree also provided that the federal court would maintain jurisdiction
"for the duration of this Consent Decree for the purposes of issuing such further directions as may be necessary or appropriate to construe, implement, modify, enforce, terminate, or reinstate the terms of this Consent Decree * * *."
As is apparent from its face, the consent decree was fully executed prior to the filing of the federal action and was filed simultaneously with it. Second, the role of the federal court was clearly limited and defined on the face of the consent decree to the future enforcement of the settlement if necessary, *88 and did not call for any concurrent defense of the action by Ehlco. Third, the decree provided its own stipulated penalties. Fourth, the stated purpose of the federal action, as disclosed in the decree itself, was to prevent any further litigation, and to permit the statutorily required "public comment" on the terms of the settlement agreement. Hence, the federal consent decree action was wholly non-adversarial, entered into by prior consent of the parties to implement an agreement negotiated and executed in the underlying prior administrative proceedings.
It is therefore apparent that Ehlco did not require any defense in the federal consent decree action, since that action was filed by agreement of the parties merely to reduce the settlement decree to an enforceable judgment pursuant to the prior agreement of the parties, and since the insured's liability in the lawsuit was a foregone conclusion, fully negotiated by the parties prior to the filing of the action. We would further surmise that, if anything, the cost of attorney fees actually incurred in the federal consent decree action would at best be nominal, since every detail appears to have been fully orchestrated pursuant to the settlement reached at the administrative level prior to the filing of the implementational consent decree action.[7]
Ehlco would further urge that the decision of our Supreme Court in Outboard Marine Corp. v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., 154 Ill. 2d 90, 180 Ill. Dec. 691, 607 N.E.2d 1204 (1992) precludes our finding that the federal consent decree action here did not constitute a suit or therefore invoke Wausau's duty to defend. We disagree. In Outboard Marine, the State of Illinois and the USEPA each filed suit in federal court in 1978 against Outboard Marine Corporation (OMC), the insured, alleging that in the course of its normal business operations it had contaminated waters including Waukegan Harbor and Lake Michigan. Those suits sought to enjoin OMC from further contaminating those waters and to compel OMC to select and implement a safe and swift method of cleaning them up. The governmental agencies ultimately moved for voluntary dismissal of those actions, which the federal district court granted without prejudice. Thereafter, in October 1988, those agencies both filed new federal complaints against OMC, in which they made the same factual allegations as those set forth in their initial complaints, and in which they prayed for response costs and in addition damages under CERCLA. In April 1989, the federal district court approved of and entered a consent decree which had been negotiated and entered into by OMC, the EPA and the State of Illinois. Pursuant to that decree, OMC was required to make payments into a trust fund for the costs associated with the cleanup of the contaminated waters.
OMC tendered its defense of the underlying actions to its insurers pursuant to the provisions of certain comprehensive general liability insurance policies, but the insurers refused to defend, alleging that the underlying actions were not covered under the policies. OMC therefore defended itself and eventually negotiated and entered into the aforementioned consent decree settlement, and then instituted its declaratory judgment action against its carriers. In its declaratory suit, OMC sought a declaration that its insurance carriers had duties to defend and indemnify it in the underlying actions, and sought reimbursement for its underlying defense costs and liabilities. The Outboard Marine court held in relevant part as follows:
"Liberty Mutual [one of OMC's primary carriers] initially asserts that the governmental agencies' 1988 complaints are not involved in this appeal and cannot be considered in determining whether the insurers had a duty to defend OMC. However, it is clear from the record that the 1988 *89 complaints were before the trial court when it ruled on OMC's motion for partial summary judgment and are, therefore, part of the record on appeal. The 1988 complaints are the only complaints which specifically pray for response costs and damages pursuant to section 107 of CERCLA. Therefore, these 1988 complaints clearly constitute `suits seeking damages.' Accordingly, we hold that, absent an applicable policy exclusion, Liberty Mutual had a duty to defend OMC and we affirm the appellate court in this regard." Outboard Marine, 154 Ill.2d at 112, 180 Ill. Dec. at 710, 607 N.E.2d at 1214. (Emphasis supplied in original).
Ehlco would urge that this language from Outboard Marine regarding the underlying 1988 complaints in that case precludes us from holding that the federal action here was a non-adversarial "suit," insufficient to invoke Wausau's duty to defend. In support, Ehlco has supplemented the record here with Liberty Mutual's (a defendant-insurer in Outboard Marine) brief to our supreme court in the Outboard Marine case, in which Liberty Mutual argued that the consent decree settlement agreement involved in that case was filed simultaneously with the underlying 1988 federal complaints and that therefore, there was nothing for it to defend in the federal action. Ehlco would appear to argue on the basis of the representations in that brief that since Liberty Mutual was ultimately found to have had a duty to defend in Outboard Marine, the fact that a consent decree may be filed simultaneously with a federal action does not prevent such an action from constituting a "suit" sufficient to trigger a duty to defend.
However, the above-referenced language from the Outboard Marine decision is not susceptible to Ehlco's interpretation. Despite the statements in Liberty Mutual's brief regarding the timing of the filing of the consent decree settlement in that case, nowhere does the Outboard Marine decision indicate or otherwise rely upon the date of the filing of the consent decree in that case. Whatever the background facts and arguments consisted of in Outboard Marine (i.e., as presented in the Liberty Mutual brief in that case), the precedential value of that case can only be gleaned from how the court there chose to present the facts and characterize the issues before it. As is clear from the above-referenced passage, the court in Outboard Marine did not concern itself with the issue of whether the federal consent decree action involved in that case constituted a "suit" as that issue was raised and addressed in the later decision of Lapham-Hickey with respect to an administrative proceeding versus a court proceeding. Rather, the Outboard Marine court was concerned with the issue of whether "damages" had been sought against OMC in the underlying actions as required by the policies in question in order to invoke Liberty Mutual's duty to defend. As noted above, the Outboard Marine court distinguished between the 1978 federal actions against OMC which sought solely equitable relief, and the 1988 federal actions which sought monetary damages and thereby invoked Liberty Mutual's duty to defend. Having distinguished Outboard Marine, as previously discussed, it follows from the decision in Lapham-Hickey that a consent decree settlement memorialized in a federal lawsuit does not give rise to an independent duty to defend, unless, perhaps, it was shown that there was some complication in its implementation that knocked the consent decree action out of its fixed orbit around the settlement agreement, or that the federal lawsuit deviated from the consent decree and took on a life of its own. Thus, since the USEPA's underlying proceedings against Hines with respect to the Mena, Arkansas site did not constitute a suit, we must conclude that no duty to defend arose which would have obligated Wausau to participate in Hines' defense with respect to that site. See Lapham-Hickey, 166 Ill. 2d 520, 211 Ill. Dec. 459, 655 N.E.2d 842.[8]
*90 Wausau contends with respect to Ehlco's Mena claim that even if Lapham-Hickey would not apply to preclude coverage, coverage would nevertheless be precluded because of Ehlco's late notice. Wausau also contends that notwithstanding our determination that the Wyoming action falls within the coverage provisions of the policy, Wausau would nevertheless have no duty to defend due to Ehlco's late notice with respect to that action. Wausau urges that the trial court was in error in estopping it from asserting Ehlco's breach of the timely notice provisions in the subject policies by reason of Wausau's failure to undertake Ehlco's defense, since those provisions are conditions precedent to any coverage and not subject to estoppel.
The purpose of a notice requirement is to enable the insurer to make a timely and thorough investigation of a claim. INA Insurance Co. v. City of Chicago, 62 Ill.App.3d 80, 19 Ill. Dec. 519, 379 N.E.2d 34 (1978). Notice provisions are considered valid conditions precedent to coverage, and should not be considered mere technical requirements for the convenience of the insurer. See Kerr v. Illinois Central Railroad Co., 283 Ill.App.3d 574, 219 Ill. Dec. 81, 670 N.E.2d 759 (1996) (stating that compliance with notice provision is a condition precedent to coverage and if breached, the insurer will not be liable under the policy); Industrial Coatings Group, Inc. v. American Motorists Insurance Co., 276 Ill.App.3d 799, 213 Ill. Dec. 317, 658 N.E.2d 1338 (1995) (stating that the requirement of timely notice is a condition precedent of the policy). See also Millers Mutual Insurance Ass'n v. Graham Oil Co., 282 Ill.App.3d 129, 218 Ill. Dec. 60, 668 N.E.2d 223 (1996); American Country Insurance Co. v. Cash, 171 Ill.App.3d 9, 120 Ill. Dec. 834, 524 N.E.2d 1016 (1988); Equity General Insurance Co. v. Patis, 119 Ill. App. 3d 232, 74 Ill. Dec. 846, 456 N.E.2d 348 (1983); INA Insurance Co., 62 Ill.App.3d 80, 19 Ill. Dec. 519, 379 N.E.2d 34; City of Chicago v. United States Fire Insurance Co., 124 Ill.App.2d 340, 260 N.E.2d 276 (1970). Whether an insured complied with its contractual duty to notify its carrier of an occurrence is resolved by determining whether a reasonably prudent person would have foreseen a lawsuit and would have either contacted his attorney or his liability carrier. Graham Oil Co., 282 Ill.App.3d 129, 218 Ill. Dec. 60, 668 N.E.2d 223; Industrial Coatings Group, 276 Ill.App.3d 799, 213 Ill. Dec. 317, 658 N.E.2d 1338; Twin City Fire Insurance Co. v. Old World Trading Co., 266 Ill.App.3d 1, 203 Ill. Dec. 264, 639 N.E.2d 584 (1993). Prejudice to the insurer from late notice of an occurrence is only a factor to be considered in determining whether notice was reasonable. Graham Oil Co., 282 Ill.App.3d 129, 218 Ill. Dec. 60, 668 N.E.2d 223. Whether an insured has been given reasonable notice usually is a question for the trier of fact, and becomes a question of law for the court only when the facts are undisputed. See generally University of Illinois v. Continental Casualty Co., 234 Ill.App.3d 340, 175 Ill. Dec. 324, 599 N.E.2d 1338 (1992).
As noted, a liability carrier has a duty to defend an action which alleges a claim that potentially comes within the coverage of the policy, even where the facts ultimately show that no coverage is available. Outboard Marine Corp., 154 Ill. 2d 90, 180 Ill. Dec. 691, 607 N.E.2d 1204; Zurich Insurance Co., 118 Ill. 2d 23, 112 Ill. Dec. 684, 514 N.E.2d 150; Sundance Homes, Inc., 238 Ill. App. 3d 335, 179 Ill. Dec. 494, 606 N.E.2d 326; Western Casualty & Surety Co., 179 Ill. App. 3d 752, 128 Ill. Dec. 621, 534 N.E.2d 1066. The breach of that duty will estop the carrier from arguing policy defenses to coverage in a later declaratory action brought against it. Murphy, 88 Ill. 2d 444, 58 Ill. Dec. 828, 430 N.E.2d 1079; Peppers, 64 Ill. 2d 187, 355 N.E.2d 24; M/A Com, 187 Ill.App.3d 358, 134 Ill. Dec. 945, 543 N.E.2d 228; Sims, 43 Ill.App.2d 184, 193 N.E.2d 123.
The first question presented here is whether a carrier which has failed to defend or reimburse its insured in an underlying action or to file a timely declaratory judgment action is estopped under the foregoing rule from arguing conditions precedent to *91 coverage such as the requirement of timely notice. Illinois courts are divided on this issue. On the one hand, there is a line of cases which support Wausau's position that a carrier is not estopped from asserting that it had no duty to defend or to indemnify due to late notice since the giving of timely notice is a condition precedent to coverage. See Industrial Coatings Group, 276 Ill.App.3d 799, 213 Ill. Dec. 317, 658 N.E.2d 1338; M/A Com, Inc. v. Perricone, 187 Ill.App.3d 358, 134 Ill. Dec. 945, 543 N.E.2d 228 (1989); Del Grosso v. Casualty Insurance Co., 170 Ill. App. 3d 1098, 120 Ill. Dec. 860, 524 N.E.2d 1042 (1988); City of Chicago v. United States Fire Insurance Co., 124 Ill.App.2d 340, 260 N.E.2d 276 (1970); International Environmental Corp. v. National Union Fire Insurance Co., 860 F. Supp. 511 (N.D.Ill.1994); and La Salle National Trust, N.A. v. Schaffner, 818 F. Supp. 1161 (N.D.Ill.1993). See also D. Caswell and M. Warnick, The Illinois Insurer Estoppel Doctrine: The Consequences of Wrongful Denial of the Duty to Defend, 7 Environmental Claims Journal 5 (Summer 1995) (stating that where an insurer fails to file a declaratory action or defend under a reservation of rights, it need not be estopped from introducing extrinsic evidence of the insured's breach of a condition precedent to coverage such as timely notice as a defense to any coverage in a subsequent coverage action).
On the other hand, there is a line of cases which appear to be aligned with Ehlco's position that due to its alleged failure to defend Hines or to file a timely declaratory action, Wausau is estopped from asserting any policy coverage defenses, including that of late notice. See La Rotunda v. Royal Globe Insurance Co., 87 Ill.App.3d 446, 42 Ill. Dec. 219, 408 N.E.2d 928 (1980); McFadyen v. North River Insurance Co., 62 Ill.App.2d 164, 209 N.E.2d 833 (1965); Maneikis v. St. Paul Insurance Co., 655 F.2d 818 (7th Cir. 1981); Petersen Sand & Gravel, Inc. v. Maryland Casualty Co., 881 F. Supp. 309 (N.D.Ill.1995); and Attorneys' Title Guaranty Fund, Inc. v. Maryland Casualty Co., No. 90 C 3916, 1991 WL 171339 (N.D.Ill. August 23, 1991). See also Central Mutual Insurance Co. v. Kammerling, 212 Ill.App.3d 744, 156 Ill. Dec. 826, 571 N.E.2d 806 (1991). See generally S. Nardoni and J. Vishneski, The Illinois Estoppel Doctrine: Illinois Courts Make it Costly for Insurers To Breach Their Duty To Defend, 8 Environmental Claims Journal 45 (Autumn 1995) (hereinafter, the title to this article will be referred to by the names of its authors, Nardoni and Vishneski).
Based upon our review of these authorities, we find those cases which support Wausau's view to be more persuasive. Nardoni and Vishneski have articulated the rationale of Ehlco's line of cases, which would invoke estoppel to preclude the interposition of a late notice defense, as being an extrapolation of the general principal of estopping an insurer who breaches his duty to defend from then seeking to interpose defenses. In order to preserve that rule, they would make no distinction between late notice defenses and other defenses to coverage. They further state that to permit an insurer to refuse to defend its insured while conducting an inquiry into facts extrinsic to the underlying complaint regarding late notice would leave the insured unprotected while the insurer decides whether to provide a defense. In support, the article states that
"[c]reating an exception to the rule for condition precedent-type defenses would destroy the effectiveness of the [estoppel] rule. It would permit carriers to safely deny their duty to defend, without fear of estoppel, as long as they include a `late notice' * * * condition precedent defense in their denial letter. This would instruct all insurance company claims representatives to include such defenses in their denial of coverage letters in every case. The exception would swallow the rule whole." Nardoni and Vishneski, The Illinois Estoppel Doctrine, at 56.
The better reasoned cases, however, would challenge these assertions. The general rationale for the invocation of the estoppel rule is that it prevents an insurer who has breached the duty to defend provision in its policy from relying on other policy defenses in that insurance contract which it has already repudiated. Murphy, 88 Ill. 2d 444, 58 Ill. Dec. 828, 430 N.E.2d 1079; Peppers, 64 Ill. 2d 187, 355 N.E.2d 24; M/A Com, 187 Ill.App.3d 358, *92 134 Ill. Dec. 945, 543 N.E.2d 228; Sims, 43 Ill.App.2d 184, 193 N.E.2d 123. However, where conditions precedent to coverage are involved, including the requirement to serve timely notice (see Kerr, 283 Ill.App.3d 574, 219 Ill. Dec. 81, 670 N.E.2d 759; Industrial Coatings, 276 Ill.App.3d 799, 213 Ill. Dec. 317, 658 N.E.2d 1338), the argument is reversed. First, the insurance contract does not take effect without timely notice. Second, the party in breach is the policyholder, not the insurer.
Thus, it would be conceptually incoherent to permit estoppel to arise where a duty to defend may well not have been breached because of the prior breach by the insured of a condition precedent regarding the giving of timely notice. The insured's breach of the timely notice provision, if proven, would preclude the vesting of any right in the insured to a defense and any correlative duty to defend on the part of the insurer. In that regard, we note that the estoppel rule initially germinated in a context where the allegations of the underlying complaint were sufficient to invoke the possibility that the underlying cause of action, if proven, would fall within the coverage provisions of the policy. Murphy, 88 Ill. 2d 444, 452, 58 Ill. Dec. 828, 832, 430 N.E.2d 1079, 1083 ("The starting point of analysis under either the general rule of estoppel or the exception is the samethe allegations of the complaint"); Peppers, 64 Ill. 2d 187, 193, 355 N.E.2d 24, 28 ("In determining whether the insurer owes a duty to defend * * * it is the general rule that the allegations of the complaint determine the duty"); Federal Insurance Co. v. Economy Fire & Casualty Co., 189 Ill.App.3d 732, 735,136 Ill.Dec. 1017, 545 N.E.2d 541 (1989) ("In determining whether an insurer owes a duty to defend the insured, courts look to the four corners of the complaint brought against the insured"). However, the allegations in the underlying complaint against the policyholder would not ordinarily contain assertions pertaining to the timely notice issue, since the underlying complaint would not, and, under ordinary circumstances, could not, deal with matters pertaining to the insurability of the underlying tort defendant. Rather, resolution of that issue would require a consideration of matters wholly extrinsic to the underlying complaint. See D. Caswell and M. Warnick, The Illinois Insurer Estoppel Doctrine: The Consequences of Wrongful Denial of the Duty to Defend, 7 Environmental Claims Journal 5 (Summer 1995). Furthermore, where the question is whether the allegations in the underlying tort complaint fall within the coverage provisions of the policy, the facts proving or disproving coverage would ordinarily be revealed and established during the course of the trial of that action. Not so those matters pertaining to timely notice, since the question of timely notice is irrelevant in the context of the underlying tort litigation.
Any concern that the Illinois estoppel rule will be vitiated by our holding ignores the fact that carriers would only escape the consequences of being estopped from contesting their duty to defend or pay the cost of defense if the court ultimately sustains their condition precedent defense based on late notice, a defense to which they then would have been clearly entitled. Furthermore, the estoppel rule remains in full force and effect with respect to all other defenses.
The decisions in M/A Com, Inc. v. Perricone, 187 Ill.App.3d 358, 134 Ill. Dec. 945, 543 N.E.2d 228 (1989) and Industrial Coatings Group, Inc. v. American Motorists Insurance Co., 276 Ill.App.3d 799, 213 Ill. Dec. 317, 658 N.E.2d 1338 (1995) are wholly in point. In M/A Com, the insurer refused to defend the insured on late notice grounds. Thereafter, the underlying tort plaintiff received a judgment against the insured and brought garnishment proceedings against the insurer, urging that the insurer was estopped from asserting late notice as a defense to payment under its policy because it had breached its duty to defend the insured. The M/A Com court rejected that argument, stating that the insurer was not estopped from establishing that a breach of the subject policy's timely notice provision precluded any coverage. In so holding, the M/A Com court stated as follows:
"The case at bar represents a departure from the typical policy coverage case exemplified by Sims [Sims v. Illinois National Casualty Co., 43 Ill.App.2d 184, 193 *93 N.E.2d 123 (1963) ]. This case involves an alleged breach of contract not by the insurer, but rather by the insured. In our estimation, this difference does not affect the proposition of law to be applied. The essential proposition of law stated in Sims is that an insurer which has breached its duty under the policy to defend the insured is estopped from later asserting any provision of the policy as a defense. That proposition is based upon the general principle of contract law that a party which has breached the terms of a contract may not rely on other terms of the same contract. [Citations.] By estopping the insurer from raising the affirmative defense [of late notice], the trial court never reached the issue of whether the insured did in fact breach the policy and thereby relieve the insurer of its duty to defend. The court apparently accepted the plaintiff's position that the insurer is in all cases obligated to either defend under a reservation of rights or seek a declaratory judgment as to the scope of its duty to defend. The duty to defend, although broad, is not boundless. The doctrine of estoppel arises only where a duty to defend exists and has been breached by the insurer. It does not prevent the insurer from raising the issue of whether it did in fact breach a duty to defend its insured." M/A Com, 187 Ill. App.3d at 361-62, 134 Ill. Dec. at 948, 543 N.E.2d at 231.
As in M/A Com, in Industrial Coatings, the insurer refused to defend its insured in an underlying USEPA potentially responsible party (PRP) action and failed to file any declaratory judgment action on late notice grounds. The insured ultimately filed a declaratory judgment action almost three years after it first sent notice to the insurer of the underlying matter. Thereafter, the insurer filed a motion for summary judgment in which it urged that despite its inaction and refusal to defend, it should not be estopped from asserting its late notice defense as a bar to defense or indemnification coverage. The trial court granted that motion. The Industrial Coatings court affirmed, stating that in order for estoppel to apply, the insurer must first be found to have had a duty to defend, and then must be found to have breached that duty. The Industrial Coatings court cited to M/A Com in support of its conclusion that if an insurer could show that the insured breached its duty to provide timely notice, it would be relieved of its duty to defend and estoppel would not apply. Accord Del Grosso v. Casualty Insurance Co., 170 Ill.App.3d 1098, 120 Ill. Dec. 860, 524 N.E.2d 1042 (1988) (holding that an insurer should not be estopped from raising the late notice issue although it had neither defended the insured in the underlying lawsuit nor filed a declaratory judgment action.).
Based upon the rationale and holdings in M/A Com and Industrial Coatings, here, Wausau should have been given the opportunity to establish that its insured breached a condition precedent to coverage.[9]*94 As noted by the court in M/A Com, the duty to defend is not boundless. Just as an insurer that breaches the terms of its policy should not be permitted to rely on other terms of the same policy to deny coverage, an insured that breaches a condition precedent to policy coverage should not be permitted to invoke the coverage provisions of that same policy. See also United States Fire Insurance Co., 124 Ill.App.2d 340, 260 N.E.2d 276; International Environmental Corp., 860 F. Supp. 511; Schaffner, 818 F. Supp. 1161.[10] Hence, the trial court erred in precluding Wausau from arguing whether the insured had breached the notice provisions of the applicable policies with respect to the underlying Wyoming action and, for that matter, with respect to the Mena action as well.[11]
[Editor's Note: Text Omitted pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 23.]
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the Circuit Court of Cook County is reversed and remanded for proceedings in accordance herewith.
Reversed and remanded.
COUSINS, P.J., and LEAVITT, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  This opinion is only an excerpt of a far more lengthy decision. In order to comply with appellate court page limitations specified by revised Supreme Court Rule 23 (Official Reports Advance Sheet No. 15 (July 20, 1994), R. 23, eff. July 1, 1994), we have omitted from publication a substantial portion of our statement of facts and our discussion involving more than 18 separate issues. Consequently, the published discussion portion of this decision only addresses the following two issues: (1) the question of Wausau's duty to defend in the underlying Mena, Arkansas proceedings under the recent decision of our supreme court in Lapham-Hickey Steel Corp. v. Protection Mutual Insurance Co., 166 Ill. 2d 520, 211 Ill. Dec. 459, 655 N.E.2d 842 (1995); and (2) whether Wausau is precluded from interposing a defense predicated upon the delayed notification of claims by its insured.
The unpublished portion of this memorandum decision addresses, among other things, the subject matter jurisdiction of this court on appeal in light of the contention that the judgment at the trial level lacked finality; whether the allegations of the underlying Union Pacific complaint in Wyoming were sufficient to invoke a duty to defend; whether the facts support the contention that the carrier was served with late notice; the impact of a non-waiver agreement upon the rule that a breach of a duty to defend will estop the carrier from invoking defenses to coverage; the impact of the filing of a declaratory judgment action upon the foregoing estoppel rule, including the question as to when the declaratory judgment action must be filed to preclude invocation of the estoppel rule; whether prejudice is required to invoke estoppel; when the invocation of estoppel can, if at all, permit recovery in excess of policy limits; the sufficiency of Ehlco's tender of its defense; as well as numerous other more incidental matters.
Because of these omissions, there may be gaps in the continuity of the aforementioned published excerpts. However, a full, unabridged text of this decision is on file with the clerk of this court under Docket No. 95-1337.
[6]  The parties did not refer to these dates, but no one contravenes the assertion by Wausau that the execution of the consent decree preceded the filing of the federal action and that the consent decree was filed contemporaneously with that action.
[7]  Ehlco also apparently contends that Wausau is estopped from denying that a suit was filed in the underlying Mena proceedings and from denying that therefore, no duty to defend was invoked since, according to Ehlco, Wausau made statements in its pleadings to the contrary. In support, Ehlco refers to Wausau's third-amended complaint, wherein Wausau stated that the USEPA filed suit against Hines in 1988 in Arkansas. However, this statement cannot reasonably be construed as an admission by Wausau that the USEPA administrative proceedings invoked Wausau's duty to defend, nor, for that matter, as an admission that the 1988 federal consent decree action invoked Wausau's duty to defend.
[8]  Since we conclude that Wausau's duty to defend was not invoked by the underlying USEPA administrative proceedings or the federal consent decree action against Ehlco, we need not address Ehlco's contention that under the aforementioned Detrex decision, the filing of the federal action entitled them to defense costs both for the defense of that action and retroactively, for the defense of the USEPA administrative proceedings leading up to that action. Under the holding in Detrex, the question as to whether an insured would be entitled to such a retroactive payment of defense costs would not arise unless the insurer's duty to defend has been invoked in the first instance.
[9]  We note at this juncture that the same reasoning with respect to conditions precedent and timely notice also applies to Wausau's interposition of the "suit" defense under Lapham-Hickey. Consequently, we agree with Wausau's contention that the trial court erred in striking its allegations regarding the suit issue from Wausau's third amended complaint. As noted, in its November 7, 1994 order, the trial court granted Ehlco's motion to strike all of the new counts in that complaint, including the suit issue, apparently because the court had found that Wausau had breached its duty to defend, and was therefore estopped from arguing any policy defenses. The trial court also stated in striking those claims that it agreed with the arguments in Ehlco's motion to strike, which as noted alleged that Wausau's new claims were unsupported by allegations of fact. However, the trial court's estoppel of Wausau to argue the suit issue was erroneous since, as with the timely notice issue, no duty to defend is triggered in the first instance unless a suit has been filed against the insured. See generally Lapham-Hickey Steel Corp. v. Protection Mutual Insurance Co., 166 Ill. 2d 520, 211 Ill. Dec. 459, 655 N.E.2d 842 (1995); Fruit of the Loom, Inc. v. Travelers Indemnity Co., 284 Ill. App. 3d 485, 219 Ill. Dec. 770, 672 N.E.2d 278 (1996). Moreover, the suit defense alleged in the third-amended complaint stated sufficient facts to withstand a motion to strike. As noted, in its complaint, Wausau specifically set forth the facts regarding the 1982 USEPA letter informing Hines that it was potentially responsible for the Mena cleanup, and further specified that in 1988, the USEPA filed its consent decree action in federal court in Arkansas. Wausau then alleged that under these facts, it had no duty to defend because no suit had been filed as defined by its policies. Wausau could not have provided more complete allegations on this issue.
[10]  Ehlco would urge in particular that the decision in Central Mutual Insurance Co. v. Kammerling, 212 Ill.App.3d 744, 156 Ill. Dec. 826, 571 N.E.2d 806 (1991) supports its position that Wausau must be estopped from arguing the late notice issue. We disagree, as that case is distinguishable. In Kammerling, the insurer received the insured's tender of defense and notified the insured that it was reserving its rights due among other reasons to the late notice of the loss. The insurer indicated that it would proceed with a declaratory judgment action against its insured and explicitly recognized its obligation to provide a defense until that declaratory action had been resolved. The carrier further indicated that it would file an additional appearance on behalf of the insured in the underlying matter (the insured was being represented by another carrier). However, the carrier did not file its declaratory judgment action until several months had passed, and in the interim, never filed an appearance for the insured or participated in any way in the underlying defense.
On appeal, the Kammerling court held that the insurer was estopped from asserting a late notice defense due to "[t]he peculiar facts of this case" (Kammerling, 212 Ill.App.3d at 749, 156 Ill. Dec. at 829, 571 N.E.2d at 809), insofar as the insurer acknowledged its duty to defend under a reservation of rights and in fact indicated that it would file a declaratory judgment action and honor its defense obligations until the resolution of that action. Unlike in Kammerling, here, Wausau did not acknowledge its duty to defend, nor did it represent that it would file a declaratory judgment action or, for that matter, file an appearance on behalf of its insured and otherwise participate in the underlying defense.
[11]  Wausau also contends that the cooperation, mitigation and voluntary payments clauses in its policies are conditions precedent to coverage which it should not have been estopped from arguing and which should have precluded judgment on the pleadings. We disagree. We first note that in making this argument in its brief, Wausau provides no factual basis for asserting that Ehlco failed to cooperate with Wausau, to mitigate the underlying claims made against it, or that Ehlco voluntarily made any payments which it was not legally required to make. In addition, Wausau has not cited to any cases which support its proposition that those clauses are conditions precedent to coverage. The one case which Wausau did cite in support of this argument, Waste Management, Inc. v. International Surplus Lines Insurance Co., 144 Ill. 2d 178, 161 Ill. Dec. 774, 579 N.E.2d 322 (1991), is inapposite. That decision merely states with respect to the cooperation clause that under its auspices, an insured must disclose to its insurer the contents of communications which the insured had with defense counsel representing them on a claim for which their insurer had the ultimate duty to satisfy. Because in making this argument Wausau has failed to apply its legal conclusions to the facts of this case and has merely cited to one irrelevant decision in support of this argument, it is waived. See, e.g., Illinois Supreme Court Rule 341(e)(7) (134 Ill.2d R. 341(e)(7)); In re Marriage of Winton, 216 Ill. App. 3d 1084, 159 Ill. Dec. 933, 576 N.E.2d 856 (1991) (where party cited to only one case which was inapposite in support of its argument, the court held that the argument was waived under Rule 341(e)(7)).

=== CASE 9742110 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:06:54.214848+00 ===

DONIELSON, Presiding Judge
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent. Iowa Code section 598.21(2) (1993) states:
Property inherited by either party or gifts received by either party prior to or during the course of the marriage is the property of that party and. is not subject to a property division under this section except upon a finding that refusal to divide the property is inequitable to the other party or to the children of the marriage.
Id.; In re Marriage of Van Brocklin, 468 N.W.2d 40, 44 (Iowa App.1991).
The district court correctly set aside to Dennis “those assets that still exist and [are] readily identifiable from inheritance proceeds” before dividing marital property. The court also determined, pursuant to Iowa Code section 598.21(1) that, under the circumstances of this case, “a near equal division of the assets is appropriate.” The court then divided the assets allotting $34,789 to Mary and $34,844 to Dennis. Included in the $69,633 to be divided were Mary’s bank accounts of $1,684.
We have held that placement of an inheritance in joint ownership does not convert it to a marital asset subject to division at dissolution. In re Marriage of Hoffman, 493 N.W.2d 84, 89 (Iowa App.1992); In re Marriage of Wertz, 492 N.W.2d 711, 714 (Iowa App.1992). The inherited funds in question in this case, however, were not placed in joint ownership. They were placed in Mary’s sole ownership and control. Dennis did not have access to her account. Mary spent some of the money for family expenses. She also spent some to buy bedroom furniture for the children after the separation. She also spent money from this account for legal fees necessitated by the dissolution. The district court correctly determined that the money in Mary’s account was a marital asset subject to division.
*728I believe it would be inequitable to adjust the property division as the majority requires. The division ordered by the district court is nearly equal. Awarding Dennis the $5108.82 attributable to the portion of his inheritance he placed in Mary’s sole account is inequitable in this case and infeasible considering the marital assets available for division. I would, affirm the district court’s division.

=== CASE 3784496 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:13.669802+00 ===

This cause came on to be heard upon the petition of the relators for a writ of prohibition and the demurrer thereto and was argued by counsel.
Relators pray that the Court of Common Pleas be prohibited from proceeding with the hearing and determination *Page 567
of criminal prosecutions, the petition alleging that relators object to the jurisdiction of the Common Pleas Court because: the grand jury failed to consider and return indictments during the term of court at which relators were bound to appear while most of them were confined in the county jail; the grand jury was not properly constituted; the grand jury discriminated against relators by indicting other persons, while most of the relators were confined in the county jail; the failure of the grand jury to indict relators at the term of court at which they were bound to appear constituted an abatement of the offense charged; the grand jury at a subsequent term was without jurisdiction to inquire into the alleged offenses and render indictments thereon; and that the Court of Common Pleas is without jurisdiction to try these relators upon such indietments.
On consideration whereof, it is ordered and adjudged by this court, that the demurrer be, and the same hereby is, sustained. The writ of prohibition does not lie where there is another regular, ordinary and adequate remedy, and prohibition is not an appropriate remedy for the correction of error and does not lie to prevent an erroneous decision in a case which a court is authorized to adjudicate. State, ex rel. Nolan, v. Clen Dening,93 Ohio St. 264; State, ex rel. Garrison, v. Brough, 94 Ohio St. 115;  Kelley, Judge, v. State, ex rel. Gellner,94 Ohio St. 331; Silliman v. Court of Common Pleas of WilliamsCounty, 126 Ohio St. 338.
It is also ordered and adjudged that the relators be granted twenty days to plead further and if no amended petition be filed within such time this action is ordered dismissed at the relators' costs.
Decree accordingly.
WEYGANDT, C.J., STEPHENSON, JONES, MATTHIAS, BEVIS, ZIMMERMAN and WILKIN, JJ., concur. *Page 568

=== CASE 9742111 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:06:59.554487+00 ===

JUSTICE THEIS delivered the opinion of the court: This is an appeal from an order of the circuit court dismissing the pro se petition of defendant Arlo Perry (Perry) for postconviction relief under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act (the Act) (725 ILCS 5/122 — 1 et seq. (West 1994)). In dismissing the untimely filed petition, the circuit court determined Perry’s delay in filing was not excused under the Act’s "culpable negligence” standard. On appeal, Perry alleges dismissal of his petition was improper for two reasons: (1) the circuit court erroneously failed to consider the issue of Perry’s lack of culpable negligence, and (2) Perry’s factual allegations established that his delay in filing was excusable. We disagree. Perry was convicted of murder in 1986. Approximately 30 days later on November 13, 1986, he was sentenced to a 34-year prison term. His conviction and sentence were affirmed on direct appeal. People v. Perry, 183 Ill. App. 3d 534, 540 N.E.2d 379 (1989). On October 19, 1992, Perry filed a pro se postconviction petition alleging various violations of his constitutional rights. The State moved to dismiss the petition as untimely based on the relevant statute of limitations, which provides that a postconviction petition cannot be filed more than three years after conviction or more than six months after denial of a petition for leave to appeal, whichever is later, unless the petitioner can allege facts showing the delay was not caused by his own culpable negligence. 725 ILCS 5/122 — 1 (West 1992). Perry responded by filing an affidavit stating his failure to file within the statutory period was based, in part, on his reliance on a prisoner handbook, which listed 10 years as the time period in which a postconviction petition could be filed. In his affidavit, Perry stated he came to the Illinois Department of Corrections at Menard in December of 1986. He further claimed: "I was given a book upon entering the 'IL.dept.of.corr.’ sentencing problems and related issues’. A handbook for Illinois prisoners’ [szc].” A copy of the relevant page of the handbook was attached to the affidavit. Perry also alleged in his affidavit that the constant lockdown at his prison limited his access to the prison’s law library so as to excuse his failure to discover the change in the statute of limitations and his noncompliance with it. Perry’s affidavit included an attachment providing dates of the lockdown. After a hearing, the court granted the State’s motion to dismiss, finding the defendant failed to file his petition within the statutory period. Perry contends the trial court erred by dismissing the petition.  The statute of limitations for postconviction petitions was changed, effective January 1, 1992, from 10 years to 3 years from the date the prisoner was found guilty or six months from the date for leave to appeal. 725 ILCS 5/122 — 1 (West 1992). Perry concedes his petition of October 19, 1992, was filed outside the statutory period, but he asserts he was not culpably negligent in failing to comply. We review the demonstration of culpable negligence under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act de nova. As the supreme court explained in People v. Bates, 124 Ill. 2d 81, 88, 529 N.E.2d 227, 230 (1988), the Post-Conviction Hearing Act contains a unique statutory " 'safety valve’ *** which acts as a substitute for the judicially imposed 'reasonable time’ rule” generally used to determine the effect of shortened limitations periods. See Mega v. Holy Cross Hospital, 111 Ill. 2d 416, 420, 490 N.E.2d 665, 667 (1986). The Act enables petitioners to avoid the effect of the shortened limitations period by showing their delay in filing was not due to culpable negligence. Bates, 124 Ill. 2d at 88, 529 N.E.2d at 230. To demonstrate the absence of culpable negligence, petitioners must allege facts justifying the delay. Bates, 124 Ill. 2d at 88, 529 N.E.2d at 230. Freedom from culpable negligence is very difficult to establish. People v. Montgomery, 45 Ill. 2d 94, 256 N.E.2d 802 (1970); People v. Diefenbaugh, 40 Ill. 2d 73, 237 N.E.2d 512 (1968); People v. Villanueva, 174 Ill. App. 3d 791, 529 N.E.2d 87 (1988); People v. Harrison, 32 Ill. App. 3d 641, 336 N.E.2d 143 (1975). For example, in Diefenbaugh, the petitioner alleged five separate, specific facts to support the claim that his delay was not due to culpable negligence: (1) he had completed only six grades of school; (2) he was incarcerated during the five-year statutory period applicable at that time; (3) he did not know what the law was; (4) he could not afford an attorney; and (5) he was not given appointed counsel until after the limitations period expired. Diefenbaugh, 40 Ill. 2d at 74, 237 N.E.2d at 513. Faced with these facts, the supreme court determined petitioner’s delay was not excusable and stated "[n]one of these reasons are sufficient to demonstrate a lack of culpable negligence on the part of the petitioner and he does not rely upon them on this appeal.” Diefenbaugh, 40 Ill. 2d at 74, 237 N.E.2d at 513. Applying the culpable negligence standard again in Montgomery, the supreme court refused to excuse petitioner’s untimely filing despite his submission of psychiatric reports, which the court found "generally indicate a condition of mental disturbance.” Montgomery, 45 Ill. 2d at 96, 256 N.E.2d at 803. However, in concluding that petitioner had failed to establish that he was not culpably negligent, the court noted petitioner previously had been determined competent to stand trial. Moreover, the court "carefully examined the several psychiatric classification reports, and 'special progress’ reports” and only then determined "it does not appear that defendant was incapable of exercising reasonable diligence in his pursuit of relief.” Montgomery, 45 Ill. 2d at 96, 256 N.E.2d at 803.  In this case, the record shows Perry alleged two facts to excuse his delay: (1) the information allegedly given to him in the prisoner handbook and (2) the lockdown at his prison. Perry first argues his reliance on an earlier version of the applicable statute contained in a prisoner handbook is sufficient to show he was not culpably negligent. Perry is mistaken. As stated in his affidavit, Perry received the handbook upon entering the Illinois Department of Corrections. Perry entered Menard Correctional Center (Menard) in 1986. In 1986, the statute of limitations for postconviction petitions was 10 years rather than 3. Therefore, the information Perry received from the Department of Corrections was accurate at the time Perry received it. Nevertheless, Perry suggests that by providing him with the handbook, the State assumed a duty to provide him with updated and accurate information concerning changes in the Post-Conviction Hearing Act shortening the filing period. Perry contends the State’s failure to do so excuses his failure to comply with the Act’s statute of limitations. Perry’s affidavit also alleges that, even if he had been informed of the change in the statute of limitations, Menard’s lock-down policy would have prevented him from complying, thereby excusing his noncompliance. Perry’s affidavit presents no facts to support these claims. First, the record is silent as to the contents of the prison library at Menard. We cannot infer merely from Perry’s ignorance of the change in the statute of limitations that the library did not contain updated and accurate information concerning postconviction relief. Thus, even if we were to accept Perry’s premise that the Department of Corrections assumed a duty to provide him with updated and accurate information when it provided the handbook, we could not find that it breached that duty on the facts stated. Perry, though proceeding pro se at the time of his petition, seeks to impose the duties attendant to competent counsel on the Department of Corrections. However, as emphasized in People v. Uppole, 228 Ill. App. 3d 281, 285-86, 591 N.E.2d 898, 901-02 (1992), even at trial defendants cannot claim the right to reject services of counsel and also claim the right to have access to the limitless range of legal materials and information. Similarly, no such limitless right exists for pro se prisoner petitioners, nor should de facto duty of counsel be imposed on the Department of Corrections. Alternatively, Perry asserts that, even if he had been informed of the change, Menard’s lockdown policy would have prevented his timely filing by restricting his access to the prison law library. However, Perry’s speculation as to the possible effects of Menard’s lockdown policy does not support reversal of the circuit court’s decision. Moreover, the dates of the lockdown included in the record reveal several month-long periods when Perry was not under lock-down. The facts contained in the record do not suggest that Perry’s delay in filing was excusable: (1) Perry received accurate information upon entry to Menard; (2) Perry was not in lockdown during several month-long periods; (3) Perry failed to plead facts as to the contents of the law library; and finally (4) Perry alleged merely a hypothetical injury he possibly could have received as a result of his lockdown. Here, as in Montgomery, the circuit court considered the alleged facts and determined they were insufficient to demonstrate a lack of culpable negligence. The lockdown dates and the handbook information were before the court and included in the record. Indeed, the circuit court indicated it considered this information when it stated it so ruled "even assuming [Perry’s affidavit] is correct as far as the dates of the lock down and the information given [Perry].” Under existing precedent and the facts alleged, the circuit court correctly determined Perry’s untimely filing was not excused. Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court. Affirmed. QUINN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9742112 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:06:59.558266+00 ===

JUSTICE ZWICK, dissenting: I dissent. Petitioner alleged that at the time he was convicted and incarcerated, he received a prisoner handbook from the Illinois Department of Corrections which officially advised that he had 10 years to file a petition pursuant to the Post-Conviction Hearing Act. The legislature subsequently modified the Post-Conviction Hearing Act, shortening the filing period from 10 years to 3 years, effective January 1, 1992. However, petitioner was never informed of this modification or its impact upon his rights. This modification effectively terminated this avenue of redress for petitioner immediately upon passage. In my view, it is unconscionable to apply the statutory language in such a manner as to erect an insurmountable barricade to a preexisting statutory right. I am persuaded by the logic and reasoning of Justice Clark’s dissent in People v. Bates, 124 Ill. 2d 81, 529 N.E.2d 227 (1988). Not only law, but decency and principles of fair play demand that the petitioner be given a reasonable time to file his postconviction petition when the effect of the statute is to immediately and prematurely terminate his vehicle for challenging constitutional correctness. See Bates, 124 Ill. 2d at 90-92 (Clark, J., dissenting, joined by Stamos, J.). It is clear that the petitioner here is free from any negligence, let alone culpable negligence. My research has not disclosed any decision in which the court found that the delay in filing a late postconviction petition could be excused because of an absence of "culpable negligence” by the petitioner. It seems that the courts have universally emasculated the "absence of culpable negligence” language in the statute. Even mental illness isn’t enough to justify a delay. This construction effectively nullifies the intent of the legislature as expressed in the clear statutory language. In the instant case, the problem is even more egregious because the petitioner’s confusion was created by the conduct of the Department of Corrections. Although the Department of Corrections was under no obligation to inform inmates of their postconviction rights, it did so in the prisoners’ handbook. In the instant case, the Department of Corrections was a "volunteer” and caused the predicament facing the petitioner. Once having volunteered, the Department was under a duty to notify inmates of the change in the postconviction statute of limitations. This would have been a very easy task, and the failure cannot be excused to the detriment of the petitioner. It is clear that the petitioner in this case has alleged sufficient facts to bring the lack of culpable negligence into play, thereby removing the jurisdictional bar.

=== CASE 9742115 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:01.13282+00 ===

D.A. Roberson, J.
Respondent, Morris Abrahams, appeals as of right from the trial court’s order reversing the order of the State Tenure Commission. The commission voted two to two concerning the issue whether the petitioner, the Board of Education of the Ann Arbor Public *123Schools, was justified in discharging respondent for improper conduct. One member of the commission abstained. The commission subsequently ruled that the legal effect of the tie vote was that the board had failed to sustain its burden of proof and ordered that respondent be reinstated. The trial court, however, agreed with the two members who found that the discharge was justified and reversed the commission’s ruling. We reverse, the decision of the trial court.
Respondent was a tenured teacher and girls’ basketball coach at a high school in Ann Arbor. On or about September 24, 1980, the school board charged respondent with unprofessional conduct with respect to six female students. Hearings were held before the board on November 6, 13, and 17 and December 8 of 1980, at which five of the six students testified. Respondent presented witnesses who contradicted the students’ testimony, but he did not testify at the hearings. On December 17, 1980, the board issued its decision, unanimously finding reasonable and just cause to discharge respondent.
On January 13, 1981, respondent appealed the board’s decision to the State Tenure Commission and requested a hearing before the commissioners. On October 22, 1981, the board filed a motion to prevent respondent from testifying or subpoenaing the female students. On July 30, 1982, the commission denied the motion. The board appealed to the circuit court, which found that the appeal was premature because it did not come within the exception to the prohibition of interlocutory appeals from administrative agencies. On May 2, 1984, this Court remanded the case for a determination of the merits of the issue. On August 7, 1985, the circuit court affirmed the commission’s ruling. The board did not appeal this decision.
*124The commission held hearings from May 2, 1986, to April 15, 1987. Four of the five student witnesses testified before the commission. Respondent’s deposition was taken at the state prison in Jackson, where he was serving a sentence for an unrelated charge that arose in 1984.1 Respondent was also allowed to testify at the hearing. On August 22, 1988, the commission issued two separate decisions. Two commissioners, Leonard Porterfield and Jon Schuster, ruled that respondent’s discharge was not for reasonable and just cause, finding that the testimony of the five student witnesses lacked credibility. Two commissioners, Wilbur Hass and Patricia Montgomery, found the testimony of the five students more credible than the testimony of respondent and ruled that the board had reasonable and just cause to discharge respondent. The fifth commissioner, Anne Patton, abstained from voting because of a conflict.2
On October 19, 1988, respondent filed a motion for clarification of the legal effect of the tie vote. On July 7, 1989, the commission issued its decision, concluding that the discharge could not be upheld because there was not a majority vote in favor of the discharge and the board had failed to meet its burden of proof.
On September 5, 1990, the trial court issued its opinion and order, reversing the July 7 order of the commission. The trial court reviewed the commission’s Rule 47(1), 1979 AC, R 38.177(1), and determined that because a majority of the commissioners did not vote to reinstate the teacher, the order was ineffective. However, instead of remand*125ing the case to the commission, the trial court stated that it would review the entire record to determine whether there was competent, material, and substantial evidence to support either set of findings. The trial court, without explanation, held that the Porterfield findings were not supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence. The trial court, again without explanation, held that the Hass findings were supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence.
This Court must review first the commission’s determination regarding the legal effect of the tie vote. Legal rulings of an agency should be set aside only if they are in violation of the constitution or a statute or are affected by a substantial and material error of law. Amalgamated Transit Union v SEMTA, 437 Mich 441, 450; 473 NW2d 249 (1991). This Court gives great deference to the construction placed on a statute by the agency legislatively chosen to enforce it. Cantu v Grand Rapids Public Schools Bd of Ed, 186 Mich App 488, 491; 464 NW2d 900 (1990). Great deference must also be given to the expertise of the commission where there are gaps in the statutory scheme. Tomiak v Hamtramck School Dist, 426 Mich 678, 690; 397 NW2d 770 (1986).
MCL 38.104(b); MSA 15.2004(b) provided at the time of the hearings in this matter3 that the hearing before the school board was to be conducted in accordance with certain enumerated rules, including:
No action shall be taken resulting in the demotion or dismissal of a teacher except by a majority vote of the members of the controlling board.
This provision was made applicable to hearings *126before the tenure commission by MCL 38.121; MSA 15.2021, which directed the tenure commission to conduct its hearing on appeal in the same manner as provided in MCL 38.104; MSA 15.2004. See also Long v Royal Oak Twp and Oak Park Bd of Ed, Dist No 1, Fractional, 350 Mich 324, 327; 86 NW2d 275 (1957). Construing these provisions of the teacher tenure act together, it is clear that the commission cannot uphold the discharge of a teacher unless a majority of the members vote to discharge the teacher.
Furthermore, on appeal to the commission, the burden of proof remains with the school district of showing reasonable and just cause for discharging the tenured teacher. Nolte v Port Huron Area School Dist Bd of Ed, 152 Mich App 637, 646-647; 394 NW2d 54 (1986); Comstock Public Schools v Wildfong, 92 Mich App 279, 284; 284 NW2d 527 (1979). The board failed to sustain its burden of proof, because it did not convince a majority of the commission that its discharge of the teacher was justified.
This Court rejects the board’s argument that the effect of the tie vote was to affirm the board’s decision to discharge respondent, which is the same effect of a tie vote in this Court, MCL 600.313; MSA 27A.313, and in the Supreme Court, MCL 600.230; MSA 27A.230. MCL 38.139; MSA 15.2039 provides that the commission shall act as a board of review for all cases appealed from the decision of a controlling board. However, the commission’s procedure and review is not similar to that of this Court or the Supreme Court. The commission has the power and authority to take additional testimony and determine anew as original questions all issues of fact and law decided by the school board. Lakeshore Bd of Ed v Grindstaff (After Second Rem), 436 Mich 339, 353-354; 461 *127NW2d 651 (1990). Moreover, the commission reviews all questions of fact and law de novo. Id., p 354; Long, supra, p 326; Comstock Public Schools, supra, pp 283-284. Because the commission’s review is not similar to that of an appellate court, an analogy to the tie vote effect in the appellate tribunals cannot be drawn.
The trial court, however, ruled that the commission’s decision and order violated the provisions of the commission’s Rule 47(1), which provides:
A decision or order of the commission shall be effective only if voted upon by a majority of the members of the commission; however, during the course of the hearing, the rulings of the chairperson of the commission are final.
Respondent argues that this rule must be construed as a rule of quorum, whereby only a majority of members must vote in order to have a valid decision. The board argues that the rule requires any decision made by the commission for or against the teacher must have a majority vote of its members. We reject respondent’s argument that this rule is a quorum requirement. However, the commission ordered reinstatement by its subsequent July 7, 1989, order, which determined that the effect of the tie vote was that the board failed to sustain its burden of proof and reinstated respondent. This decision was voted upon by a majority of the members of the commission and therefore is effective under Rule 47(1).
The board further asserts that the commission’s findings are not supported by the evidence. Because the commission ordered reinstatement of respondent, this Court will review the Porterfield decision, the findings of which support respondent’s reinstatement, and the entire record. Al*128though the board argues that the Court should review both decisions and find in favor of the Hass decision, and thereby reject the Porterfield decision, it is not this Court’s function to cast the deciding vote.
The power of this Court in reviewing a decision by the commission is limited. Hagerty v State Tenure Comm, 179 Mich App 109, 117; 445 NW2d 178 (1989); Tomczik v State Tenure Comm, 175 Mich App 495, 499; 438 NW2d 642 (1989). This Court must determine from the whole record whether there was competent, material, and substantial evidence received by the school board or the tenure commission, or both, to support the commission’s finding that there was not reasonable and just cause to reverse the teacher’s dismissal. Id.; Const 1963, art 6, § 28; MCL 24.306(1)(d); MSA 3.560(206)(1)(d). "Substantial evidence” is evidence that a reasonable mind would accept as sufficient to support a conclusion. Tomczik, supra, p 499. The commission’s findings of fact are conclusive, and an appellate court cannot decide questions of fact that were before the commission. Farrimond v East Jordan Public Schools Bd of Ed, 138 Mich App 51, 56; 359 NW2d 245 (1984); Freiberg v Big Bay De Noc School Dist Bd of Ed, 61 Mich App 404, 416; 232 NW2d 718 (1975), after remand 91 Mich App 462; 283 NW2d 775 (1979).
Student "Laura” testified that respondent would shake her hand and, holding on to it and caressing it, talk to her in a low whisper, telling her she was special. Laura also testified that respondent complimented her physique. She also claimed that while they sat on a bench during gym class, respondent stroked her leg, telling her it was soft, and, on another occasion, he rubbed her inner thigh. Laura stated that other students were present during these two incidents. Laura claimed that *129respondent told her he wanted to "get in her” when she spoke to him in the hallway that he was monitoring. Laura testified that she skipped two English classes because respondent was waiting outside the door to her classroom and she did not want to talk to him. Instead of attending class, Laura went to her counselor and informed her of the respondent’s actions.
The signers of the Porterfield opinion found that Laura had a motive to fabricate her story, because she needed an excuse from being absent from her English class. The opinion also found that her testimony was contradicted by her English teacher, who testified that Laura had skipped class when papers were due. Her testimony was also contradicted by another student, Patricia, who testified that she was talking to respondent when he was monitoring the hall, that Laura approached and spoke to them, and that Laura did not engage in a conversation with respondent apart from her. The opinion also found her accusation that respondent rubbed her inner thigh during gym class to be incredible, because other students were present. After reading the testimony, the factual finding regarding Laura’s credibility was supported by the evidence.
Another student, "Jennifer,” who played basketball and softball, testified that respondent continuously told her she looked nice running on the basketball court and that she had nice legs. She also claimed that respondent would shake her hand and hold it, caressing it, that he twice attempted to pull her close to him, once in front of another student, Cathy, and that he told her that some day he would have her and that he would go to bed with her. Allegedly, respondent also told her boyfriend that he would take her away from him.
*130The signers of the Porterfield opinion found that Jennifer was not credible because her boyfriend had testified that respondent only told him he was lucky to be going out with a nice girl and she later had changed this part of her testimony before the commission. The witness Cathy testified that she had not seen respondent pull Jennifer toward him. The opinion also found her accusations lacked merit because, after the alleged statements had been made, respondent had been given a team softball, which Jennifer inscribed "if only you were younger.” Jennifer also had given respondent her senior picture with a personal note on the back and had visited him once at his home after she graduated. After reading the testimony, the evidence supports the factual finding regarding Jennifer’s credibility.
"Catherine,” who was a student physical education assistant for respondent, testified that he would shake her hand, holding it, and, in a low voice, tell her she was his woman. Catherine claimed that respondent had placed his hand down her shirt while she was sitting at a desk in his office. After a few minutes, she left. In response to being asked whether this bothered her, she stated "in a way it did.” Catherine also claimed that during finals week, she and her friend Cathy went to respondent’s office and asked him if they could play basketball in the gym. Catherine alleged that when Cathy had gone to retrieve a basketball in the supply room across from the gym, respondent pulled down his sweat pants and asked her to engage in fellatio. Catherine claimed she stood there for about five minutes until respondent covered himself when Cathy was returning to the office. After the alleged incident, Catherine played basketball with Cathy in the gym. Cathy testified *131that Catherine did not appear upset after she left respondent’s office.
The signers of the Porterfield opinion found that Catherine’s casual reaction and treatment of respondent’s exposing of himself and his placing his hand down her shirt cast doubt concerning whether the incidents had occurred. Furthermore, the opinion stated that Catherine’s description of the incidents were incredible, in that the door to the office was open when respondent exposed himself to her, that she said nothing during the two or three minutes that respondent had his hand down her shirt, and that she finished her work and left for lunch after respondent removed his hand.
"Denise” testified that respondent was her gym teacher and that she was the assistant manager of the girls’ basketball team that he coached. Denise testified that respondent would shake her hand, hold on to it, and stroke it. Denise claimed that one evening as respondent was driving her home from a basketball game, he told her he had to stop at another school, where he coached a boys’ basketball team, to get a clipboard. She went inside the school with him, and allegedly he put his arms around her, kissed her, exposed his penis, and placed her hand on his penis. Denise claimed that she told respondent that she wanted to go home and that, during the drive, he placed his hand on her chest and told her that he loved her and that she was special. Another time, Denise went into respondent’s office to tell him she would not be in class, but he was on the phone. When he completed his telephone conversation, he walked over to Denise, shut the door, pulled down his sweat pants, and asked her to engage in fellatio. Denise claimed she looked away and then, after he turned, she left. Denise testified before the com*132mission that she regarded respondent as a friend, even after these incidents.
The signers of the Porterfield opinion found that Denise’s testimony lacked credibility because although the two incidents occurred during the first semester, she continued to walk into respondent’s office alone. Also, another student who assisted respondent during the second semester testified that Denise had a good relationship with respondent during the second semester and would visit him in his office during free periods and after school. Furthermore, Denise was assigned to respondent’s gym class during the second semester, yet she did not attempt to transfer. In fact, there was evidence that Denise was originally assigned to another teacher’s gym class, but was transferred to respondent’s gym class, although she denied she sought a transfer.
The opinion also found the credibility of Catherine and Denise was questionable because they had driven to respondent’s house after the alleged incidents to "toilet paper” it. Catherine and Denise testified that they stopped at respondent’s house because he was outside on the porch and spoke with him. After reading the testimony, we find that the factual findings in the Porterfield opinion regarding the credibility of Catherine and Denise were supported by the evidence.
The final student witness, "Catherine,” described a similar handshake by respondent. Catherine testified that respondent told her that he would always remember her, that she was beautiful, and that "some day [it would be] me and you.” Catherine also claimed that respondent said: "The day I’m happy is the day that I get to spend the night with you.” Catherine claimed that respondent made these comments during the first semester of the 1978-79 school year in her study hall. Cather*133ine testified that she began ignoring respondent when her friend Kristine pulled her away from him while he was shaking her hand in the hallway. Catherine did not report these incidents until Jane Bennett asked her if respondent had ever bothered her.
The signers of the Porterfield opinion found that only the testimony regarding respondent’s desire to spend an evening with Catherine would support a finding of reasonable and just cause for discharge, but found that this part of her testimony was questionable because it was called into question by respondent’s impeachment of her during cross-examination. Catherine’s testimony was contradicted by the cross-examination of Ronald Tesch, during which a copy of the schedule of teachers for the physical education department for the first semester of 1978-79 school year was introduced. The schedule reflected that respondent was not assigned to monitor the study hall. In view of this testimony, the finding regarding Catherine’s credibility was supported by the evidence.
The findings in the Porterfield opinion regarding the credibility of the student witnesses were supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence, and, therefore, the board failed to sustain its burden of proving that respondent’s discharge was justified. This Court, however, cannot order reinstatement of respondent because he is currently serving his sentence in prison. However, respondent is entitled to back pay for the period from the date of his discharge to the date of his arrest.
Reversed.
Holbrook, Jr., P.J. I concur in the result only.
In 1985, respondent was convicted of second-degree murder for the murder of his wife.
Patton disclosed to the parties that her husband had been hired by the law firm that included the board’s attorney. Although respondent indicated that he had no objection to Patton’s participation, Patton chose to abstain.
Certain provisions of the teacher tenure act, including MCL 38.104; MSA 15.2004, have been amended, effective June 1993.

=== CASE 9742116 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:01.137904+00 ===

Taylor, J.
(dissenting). I would sustain the trial *134court’s opinion and order that ruled that the discharge was justified and that reversed the State Tenure Commission’s reinstatement of respondent Abrahams despite the commission’s tie vote. The reasons given in the Porterfield opinion to support the view that the student witnesses’ testimony was not credible rest on legal error, therefore the findings in the Porterfield opinion should be reversed.
As the majority correctly states, under our limited scope of review of this matter, this Court must determine from the whole record whether there was competent, material, and substantial evidence to support the commission’s finding that there was not reasonable and just cause to reverse respondent’s dismissal. However, we are to hold unlawful and set aside such a decision if it was affected by a substantial and material error of law. Nestell v Bridgeport-Spaulding Community Schools Bd of Ed, 138 Mich App 401, 404; 360 NW2d 200 (1984); MCL 24.306; MSA 3.506(206).
The signers of the Porterfield opinion purport to relate and critique the testimony of several women who were respondent’s students at a time when he was their high school gym teacher. These students alleged that respondent engaged in improper conduct toward them. The signers of the Porterfield opinion ultimátely conclude that each of these witnesses was lying concerning the alleged improper touching or improper comments, although these allegations were made not only at the time of the initial complaints in 1980 but also reiterated by the witnesses at hearings held before the commission in 1986 and 1987.
I note particularly the treatment in the Porter-field opinion of the testimony of "Denise,” which, like that of the other witnesses, was deemed not to be credible. Without exception, the reasons given *135for disbelieving her rest on the fact that her behavior , toward respondent was irrational in light of what she claimed he did. That is, she did not try to avoid him despite his sexual misconduct toward her, appeared to have a good relationship with him, and even went so far as to decorate the environs of his home with toilet paper. The signers of the Porterfield opinion conclude that Denise cannot be believed because of her irrational behavior.
However, the examples given in the Porterfield opinion as the bases for discounting her testimony do nothing more than point out that Denise acted like a teenage girl in her behavior toward her teacher. This entire line of reasoning completely overlooks the fact that Denise was a teenager at the time the misconduct occurred.
The line of reasoning in the Porterfield opinion fundamentally misunderstands our law by applying an adult standard to the conduct of a minor. Our jurisprudence has historically afforded greater protection to those of tender years like Denise. As Justice Cooley said:
Children, wherever they go, must be expected to act upon childish instincts and impulses; and others who are chargeable with a duty of care and caution towards them must calculate upon this, and take precautions accordingly. [Powers v Harlow, 53 Mich 507, 515; 19 NW 257 (1884).]
Children are expected to act like children: it is expected that they may respond inappropriately to the actions of others. By analogy, a child below the age of sixteen cannot, under our law, consent to sexual penetration or contact. MCL 750.520b(1)(b); MSA 28.788(2)(1)(b), MCL 750.520c(1)(b); MSA 28.788(3)(1)(b), and MCL 750.520d(1)(a); MSA *13628.788(4)(1)(a). Evidence that a child purports to consent to sexual acts cannot be used as a defense or to discredit the child’s assertions. It is, in fact, legally irrelevant. In this matter, the fact that Denise responded inappropriately to respondent’s acts of sexual aggression cannot be used to discredit her, because to do so would establish in our law the proposition that the infirmities of minors are not a shield for their protection under the law, but, rather, a sword to discredit them from vindicating their legal rights.
Nevertheless, in direct contravention of this longstanding principle, it is stated in the Porter-field opinion that, in essence, "Teenagers who act like teenagers cannot be believed.”
My review of the Porterfield opinion leads me to conclude that, while facially valid and reasonable factors were given for disbelieving other witnesses, a legally improper factor was the sole reason given for discrediting Denise. This constitutes a substantial and material error of law. Her testimony should stand, and, standing alone, it constitutes evidence sufficient to show reasonable and just cause for discharging respondent.
Accordingly, I would reverse the findings set forth in the Porterfield opinion and order on the ground that, had not the signers of that opinion applied faulty legal reasoning in assessing Denise’s credibility, the inescapable conclusion would have been that respondent had engaged in unprofessional sexual conduct toward one of his young charges. Were it not for the vintage of this case, I would vote to simply remand this case for new fact finding on the existing record. In the alternative, and in light of the age of this case, I would find that the school district succeeded in carrying its burden of proof to demonstrate that reasonable *137and just cause existed for respondent’s discharge. See Couch v Saginaw Malleable Iron, 51 Mich App 317, 321; 214 NW2d 885 (1974). Ascribing the two votes of the Porterfield opinion to the two-vote Hass opinion results in a four to zero vote to discharge respondent, i.e., to deny his petition, in view of which there would be no need to delve into the tie-vote issue as the majority has done.
Again, I would affirm.

=== CASE 9742117 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:02.15601+00 ===

JUSTICE MILLER delivered the opinion of the court: After a jury trial in the circuit court of Lake County, the defendant, Mark Burnidge, was convicted of two counts of aggravated criminal sexual abuse. The trial judge sentenced the defendant to 36 months’ probation, together with a nine-month term of periodic imprisonment. The judge also ordered the defendant to pay a total of $1,500 in restitution and fines. The appellate court affirmed the defendant’s convictions and sentence. 279 Ill. App. 3d 127. We allowed the defendant’s petition for leave to appeal (155 Ill. 2d R. 315(a)), and we now affirm the judgment of the appellate court. Only a brief recitation of the evidence in this case is necessary here. At trial, R.R., who was 15 years old at the time of the offenses, testified that she and a friend, J.P., arrived at St. Matthew’s Lutheran Church, located in Lake Zurich, around 7:30 p.m. on April 16,1994. They were attending a youth function at the church that night, and they came early to prepare for the event. The defendant, who was then 23 years old, and who served as a counselor to the youth group, was already present when the two girls arrived. According to the complaining witness, after she and the defendant had set up a table in the lobby of the building and were returning to the classroom area, she and the defendant stopped in the gymnasium, where the defendant led her to the stage. There, the defendant kissed her and reached under her shirt and bra and touched her breasts. The defendant also placed R.R.’s hand on the front of his pants. R.R. told the defendant to stop, and he complied. R.R. testified further that, about 5 or 10 minutes after the incident in the gymnasium, while she and the defendant were in the basement of the building looking for a video cassette recorder, the defendant again kissed her on the mouth, reached under her clothing and touched her breasts, and placed her hand on the front of his pants. R.R. asked the defendant to stop; he did initially but resumed a few moments later. R.R. then told the defendant that they had to go, and they left the basement. R.R. rejoined J.P. upstairs and asked her friend to accompany her to the restroom. There, R.R. straightened her bra, which the defendant had unfastened, and told J.P. what had happened. Later that evening, R.R. reported the incidents to Rev. Carlton Payne, the assistant pastor of the church. R.R. testified that, at a subsequent meeting attended by her, her parents, Rev. Payne, and the defendant, the defendant apologized for what he had done. R.R. denied putting her arm around the defendant or resting her head on his shoulder, as the defendant, in his own testimony at trial, said she had done. Over a defense objection, R.R. also described a similar incident that occurred in August 1993. On that occasion, R.R. had gone to the church to help her mother do some cleaning. The defendant was there, and he invited R.R. to play basketball with him in the gym. After playing a while, the defendant led R.R. to the stage, where he kissed her and placed his hands under her clothing and felt her breasts. R.R. reported this incident to Rev. Payne about a week later but did not tell anyone else about it at the time. After the incidents in April 1994, however, R.R. informed her parents about the earlier occurrence. J.P. provided testimony corroborating R.R.’s account of their preparations for the church event that night. According to J.P., after R.R. and the defendant had returned from a search for the video cassette recorder, R.R. suggested that the two girls go to the restroom. There, R.R. straightened her bra and tucked in her shirt. R.R. seemed nervous and began to cry. R.R. then told J.P. that the defendant had kissed her and "tried to go up her shirt.” The defendant also testified at trial, admitting to one instance of physical contact with R.R. The defendant said that he, R.R., and J.P. first set up a table in the lobby of the building. Afterwards, they were searching for a video cassette recorder, and at one point the defendant told the two girls that he would look downstairs for it. The defendant testified that as he was going to the lower level of the building, R.R. appeared behind him and said that she, too, was going to look for the video recorder. According to the defendant, as they were walking together down a hallway in the basement, R.R. put her arm around the defendant’s waist and rested her head on his shoulder. The defendant testified that, when they reached the end of the hallway, he kissed R.R. and placed his hand on her breasts, over her clothing. The defendant stated that the incident lasted about 10 seconds, and he explained that he stopped what he was doing because it was not proper. According to the defendant, neither he nor R.R. said anything during this time. The defendant denied having any other physical contact with R.R. on April 16, 1994, and he also denied the August 1993 incident described by her. At the defendant’s request, the trial judge instructed the jury on battery as an included offense of the two charges of aggravated criminal sexual abuse. The jury found the defendant guilty of both counts of aggravated criminal sexual abuse, as well as of battery. The trial judge later vacated the battery conviction because it was included in the principal charges. On the two counts of aggravated criminal sexual abuse, the trial judge sentenced the defendant to 36 months’ probation, with a nine-month term of periodic imprisonment, and ordered the defendant to pay a total of $1,500 in fines and in restitution; the restitutionary portion of the order provided reimbursement to the complainant, and her family for counseling costs. The appellate court affirmed the defendant’s convictions and sentence. 279 Ill. App. 3d 127. The court rejected, among other contentions, the defendant’s "novel argument” that the entire prosecution should have been dismissed because the State’s evidence was tainted by a clergyman’s improper disclosure of confidential information received from the defendant. 279 Ill. App. 3d at 132. We allowed the defendant’s petition for leave to appeal. 155 Ill. 2d R. 315(a). The only question raised on appeal by the defendant concerns the trial judge’s refusal to dismiss the present case because, in the defendant’s view, it was tainted by a clergyman’s improper disclosure of conversations between- the clergyman and the defendant. This issue was raised prior to trial, when the defendant asked the trial judge to suppress all evidence derived from conversations between the defendant and Rev. John Golisch, and reported by Rev. Golisch to the Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS). Rev. Golisch was a pastor at another Lutheran church and a psychologist, and Rev. Payne had referred the defendant to him for counseling. After speaking with the defendant, Rev. Golisch was not sure whether he was required to file a report with DCFS pursuant to section 4 of the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act (325 ILCS 5/4 (West 1994)). Rev. Golisch explained at the pretrial hearing that he called DCFS for advice and was told that as a clergyman he was not required to submit a report but that as a psychologist he was. The statute requires psychologists, but not members of the clergy, to report instances of abuse. Rev. Golisch subsequently submitted to DCFS a report that identified R.R. as a victim of abuse but did not name the offender. Also at the pretrial hearing, the parties stipulated that DCFS relayed Rev. Golisch’s report to the Lake County sheriff’s office, and that the sheriff’s office then brought the matter to the State’s Attorney’s attention. The trial judge agreed with the defendant that Rev. Golisch could not be compelled to testify to his conversations with the defendant and that Rev. Golisch’s report could not be introduced into evidence. The trial judge refused the defendant’s request, however, that he suppress all the other evidence obtained in the wake of the report. Separately, the trial judge determined that conversations between the defendant and Rev. Payne and Deacon Todd Martin were also protected by the clergymen privilege and that those witnesses therefore could not be compelled to testify about what the defendant had said in confidence to them. The defendant contends that his conversations with Rev. Golisch were privileged and that section 4 of the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act did not require the clergyman to submit a report to DCFS. The defendant argues further that the Lake County authorities would not have learned about the present offenses had it not been for the allegedly improper disclosure made by Rev. Golisch, and the defendant believes that all the information traceable to the disclosure must therefore be excluded. In essence, the defendant seeks to have the entire prosecution quashed because it is the "fruit of the poisonous tree,” having been derived, in the defendant’s view, solely from Rev. Golisch’s report. Accordingly, the defendant asks that his convictions be reversed outright, without a remand for retrial. In response, the State contends that the defendant’s conversations with Rev. Golisch were not privileged, that Rev. Golisch was required to report the instances of abuse to DCFS, and that the defendant waived any privilege he might have possessed. Finally, the State argues that suppression of all the evidence is not an appropriate remedy in this case. We agree with the State that suppression is not required here, and we do not address the State’s alternative arguments. Just as the defendant seeks application of the exclusionary rule to what he characterizes as the fruit of a poisonous tree, so, too, do we believe that exceptions to the poisonous tree doctrine could be invoked if the exclusionary rule were to apply. Assuming, without deciding, that suppression might be necessary in appropriate cases involving violations of evidentiary privileges (see Walstad v. State, 818 P.2d 695, 699 & n.6 (Alaska App. 1991)), we do not believe that so drastic a remedy would be warranted here. It should be noted that information regarding the defendant’s involvement in the present offenses was not secret, even if it is assumed both that the defendant’s conversations with Rev. Golisch were privileged and that Rev. Golisch was not required to file a report with DCFS. The complaining witness’ own testimony implicated the defendant in these offenses, and the defendant, through an admission made to the victim and her family, had himself acknowledged responsibility for what he had done. In Wong Sun v. United States, 371 U.S. 471, 9 L. Ed. 2d 441, 83 S. Ct. 407 (1963), the Supreme Court determined that the exclusionary rule is not applicable when the prosecution acquires the evidence in question from a source independent of the alleged illegality. R.R. and her family provided the State with an independent basis for the prosecution. We also note that the report made by Rev. Golisch to DCFS did not identify the defendant by name, referring to him only as a helper to the church youth group to which R.R. belonged. Apparently, it was not until further investigation that the State learned of the defendant’s identity. The defendant maintains, however, that the present case would not have come to the attention of the authorities in Lake County had it not been for Rev. Golisch’s report to DCFS, and the defendant therefore insists that the entire prosecution be quashed. As support for this argument, the defendant emphasizes that both Rev. Payne and the complaining witness’ family believed, at least initially, that the matter could be resolved entirely within the church, and without the intervention of the civil authorities. In Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. 431, 81 L. Ed. 2d 377, 104 S. Ct. 2501 (1984), the Supreme Court recognized the "inevitable discovery” exception to the rule requiring the exclusion of evidence obtained as a result of a violation of a defendant’s constitutional rights. The court in Nix held that evidence arguably tainted by a prior illegality may be introduced if the prosecution is able to show that "the evidence in question would inevitably have been discovered without reference to the police error or misconduct.” Nix, 467 U.S. at 448, 81 L. Ed. 2d at 390, 104 S. Ct. at 2511. The rationale for the "inevitable discovery” exception is that, while "the prosecution is not to be put in a better position than it would have been in if no illegality had transpired,” the prosecution should not be put "in a worse position simply because of some earlier police error or misconduct.” (Emphasis in original.) Nix, 467 U.S. at 443, 81 L. Ed. 2d at 387, 104 S. Ct. at 2508. Although the issue was not phrased in these precise terms at the pretrial hearing on the defendant’s motion to suppress, we nonetheless believe that the record belies the defendant’s contention that the complaining witness and her parents would not have pursued this matter outside the church. At the pretrial hearing, the complaining witness’ father, who was a deacon in the church, acknowledged that he, as well as the others involved in this case, sought initially to resolve this problem internally, without the involvement of civil authorities. The complaining witness’ father also said, however, that in his own mind he kept open the possibility that criminal charges could be brought. R.R.’s father explained further that he met with Rev. Harold Krueger and Rev. Payne, the pastor and assistant pastor of the church, on April 19, several days after the incidents charged here. R.R.’s father told the two clergymen that he was very concerned about the matter, that he did not believe that the defendant should be associated with the youth group, and that the defendant, who was a church trustee, should relinquish his set of keys to the church. R.R.’s father testified further that he next discussed the matter with Rev. Krueger and Rev. Payne several weeks later; also attending that meeting were the complaining witness’ mother and the parents of J.P., who testified at trial. R.R.’s father was angry that more had not been done about the situation, and he continued to insist that the defendant should surrender his keys to the building and adopt a lower profile in church activities. The victim impact statement submitted by the complaining witness’ parents, and introduced into evidence as an attachment to the presentence report, also shows the family’s growing sense of displeasure with their church’s response to the accusations against the defendant. In a joint statement, the complaining witness’ mother and father said that although they had initially believed that the matter could be resolved within the confines of their church, they later became dissatisfied with what the parents believed were insufficient measures taken by the church leaders in response to the defendant’s misconduct. The statement explained, "First, it was the defense attorney’s position that this incident should have never gotten to court; that it should have been handled in the church. It was our INITIAL intent that this matter be handled by the church, but in our opinion, it was not handled, it was ignored!” (Emphasis in original.) The parents expressed their surprise at what they perceived to be the church’s reluctance to make any response to the charges, and noted that the defendant was allowed to participate in the church youth group even after R.R. had reported the August 1993 incident to Rev. Payne. The parents’ victim impact statement continued, "About the time we realized that we would be leaving the church, Pastor Payne notified us that DCFS would be contacting us. At this point, we decided to cooperate fully with the Lake County Sheriffs Department and DCFS. We have no regrets about what has happened. We never had to make the decision to call the police, but we never ruled it out either.” The family eventually decided to leave this church and to join another one in a different town. The complaining witness, in her own victim impact statement, also expressed the view that the church had not handled the situation properly. R.R. explained that the family initially believed that the matter could be resolved within the church but later welcomed the intervention of the civil authorities. In her own statement, which she read at the sentencing hearing, R.R. said, "At first we weren’t happy that officials were getting involved. Now we are happy they came to help us.” The testimony and victim impact statements submitted by R.R. and her parents demonstrate to us that the information the defendant seeks to suppress would have come to light even without the involvement of DCFS. In sum, we do not agree with the defendant that the exclusionary rule requires suppression of all the evidence in this case. By requesting that the entire prosecution be dismissed, the defendant is seeking a remedy that is much more extensive in scope than the evil he complains of. In the circumstances presented here, the trial judge granted the defendant the full measure of relief that was necessary to vindicate the privilege the defendant asserts. Following a pretrial hearing, the judge barred the introduction of the report made by Rev. Golisch to DCFS, as well as testimony by the clergymen to whom the defendant had spoken about the matter — Rev. Golisch, Rev. Payne, and Deacon Martin. By excluding this evidence, the trial judge provided the defendant with an appropriate remedy for the alleged breach of the privilege. See People v. Knippenberg, 66 Ill. 2d 276 (1977). The special concurrence presupposes that we have determined that the exclusionary rule is available in these circumstances, but in this case we have only assumed its application. Because the defendant raises no further challenge to the proceedings below, we therefore affirm his convictions and sentence. For the reasons stated, the judgment of the appellate court is affirmed. Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9742118 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:02.160648+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE FREEMAN, specially concurring: Defendant in this case has framed the issue on appeal as one requiring an analysis which is ordinarily reserved for those cases challenging the admissibility of evidence as being the "fruit of the poisonous tree.” The majority has inclined its ear and, correspondingly, engages in an analysis to determine whether, regardless of Rev. Golisch’s violation of the clergy testimonial privilege, the challenged evidence would have been inevitably discovered and, therefore, properly admissible. 178 Ill. 2d at 435-36. I agree with the majority’s ultimate conclusion that the trial court provided defendant with the appropriate remedy for an alleged breach of the clergy privilege. 178 Ill. 2d at 439. I disagree, however, with the majority’s decision to assume, for purposes of disposing of this appeal, application of the "fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine” and its correlative inevitable discovery exception. By so doing, the majority engages in an extensive and unnecessary analysis which is not only incorrect, but lends support to the notion that a fourth amendment analysis may be available in an evidentiary privilege case. I therefore write separately to address this point. The "fruit of the poisonous tree” doctrine was born out of fourth amendment concerns over improper police conduct in the gathering of evidence. See Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. 431, 442, 81 L. Ed. 2d 377, 386, 104 S. Ct. 2501, 2508 (1984). Generally, evidence obtained through the exploitation of illegal police conduct must be excluded from evidence at trial. See Note, The Inevitable Discovery Exception To The Constitutional Exclusionary Rules, 74 Colum. L. Rev. 88 (1974). This exclusionary rule deprives the prosecution of evidence tainted by official wrongdoing and thereby discourages future improprieties. See United States v. Jones, 72 F.3d 1324, 1330 (7th Cir. 1995). An exception to the exclusionary rule is the "inevitable discovery doctrine.” People v. Edwards, 144 Ill. 2d 108, 143 (1991); Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. 431, 81 L. Ed. 2d 377, 104 S. Ct. 2501 (1984). The exception serves to block the setting aside of convictions that would have been obtained without police misconduct. Nix, 467 U.S. at 443 n.4, 81 L. Ed. 2d at 387 n.4,104 S. Ct. at 2509 n.4. If the prosecution can establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the information inevitably would have been discovered by lawful means, then the evidence should be received. Nix, 467 U.S. at 444, 81 L. Ed. 2d at 387-88, 104 S. Ct. at 2509. The majority, without supporting authority, extends the reach of the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine to now cover more than police misconduct cases, but also violations of the clergy privilege by clergymen. Application of the doctrine in these cases is simply inappropriate. See People v. Ward, 199 A.D.2d 573, 604 N.Y.S.2d 320 (1993) (fruit of poisonous tree doctrine not applied to suppress evidence flowing from privileged communication between clergy and penitent); see also Walstad v. State, 818 P.2d 695, 699 n.6 (Alaska App. 1991) (noting that there seems to be considerable doubt as to the extent to which the fruits of the poisonous tree doctrine should apply in cases involving violations of evidentiary privileges). The availability of the doctrine in an evidentiary privilege case, such as this one, could have undesirable consequences. Specifically, in the event that the inevitable discovery exception does not operate to purge the taint of evidence obtained as a result of a violation of the clergyman’s privilege, the availability of the exclusionary rule will operate to exclude probative evidence from admission at trial. Moreover, application of the rule in other than illegal police conduct cases is wholly inconsistent with the purpose of the exception— deterring police misconduct. Even assuming that application of the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine is proper in evidentiary privilege cases, I disagree that the inevitable discovery exception would operate to "purge the taint” of the challenged evidence here. The majority believes otherwise, finding that because R.R.’s parents had not ruled out the possibility of pursuing criminal charges, evidence concerning the criminal sexual abuse would have been inevitably discovered regardless of Rev. Golisch’s report to DCFS. See 178 Ill. 2d at 437-38. This analysis is plagued with infirmities. First, because the State has not engaged in any illegal conduct in acquiring Rev. Golisch’s statements, it bears no burden of proof on the issue of inevitable discovery. That, of course, leaves the court to inappropriately make this factual determination. See Jones, 72 F.3d at 1334 (stating that typically a preponderance of the evidence burden of proof for purposes of inevitable discovery requires testimony rather than mere argument). Second, courts will generally find that evidence would have been inevitably discovered where such evidence would have been, inter alla, discovered through an independent line of investigation untainted by the illegal conduct and the independent investigation was already in progress at the time the evidence was unconstitutionally obtained. People v. Durgan, 281 Ill. App. 3d 863, 867 (1996), citing People v. Perez, 258 Ill. App. 3d 133, 138 (1994); see also Nix, 467 U.S. at 459, 81 L. Ed. 2d at 397, 104 S. Ct. at 2517 (Brennan, J., dissenting, joined by Marshall, J.). In this case, there was no independent police investigation in progress. The investigation did not begin until after Rev. Golisch made his report to DCFS. Third, the finding of inevitable discovery requires proof by a preponderance of the evidence that the challenged evidence would have been discovered despite the illegal conduct. It is important that courts be extremely careful not to apply the " 'inevitable discovery’ rule upon the basis of nothing more than a hunch or speculation as to what otherwise might have occurred.” See 1 W. LaFave, Criminal Procedure § 9.3, at 741 (1984). Speculation and assumption do not satisfy the dictates of Nix. See Jones, 72 F.3d 1324 (holding that for inevitable discovery exception to apply, government must establish by preponderance of evidence not only that there would have been probable cause for a lawful search, but that the search in fact would have occurred). As the majority itself notes, R.R.’s parents had originally intended for this matter to be "handled in the church.” 178 Ill. 2d at 438. Although the parents had thoughts of filing a complaint with the police, there is no evidence that the parents would have, in fact, contacted the police. Further, it is insufficient for purposes of inevitable discovery that the police might or could have obtained R.R.’s parents’ statement. Clearly, to conclude that R.R.’s parents would have made a police report is speculative. Thus, the majority’s reliance on the above facts to support inevitable discovery falls far short of the preponderance of the evidence burden of proof mandated by the Court in Nix. There is one final factor which points up the inappropriateness of the use of the inevitable discovery exception in this case. As I have stated, the inevitable discovery exception flows out of fourth amendment concerns for overreaching by police. In the typical case, the focus of the inquiry is on the future intended investigatory conduct of the violator — the police. For its finding of inevitable discovery, the majority here focuses its inquiry, not on the future intended conduct of the person having allegedly violated the privilege, Rev. Golisch, but instead, on the witnesses to the offense. Consistent with the inevitable discovery analysis, the focus of the inquiry here should necessarily be on the intended future conduct of Rev. Golisch in his investigation of the offense. Because Rev. Golisch was, of course, not engaged in an investigation, consideration of his future conduct would leave the inevitable discovery inquiry yet unanswered. The exclusionary rule, out of which was created the inevitable discovery exception, is the constitutional response to illegally seized evidence. The rule serves the legitimate purpose of deterring police misconduct, while its exceptions operate to defeat the rule’s absolute bar to the admissibility of illegally seized evidence. The clergy testimonial privilege, which is statutorily created, also protects legitimate competing interests. However, privileges should be allowed only to the extent necessary to achieve their desired purposes. See J. Hilliard, The Public’s Right to Evidence — Sometimes: The Clergy Testimonial Privilege, 83 Ill. B.J. 182, 182-83 (1995). To apply fourth amendment principles to a statutorily created privilege inappropriately elevates the privilege to constitutional dimensions. See Walstad, 818 P.2d at 699 n.6 (stating that if government was party to improper breach and a constitutional privilege was involved the legal fruits doctrine will apply). Incidentally, it is generally accepted that the clergy privilege is not required by the first amendment. See 83 Ill. B.J. at 183. The clergy privilege, not being of constitutional dimension, merits for its violation no constitutional remedy. In my view, the appellate court’s analysis of the issue presented in this appeal is the proper one. Rather than suggest that fourth amendment principles are even appropriate in cases involving evidentiary privileges, I would simply have affirmed the appellate court. JUSTICE BILANDIC joins in this special concurrence.

=== CASE 9742119 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:02.8928+00 ===

NEUMANN, Justice.
John E. Bachmeier et al. (Bachmeier) appeal from the Order granting summary judgment, and Judgment for costs entered by the District Court for Ward County, Northwest Judicial District. We reverse and remand.
This appeal comes to us from the granting of PACCAR Inc.’s (PACCAR) motion for summary judgment. The relevant facts are not in dispute. Bachmeier brought this action claiming strict product liability, negligence, and breach of warranty against PAC-CAR after their son, Steven Bachmeier, died in an accident while riding as a passenger in a 1979 Kenworth truck manufactured by PACCAR. The likely cause of the accident was the breaking of the truck’s right front hub. On October 22, 1985, while traveling down the Ohio Turnpike, the right front hub of the truck broke, the truck left the roadway and overturned, resulting in injuries which caused Steven’s death.
Prior to the bringing of this product liability action against PACCAR, Bachmeier brought a wrongful death action against the owner of the truck. The owner’s insurer, Great West Casualty Company (Great West), hired a metallurgical engineer, Dr. Carl Lop-er (Loper), to examine the hub. In the course of this examination, Loper took a series of photographs of the fractured hub and prepared a series of three preliminary reports. In his first report, Loper concluded that the fracture of the hub was a fatigue fracture that resulted from excessive stresses to the hub as a result of bearing damage. He found no design or manufacturing problems. In his third report, Loper concluded that the bearing damage he observed resulted from insufficient lubrication. The wrongful death action against the owner of the truck was settled out of court. On August 14, 1986, in exchange for $60,000.00, Bachmeier signed a Pierringer Release1 of their claim against the owner of the truck. One day later, on August 15, 1986, Great West wrote to Loper telling him that the case had settled and he could dispose of the parts in his possession. Loper then disposed of the hub within three days.
The products liability suit against PAC-CAR was commenced on October 15, 1987. The products liability claim is based upon a design defect theory. Bachmeier has retained an engineering and design expert, G.A. Tomlinson (Tomlinson), and has also retained Loper as a consultant. PACCAR’s defenses to this suit include the contention that it was lack of maintenance and lubrication which caused the hub to fracture, and not faulty design.
On February 18, 1992, PACCAR filed a Motion for Summary Judgment of Dismissal. This motion was based on two legal theories. The first theory argued that without the destroyed hub, Bachmeier was unable to prove the defect theory of the claim. The second theory was that Bachmeier⅛ failure to preserve the hub resulted in unreasonable prejudice to PACCAR due to PACCAR’s deprivation of the opportunity to examine the hub and establish and prove its theory of defense. In an order dated September 2, 1992, the trial court denied PACCAR’s motion for summary judgment. The trial court *531found that because there was some evidence of PACCAR’s liability, summary judgment was not appropriate at that time. Acknowledging the potential for prejudice due to the destruction of the hub, the trial court decided that the existence or extent of this prejudice would be best determined after the commencement of trial. In addition, the trial judge reserved the right to either reconsider his decision or reconsider further motions regarding this matter. Thereafter, on January 15, 1993, on its own motion, the trial court reexamined and reconsidered PAC-CAR’s motion for summary judgment. Upon reconsideration, the trial court set aside the Order dated September 2, 1992, and granted PACCAR’s motion for summary judgment. The trial court’s rationale was that without the hub, PACCAR would be deprived of the defense of lack of lubrication.2 Bachmeier appeals from this Order granting summary judgment, and Judgment awarding costs. We reverse and remand.
In order to clearly analyze the issues on appeal, we find it helpful to clarify which legal theories do not apply to this analysis. Contrary to some of the contentions of the parties, upon reading the order granting summary judgment, it is evident that the trial court’s order was not based on Rule 37 nor on Rule 56 of the North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure.
RULE 37
Bachmeier argues that the trial court’s order granting summary judgment was a Rule 37 sanction. We disagree. Rule 37 addresses sanctions for failure to make discovery, and provides for sanctions for those who do not cooperate with discovery. See James L. Underwood, A Guide to Federal Discovery Rules, 59-63 (1979 & Supp. 1983); Rule 37, N.D.R.Civ.P. Bachmeier does not fit into this category. There was no order issued or violated, nor does there appear to have been a refusal to respond to discovery requests. The parties simply learned that the prior defendant’s expert had destroyed the hub. Specifically, Rule 37(d)(3) addresses discovery sanctions when a party fails to respond to requests for inspection under Rule 34 of the North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure. Rule 34(a) states the scope of Rule 34.
“(a) Scope. Any party may serve on any other party a request
(1) to produce and permit the party making the request, or someone acting on the requestor’s behalf, to inspect and copy any designated documents ..., or to inspect and copy, test, or sample any tangible things that constitute or contain matters within the scope of Rule 26(b) and which are in the possession, custody or control of the party upon whom, the request is served. ...”
Rule 34(a), N.D.R.Civ.P. (emphasis added). A large number of the cases cited as authority in both Bachmeier’s and PACCAR’s briefs are Rule 37 sanction cases for failure to make discovery. Although some of these cases are helpful to the extent they address problems which frequently arise when evidence has been lost or destroyed, they are not directly on point. This case is distinguishable from these Rule 37 cases in that Bachmeier never had possession, custody, or control of the hub. In addition, the insurance company which did have control of the hub is not a party in interest in the present case. This is not a case where a party transferred possession of a needed item to a nonparty in an attempt to frustrate discovery. Although there may be situations where a party may be required to obtain an *532item from a nonparty, we are not convinced that this is such a case. Although Bachmeier could have requestéd the hub from Great West, this in and of itself did not give him a right to possession of the hub. The hub remained in the truck owner’s control. The appropriate method for discovery of items in nonparty possession is by a subpoena duces tecum. Rule 45, N.D.R.Civ.P.
There are two primary reasons, then, that the order granting summary judgment could not have been invoked under the power of Rule 37. First, there was never a discovery order issued or violated, and the record reflects no failure to respond to a discovery request. Second, any Rule 34 request for Bachmeier to produce the hub for discovery purposes would have been inapplicable, because Bachmeier never had possession, custody, or control of the hub. It follows that the imposition of a Rule 37 order compelling discovery and a subsequent imposition of sanctions would have been invalid. For these reasons we find the trial court’s authority to grant summary judgment did not flow from Rule 37. See Unigard Sec. Ins. v. Lakewood Engineering & Mfg., 982 F.2d 363 (9th Cir.1992).
RULE 56
One of PACCAR’s arguments is that the trial court’s order granting summary judgment was based on Rule 56 of the North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure. We disagree with this contention.
“Summary judgment is a procedural device which can be used to promptly and expeditiously dispose of a controversy without a trial, if there is no dispute as to any material issues of fact or inferences which may be drawn from undisputed facts, or when only a question of law is involved.”
United Elec. Service & Supply, Inc. v. Powers, 464 N.W.2d 818, 819 (N.D.1991). The trial court’s order granting summary judgment was not based upon this traditional application of Rule 56. The order granting PACCAR’s motion for summary judgment does not address whether there were material facts in dispute or differing inferences to be drawn. In fact, the trial court’s initial response to the motion was to deny it on the grounds that some evidence existed as to PACCAR’s liability. The order granting summary judgment does not appear to be based upon a reversal of the initial finding of evidence of liability, but instead focuses on a finding of prejudice to PACCAR. It is not founded on the traditional grounds that the moving party was entitled to judgment as a matter of substantive law.
The parties’ briefs discuss and cite cases in which the court dismissed the action immediately after the exclusion of some evidence which was necessary for the party to establish a prima facie case. E.g., American Family Insur. Co. et al. v. Village Pontiac-GMC, Inc. et al., 223 Ill.App.3d 624, 166 Ill.Dec. 93, 585 N.E.2d 1115 (2d Dist.1992) (granted motion to bar evidence, then granted summary judgment motion); Fire Ins. Exchange v. Zenith Radio Corp., 103 Nev. 648, 747 P.2d 911 (1987) (excluded expert testimony pursuant to Rule 37, then granted motion for summary judgment). In these cases the summary judgment was usually preceded by a separate motion requesting preclusion of evidence concerning the alleged product defect. In such Rule 56 summary judgment motions, it is necessary for courts to determine whether there are genuine issues as to material facts. Here the trial court made the initial finding that summary judgment was not appropriate due to the existence of genuine issues as to material facts, and the subsequent order granting summary judgment in no way addressed or reversed this finding. The trial court’s order granting summary judgment, therefore, could not have been based on the normal application of Rule 56.
INHERENT POWER
The trial court’s granting of PAC-CAR’s motion for summary judgment can only be understood as the exercise of its inherent power to sanction. Sanctions may be appropriate when evidence relevant to the lawsuit is destroyed. E.g., Headley v. Chrysler Motor Corp., 141 F.R.D. 362 (D.Mass.1991). The trial court’s rationale for granting summary judgment is evidenced in the order. The Order states:
*533“Without the equipment • needed, the Defendants are denied ‘a day in court’ and the right to raise vital issues and defenses. The fact that the Plaintiffs may also be prejudiced by the destruction of this chattel does not cancel the spectre of prejudice to the Defendants. It is noted that one of the issues raised in defense by the Defendants is the alleged lack of lubrication of the bearings. Without the hub the Defendants are deprived of this possibly .vital defense. The Plaintiffs contend that the photographs and similar hubs are still available and would constitute probative evidence. However, I agree with the.contention of the Defendants that the physical object is much more persuasive than an oral or photographic description.”
Sanctions based on this inherent power will be overturned on appeal only upon a showing of abuse of discretion. E.g., Dillon v. Nissan Motor Co., Ltd., 986 F.2d 263 (8th Cir.1993). See Gohner v. Zundel, 411 N.W.2d 75, 80 (N.D.1987) (court’s inherent authority to dismiss counterclaim on its own initiative); Vorachek v. Citizens State Bank of Lankin, 421 N.W.2d 45 (N.D.1988) (Rule 37 sanctions). In Rule 37 sanctions we have found that dismissal of a claim should not be imposed if an alternative, less drastic, sanction is available and is equally effective. E.g., Gohner, 411 N.W.2d at 79. We believe the same rationale applies when the court exercises its inherent power, and therefore the trial court has a duty to impose the least restrictive sanction available under the circumstances. Vorachek, 421 N.W.2d at 50-51 (Rule 37 “[sjanctions must be tailored to the severity of the misconduct, and dismissal of an action or entry of default judgment should be used sparingly, only in extreme situations, and should not be used if an alternative, less drastic sanction is available and would be just as effective.”). Dismissal of the entire case with prejudice is perhaps the most restrictive sanction which exists. Imposition of this sanction before the start of trial exacerbates this harshness. We prefer that disputes be settled on the merits. St. Aubbin v. Nelson, 329 N.W.2d 874, 876 (N.D.1983).
Generally, sanctions exist to further two goals. First, sanctions exist to penalize those whose conduct is deemed to warrant a sanction; second, they exist to deter others who may be tempted to behave in such a way as to warrant the imposition of a sanction. See Vorachek, 421 N.W.2d at 51 (Rule 37); Computer Associates Int’l, Inc. v. American Fundware, Inc., et al., 133 F.R.D. 166, 169 (D.Colo.1990) (Rule 37). As applied in this case, any sanction imposed against Bachmeier has the additional goal of “evening the parties’ playing field” in order to protect the integrity of the legal process. In this respect, as applied to this case, the trial court’s inherent power to impose a sanction of summary judgment is distinguishable from a Rule 37 sanction of dismissal. A Rule 37 dismissal requires that the discovery abuse be deliberate or in bad faith. Gohner, 411 N.W.2d at 79. This is not a necessary requirement for dismissal based on the court’s inherent power. The trial court found that the destruction of the hub was not malicious. We agree. At most, Bachmeier might have been negligent in not taking affirmative steps to preserve the hub, but we refrain from making this finding. If we agree with PAC-CAR’S contention that destruction of the hub was spoliation of evidence, and a possible tort, it follows that Bachmeier might have had a reasonable expectation that Great West would preserve the hub for expected or potential litigation. Miller v. Allstate Ins. Co., 573 So.2d 24 (Fla.Dist.Ct.App.1990), rev. denied, 581 So.2d 1307 (Fla.1991).
This case is distinguishable from all of the cases cited by the parties. As discussed above, this is neither a Rule 37 ease nor a Rule 56 case, and is therefore clearly distinguishable from any of those cases cited by the parties. We also distinguish this case from the “inherent power” cases cited to by the parties in their briefs. First, this is not a case where the evidence was “willfully” destroyed. Compare Graves v. Daley, 172 Ill.App.3d 35, 122 Ill.Dec. 420, 422-23, 526 N.E.2d 679, 681-82 (1988) (distinguished willful destruction from innocent or negligent destruction). Second, Loper and Great West, the people who destroyed the evidence, were not parties to the second action, nor were they real parties in interest. Compare State Farm Fire & Cas. Co. v. Frigidaire, 146 F.R.D. 160 (N.D.Ill.1992). Finally, the *534hub was not in Bachmeier’s possession or control at the time of its destruction. Compare Dillon v. Nissan Motor Co., Ltd., 986 F.2d 263 (8th Cir.1993) (retained witness and counsel destroyed evidence). See also Dinello, et al. v. General Motors Corp., et al., 1993 WL 407864 (Conn.Super. Oct. 6, 1993) (summary judgment denied when defendant failed to show that the plaintiffs had either possession or control of the product after the accident, or the power to preserve the product).
The trial court has broad discretion in determining when sanctions are appropriate, and what sanctions to impose. See Benedict v. St. Luke’s Hospitals, 365 N.W.2d 499, 504 (N.D.1985). Similar to Rule 37 sanctions, we believe inherent power sanctions require case-by-case analysis of all the circumstances presented in the case. Vorachek v. Citizens State Bank of Lankin, 421 N.W.2d 45, 51 (N.D.1988) (Rule 37). Valid considerations include, but are not limited to: the culpability, or state of mind, of the party against whom sanctions are being imposed; a finding of prejudice against the moving party, and the degree of this prejudice, including the impact it has on presenting or defending the case;3 and, the availability of less severe alternative sanctions. See Dillon, 986 F.2d at 267-68; Computer Associates Int’l, Inc., 133 F.R.D. at 169; Nevada Power v. Fluor Illinois, 108 Nev. 638, 837 P.2d 1354 (1992); Stubli v. Big D Int’l Trucks, Inc., et al., 107 Nev. 309, 810 P.2d 785 (1991).
The record here and the court’s order granting summary judgment are not sufficient to support the granting of summary judgment. The trial court has failed to sufficiently articulate the factual and legal issues involved, and to weigh and balance the degree of PACCAR’s prejudice against the degree of Bachmeier’s culpability. Specifically, although PACCAR has argued adamantly that it has been irreparably prejudiced by the destruction of the hub, it has not buttressed this claim with adequate proof. This finding of prejudice is especially critical in a ease like this one, where the sanctioned party was, at most, neglectful, and the sanction being imposed is summary judgment.
PACCAR argues that because its experts had no opportunity to inspect, test, or preserve the hub, its ability to defend itself has been prejudiced. We agree that the destruction of the hub has affected PACCAR to its detriment in that it did not have the opportunity to have its own experts examine and test the wheel parts.4 PACCAR also argues that the hub is “critical evidence” on the issue of lack of maintenance. This is a “catch-22” situation in that Bachmeier’s theory of design defect does not necessarily require inspection of the actual hub, but PACCAR’s defense of lack of lubrication very well may.
PACCAR argues that, with the hub, it could prove that the hub failed due to lack of lubrication of the bearings.5 The inverse *535of this, although suggested, has not been proven. PACCAR has not come forward with expert testimony to show that the missing hub is essential to its lack of lubrication defense. Because of the technical nature of the claim and defense, expert testimony seems essential to support it. See Capitol Chevrolet, Inc. v. Smedley, 614 So.2d 439 (Ala.1993); Stubli, 810 P.2d 785.
In reviewing PACCAR’s brief in support of the motion for summary judgment, post-hearing brief, appendix that accompanied the initial motion, and miscellaneous correspondence related to the motion, there is no expert testimony which says the defense of lack of lubrication or maintenance cannot be proven due to the destruction of the hub. Loper photographed the hub from several angles, so there are multiple color photographs available for PACCAR to use as evidence. In addition, Loper made preliminary reports, and is able to testify as to these reports. This is distinguishable from cases where there is absolutely no evidence available, or the evidence which is available is clearly inadequate. E.g., Dillon, 986 F.2d at 286 (photographs not comprehensive, failed to document condition of product, and were grainy and blurred). There is no expert testimony in the record that attempts to establish why this evidence is not adequate to prove PACCAR’s defense. What is included in the record is a legal argument advocating the preference of having the actual hub available. This is not adequate. We are not convinced that this is a case where unavailability of the hub, in and of itself, is adequate proof of prejudice. The record does not support the conclusion that PAC-CAR’s defense would be insurmountably difficult without the hub.
Athough we agree with PAC-CAR and the trial court that the actual hub would be superior to the photographs and the testimony of Loper, dismissal of a case with prejudice requires more than an undifferentiated finding of prejudice. Prejudice is a matter of degree, and trial courts have the duty to impose the least restrictive sanction in light of the circumstances. A determination. of the appropriate sanction in a case such as this requires consideration of the significance of the detriment to PACCAR (and possibly to Baehmeier, as well), the culpability of Baehmeier, and the efficacy of lesser sanctions for leveling the playing field. Without these considerations, the trial court’s analysis is incomplete. We reverse and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion, including a consideration of whether less restrictive sanctions might be appropriate at this stage of the proceedings.
SANDSTROM, J., concurs.
. The nature of a Pierringer Release is that it releases only the parties specifically named. The release stated that it would
"expressly reserve any and all other claims, action, causes of action, rights and demands of whatever kind or nature not hereby released which they or either of them may have against any and all other persons, partnerships, associations, corporations, or other legal entities not hereinbefore named or released arising out of said accident or for injuries or damages resulting therefrom, it being intended and understood that this release shall not release or discharge any other persons, partnerships, associations, corporations or other legal entities except those hereinbefore named and released. ...”
. The record from the trial court shows that a Memorandum Opinion Imposing Sanctions dated August 18, 1992, was filed with the trial court on February 19, 1993, nearly a month after the trial court had granted a summary judgment of dismissal. This memorandum opinion purported to impose the sanction of barring Bachmeier from presenting any evidence concerning the condition of the destroyed hub. The record does not indicate whether this order was ever mailed or otherwise conveyed to counsel prior to dismissal of the action. We therefore do not know if the trial judge intended it to act as a prior ruling on the matter, which might still stand after our reversal of the dismissal. In light of the ambiguity of the trial court's intention regarding the Memorandum Opinion Imposing Sanctions; and in light of our direction in this opinion to weigh the detriment to PACCAR, the culpability of Bachmeier, and the efficacy of lesser sanctions; we treat the trial court's August 18, 1992, Memorandum Opinion Imposing Sanctions as having no effect, due to its lack of dissemination and its belated filing.
.Relevant to the question of impact on presentation or defense is the fact that the legal system has built-in safety devices. As a result, destruction of the hub has affected both parties in this case. Bachmeier, as the plaintiff in this products liability case, must establish a prima facie case in order to proceed. Kaufman v. Meditec, Inc., 353 N.W.2d 297 (N.D.1984); N.D.C.C. ch. 28-01.1; see also Restatement (Second) Torts § 402A. Failure to adequately establish any of the necessary elements of the claim may result in dismissal. See Rules 12 and 56, N.D.R.Civ.P. Failure to adequately prove any of the elements at trial will result in a favorable outcome for the other party. In proving the case, Bachmeier faces what may be the difficult task of proving the elements of causation. These elements may be less burdensome here because the defect alleged by Bachmeier is “generic" in nature and not "aberrational": Bachmeier alleges the claimed defect is a design defect, present in all hubs made from this specific blueprint, and not just a manufacturing defect, present only in the hub which was destroyed. On the other hand, it may be that Bachmeier has been affected by the destruction of the hub in that the legal theories available have been limited. A defect in manufacture claim is probably precluded by the absence of the hub. "Procedural rules relating to pleading and burden of proof as between litigants are rules that have the effect of allocating risks of losses between claimants and defendants just as surely as do rules of substantive law.” W. Page Keeton et al., Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts § 103, at 712 (5th ed. 1984). These rules are designed in part to protect defendants from unsubstantiated claims.
. It is undisputed that the hub was destroyed by Loper before this action against PACCAR was brought.
. We think it is important to note that PACCAR’s theory of defense is based in part on the expert findings and opinions of Loper. If the "lack of *535lubrication” theory were nothing more than creative lawyering in an attempt to show theoretical prejudice, this would be a different case,

=== CASE 9742120 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:02.897734+00 ===

LEVINE, Justice,
concurring in the result.
Unlike the Chief Justice, I am not sure I agree with most of what the majority says, but I do agree with its conclusion that we need an expert opinion to detail the extent of the defendant’s prejudice in order to weigh the prejudice suffered against the remedy of dismissal. Like the Chief Justice, I agree that the defendant has suffered prejudice, but, like the majority, I am not sure just how much. The majority’s insistence on expert testimony to help answer that question is prudent policy to follow before granting the extraordinary remedy of dismissal. I therefore concur in the result.
I embrace the following propositions, whether or not found in the majority or dissenting opinion:
1. As between plaintiffs and defendant, plaintiffs bear the responsibility for the absence of the hub and any risk arising from that absence. While plaintiffs did not destroy the hub intentionally, they either were negligent in protecting against destruction or made a conscious decision to forgo protecting against the destruction because there was deemed to be no viable claim against the manufacturer. In either event, the parties are not equally blameless for the destruction of the hub. Defendant had no opportunity to protect itself. Plaintiffs did.
2. Plaintiffs are proceeding on a design defect theory for which they need not rely on *536the particular hub. Indeed, a cynic might venture that not only need plaintiffs not rely on the particular hub, but given the defense that this hub was not reasonably maintained, plaintiffs are well rid of the particular hub.
3. Defendant does need the particular hub because its defense is lack of lubrication, so the question is whether the available photos of the hub and circumstantial evidence are reasonable substitutes for the actual thing. So far, we have only the argument of defendant’s counsel and our own common sense that defendant is prejudiced, which are, of course, helpful and necessary to our legal determination of prejudice but, in this case, not sufficient to justify dismissal. Because defendant relies on the hub for its defense there is certainly prejudice to the defendant. However, the trial judge and we need to know the extent of prejudice to defendant’s case. See Dillon v. Nissan Motor Co., 986 F.2d 263 (8th Cir.1993) [upholding exclusion of evidence at trial because trial record established prejudice where photos were grainy and not comprehensive, and vehicle that was destroyed “was evidence which may have proved helpful to the defense”]. The parties are not equally victimized by the destruction of the hub, despite any contrary suggestion.
The bottom line here is whether the defendant can mount a successful defense based upon the color photos and circumstantial evidence or whether the tests it would have conducted and other evidence it would have garnered from the hub were indispensable and if so, what were they and why crucial, and without which, what effect? If defendant produces that kind of elucidating expert testimony to establish serious prejudice, dismissal may be an appropriate exercise of the court’s inherent authority.
Therefore, I concur in the result.
MESCHKE, J., joins.

=== CASE 9742121 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:02.901692+00 ===

VANDE WALLE, Chief Justice,
dissenting.
With the exception of the conclusion, I agree with most of what is said in the majority opinion. I therefore respectfully dissent.
The issue is clear. Bachmeiers hope to prove a design defect in the hub. The defect, if it exists, is present in all the hubs PACCAR manufactured and can be proven by any hub manufactured from that design.
PACCAR hopes to defend, for purposes of this issue, on a theory that the cause of the failure was the lack of lubrication of the destroyed hub, notwithstanding any defect in the design, (which they do not concede but in any event, is not material for purposes of this issue). The lack of lubrication is not a fabricated-for-the-moment defense but is supported by Loper, the plaintiffs’ expert witness.
Because the issue is relatively simple, I do not agree that a remand for the purpose of further expert testimony is justified. It does not require expert testimony to tell us that a design defect may be proven without the actual hub but a defense of lack of lubrication as causation of the failure of the hub cannot be proven without the actual hub. PACCAR is therefore prejudiced in a real sense. Thus, the parties are not “equally prejudiced by the destruction of the hub.” These “equal ‘prejudices’ ” do not, “in some manner, cancel each other out,” and a “ ‘two tie, all tie’ analysis is simply incorrect.” Headley v. Chrysler Motor Corporation, 141 F.R.D. 362, 366 (D.Mass.1991). Rather; PACCAR is prejudiced in the real sense.
I believe the trial court adequately weighed the arguments, including the fact photos of the hub are available although taken for purposes other then to illustrate lubrication of the hub or lack thereof. I would affirm the judgment of the district court.

=== CASE 9742122 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:03.895526+00 ===

JUSTICE HOMER delivered the opinion of the court: Following a jury trial, defendant Ralph H. Syverson was found guilty of home invasion (720 ILCS 5/12 — 11(a)(1) (West 1994)) and guilty but mentally ill of second degree murder (720 ILCS 5/9— 2(a)(1) (West 1994)). Following a sentencing hearing, the trial court concluded that consecutive sentences were mandatory. The court then sentenced the defendant to a 15-year term of imprisonment for home invasion and a consecutive 10-year term for second degree murder. The defendant appeals, arguing that the trial court erred in concluding that consecutive sentences were mandatory. We affirm. FACTS At trial, it was established that the defendant was an Illinois state trooper. In 1976, he married Marianne Wielgopolan, and the couple had one child. In May of 1994, Marianne told the defendant that she had been seeing another man and wanted a divorce. Approximately one week later, Marianne moved out of the marital home. Over the next few months, the defendant attempted to reconcile with Marianne. In late July of 1994, Marianne agreed to go to joint counseling with the defendant. She also told the defendant that she was leaving her paramour, Gale Rapp. However, a few days later Marianne began to see Rapp again. When she informed the defendant, he became angry. On August 14, 1994, the defendant arrived at Marianne’s apartment in the early morning. He brought doughnuts and asked Marianne to give him another chance. After about an hour, the defendant left. The next day, Rapp came over to Marianne’s apartment. The two went to bed around midnight. They awoke in the early morning to find the defendant standing in the bedroom doorway. Marianne said, "How in the hell did you get in here?” The defendant then walked over to the bed and said: "Gale Rapp, I am — I am here to kill you, Gale Rapp. You ruined my life. We were going to go to joint counseling.” At that point, the defendant brought out his service revolver. Marianne and Rapp both reached for the gun and a struggle ensued. The defendant fired a shot and Rapp fell back, muttering something. The defendant fired a few more shots and Marianne ran out of the bedroom to the kitchen. After a while, the defendant stopped shooting, came out of the bedroom, and put his gun on a bar stool in the living room. He then telephoned the Ottawa police, who arrived at the scene shortly thereafter. The defendant was found guilty of home invasion and guilty but mentally ill of second degree murder. A sentencing hearing was held at which the trial court found that consecutive sentences were mandatory. The court then imposed a 15-year term of imprisonment for home invasion and a consecutive 10-year term of imprisonment for second degree murder. ANALYSIS  On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in finding that consecutive sentences were mandatory. The defendant correctly notes that consecutive sentences are mandatory if: (1) the offenses "were committed as part of a single course of conduct during which there was no substantial change in the nature of the criminal objective”; and (2) one of the offenses "was a Class X or Class 1 felony and the defendant inflicted severe bodily injury.” 730 ILCS 5/5 — 8— 4(a) (West 1994). The defendant contends that neither of these prerequisites was met in the instant case. I The defendant first argues that he did not commit the home invasion and the murder "as part of a single course of conduct during which there was no substantial change in the nature of the criminal objective.” After reviewing the applicable case law, it is apparent that there is some uncertainty regarding the meaning of "a single course of conduct during which there was no substantial change in the nature of the criminal objective.” 730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—4(a) (West 1994). Some cases have suggested this language is unclear. See People v. Bole, 155 Ill. 2d 188, 193, 613 N.E.2d 740, 742 (1993) ("It is unclear from the statute whether the additional language, 'during which there is no substantial change in the nature of the criminal objective,’ is meant to define, or describe, the phrase 'single course of conduct,’ or whether it is intended instead to limit that phrase”). Other cases have used various tests in attempting to explain what constitutes a "single course of conduct.” See, e.g., People v. Harris, 220 Ill. App. 3d 31, 32, 580 N.E.2d 903, 904 (1991) (using an "independent motivation” test); People v. Fritz, 225 Ill. App. 3d 624, 629, 588 N.E.2d 307, 310-11 (1992) (using an "overarching criminal objective” test); People v. Kagan, 283 Ill. App. 3d 212, 220, 669 N.E.2d 1239, 1245 (1996) (using both "independent criminal motivation” language and "overarching criminal objective” language). Recently, the merits of these tests have been called into question. People v. Strickland, 283 Ill. App. 3d 319, 324, 668 N.E.2d 1201, 1204 (1996) ("appellate courts have not developed any consistent or coherent analysis of when courses of conduct are 'related’ as opposed to 'separate’ ”); People v. Guzman, 276 Ill. App. 3d 750, 759, 658 N.E.2d 1268, 1275 (1995) ("The appropriate test for determining what constitutes a single course of conduct under section 5 — 8—4 is somewhat unclear”).  The problem with the above-noted tests is that they place undue emphasis on a rather amorphous concept, a defendant’s motivation, while deemphasizing other relevant factors. We believe it is better to consider the totality of the circumstances, with the defendant’s motive being only one of several factors the court should consider. See, e.g., People v. Bilyeu, 102 Ill. App. 3d 130, 132, 429 N.E.2d 912, 913 (1981); People v. Lee, 41 Ill. App. 3d 502, 505, 354 N.E.2d 543, 546 (1976). Among the other factors the court should consider are: (1) the time lapse between each offense (People v. Bole, 155 Ill. 2d 188, 613 N.E.2d 740 (1993)); (2) the proximity in location of the offenses (People v. Paino, 137 Ill. App. 3d 645, 484 N.E.2d 1106 (1985)); and (3) the number of victims (People v. Lindsay, 67 Ill. App. 3d 638, 384 N.E.2d 793 (1978)).  Although each of these factors should be considered by the trial court, no single factor is necessarily determinative. See, e.g., People v. Embry, 249 Ill. App. 3d 750, 619 N.E.2d 246 (1993) (sexual assaults with multiple victims found to be a single course of conduct); Bole, 155 Ill. 2d 188, 613 N.E.2d 740 (sexual assaults involving only one victim found to be more than a single course of conduct). Moreover, the trial court’s determination will be upheld as long as there is evidence to support it. People v. Morris, 237 Ill. App. 3d 140, 603 N.E.2d 1196 (1992). In the case at hand, the record reveals that both offenses: (1) occurred seconds apart; (2) occurred in a single location; (3) were committed against a single victim, Gale Rapp; and (4) appeared to have a single motivation, the desire to eliminate Gale Rapp as a threat to the defendant’s marriage. Under these circumstances, we find that there was substantial evidence supporting the trial court’s determination that the defendant committed both offenses during a "single course of conduct during which there was no substantial change in the nature of the criminal objective.” II  The defendant also contends that the second prerequisite for mandatory consecutive sentences was lacking because it was not established that "one of the offenses for which defendant was convicted was a Class X or Class 1 felony and the defendant inflicted severe bodily injury.” 730 ILCS 5/5 — 8—4(a) (West 1994). The defendant argues that the home invasion, while a Class X felony, could not be used as the "triggering” felony because it did not "involve” the infliction of severe bodily injury. That offense was complete, the defendant contends, when the defendant entered his wife’s apartment and threatened her and Rapp.1 Since that offense did not involve injury to anyone, it does not satisfy the second prerequisite, argues the defendant. Likewise, the second degree murder conviction, a Class 1 felony, fails to qualify, contends the defendant, because "severe bodily injury” is an inherent element of the offense. The defendant succeeds with his argument only if this court finds that neither of the defendant’s convictions qualify as a triggering Class X or Class 1 felony requiring consecutive sentencing in this case. First we consider whether the Class X home invasion qualifies. The defendant fails to cite, and we have not found, any authority for his position.2 The plain language of the statute does not require that the injury be inflicted as part of the triggering felony. So long as a Class X or Class 1 felony is committed and severe bodily injury is inflicted during a single course of conduct, consecutive sentences are required. Having already determined that the defendant committed both offenses during a single course of conduct, we find that the defendant’s conduct fell squarely within the requirement of section 5 — 8—4(a) that the defendant commit a "Class X or Class 1 felony and [inflict] severe bodily injury.” Having so decided, it becomes unnecessary for us to consider the defendant’s additional argument that his Class 1 felony second degree murder conviction could not be used as the triggering felony. The trial judge was correct in his position that consecutive sentences were required in this instance. CONCLUSION For the reasons set forth above, the judgment of the circuit court of La Salle County is affirmed. Affirmed. SLATER, J., concurs.  The indictment charged that the defendant "[k]nowingly and without authority entered the dwelling place of Marianne Syverson *** and while armed with [a firearm] threatened the imminent use of force upon persons within such dwelling place.”   The case cited by the defendant in support of his argument that the home invasion was not a triggering felony, People v. Porter, 277 Ill. App. 3d. 194, 660 N.E.2d 118 (1995), is distinguishable from the instant case. In Porter, the defendant was convicted of one count of first degree murder and four counts of attempted first degree murder, involving five separate victims. Two of the attempted murder victims were unharmed. The defendant did not dispute the applicability of section 5 — 8—4(a). The issue before the court was whether all five of the sentences must run consecutively or only those for the three felonies that involved severe bodily harm to the victims. The appellate court determined that consecutive sentencing was not applicable for the two offenses not involving severe bodily injury to a victim. In the instant case, Rapp, the individual receiving "severe bodily injury,” was the victim of both the felonies.

=== CASE 9742123 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:03.899478+00 ===

JUSTICE HOLDRIDGE, dissenting: I respectfully dissent. I would hold that the home invasion and the murder were not part of a "single course of conduct during which there was no substantial change in the nature of the criminal objective.” 730 ILCS Ann. 5/5 — 8—4(a) (Michie 1994). The relevant statutory language provides: "The court shall not impose consecutive sentences for offenses which were committed as part of a single course of conduct during which there was no substantial change in the nature of the criminal objective, unless, one of the offenses for which defendant was convicted was a Class X or Class 1 felony and the defendant inflicted severe bodily injury, or where the defendant was convicted of a violation of Section 12 — 13 or 12 — 14 of the Criminal Code of 1961, in which event the court shall enter sentences to run consecutively.” 730 ILCS Ann. 5/5 — 8—4(a) (Michie 1994). The issue in this matter is whether the home invasion and the second degree murder were committed as part of a single course of conduct during which there was no substantial change in the nature of the criminal objective. My review of the record leads me to conclude that these offenses were not part of a single course of conduct. While I agree with the majority’s position that some degree of uncertainty exists as to the meaning of this statutory provision, I do not agree that the application of a "totality of the circumstances” brings any greater degree of clarity to the issue than the other methods of analysis articulated by other courts. Rather, I believe that the language of subsection 5 — 8—4(a) and the case law interpreting that subsection do not mandate consecutive sentences where there are separate and distinct acts or where various acts are separately motivated. See, e.g., People v. Baker, 133 Ill. App. 3d 620 (1985). In other words, where there is an "independent motivation” for the various acts, consecutive sentences are not mandated. See, e.g. People v. Harris, 220 Ill. App. 3d 31, 32 (1991). Here, the record is clear that the jury found that defendant’s acts were not within a "single course of conduct during which there was no change in the nature of the criminal objective.” The jury’s verdicts on each of the charged offenses can lead to only one conclusion. The jury found, not a single course of conduct on the part of the defendant, but rather two separate and distinct criminal acts. The jury found the defendant guilty — simply guilty, not guilty but mentally ill — of home invasion, thereby finding that the defendant, without mental impairment of any kind, had entered his wife’s apartment and threatened harm upon persons within the apartment. The jury also found that the defendant, while suffering from a mental impairment — the disassociative reaction — then proceeded to kill Rapp while in the heat of passion. There is only one conclusion that can be drawn from the jury’s conflicting verdicts on the two offenses: that each offense was motivated by a completely different criminal objective, and thus the two offenses were not part of a single course of conduct. Clearly, the jury found that the defendant acted under no mental impairment when he broke into the apartment while armed with a dangerous weapon, but he was motivated to shoot Rapp by something that happened while the defendant was in the apartment, which acted upon his mental impairment to produce a completely different criminal objective from the defendant’s objective in entering the apartment. In other words, the jury’s verdicts, guilty of offense of home invasion and guilty but mentally ill of the offense of second degree murder, establish that the defendant entered the apartment without the intent to kill Rapp but was motivated to kill him only after entering the apartment. Where independent motivations exist for each offense, consecutive sentences are not mandated by subsection 5 — 8—4(a). See People v. Williams, 60 Ill. 2d 1 (1975) (proper finding of independent motivation for offenses where defendant entered building to commit robbery but then wound up killing person in the building). As I would find that the two offenses for which the defendant was sentenced were not part of a single course of conduct during which there was no substantial change in the nature of the criminal objective, I would not address the issue of whether one of the offenses for which the defendant was convicted was a Class X or Class 1 felony and the defendant inflicted severe bodily harm. For the foregoing reasons, I would find that the trial court erred in finding that consecutive sentences were mandated by subsection 5 — 8—4(a). I therefore dissent. I would remand the matter for the trial court to determine whether consecutive sentences, while not mandatory, were nonetheless otherwise warranted.

=== CASE 9742124 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:04.480665+00 ===

OPINION
FRIEDLANDER, Judge.
Jay Myoung Yoon appeals the judgment in his marital dissolution action instituted by Sunsook Yoon. Jay presents the following restated issues for review:
1. Did the trial court err in computing the child support payment?
2. Did the trial court err in determining the value of Jay’s medical practice?
3. Did the trial court err in dividing the marital assets of the parties?
4. Did the trial court err in prohibiting Jay from testifying as an expert medical witness?
5. Did the trial court err in denying Jay’s motion for change of judge?
Sunsook, on cross-appeal, presents the following restated issue for review:
6. Did the trial court err in determining that Jay had not dissipated the marital assets?
We affirm in part and reverse and remand in part.
The parties’ twenty-three-year marriage was dissolved by an August 15, 1996 decree of dissolution. At the time of the dissolution, there were two minor children of the marriage and one child over the age of majority. The trial court entered findings of fact and conclusions of law pursuant to Ind.Trial Rule 52(A) regarding payment of child support and division of marital property. Additional facts will be provided where relevant.
1.
The trial court ordered Jay to pay $698.00 per week for support of the minor children and 50% of their college expenses. Neither party challenges the court’s order, however, Jay contends that the court committed an abuse of discretion by failing to abate his child support obligation to the extent it duplicates the contribution for the children’s room, board, and other living expenses while at college.
Post-secondary education expenses incurred on behalf of children may be added to a basic child support obligation. Ind.Child Support Guideline 3(E). Commentary 3(b) to this guideline provides that, if college expenses are provided separate from child support, “support paid to the custodial parent should be reduced or eliminated, at least while the student is away from the household and at school.” Therefore, when a parent is ordered to pay child support and a portion of the child’s college expense, the trial court must consider full or partial abatement of the basic child support obligation. Such a system avoids the duplication of payment for a single expense, which would result in a windfall to the custodial parent. Stover v. Stover, 645 N.E.2d 1109 (Ind.Ct.App.1995).
Sunsook, the custodial parent, does not argue, and the record fails to demonstrate, that the trial court abated Jay’s child support obligation for the time during which the minor children were at school. This was error. Thus, we remand this case to the trial court and instruct the court to recompute Jay’s child support obligation for those time periods when the minor children are actually away attending college on campus, and to include either a full or partial abatement of child support during such times.
Jay asserts that the trial court erred in determining his child support obligation because the court failed to take into account evidence submitted after January 1995, such as Jay’s health difficulties and changes in the medical industry, which all indicated a reduction in his level of income.
*204The trial court entered findings of fact relevant to the issue of child support. Therefore, , we must first determine whether the evidence supports the findings and then whether the findings support the judgment. The findings and conclusions will be set aside only if they are clearly erroneous, i.e., if the record contains no facts or inferences supporting them. Reversal of a finding is only appropriate if the finding was clearly against the logic and effect of the facts, or reasonable probable deductions to be drawn therefrom. Nat'l. Advertising Co. v. Wilson Auto Parts, Inc., 569 N.E.2d 997 (Ind.Ct.App.1991).
The trial court found that Jay had and continues to have the ability to earn $18,-888.98 per week and based his child support obligation upon this amount. Further, the trial court found that Jay “has the ability to determine and set his own income level and has attempted to reduce it during the pen-dency of this action, not because of the condition of his health, but by failing and refusing to submit prompt and timely bills to his patients and hospitals.” Appellant’s Appendix at 15.
In January 1995, Jay’s gross income was $18,888.98 per week. However, at trial Jay presented evidence that his income level had been reduced substantially during 1995 and the first eight months of 1996 because his health was declining and industry trends were making it difficult for his solo practice to compete. Cameron McQuay, a certified public accountant appeared on Sunsook’s behalf and testified that he visited Jay’s office in October 1995 and, at that time, Jay was operating an ongoing medical practice and had scheduled patients through March 1996.
The level of income attributed to Jay is supported by the evidence. The trial court did not err in using this amount to calculate the child support obligation.
2.
Jay argues that the trial court erred in determining the value of his medical practice because the court considered the intangible asset of goodwill in its valuation and accepted a valuation which failed to take account of his deteriorating health and specific industry trends. Before discussing this contention, we address Sunsook’s assertion that the doctrine of waiver precludes Jay from raising this issue.
During cross-examination of R. James Ald-ering, Jr.,1 there was a substantial discussion by the court and the parties’ counsel of the application of the case law from Porter v. Porter, 526 N.E.2d 219 (Ind.Ct.App.1988), trans. denied, regarding the inclusion of goodwill in valuation. The issue was not waived.
Jay asserts that goodwill should not be treated as a divisible marital asset because, inter alia, such a practice represents the minority viewpoint among other states, will encourage a “battle of the experts”, and goodwill is “future earnings by another name.” Appellant’s Brief at 17.
We established in Porter, 526 N.E.2d 219, that the goodwill of a professional practice may be included in the marital estate for purposes of property distribution pursuant to a dissolution decree. We decline Jay’s invitation to revisit the question even though numerous jurisdictions have refused to consider goodwill in evaluating a professional practice.
In Porter, 526 N.E.2d 219, 224, (citing In re Marriage of Lukens, 16 Wash.App. 481, 486, 558 P.2d 279 (1976)), we acknowledged the conceivable difficulties with valuing professional goodwill:2
The fact that professional goodwill may be elusive, intangible, and difficult to evaluate is not a proper reason to ignore its existence.
Here, again, we recognize the possibility that experts will disagree on the value of a professional practice, but refuse to alter our valuation system due to such potential difficulties.
The accepted definition of goodwill is the expectation of continued public patronage. Porter, 526 N.E.2d at 219 (citing Matter of Marriage of Fleege, 91 Wash.2d 324, *205588 P.2d 1136 (1979)). In order to determine the value of goodwill, the present , value of that expectation is considered. In contrast, a valuation concerning future earnings does not focus on the present value of expected public patronage. Goodwill and future earnings are distinguishable from each other.
For the reasons aforementioned, we conclude that the trial court did not err in considering goodwill in evaluating Jay’s medical practice.
Next, we address Jay’s argument that the trial court improperly failed to consider his deteriorating health and certain industry trends.3
The trial court found:
[Jay] has the ability to determine and set his own income level and has attempted to reduce it during the pendency of this action, not because of the condition of his health, but by failing and refusing to submit prompt and timely bills to his patients and to hospitals.
Appellant’s Appendix at 15.
Jay’s earning level declined substantially from 1994 to 1995. According to Jay, the decline resulted from his deteriorating health and certain industry trends which made it more difficult for solo practitioners to compete. Sunsook presented evidence that the reduction was attributable to Jay’s failure to appropriately bill for his services. The trial court weighed the evidence presented and agreed with Sunsook. Jay has not demonstrated that the trial court did not consider the evidence he offered. Instead, Jay asks us, in effect, to reweigh the evidence but this is a task we are ill-equipped to perform.
The evidence supports the finding and, therefore, the trial court’s acceptance of the valuation figure was not error.
3.
Jay contends that the trial court erred in dividing the marital property of the parties because it took into account his future earning capacity when determining the value of the medical practice. Specifically, Jay asserts that goodwill and future earnings are indistinguishable and that consideration of his future earning capacity resulted in a windfall for Sunsook. However, as previously discussed, goodwill and future earnings are different elements. Therefore, Jay’s assertion is restated as whether the trial court’s division constituted error.
The trial court has discretion to divide the marital property unequally, but when it makes such a division, Ind.Code Ann. § 31-l-11.5-ll(c) (West Supp.1996) requires the court to set forth a basis for its decision. In re Marriage of Snemis, 575 N.E.2d 650 (Ind.Ct.App.1991). For example, disparate earning abilities of the parties would permit an unequal division. IC § 31-1-11.5-11(c)(5).
The court determined that Sunsook should receive 55.4% of the marital assets. In support of the decision, the court found:
(105) ... that the present and future earning ability of the parties is disparate in that [Jay’s] present ability and future ability to earn through his medical practice is greater.
Appellant’s Appendix at 19. The evidence at trial supports the finding and, therefore, the trial court did not err in employing Jay’s present and future earning ability as the basis for the unequal distribution of marital property.
4.
Jay claims that the trial court committed reversible error by not allowing him to testify as an expert witness regarding his medical condition.
The trial court has broad discretion in ruling on the propriety of expert testimony and will only be reversed for an abuse of discretion. During direct examination, if the trial court determines that a witness may not testify, the proponent of the excluded testimony must make an offer of *206proof to preserve the ruling for appellate review. The offer must show the substance, relevancy, materiality, and purpose of the excluded evidence in order to enable the reviewing court to determine whether exclusion was proper. Donaldson v. Indianapolis Pub. Transp. Corp., 632 N.E.2d 1167 (Ind.Ct.App.1994).
During Jay’s direct examination, his counsel raised the matter of Jay’s medical condition. Sunsook objected on the ground that Jay was not qualified to provide expert testimony and the trial court sustained the objection. Although wé can speculate that Jay would have testified that the condition of his health was deteriorating and that such a condition was relevant 'and material to the case, Jay bore the burden of providing such information. Here, Jay failed to make an offer of proof. Therefore, we cannot determine whether Jay was prejudiced by the trial court’s ruling. Thus, we cannot say that the trial court committed reversible error in excluding Jay’s expert testimony.
5.
Jay asserts'that the trial court erred when it denied his motion for change of judge.
Ind.Trial Rule 76(C) governs applications for change of judge and imposes specific time limits for filing such motions. However, the rule permits a party to file an application subsequent to expiration of the time limits in certain situations and requires verification of the application “personally by the party himself....” T.R. 76(C)(6).
On the first day of trial, Jay made an oral, unverified motion for change of judge based upon bias and prejudice.4 This motion did not comply with the requirements of T.R. 76(C)(6) and, therefore, the trial court’s denial did not constitute reversible error.5
6.
Sunsook argues that the trial court erred by failing to find that Jay had dissipated certain marital assets after' the parties separated. Specifically, Sunsook asserts that Jay expended approximately $1,177,000 from the parties’ bank accounts and that Jay’s distributive share should have been reduced by that amoünt. The trial court found that Jay did not dissipate assets during the marriage. Therefore, the standard of review under T.R. 52(A) is applicable.
At trial, substantial evidence was presented concerning authority over, and deposit and withdrawal activity from, the parties’ bank accounts. For example, Jay testified that approximately sixty to seventy percent of the gross receipts from the medical practice, which he deposited into a certain account, was spent on overhead expenses for the practice.
There was evidence to support the finding that Jay did not dissipate the marital assets and the finding supports the conclusion that the distributive share awarded to Jay is the appropriate amount.
Judgment affirmed in part and reversed and remanded in part.
KIRSCH, J., concurs.
BARTEAU, J., concurs with separate opinion.
. Aldering, a certified public accountant with experience in valuing businesses, testified on Sunsook's behalf.
. Jay aptly labels this potential difficulty as "battle of the experts”.
. Jay offers Quillen v. Quillen, 659 N.E.2d 566, 572-73 (Ind.App.1995), as guidance for his argument. In Quillen, the court stated that it "has never upheld an asset valuation that completely ignores factors which, as admitted by the supporting valuation expert, would have a negative effect on the asset’s value.” Jay’s reliance is misplaced because his premise, i.e. that the trial court completely ignored the evidence of industry trends and Jay's health, is not applicable.
. Jay’s oral'motion falls under the exception provided by T.R. 76(C)(6).
. We decline Jay’s invitation, to consider the affidavit which was submitted for the first time on appeal.

=== CASE 2229950 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:32.730115+00 ===

507 N.W.2d 842 (1993)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Freddi Levi BURTON, Appellant.
No. C7-92-1944.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
October 29, 1993.
ORDER
Based upon all the files, records and proceedings herein,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED (1) that the petition of defendant, Freddi Levi Burton, for further review of a decision of the court of appeals be, and the same is, granted and (2) that the decision of the court of appeals affirming defendant's conviction of second-degree intentional murder is affirmed but the sentence imposed by the trial court for the offense is reduced from 346 months to 180 months.
In State v. Gilbert, 448 N.W.2d 875, 876 (Minn.1989), we affirmed the conviction of a defendant convicted of attempted second-degree intentional murder but reduced the sentence in the interests of justice. We said that while we were unable to conclude that the evidence of actual intent to kill was legally insufficient, "we have concluded that, because of the closeness of the issue, it would serve the interests of justice to reduce defendant's sentence." Id. In that case we reduced the sentence to that which would have been imposed if the defendant had been convicted of the lesser offense of attempted third-degree depraved mind murder.
In this case we are unable to conclude that the evidence of actual intent to kill was legally insufficient, but in the interests of justice we reduce the sentence to 180 months. This is the presumptive sentence applicable if the jury had concluded, as it clearly could have, that defendant was guilty of second-degree felony murder in that he intentionally aided the assault on the victim and the victim's death, although not necessarily actually intended by defendant, resulted from the group assault in which defendant intentionally participated.
In conclusion, the decision of the court of appeals is affirmed as modified; Justice Tomljanovich dissents from that part of our decision reducing defendant's sentence.
/s/ Alexander M. Keith
Chief Justice.

=== CASE 9742126 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:05.33728+00 ===

*426Hastings, C.J.
This action was filed pursuant to the Political Subdivisions Tort Claims Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 13-901 et seq. (Reissue 1987), to recover damages for personal injuries and loss of consortium alleged to have been suffered by reason of the alleged negligence of defendant. On June 11, 1991, the district court sustained defendant’s demurrer to the second amended petition for failure to state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action, based on plaintiffs’ failure to comply with the procedural requirements of § 13-906. Upon plaintiffs’ failure to amend their petition within the time provided by the court, the action was dismissed. Plaintiffs appeal; we reverse, and remand for further proceedings.
In considering a demurrer, a court must assume that the pleaded facts, as distinguished from legal conclusions, are true as alleged and must give the pleading the benefit of any reasonable inference from the facts alleged, but cannot assume the existence of a fact not alleged, make factual findings to aid the pleading, or consider evidence which might be adduced at trial. Gallion v. Woytassek, ante p. 15, 504 N.W.2d 76 (1993); Hamilton v. City of Omaha, 243 Neb. 253, 498 N.W.2d 555 (1993).
Statutory interpretation is a matter of law in connection with which an appellate court has an obligation to reach an independent correct conclusion irrespective of the determination made by the court below. In re Application of City of Lexington, antep. 62, 504 N.W.2d 532 (1993); In re Application of City of Lincoln, 243 Neb. 458, 500 N.W.2d 183 (1993).
According to plaintiffs’ petition, Clara Malzahn suffered personal injuries while attempting to exit a Metro Area Transit bus on February 13,1989. Various allegations of negligence on the part of defendant were made.
On January 25, 1990, Clara and Lee Malzahn filed a claim with the board of directors of Metro Area Transit, pursuant to § 13-905 of the Political Subdivisions Tort Claims Act. On February 4, 1991, plaintiffs filed a petition in the district court for Douglas County against Metro Area Transit. On February 12, plaintiffs filed an amended petition, joining The Transit *427Authority of the City of Omaha as an “additional” defendant. A second amended petition was filed on April 17 against The Transit Authority of the City of Omaha, doing business as Metro Area Transit. Defendant demurred to that petition, stating:
Plaintiffs’ petition does not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action for the reason that plaintiffs fail to allege compliance with the procedural requirements of the Nebraska Political Subdivision’s [sic] Tort Claims Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-901 et seq. (Reissue 1987) for their failure to allege written notice of their withdrawal of their claims as required by Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-906 (Reissue 1987)____
Following a hearing, the court sustained the demurrer and gave plaintiffs 2 weeks to further amend their petition, and on their failure to do so, the court dismissed the action on June 27, .1991.
On appeal, plaintiffs assign as error the sustaining of the demurrer and the dismissal of the action.
In their second amended petition, plaintiffs alleged, in pertinent part:
2. That on or about January 25,1990, Plaintiffs filed a written claim for injuries with the Transit Authority of the City of Omaha, d/b/a Metro Area Transit, for personal injuries, medical expenses, pain and suffering, past and future loss of earning capacity, together with a claim by Lee Malzahn, for loss of society, companionship, and consortium____
3. That Plaintiffs further allege that more than six (6) months have elasped [sic] since the filing of the aforesaid claim, but no action has been taken by Defendant to provide compensation to Plaintifffs] for the injuries as hereinafter alleged.
4. Plaintiffs further allege that the failure to take any action on Plaintiffs’ claim for a period of more than one year after the filing of the same operates as a denial of the claim, by operation of law, and Plaintiffs have therefore filed the aforesaid action against Defendant Transit Authority of the City of Omaha, d/b/a Metro Area *428Transit.
Thus, the question is whether the giving of specific or separate written notice to a political subdivision by a claimant of the latter’s withdrawal of his or her claim from consideration by the political subdivision is a prerequisite to the commencement of a suit under the Political Subdivisions Tort Claims Act.
Plaintiffs alleged in their petition that the failure of defendant to act on the claim was a denial of the claim by operation of law. However, on appeal plaintiffs argue that the filing of their petition constituted written notice of withdrawal of their claim.
In arguing that the district court erred in sustaining defendant’s demurrer, plaintiffs first contend that the language of § 13-906 is vague and ambiguous. That section states:
No suit shall be permitted under this act unless the governing body of the political subdivision has made final disposition of the claim, except that if the governing body does not make final disposition of a claim within six months after it is filed, the claimant may, by notice in writing, withdraw the claim from consideration of the governing body and begin suit under this act.
(Emphasis supplied.) Plaintiffs assert that the word “may” indicates that claimants have some type of choice, and that it is not easily discernible from the statute what that choice involves.
Generally, “may” used in a statute will be given its ordinary permissive and discretionary meaning unless it would manifestly defeat the statutory objective. Peterson v. Minden Beef Co., 231 Neb. 18, 434 N.W.2d 681 (1989).
Plaintiffs here suggest that the choice could be between making a telephone call or sending written notice. However, the plain meaning of the statute indicates that if the governing body does not make final disposition of the claim within 6 months, the claimants’ choice is that they may withdraw the claim and begin suit or that they may not withdraw the claim and begin suit; the modifying phrase “by notice in writing” simply directs claimants on how to withdraw the claim, should they desire to do so and begin suit.
*429In the absence of anything indicating to the contrary, statutory language is to be given its plain arid ordinary meaning; when the words of a statute are plain, direct, and unambiguous, no interpretation is necessary or will be indulged to ascertain their meaning. In re Application of City of Lexington, ante p. 62, 504 N.W.2d 532 (1993); In re Application of City of Lincoln, 243 Neb. 458, 500 N.W.2d 183 (1993).
However, plaintiffs further contend that even if written notice must be provided, the statute is ambiguous because it does not specify what type of written notice will suffice. Accordingly, arguing that notice requirements of the act are to be construed liberally, they assert that a petition and service of summons will satisfy the requirements of the statute.
In Chicago Lumber Co. v. School Dist. No. 71, 227 Neb. 355, 417 N.W.2d 757 (1988), we examined the issue of compliance with the notice requirements of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 23-2404 (Reissue 1983), the predecessor of § 13-905, which provides that all claims presented to a governing body must be in writing and must state the time and place of the occurrence giving rise to the claim, We found;
The purpose of § 23-2404 [now § 13-905] is not to require a statement of fact to the extent that the governmental subdivision’s absolute liability is verbally demonstrated in the documentary or written claim. Rather, the written claim required by § 23-2404 notifies a political subdivision concerning possible liability for its relatively recent act or omission, provides an opportunity for the political subdivision to investigate and obtain information about its allegedly tortious conduct, and enables the political subdivision to decide whether to pay the claimant’s demand or defend the litigation predicated on the claim made____
We hold, therefore, that the notice requirements for a claim filed pursuant to the Political Subdivisions Tort Claims Act are liberally construed so that one with a meritorious claim may not be denied relief as the result of some technical noncompliance with the formal prescriptions of the act. . . . Therefore, substantial compliance with the statutory provisions pertaining to a *430claim’s content supplies the requisite and sufficient notice to a political subdivision in accordance with § 23-2404, when the lack of compliance has caused no prejudice to the political subdivision.
(Citations omitted.) 227 Neb. at 368-69, 417 N.W.2d at 765-66.
While in Chicago Lumber Co. we dealt with the content of notice required by the predecessor of § 13-905, the fact that in this case we are dealing with the form of notice under § 13-906 should make no difference. We can perceive no notable distinction between an objection to the content of a notice and one to the nature of a notice of withdrawal. The objective of the statute has been reached in this case. Defendant had notice of the claim for approximately 1 year and had ample time to “investigate and obtain information about its allegedly tortious conduct, [so as to enable] the political subdivision to decide whether to pay the claimant’s demand or defend the litigation predicated on the claim made.” No clearer expression of the intent of a claimant to withdraw his or her claim and to begin suit can be manifested than the actual filing of the petition.
Absent any consideration of the statute of limitations, we hold that the filing of a petition is substantial compliance with the terms of § 13-906 as to the withdrawal of a claim from consideration. See, also, Millman v. County of Butler, 235 Neb. 915, 458 N.W.2d 207 (1990).
We reverse the judgments of the district court sustaining defendant’s demurrer and dismissing the petition and remand the cause for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded for FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.
Shanahan, J., not participating.

=== CASE 9742128 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:05.610658+00 ===

JUSTICE NICKELS delivered the opinion of the court: In these consolidated appeals, we decide whether Kane County assistant public defenders are considered "managerial employees” within the meaning of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (the Act) (5 ILCS 315/1 et seq. (West 1994)). The Illinois State Labor Relations Board (the Board) found that the assistant public defenders are not managerial employees. Based on this finding, it certified the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, Council 31, AFL-CIO (AFSCME), to represent the assistants for collective-bargaining purposes. On administrative review, the appellate court reversed, holding that the assistants are managerial employees. Because managerial employees are excluded from collective bargaining under the Act (see 5 ILCS 315/3(n), 6(a) (West 1994)), this holding precluded AFSCME from representing the assistants. The Board and AFSCME both filed petitions for leave to appeal (155 Ill. 2d R. 315(a)), which were allowed. We affirm the appellate court. BACKGROUND On February 7, 1994, AFSCME filed a representation petition with the Board. AFSCME sought to represent a collective-bargaining unit of all full-time and part-time Kane County assistant public defenders employed by the chief judge of the Sixteenth Judicial Circuit. The proposed unit excluded any supervisors, confidential employees, and managerial employees because the Act does not apply to those types of employees. See 5 ILCS 315/3(n), 6(a) (West 1994). A hearing was held before an administrative law judge. AFSCME sought to include all of the assistants within the collective-bargaining unit, except Regina Harris. The parties stipulated that this particular assistant was a supervisor within the meaning of the Act. The administrative law judge heard extensive testimony concerning the nature of the Kane County public defender’s office and the duties of the assistants. We summarize that testimony. The duties of the public defender are defined by statute. The purpose of the office is to provide quality legal representation in certain proceedings for indigent individuals who would otherwise not be able to retain quality legal representation. 55 ILCS 5/3 — 4000 (West 1994). Section 3 — 4006 of the Counties Code provides, in pertinent part: "The Public Defender, as directed by the court, shall act as attorney, without fee, before any court within any county for all persons who are held in custody or who are charged with the commission of any criminal offense, and who the court finds are unable to employ counsel. The Public Defender shall be the attorney, without fee, when so appointed by the court under Section 1 — 20 of the Juvenile Court Act or Section 1 — 5 of the Juvenile Court Act of 1987 or by any court under Section 5(b) of the Parental Notice of Abortion Act of 1983 for any party who the court finds is financially unable to employ counsel.” 55 ILCS 5/3 — 4006 (West 1994). The public defender is authorized to appoint assistant public defenders to carry out the duties of the office. 55 ILCS 5/3 — 4008, 3 — 4008.1 (West 1994). At the time of the hearing, the Kane County public defender’s office consisted of 13 full-time assistants and 3 part-time assistants. The office was arranged into several divisions, including felony trial, felony preliminary hearing, juvenile, DUI, and misdemeanor. The public defender supervised the felony trial division, while assistant Harris generally supervised the other divisions. The office had a caseload of over seven thousand cases per year, and assistants were assigned to handle this caseload. The assistant public defenders have absolute discretion in handling their cases. The assistants generally do not consult with the public defender about their cases. The public defender testified that more than 90% of the decisionmaking in the felony division occurred without his knowledge or input. Much of the decisionmaking in the other divisions also occurred without his input and without the input of supervisor Harris. The public defender had never interfered with any of the decisions made by the assistants with respect to their cases. The public defender did not tell the assistants how to investigate or develop defenses in their individual cases. Assistants were not required to seek supervisory approval before entering into plea negotiations or entering a plea. They initiated their own investigations, directed investigators, met with clients, and issued subpoenas and other documents. The assistants were fully responsible for all stages of case development and exercised their own independent judgment. The public defender and supervisor Harris handled their own caseloads. The public defender, however, generally handled the day-to-day operations and administrative matters of the felony division. Supervisor Harris was generally responsible for administrative matters in the other divisions. The office was run in a fairly informal manner. The public defender assigned all cases in the felony trial division, but assistants were permitted to transfer cases among themselves. The office possessed no formal performance evaluations and no formal disciplinary system. The public defender and the assistants all received the same fringe benefits, vacation plan, sick leave and leave of absence policies, and health care options. The public defender issued a general set of office rules and policies to the assistants, which governed such areas as office dress and hours. Occasionally, the public defender and supervisor Harris issued general directives regarding the handling of cases. The public defender reviewed closed files to determine the outcome of a case and how it was reached, and to make sure certain paperwork requirements were met. The public defender handled budget matters himself. He approved any large expenditures of money and any requests to hire expert witnesses. The public defender and the supervisor also controlled the interviewing and hiring of new assistants. The public defender and supervisor Harris had ultimate supervisory control over administrative matters, although the assistants provided input into some decisions. After hearing testimony concerning the duties of the assistants, the administrative law judge determined that the assistants under consideration were not managerial employees. Based on this finding, he concluded that the assistants formed an appropriate collective-bargaining unit under the Act. The administrative law judge recommended that AFSCME’s representation petition be granted and ordered a representation election. The Board adopted the administrative law judge’s recommendation, agreeing that the assistant public defenders were not managerial employees. A representation election was held among all full-time and part-time Kane County assistant public defenders, excluding Harris. AFSCME won the election, and the Board certified AFSCME as the collective-bargaining representative of this unit. The chief judge petitioned directly to the appellate court for administrative review of the Board’s order. See 5 ILCS 315 /9(i) (West 1994). The appellate court reversed the Board, holding that the assistants are managerial employees. The appellate court based its holding on three factors: "(1) the public defender delegates an overwhelming majority of the decision-making responsibilities to members of his staff; (2) the assistant public defenders, on a day-today basis, inherently exercise a great deal of authority and discretion in effectuating and achieving the goals of their office; and (3) the professional interests of the assistant public defenders are fundamentally identical to that of the public defender.” 275 Ill. App. 3d 853, 859. In this appeal, we determine whether the assistants are managerial employees within the meaning of the Act. ANALYSIS I. The Managerial Exclusion Section 3(j) of the Act defines a "managerial employee” as "an individual who is engaged predominantly in executive and management functions and is charged with the responsibility of directing the effectuation of management policies and practices.” 5 ILCS 315/3(j) (West 1994). The Act excludes these managerial employees from the class of employees who are entitled to engage in collective bargaining. See 5 ILCS 315/3(n), 6(a) (West 1994). The exclusion is intended to maintain the distinction between management and labor and to provide the employer with undivided loyalty from its representatives in management. See National Labor Relations Board v. Yeshiva University, 444 U.S. 672, 682, 63 L. Ed. 2d 115,125,100 S. Ct. 856, 862 (1980); National Labor Relations Board v. Bell Aerospace Co. Division of Textron, Inc., 416 U.S. 267, 281-82, 40 L. Ed. 2d 134, 146-47, 94 S. Ct. 1757, 1765 (1974). The managerial exclusion in the Act was adopted from decisions of the National Labor Relations Board and the United States Supreme Court. See, e.g., Yeshiva, 444 U.S. 672, 63 L. Ed. 2d 115, 100 S. Ct. 856; Bell Aerospace, 416 U.S. 267, 40 L. Ed. 2d 134, 94 S. Ct. 1757. The statutory definition of managerial employee under the Act is very similar to the definition contained in the two foregoing United States Supreme Court decisions. The Supreme Court’s application of the managerial exclusion provides guidance to our analysis. In Yeshiva, the Supreme Court applied the managerial exclusion to preclude the unionization of certain professional employees. Specifically, the Court held that members of the Yeshiva University faculty were managerial employees and therefore excluded from collective bargaining. In explaining the managerial exclusion, the Court stated: "Managerial employees must exercise discretion within, or even independently of, established employer policy and must be aligned with management. *** [A]n employee may be excluded as managerial only if he represents management interests by taking or recommending discretionary actions that effectively control or implement employer policy.” Yeshiva, 444 U.S. at 683, 63 L. Ed. 2d at 126, 100 S. a. at 862. The Court further stated that, given the concern for divided loyalty between employer and union, "the relevont consideration is effective recommendation or control rather than final authority” over employer policy. Yeshiva, 444 U.S. at 683 n.17, 63 L. Ed. 2d at 126 n.17, 100 S. Ct. at 863 n.17. See also Bell Aerospace, 416 U.S. at 288, 40 L. Ed. 2d at 150, 94 S. Ct. at 1768 (definition of managerial employee includes generally all employees who " 'formulate and effectuate management policies by expressing and making operative the decisions of their employer’ ” and is not limited to those employees who have some involvement in labor relations matters); Board of Regents of the Regency Universities System v. Illinois Educational Labor Relations Board, 166 Ill. App. 3d 730, 740-41 (1988) (managerial exclusion is not limited to employees who have some potential to affect labor relations matters, such as wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment). In Yeshiva, the National Labor Relations Board argued that faculty decisionmaking was exercised in the faculty’s own professional interest rather than in the employer’s interest. The Court found no justification for such a distinction. Instead, it concluded that the interests of the faculty and the employer were indistinguishable, and any attempt to separate these interests would divide faculty loyalty between employer and union. Yeshiva, 444 U.S. at 686-87, 63 L. Ed. 2d at 128-29, 100 S. Ct. at 864-65. In applying the managerial exclusion to the Yeshiva faculty, the Court stated that the Yeshiva faculty was intimately involved in policy decisions in a number of areas, including course offerings, course scheduling, teaching methods, grading policies, admissions standards, graduation standards, size of the student body, tuition, and location of a school. Yeshiva, 444 U.S. at 686, 63 L. Ed. 2d at 128, 100 S. Ct. at 864. The Court conceded that there was some tension between the managerial exclusion and the inclusion of professionals in collective bargaining. By its ruling, the Court did not intend to prevent all professionals from engaging in collective bargaining. The Court stated that employees who only engage in "the routine discharge of professional duties in projects to which they have been assigned cannot be excluded from coverage even if union membership arguably may involve some divided loyalty.” Yeshiva, 444 U.S. at 690, 63 L. Ed. 2d at 130, 100 S. Ct. at 866. The Court, however, determined that the Yeshiva faculty exercised "authority which in any other context unquestionably would be managerial.” Yeshiva, 444 U.S. at 686, 63 L. Ed. 2d at 128, 100 S. Ct. at 864. Illinois courts have also considered the application of the managerial exclusion to professionals. Most significantly, in Office of the Cook County State’s Attorney v. Illinois Local Labor Relations Board, 166 Ill. 2d 296 (1995), this court held that assistant Cook County State’s Attorneys were managerial employees and excluded from collective bargaining under the Act. This court discussed the statutory powers and duties of the State’s Attorney and assistants. These powers and duties include representing the county and the state in the prosecution of civil and criminal actions, prosecuting and defending actions involving a county officer acting in an official capacity, and giving legal advice to county officers. See Cook County State’s Attorney, 166 Ill. 2d at 302-03. Given the procedural posture of Cook County State’s Attorney, the Board had not conducted any fact finding at the time of the appeal. This court found that such fact finding was unnecessary because the pertinent inquiry focused on the statutory duties of the assistants, rather than the specific tasks performed by particular individuals. Cook County State’s Attorney, 166 Ill. 2d at 305. The court therefore decided the issue as a matter of law, based on statute and case law detailing the role of the assistant State’s Attorneys. In determining whether the assistant State’s Attorneys were managerial employees, this court stated that' "[t]he authority to make independent decisions and the consequent alignment of the employee’s interests with management’s are hallmarks of managerial status for purposes of labor law.” Cook County State’s Attorney, 166 Ill. 2d at 301. This court determined that the assistants were vested with the authority to exercise the power of the State’s Attorney and played a substantial part in discharging the statutory mission of the State’s Attorney’s office. This court stated that the assistants act as "surrogates for the State’s Attorney” in performing the statutory duties of the State’s Attorney. Cook County State’s Attorney, 166 Ill. 2d at 303. Because of this close affiliation with the State’s Attorney, the assistant State’s Attorneys were found to be managerial employees. The managerial exclusion has been addressed by the appellate court in other cases. In Salaried Employees of North America (SENA) v. Illinois Local Labor Relations Board, 202 Ill. App. 3d 1013 (1990), the appellate court held that, based on the facts presented to the Board, law department attorneys employed by the City of Chicago were managerial employees. The court stated that "[mjanagerial employees are those involved in the direction of the governmental enterprise or a major unit thereof who possesses authority to broadly affect its mission or fundamental methods.” Salaried Employees, 202 Ill. App. 3d at 1020. The court relied on three factors in finding the employees to be managerial: (1) the informal setup of the office, allowing an employee to work in different divisions of the law department; (2) the authority of all the attorneys to recommend changes in the city’s operation and policy; and (3) the large amount of discretion exercised by the attorneys on behalf of the city. The court concluded that the interests of the law department employees were identical to those of the city. In Chief Judge of the Circuit Court v. American Federation of State, County & Municipal Employees, Council 31, 229 Ill. App. 3d 180 (1992), the appellate court held that, based on the facts presented to the Board, guardians ad litem employed in the office of the Cook County public guardian were managerial employees. Pursuant to statute, the public guardian, Patrick Murphy, had been appointed to represent individuals who were found to be incompetent due to age or disability. Because of the caseload, the individual cases were assigned to guardians ad litem, who made almost all of the decisions in their respective cases. The Board argued that the guardians ad litem did not represent the interests of their employer but, instead, represented the many individual wards of the court. The court rejected this argument. The court concluded that the guardians ad litem, through their exercise of extensive discretionary decisionmaking, effectively directed the policies of the Cook County public guardian’s office. . II. Assistant Public Defenders In applying the managerial exclusion as defined in the Act, we find that this court’s recent decision in Cook County State’s Attorney is dispositive of the issue. We note that the Board reached its decision in the instant case before Cook County State’s Attorney was decided and that the appellate court relied heavily on that case in reaching its conclusion. As in Cook County State’s Attorney, the statute and case law define the duties of the public defender and assistants, such that the instant case can be decided as a matter of law. We hold, as a matter of law, that the assistant public defenders are managerial employees and therefore not subject to the collective-bargaining provisions of the Act. As noted, the statutory purpose of the public defender’s office is to provide quality legal representation in criminal and related proceedings for indigent individuais. 55 ILCS 5/3 — 4000 (West 1994). The statutory duties of the public defender’s office are to provide quality legal representation for certain individuals in criminal cases, juvenile cases, and parental notice of abortion cases. 55 ILCS 5/3 — 4006 (West 1994). As was true of assistant State’s Attorneys, the assistant public defenders act as officers for the performance of the general duties of the public defender’s office, exercise some portion of the sovereign power of the state, and perform acts that are generally regarded as acts of the public defender. See 55 ILCS 5/3 — 4008, 3 — 4008.1 (West 1994); Warren v. Stone, 958 F.2d 1419, 1424 (7th Cir. 1992); People v. Benford, 31 Ill. App. 3d 892, 895 (1975); People ex rel. Cook County v. Majewski, 28 Ill. App. 3d 269, 271-73 (1975). Although no exact criteria define a managerial employee, this court, in Cook County State’s Attorney, 166 Ill. 2d at 304, relied heavily on the existence of three factors in determining that assistant State’s Attorneys are managerial employees: (1) the close identification of a State’s Attorney with the actions of his or her assistants, (2) the unity of their professional interests, and (3) the power of the assistants to act on behalf of the State’s Attorney. The relationship between the public defender and the assistants also manifests these characteristics. The assistant public defenders possess significant authority and discretion to discharge the mission of the public defender’s office. In effect, they act as surrogates for the public defender. The Board and AFSCME argue that Cook County State’s Attorney is distinguishable from the instant case. They assert that assistant State’s Attorneys, in general, provide legal representation on behalf of the state. In contrast, the Board and AFSCME argue, the assistant public defenders represent the interests of their indigent clients but do not represent the interests of the state or chief judge. A similar argument was recently rejected by the Supreme Court. In National Labor Relations Board v. Health Care & Retirement Corp. of America, 511 U.S. 571, 128 L. Ed. 2d 586, 114 S. Ct. 1778 (1994), the Court was required to determine whether certain nurses should be considered "supervisors” within the meaning of the National Labor Relations Act. The National Labor Relations Board argued that the nurses were not supervisors because they acted in their own professional interests, not in the interests of their employer. The Court rejected that argument and noted that such an argument had also been rejected in Yeshiva: "The Board’s interpretation, that a nurse’s supervisory activity is not exercised in the interest of the employer if it is incidental to the treatment of patients, is similar to an approach the Board took, and we rejected, in NLRB v. Yeshiva Univ., 444 U.S. 672 (1980). There, we had to determine whether faculty members at Yeshiva were 'managerial employees.’ *** Like supervisory employees, managerial employees are excluded from the Act’s coverage. [Citation.] The Board in Yeshiva argued that the faculty members were not managerial, contending that faculty authority was 'exercised in the faculty’s own interest rather than in the interest of the university.’ [Citation.] The Board’s reasoning fares no better here than it did in Yeshiva. As in Yeshiva, the Board has created a false dichotomy — in this case, a dichotomy between acts taken in connection with patient care and acts taken in the interest of the employer. That dichotomy makes no sense. Patient care is the business of a nursing home, and it follows that attending to the needs of the nursing home patients, who are the employer’s customers, is in the interest of the employer. [Citation.] We thus see no basis for the Board’s blanket assertion that supervisory authority exercised in connection with patient care is somehow not in the interest of the employer.” Health Care, 511 U.S. at 577-78, 128 L. Ed. 2d at 593-94, 114 S. Ct. at 1782. See also Chief Judge, 229 Ill. App. 3d at 187-88 (rejecting the Board’s argument that Cook County guardians ad litem represented the many individual wards of the court instead of representing the interests of their employer). For similar reasons, we reject the purported distinction as meaningless. The Board also relies on conflict of interest cases to suggest that the assistant public defenders are not closely aligned with the public defender’s office. See People v. Spreitzer, 123 Ill. 2d 1 (1988); People v. Banks, 121 Ill. 2d 36 (1987); People v. Robinson, 79 Ill. 2d 147 (1979). In these cases, the relevant question was whether an assistant could represent a client even if other attorneys in the office had a conflict of interest involving that client. This court found no per se conflict of interest. This court determined that the attorneys in the public defender’s office could act in the professional interests of their clients and perform the statutory duties of the office despite any allegiance to the office and the other attorneys in the office. See, e.g., Banks, 121 Ill. 2d at 42-43. The conflict of interest cases cited by the Board are not helpful in the context of collective bargaining. As stated, like the relationship between the State’s Attorney and his or her assistants, the assistant public defenders act on behalf of the public defender in carrying out the statutory duties of the public defender’s office. The nature of this affiliation is not affected by the ability of the assistants to set aside any personal allegiance in a particular case and perform the statutory duties of the office. The professional interests of the public defender, his or her assistants, and the office remain the same: to provide quality legal representation to indigent individuals. In addition, the assistants retain broad authority to act on behalf of the public defender. Finally, the Board and AFSCME argue that certain public sector attorneys in Illinois and other jurisdictions have been allowed to organize into collective-bargaining units. The cases and certification orders cited provide little support to the matter involved here. In many of these decisions, the question of managerial status was not even at issue. In addition, the duties of these public sector attorneys are generally different from the duties of the assistant public defenders, as provided by Illinois statute and case law. We emphasize, as we did in Cook County State’s Attorney, that the holding of the instant case should not be broadly interpreted to mean that all publicly employed attorneys or other professional employees are deemed managerial employees under the Act. Instead, we hold only that the assistant public defenders meet the definition of managerial employees under the Act. CONCLUSION The Kane County assistant public defenders are managerial employees, within the meaning of the Act. They are excluded from collective bargaining under the Act. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the appellate court is affirmed. Affirmed.

=== CASE 9742129 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:07:05.616375+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE FREEMAN, dissenting: The majority, relying on this court’s opinion in Office of the Cook County State’s Attorney v. Illinois Local Labor Relations Board, 166 Ill. 2d 296 (1995), holds that the Kane County assistant public defenders are managerial employees as a matter of law and, as such, are precluded from collective bargaining. I disagreed with the holding in Cook County State’s Attorney then and I disagree that it is dispositive of the issue before this court now. I, therefore, respectfully dissent. Citing National Labor Relations Board v. Yeshiva University, 444 U.S. 276, 63 L. Ed. 2d 115, 100 S. Ct. 856 (1980), and National Labor Relations Board v. Bell Aerospace Co. Division of Textron, Inc., 416 U.S. 267, 40 L. Ed. 2d 134, 94 S. Ct. 1757 (1974), the majority here acknowledges that the managerial exclusion in Illinois’ Labor Relations Act was born out of decisions of the National Labor Relations Board and the Supreme Court. The majority then further acknowledges the Supreme Court’s application of the managerial exclusion as having "provide[d] guidance” to its analysis. See 178 Ill. 2d at 339. No sooner than it acknowledges these precedents, however, the majority veers off course. Quite contrary to Yeshiva and Bell Aerospace, the majority here has taken a direction guaranteed to insure every statutorily defined public employer of professional employees absolute freedom from organized labor. The nature of the managerial exclusion is clear and the principles to be applied in making the managerial status determination may be stated briefly. As defined in Bell Aerospace, 416 U.S. 267, 40 L. Ed. 2d 134, 94 S. Ct. 1757, managerial employees are those employees whose interests are more closely identified with those of management or who are representatives of management, although their work does not generally entail the supervision of bargaining unit employees. The "touchstone of managerial status is *** an alliance with management.” See Yeshiva, 444 U.S. at 695, 63 L. Ed. 2d at 134, 100 S. Ct. at 869 (Brennan, J., dissenting, joined by White, Marshall and Blackmun, JJ.). Yeshiva recognizes the existence of such an alliance as being when the employee represents management interests by taking or recommending discretionary actions that effectively control or implement employer policy. Yeshiva, 444 U.S. at 683, 63 L. Ed. 2d at 126, 100 S. Ct. at 862. In contrast, employees whose decisionmaking is limited to the routine discharge of professional duties in projects to which they have been assigned cannot be excluded from unionized bargaining even if union membership arguably may involve some divided loyalty. Key to the managerial exclusion determination is a recognition that "/o]nly if an employee’s activities fall outside the scope of the duties routinely performed by similarly situated professionals will [the employee] be found aligned with management.” (Emphasis added.) Yeshiva, 444 U.S. at 690, 63 L. Ed. 2d at 130, 100 S. Ct. at 866. The principles espoused in Yeshiva have been adopted to answer the managerial exclusion inquiry in other than academic settings. In Montefiore Hospital & Medical Center, 261 N.L.R.B. 569 (1982), for example, the medical center, as employer, attempted to exclude medical doctors from the bargaining units because the center viewed the doctors as a part of management. The Board noted that as professional employees, the doctors might also be managerial, but their managerial status could not be based on decisionmaking which was merely part of the routine discharge of their professional duties. Consistent with Yeshiva, the Board stated that "[o]nly if the activities of professional employees fall outside the scope of the duties routinely performed by similarly situated professionals will they be found aligned with management.” Montefiore, 261 N.L.R.B. at 570. Relevant to the managerial determination in the health care area is whether the decisions alleged to be managerial or supervisory are "incidental to” or "in addition to” the treatment of patients. See 2 C. Morris, The Developing Labor Law 1459 n.199 (2d ed. 1983). Decisions which are merely incidental to treatment are not considered managerial, but are viewed merely as being within the scope of the employee’s duties. Finally and, I believe, most importantly, managerial status of employees must be decided on the particular facts of each case. See Yeshiva, 444 U.S. at 691, 63 L. Ed. 2d at 131, 100 S. Ct. at 867. In Bell Aerospace, the Court noted that the status determination requires consideration of the employees’ actual job responsibilities, their authority to act, as well as their relationship with their employer. Bell Aerospace, 416 U.S. at 290 n.19, 40 L. Ed. 2d at 151 n.19, 94 S. Ct. at 1769 n.19; see also Montefiore Hospital & Medical Center, 261 N.L.R.B. 569 (1982) (noting that in the health care context, the Board must evaluate the facts of each case to determine whether decisions alleged to be managerial are incidental to the professional’s treatment of patients). Although purportedly "guided” by the Supreme Court’s application of the exclusion, which requires consideration of the facts of each case, the majority engages in a very different analysis — one which allows for the total disregard of the Board’s factual findings. Contrary to Yeshiva or Bell Aerospace, the majority here decides that "the statute and case law define the duties of the public defender and assistants, such that the instant case can be decided as a matter of law.” 178 Ill. 2d at 343. Aside from my disagreement that managerial status can be determined simply as a matter of law (see Yeshiva, 444 U.S. at 691, 63 L. Ed. 2d at 131, 100 S. Ct. at 867 (whether college professors were managerial employees presented mixed question of law and fact); Boston University Chapter, American Ass’n of University Professors v. National Labor Relations Board, 835 F.2d 399, 401 (1st Cir. 1987); see also Bloomquist v. Ely, 247 Ill. App. 3d 656, 667 (1993) (whether a certain device constitutes implement of husbandry as defined by statute raises mixed question of law and fact)), the relevant statute and case law tell us of no more than the purpose and function of every public defender’s office, generally. Neither describes, nor could it, the actual duties of the Kane County assistant public defenders in particular. Beyond the lack of particularity concerning the Kane County office, the majority’s statutory analysis presents a more fundamental problem: What quantum of statutory detail is sufficient to defeat the need for fact finding? In Cook County State’s Attorney, the court declined the Board’s invitation for administrative agency fact finding as unnecessary to the disposition of the case. In so doing, the court opined that the statutes and the case law provided "sufficient” detail concerning the duties of the State’s Attorney and his assistants for determining the issue of the assistant State’s Attorneys’ status as a matter of law. Cook County State’s Attorney, 166 Ill. 2d at 305. Even accepting the Cook County State’s Attorney court’s declination of fact finding as proper to the analysis, the statutory details pertaining to the public defender’s office are, to say the least, at a minimum. Thus, even a correct application of the faulty reasoning in Cook County State’s Attorney to this case should dictate that the status of the assistant public defenders cannot be decided as a matter of law. A simple comparison of the statutory provisions pertaining to public defenders and those pertaining to State’s Attorneys serves to demonstrate the problems, first, with defining what amount of detail is "sufficient” and, second, with finding the level of detail "sufficient” in this case. Specifically, the Counties Code provides, generally, for the creation of the public defender’s office. The statute also provides that the purpose of the office is to provide quality legal representation in criminal and related proceedings for persons who would otherwise have no ability to retain quality legal representation. See 55 ILCS 5/3 — 4000 (West 1994). The duties of the public defender are to provide legal representation in criminal, juvenile, and parental notice of abortion cases. See 55 ILCS 5/3 — 4006 (West 1994). Further, the statute empowers the public defender to appoint assistant public defenders for the proper discharge of the duties of the office, and who serve at the pleasure of the public defender. 55 ILCS 5/3 — 4008, 3 — 4008.1 (West 1994). Case law adds that the representation of indigent defendants is a requirement of due process of law which constitutes a delegation of sovereignty to the public defender’s office (see People ex rel. Cook County v. Majewski, 28 Ill. App. 3d 269, 272 (1975)), and that the public defender is responsible for the professional conduct and acts of his assistants (see People v. Dread, 27 Ill. App. 3d 106 (1975)). As is apparent, the statute pertaining to the public defender’s office provides nothing more than the legislative authorization for the provision of legal representation in particular types of cases. In contrast, and as recited in Cook County State’s Attorney, the statute pertaining to the State’s Attorneys provides, in significantly greater detail, that "[t]he State’s Attorney is required, among other things: '(1) To commence and prosecute all actions, suits, indictments and prosecutions, civil and criminal, in the circuit court for his county, in which the people of the State or county may be concerned. (2) To prosecute all forfeited bonds and recognizances, and all actions and proceedings for the recovery of debts, revenues, moneys, fines, penalties and forfeitures accruing to the State or his county, or to any school district or road district in his county; also, to prosecute all suits in his county against railroad or transportation companies, which may be prosecuted in the name of the People of the State of Illinois. (3) To commence and prosecute all actions and proceedings brought by any county officer in his official capacity. (4) To defend all actions and proceedings brought against his county, or against any county or State officer, in his official capacity, within his county. * * * (7) To give his opinion, without fee or reward, to any county officer in his county, upon any question or law relating to any criminal or other matter, in which the people or the county may be concerned. * * * (11) To perform such other and further duties as may, from time to time, be enjoined on him by law. (12) To appear in all proceedings by collectors of taxes against delinquent taxpayers for judgments to sell real estate, and see that all the necessary preliminary steps have been legally taken to make the judgment legal and binding.’ ” Cook County State’s Attorney, 166 Ill. 2d at 302-03, quoting 55 ILCS 5/3 — 9005(a) (West 1992). I read Cook County State’s Attorney to at least recognize that, in the absence of "sufficient” statutory detail, the managerial exclusion determination should be treated as a question of fact. In fact, the court in Cook County State’s Attorney, 166 Ill. 2d at 304-05, explained fact finding in Chief Judge of the Circuit Court v. American Federation of State, County & Municipal Employees, Council 31, 229 Ill. App. 3d 180 (1992), involving guardians ad litem, and Salaried Employees of North America (SENA) v. Illinois Local Labor Relations Board, 202 Ill. App. 3d 1013 (1990), involving lawyers of the municipal law department, as necessary because no detailed statutory apparatus, similar to that for State’s Attorneys, describes the function of those employees. Here, we have little more than the statutory authorization for the existence of an office, and the majority equates that with Cook County State’s Attorney’s "sufficient” statutory detail. At any rate, to be truly guided by the analysis in Yeshiva requires not merely consideration of case law and statutory provisions, but also consideration of an employee’s actual job responsibilities. A view of the Kane County assistant public defenders’ actual responsibilities can support but one conclusion — that the assistants’ duties are not managerial in nature, but are merely routine; their decisions are not in addition, but are merely "incidental,” to their professional responsibility to render legal services to indigent clients. Although apparently not relevant to its determination, the majority recites several of the factual findings made by the Board. Because the Board’s findings form the basis of my dissent, however, I find it apt to recount them here in somewhat greater detail. At the time of these proceedings Michael Mclnerney held the position of Kane County public defender. According to Mclnerney, he assigns each assistant to one of four divisions in the public defender’s office. The daily operations and administrative matters of the felony division are Mclnerney’s responsibility, while Supervisor Harris is responsible for the other divisions. Mclnerney personally handles a caseload of 10 to 15 serious felony cases. Ordinarily, Mclnerney assigns all felony trial division cases. In assigning cases, he considers the type of case, the experience of the assistants and the size of their current caseloads. In March 1994, while Mclnerney was away from the office for a one-week period, he assigned the senior felony division attorney the task of case assignments. However, the senior attorney was given explicit instruction by Mclnerney concerning how assignments were to be made. Mclnerney testified that this was an isolated incident. With respect to juvenile cases, the two assistants assigned to that division decide between themselves their specific case assignments. Once cases are assigned, the assistants are expected to exercise their professional judgment with respect to their representation. Assistants decide how to handle the case, the strategies involved, whether to engage in plea bargaining and what defenses to assert. Decisions made by assistants in connection with their cases are governed solely by the interests of their clients, with the overriding objective being the provision of quality legal representation. As long as the assistants process cases within the guidelines established by Mclnerney and Harris, Mclnerney expects the assistants neither to consider his interests nor to take into account how Mclnerney, himself, would handle a case in the same situation. The assistants do not enjoy complete freedom from Mclnerney’s control, however. Mclnerney and Harris promulgate some of the procedures for case management. For example, Mclnerney issued a memorandum to the assistants in the felony preliminary hearing division indicating that, based upon his review, the assistants had not prepared case notes thoroughly enough. He set in place an office policy which prohibits (1) pleading a client guilty unless the assistant has read the police report and (2) waiving a preliminary hearing without a plea agreement by the State’s Attorney. Additionally, Mclnerney advised the assistants how to deal with cases in which a client wishes to enter a plea against the assistant’s recommendation. As supervisor, Harris has issued a memorandum establishing a procedure for assistants to follow in cases where a client fails to appear in court. Also, she has issued memoranda concerning the assignment of cases and the specific steps to be followed in custody cases. It does not appear from the record that the assistants share a similar supervisory function in the management of the office. In fact, the record reveals that in the event that an assistant becomes aware that an investigator employed by the public defender is not following office procedures, the assistant has no authority to direct that individual. The assistant must instead bring the concern either to Mclnerney’s attention or to the attention of the head investigator. Further, the assistant public defenders have no fiscal oversight responsibilities for the office. Although Mclnerney has solicited the assistants’ opinion concerning what needs the budget should address, the assistants do not prepare the annual budget, they are never asked to prepare draft proposals of the budget, and they are not invited to offer budget recommendations. Mclnerney and Supervisor Harris make even those fiscal decisions involving the use and availability of office funds. In that respect, the assistants have been given limited authority to spend "a couple hundred dollars” of office funds for items relating to their cases, such as hearing transcripts or expert witness fees. Any expenditure in excess of that amount, however, requires Mclnerney’s prior approval. Only Mclnerney and the office manager know the amount of money maintained in the office account and only those two have access to the office budget figures. On a single occasion, Mclnerney allowed one assistant to determine the type of computer equipment that would be appropriate for the office. In this instance, the office had received a prior monetary grant to purchase the equipment. Mclnerney’s reliance on the assistant was necessary only because Mclnerney lacked adequate knowledge concerning computer technology. The clearest example of the assistants’ nonmanagerial status is the fact that Mclnerney determines office policies with respect to working hours, office conduct, dress code, requests for time off and vacation. While, on occasion, Mclnerney seeks input from the assistants on such issues, Mclnerney has the final say in such matters. Finally, the assistants do not make decisions concerning the hiring of new staff. Mclnerney testified that, with the exception of one particular instance, he and Supervisor Harris conduct interviews with prospective employees. Critical to the managerial employee determination in Yeshiva was the fact that the faculty’s power extended beyond strictly academic concerns; they were not limited to the routine discharge of their professional duties. In fact, the Yeshiva faculty "substantially and pervasively” ran the university. Cf. Salaried Employees of North America, 202 Ill. App. 3d 1013 (attorneys held to be managerial where they all were involved in hiring, had access to all files, and could be assigned to labor-related matters). While in this case there are isolated incidents where the assistants have performed, at Mclnerney’s request, beyond the scope of their legal representation function, Mclnerney testified that the assistants do not make any decisions on a regular basis except those decisions which directly relate to representation of their clients. The facts clearly demonstrate that in this case, unlike the faculty in Yeshiva, it is Mclnerney and Supervisor Harris who "substantially and pervasively” operate the public defender’s office. The public defender and Harris set policy with respect to the greater number of labor relations issues. More than that, however, the public defender and Harris determine policy with respect to (1) the preparation of case notes, (2) when a guilty plea may be offered, (3) the management of clients who wish to plead other than as recommended by the assistant, (4) the procedure for handling cases in which defendants fail to appear, and (5) the specific steps in the management of custody cases. What the majority does here is to erroneously elevate the assistants’ independent exercise of professional judgment to the level of managerial discretion. Clearly, "[wjork which is based on professional competence necessarily involves a consistent exercise of discretion and judgment, else professionalism would not be involved. Nevertheless, professional employees plainly are not the same as management employees either by definition or in authority, and managerial authority is not vested in professional employees merely by virtue of their professional status, or because work performed in that status may have a bearing on company direction.” Neighborhood Legal Services, Inc., 236 N.L.R.B. 1269, 1273 (1978). Accord General Dynamics Corp., 213 N.L.R.B. 851 (1974). As an attempt to bolster its analysis, the majority finds significant that, similar to the State’s Attorney and his assistants in Cook County State’s Attorney, (1) the public defender has a close identification with the actions of his assistants, (2) the public defender and the assistants have a unity of professional interest and (3) the assistants have the power to act on behalf of the public defender. The majority additionally points out that the assistants act as surrogates for the public defender. See 178 Ill. 2d at 344. These characteristics, of course, define the nature of most any professional employer-employee relationship. They are, for that reason, unremarkable for purposes of determining managerial status. The duties performed by the Kane County assistant public defenders are merely incidental, not in addition, to the rendition of their legal representation; their activities — the rendition of quality legal representation — do not fall outside the scope of those duties routinely performed by similarly situated professionals. The assistants are simply the rank and file employees of the office who exercise professional judgment in the performance of their assigned duties. They are not, therefore, sufficiently aligned with either the chief judge or the public defender and they are not, for that reason, managerial employees. The Board’s finding to that effect was both reasonable and consistent with Illinois’ Labor Relations Act and should be affirmed. Before concluding, I find it necessary to address one additional point. To make the holding here more palatable, the majority, just as the majority did in Cook County State’s Attorney, offers that its holding is limited, in that not all publicly employed attorneys or other professional employees are deemed managerial employees under the Act. See 178 Ill. 2d at 347. Barring the existence of a statute defining the nature and purpose of the employment, that might be true. Where such a statute exists, however, under Cook County State’s Attorney and now this case, it appears certain that all such employees must be deemed managerial as a matter of law, regardless of their actual job duties and, apparently, regardless of the sufficiency of the statutory detail. In conclusion, the majority’s application of the managerial exclusion in this case is wholly inconsistent with both the Supreme Court’s application of the exclusion in Yeshiva as well as with the National Labor Relations Board’s interpretation. Although the majority would argue otherwise, I believe that its misapplication of Yeshiva was improperly motivated by concerns with some of the more difficult realities of organized labor, i.e., the potential for work stoppages and strikes. Considering the impact of a work stoppage in the public defender’s office, the concerns are, admittedly, valid. Such concerns, however, properly rest within the legislature’s domain and should be left to be addressed either by that body (see 5 ILCS 315/14(m) (West 1994) (Illinois Public Labor Relations Act expressly forbids certain public employees to strike, e.g., firefighters and paramedics)), or by the parties at the collective-bargaining table (see 1 C. Morris, The Developing Labor Law 815 (2d ed. 1983) (under the National Labor Relations Act, an employer may bargain for a no-strike clause to the point of impasse)); see also 22 Ill. Jur. Labor and Employment § 12:37 (1995) (it is unlawful for public employees to strike if, inter alla, a collective-bargaining agreement prohibits a strike or the parties have mutually agreed to submit disputed issues to binding arbitration). Today’s holding is an inappropriate usurpation of the legislature’s authority to determine who may be invited to sit at the collective-bargaining table. Worse than that, however, the holding unfairly deprives the Kane County assistant public defenders — intended beneficiaries of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act’s coverage — a right enjoyed by other publicly employed professionals — the right to participate in defining the nature and terms of their employment. For all of the reasons stated, I dissent. JUSTICES HARRISON and McMORROW join in this dissent.

=== CASE 2229956 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:32.890966+00 ===

202 Mich. App. 310 (1993)
507 N.W.2d 827
BURGER
v.
MIDLAND COGENERATION VENTURE
Docket No. 135415.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Submitted April 14, 1993, at Grand Rapids.
Decided November 1, 1993, at 9:40 A.M.
Milan, Miller, Berger, Brody & Miller, P.C. (by Martin M. Miller and Paul A. Isley) (Bendure & Thomas, by Mark R. Bendure and Victor S. Valenti, of Counsel), for the plaintiff.
Kitch, Saurbier, Drutchas, Wagner & Kenney, P.C. (by Thomas J. Foley, Susan Healy Zitterman, and Sharon A. Dewaele), for the defendants.
Before: NEFF, P.J., and McDONALD and MURPHY, JJ.
MURPHY, J.
Plaintiff appeals from an order of the Midland Circuit Court granting defendants' motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(7). Defendants cross appeal from the order of the circuit court denying their motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(8) and (10). We affirm in part and reverse in part.
This case arises out of a construction accident that occurred at the plant of defendant Midland Cogeneration Venture (Midland) near Midland, Michigan. At the time of the accident, plaintiff was an employee of Babcock & Wilcox Construction, Inc., a subcontractor that had contracted with defendant Fluor Daniel, Inc., Midland's general contractor, to install boilers for the Midland plant. Plaintiff was standing on a wet pipe inside an air duct for the purpose of cleaning the duct when he slipped and fell, suffering permanent injuries. Plaintiff received workers' compensation benefits under a "wrap-up" workers' compensation insurance policy purchased by Midland, which was *312 to cover all contractors, subcontractors, and their respective employees at the job site.
Plaintiff filed this suit against Midland and Fluor Daniel, alleging that defendants were negligent on the theories of inherently dangerous activity and premises liability. Defendants moved for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(7), contending that plaintiff's suit was barred because the wrap-up policy caused both defendants to be statutory employers under MCL 418.171; MSA 17.237(171). Defendants argued that, therefore, plaintiff's suit was barred by the exclusive remedy provision of the Workers' Disability Compensation Act, MCL 418.131; MSA 17.237(131). Defendants subsequently moved for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(8) and (10), contending that they owed no duty to plaintiff.
The circuit court granted defendants' motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(7), determining that defendants were statutory employers under the WDCA and were entitled to its exclusive remedy provisions, thereby providing immunity from suit in tort. The circuit court denied defendants' motions pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(8) and (10), however, determining that whether Midland retained sufficient control over the work site was a question of fact and that reasonable minds could differ regarding whether the risk of danger involved in plaintiff's work duties was recognizable in advance. The circuit court denied plaintiff's and defendants' motions for rehearing and reconsideration.
I
The essence of plaintiff's challenge on appeal is whether, under the facts of this case, the exclusive remedy provision of § 131 of the WDCA, MCL *313 418.131; MSA 17.237(131), applies to bar plaintiff's tort claim and thereby justifies summary disposition of plaintiff's claim pursuant to MCR 2.116(C) (7). Plaintiff contends that the exclusive remedy provision does not apply because, contrary to the holding of the circuit court, defendants do not qualify as statutory employers under § 171 of the WDCA. We agree.
Generally, workers' compensation liability extends to all employers under § 111 of the act, MCL 418.111; MSA 17.237(111), other than those set forth in § 115, MCL 418.116; MSA 17.237(115). Smith v Park Chemical Co, 154 Mich. App. 180, 182; 397 NW2d 260 (1986). Recognizing that employees in certain industries may not be adequately covered, the Legislature enacted § 171 of the act to ensure that workers' compensation coverage is extended to employees of contractors and subcontractors, even if their employers failed to obtain adequate coverage. Id. Section 171 provides as follows:
(1) If any employer subject to the provisions of this act, in this section referred to as the principal, contracts with any other person, in this section referred to as the contractor, who is not subject to this act or who has not complied with the provisions of section 611, and who does not become subject to this act or comply with the provisions of section 611 prior to the date of the injury or death for which claim is made for the execution by or under the contractor of the whole or any part of any work undertaken by the principal, the principal shall be liable to pay to any person employed in the execution of the work any compensation under this act which he or she would have been liable to pay if that person had been immediately employed by the principal. If compensation is claimed from or proceedings are taken against the principal, then, in the application of this act, *314 reference to the principal shall be substituted for reference to the employer, except that the amount of compensation shall be calculated with reference to the earnings of the person under the employer by whom he or she is immediately employed. A contractor shall be deemed to include subcontractors in all cases where the principal gives permission that the work or any part thereof be performed under subcontract.
Employers subject to liability under § 171 are commonly referred to as statutory employers. Smith, supra, 183. If an employer is a statutory employer under § 171 of the WDCA, the exclusive remedy provision of § 131 of the WDCA applies. Dagenhardt v Special Machine & Engineering, Inc, 418 Mich. 520, 529-530; 345 NW2d 164 (1984); Smith, supra, 185. Section 131 provides, in pertinent part:
(1) The right to the recovery of benefits as provided in this act shall be the employee's exclusive remedy against the employer for a personal injury or occupational disease. The only exception to this exclusive remedy is an intentional tort.
An employer qualifies as a statutory employer under § 171 if it contracted with another employer not subject to the act or who has not complied with § 611 of the act, MCL 418.611; MSA 17.237(611). See Sexton v JIT, Inc (On Remand), 200 Mich. App. 52, 55; 504 NW2d 16 (1993). To comply with § 611, an employer must secure payment of workers' compensation benefits either by being self-insured, by obtaining insurance, or by insuring with the Accident Fund. Sexton, supra, 54.
In this case, plaintiff's employer, Babcock & Wilcox, was the subcontractor of defendant Fluor *315 Daniel, the contractor hired by defendant Midland to oversee construction at Midland's plant. Midland purchased the so-called wrap-up workers' compensation insurance policy covering all contractors, subcontractors, and their employees. By purchasing the wrap-up policy, Midland complied with the requirement of § 611 that it secure payment of workers' compensation benefits by obtaining insurance. Further, by contracting with Midland, Fluor Daniel complied with the requirement of § 611 that it secure payment of workers' compensation benefits by obtaining insurance. Similarly, because Babcock & Wilcox was a named insured under the wrap-up policy, it also complied with § 611. See Sexton, supra, 54-55. This being the case, neither defendant can be a statutory employer under § 171 because neither defendant contracted with someone who was not subject to the act or who had not complied with § 611, because each was subject to the act and each complied with § 611, as did Babcock & Wilcox. Because neither defendant qualifies as a statutory employer under § 171, neither defendant was entitled to protection under the exclusive remedy provision of § 131 of the WDCA.[1]Sexton, supra. Defendants were therefore not entitled to summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(7).
II
Defendants contend on cross appeal that the circuit court improperly denied their motions for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(8) and (10). We disagree.
A motion for summary disposition pursuant to *316 MCR 2.116(C)(8) tests the legal sufficiency of a claim by the pleadings alone. Lowman v Karp, 190 Mich. App. 448, 450; 476 NW2d 428 (1991). The motion should be granted only if the claim is so clearly unenforceable as a matter of law that no factual development could justify recovery. Id., 450-451. A motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(10) is properly granted when, giving the benefit of doubt to the nonmoving party, it is impossible for the record to be developed so as to leave open an issue upon which reasonable minds might differ. Admiral Ins Co v Columbia Casualty Ins Co, 194 Mich. App. 300, 310-311; 486 NW2d 351 (1992).
Defendants argue that plaintiff is not entitled to recover tort damages under the theories of premises liability or inherently dangerous workplace because they owed no legal duty to plaintiff. Generally, the owner of property is not liable to the employee of an independent contractor for negligence. Justus v Swope, 184 Mich. App. 91, 94; 457 NW2d 103 (1990); Samodai v Chrysler Corp, 178 Mich. App. 252, 255; 443 NW2d 391 (1989). One exception is where the activity is inherently dangerous. Justus, supra; Samodai, supra. To be inherently dangerous, the risk involved must be recognizable in advance, at the time of the contract, and must be inherent in the work itself or normally expected in the ordinary course of doing the work. Justus, supra. Where evidence is presented concerning the hazardous elements of a job, the determination whether the job is inherently dangerous is a question for the jury. Perry v McLouth Steel Corp, 154 Mich. App. 284, 301; 397 NW2d 284 (1986). In this case, the circuit court correctly determined that whether the job was inherently dangerous was a question for the jury to resolve. Id.
*317 Another exception to the general rule that the property owner is not liable in negligence to the employee of an independent contractor is where the property owner retains control over the work done and the contractor's activities. Samodai, supra. Defendants argue that defendant Midland did not retain sufficient control over the project to be subject to tort liability. There is no specific test to determine whether an owner has retained control over a construction project on the owner's property. Wolfe v Detroit Edison Co, 156 Mich. App. 626, 628; 402 NW2d 16 (1986). Contractual provisions subjecting the contractor to the owner's oversight alone are not enough to retain control. Samodai, supra, 256. Rather, the owner must retain at least partial control and direction of the construction work, beyond safety inspection and general oversight. Id. In this case, plaintiff alleged that Midland retained the right to assign subcontractors to Fluor Daniel, to perform the work itself, and to approve all subcontracts. The circuit court correctly determined that whether Midland retained sufficient control over the project to be subject to tort liability was a question of fact.
The order granting defendants' motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(7) is reversed and the case is remanded to the circuit court. The order denying defendants' motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(8) and (10) is affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  We note that defendants do not contend that they were otherwise entitled to application of the exclusive remedy provision, except as statutory employers.

=== CASE 2229958 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:32.926549+00 ===

507 N.W.2d 183 (1993)
In re the Marriage of George TZORTZOUDAKIS and Marika Tzortzoudakis.
Upon the Petition of George Tzortzoudakis, Appellee/Cross-Appellant,
And Concerning Marika Tzortzoudakis, Appellant/Cross-Appellee.
No. 91-1859.
Court of Appeals of Iowa.
September 2, 1993.
*184 Becky S. Knutson of Davis, Hockenburg, Wine, Brown, Koehn & Shors, P.C., Des *185 Moines, and John C. Wagner, Cedar Rapids, for appellant/cross-appellee.
Jon M. Kinnamon of Kinnamon, Kinnamon, Russo & Meyer, Iowa City, for appellee/cross-appellant.
Considered by DONIELSON, P.J., and SACKETT and HABHAB, JJ.
DONIELSON, Presiding Judge.
Marika and George Tzortzoudakis were married in Greece in 1947. At that time Marika was a resident of Greece and George was a resident of the United States. After the marriage the parties moved into George's parents' house in Cedar Rapids. The parties had two children during the marriage, John, born in 1949, and Nicholas, born in 1951. The children are both adults. However, John suffers from a mental or psychiatric disorder and resides with Marika.
In the early 1950s George and Marika built a separate apartment on the upper floor of George's parents' home. They spent about $7,500 on the project. Marika had a part-time job outside the home and also helped in the Tzortzoudakis family dry cleaning business. George was employed at the Penford Company.
In 1963 Marika became seriously ill with asthma. The parties agreed that she would go to Greece with the children for six months. In fact, she did not move back to the United States until 1981.
Marika filed a petition for separate maintenance in 1965. A separate maintenance decree was entered by the district court on August 24, 1965. The decree ordered George to pay $75 per month per child in child support. George was also to pay $90 per month in alimony. George stopped paying child support and alimony in 1974, when the youngest child was twenty-three years old. George provided no support for Marika after 1974.
As noted above, Marika moved back to the United States in 1981. She and John live in a rental house about a block from George in Cedar Rapids. Marika is in poor health. She suffers from asthma, arthritis, and heart trouble. She receives about $305 per month in social security benefits, and John receives about $400 per month because of his disability. George has retired. He has social security benefits of $600 per month, a pension of $435 per month, and interest income of about $435 per month, for a total of $1,470 per month.
George filed a petition for dissolution in May 1990. The district court entered a dissolution decree on October 29, 1991. At the time of the dissolution Marika was sixty-four and George was sixty-eight years old. The court noted that Marika's residence had recently been condemned and she needed to find a new residence. The court ordered George to pay the unpaid amount of alimony which had accrued since 1974, $17,280. George was also ordered to pay permanent alimony of $300 per month.
George was awarded his residence, which was valued at $140,000. However, Marika was granted a lien of $50,000 on the house, payable within one year. If George did not pay the lien within one year, the amount of the lien increased to $60,000. If the lien was not paid within two years, the lien was increased to $70,000, and Marika could demand the sale of the house. George was also ordered to pay $1,550 for Marika's trial attorney fees.
Marika filed an appeal, and George filed a cross-appeal.
I. SCOPE OF REVIEW
Our review of this equitable action is de novo. Iowa R.App. P. 4. We are not bound by the district court's findings of fact, but we do give them deference because the district court had an opportunity to view, firsthand, the demeanor of the witnesses when testifying. In re Marriage of Brown, 487 N.W.2d 331, 332 (Iowa 1992).
II. PROPERTY DIVISION
A. Marika contends the property division is inequitable to her. She first asks to be awarded George's house because she needs a permanent residence. In the alternative, she asks to be awarded a lien equal to half of the value of the house. She also asks to be *186 awarded the present value of the unpaid alimony, which she calculates to be $35,111.
The partners in a marriage are entitled to a just and equitable share of the property accumulated through their joint efforts. In re Marriage of Russell, 473 N.W.2d 244, 246 (Iowa App.1991). We consider property division and alimony together in evaluating their individual sufficiency. Id. The Iowa courts do not require an equal division or a percentage distribution. Id. The determining factor is what is fair and equitable in each particular circumstance. Id.
The dissolution decree awarded Marika assets worth $67,280 and George assets worth $119,920. Under the unique facts of this case, in which the parties have been separated for almost thirty years, we find this division of property to be equitable. Furthermore, George inherited most of the property which he now owns. We do note that George has offered to give Marika certain household items which are not mentioned in the decree.
B. In his cross-appeal, George contends that the district court should not have included his inherited property, including his residence, in the marital property to be divided. George inherited about $35,000 and his residence from his mother. George claims these assets should be set aside to him.
Iowa Code section 598.21(1) (1991) states "the court shall divide all property, except inherited property or gifts received by one party, equitably between the parties." However, section 598.21(2) provides an exception "upon a finding that refusal to divide the property is inequitable to the other party or to the children of the marriage." In determining whether an equitable distribution of gifts or inherited property is warranted, the length of the marriage is an important factor. In re Marriage of Hoffman, 493 N.W.2d 84, 89 (Iowa App.1992).
The district court considered the fact that George had inherited much of the property held by him. The court found that George and Marika had contributed to the estate which George later inherited by improving George's parents' home. Both George and Marika had also worked without pay for the family dry cleaning business. The court also considered Marika's special needs and those of the parties' son, John. Marika is in poor health, and she and John need to find a new residence. The court concluded it would be inequitable to set the inherited property aside to George.
We agree with the district court's reasoning and conclusion. We find it would be inequitable to set aside to George the property inherited by him. We affirm the property distribution as set forth by the district court.
III. ALIMONY
Marika contends she should be awarded a greater amount of alimony. She asks for $550 per month in alimony. Marika states that she is living in poverty and that George has the ability to pay more than $300 per month.
Alimony is a stipend to a spouse in lieu of the other spouse's legal obligation for support. In re Marriage of Francis, 442 N.W.2d 59, 62 (Iowa 1989). Alimony is not an absolute right; an award depends upon the circumstances of each particular case. In re Marriage of Whelchel, 476 N.W.2d 104, 110 (Iowa App.1991). When determining the appropriateness of alimony, the court should consider the earning capacity of each party. In re Marriage of Oler, 451 N.W.2d 9, 13 (Iowa App.1989). Also, the ability of the one spouse to pay should be balanced against the needs of the other spouse. Id.
We affirm the district court's award of $300 per month in alimony to Marika. While Marika receives the amount of $305 per month in social security benefits, she shares expenses with her son John, who receives $400 per month in social security benefits.
IV. ATTORNEY FEES
Marika asks for attorney fees for this appeal. An award of attorney fees is not a matter of right, but rests within the court's discretion and the parties' financial positions. In re Marriage of Hunt, 476 N.W.2d 99, 103 (Iowa App.1991). We determine each party *187 should pay his or her own attorney fees in this case.
We affirm the district court on all issues raised on appeal and cross-appeal. Costs of this appeal are assessed to George Tzortzoudakis.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2229965 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:33.048131+00 ===

507 N.W.2d 677 (1993)
2 Neb. Ct. App. 178
Leonard James OLMER, Appellee and Cross-Appellant,
v.
Jane Christine OLMER, Now Known As Jane Christine Baker, Appellant and Cross-Appellee.
No. A-92-047.
Court of Appeals of Nebraska.
November 2, 1993.
Richard E. Mueting and Joel E. Carlson, of Mueting and Stoffer, Norfolk, for appellant.
Jeffrey L. Hrouda, Norfolk, for appellee.
CONNOLLY, IRWIN, and WRIGHT, JJ.
*678 CONNOLLY, Judge.
Jane Christine Baker appeals the trial court's decision denying her request for an increase in child support payments by the appellee, Leonard James Olmer, her ex-husband. The trial court found no material change of circumstances to justify modification of child support or visitation rights. The court did find that the parties' only child, Jared, had suffered a hearing loss that constituted a material change of circumstances not contemplated at the time of the decree. Consequently, the court ordered each party to pay one-half of any necessary medical expenses for Jared which are not covered by Leonard's insurance or other available sources. Leonard cross-appeals, asserting that the trial court erred in not awarding him attorney fees for defending the modification action. We affirm in part as modified, and in part vacate and remand for further proceedings.
I. FACTS
According to the petition for dissolution, Jane and Leonard were married on November 29, 1986, and had one child, Jared. Jared was almost 2 years old when the parties were divorced on June 13, 1989. Pursuant to a decree of dissolution, Jane was awarded custody of Jared and Leonard was ordered to pay $230 per month in child support. On April 4, 1991, Jane filed an application for an increase in child support and a change in visitation rights based on changes in the conditions of the parties and the discovery that Jared had developed a hearing impairment that would result in medical bills.
The trial court found that no material change of circumstances had occurred to justify an increase in child support or a change in visitation rights. The court did find a material change as to Jared's health because of the hearing impairment and ordered each party to pay one-half of the necessary medical expenses not covered by Leonard's insurance or other available sources.
II. ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
Jane assigns various errors dealing with the admission of evidence, but does not discuss them in her brief. We refuse to consider errors assigned but not discussed. See, State v. Moss, 240 Neb. 21, 480 N.W.2d 198 (1992); Chambers-Dobson, Inc. v. Squier, 238 Neb. 748, 472 N.W.2d 391 (1991). Jane's remaining assignments of error concern her request for modification of child support and visitation rights, and they can be summarized as follows: The trial court erred in failing to find a material change of circumstances based on (1) Leonard's increased earning capacity, (2) a decrease in Jane's earning capacity, and (3) increased medical costs incurred by Jane because of Jared's hearing impairment.
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
An appeal involving the modification of a child support award is reviewed de novo on the record, and the trial court's decision will be affirmed absent an abuse of discretion. Lodden v. Lodden, 243 Neb. 14, 497 N.W.2d 59 (1993). The de novo review is also qualified by the fact that where there is a conflict in the evidence, weight is given to the fact that the trial court saw and heard the witnesses and accepted one version of the facts as opposed to the other. Kroenke v. Kroenke, 239 Neb. 699, 477 N.W.2d 583 (1991); Schmitt v. Schmitt, 239 Neb. 632, 477 N.W.2d 563 (1991).
IV. ANALYSIS
1. MATERIAL CHANGE OF CIRCUMSTANCES
Modification of a child support award is not justified unless the applicant proves a material change of circumstances has occurred since the dissolution. Lodden, supra. In determining if a material change of circumstances has occurred, an appellate court considers factors such as a change in the financial resources or ability to pay on the part of the parent obligated to pay support, needs of the child or children for whom support is paid, good or bad faith motive of the obligated parent in sustaining a reduction of income, and the duration of the change, namely, whether the change is temporary or permanent. Schmitt, supra. A material change of circumstances may also be found *679 pursuant to paragraph P of the Nebraska Child Support Guidelines, which states:
Application of the child support guidelines which would result in a variation by 10 percent or more, upward or downward, of the current child support obligation, due to financial circumstances which have lasted 6 months and can reasonably be expected to last for an additional 6 months, establishes a rebuttable presumption of a material change of circumstances.
Paragraph P was adopted November 14, 1991, 12 days before the modification hearing at issue in this case. It appears from the record that the trial court did not make a finding as to whether paragraph P of the child support guidelines was applicable.
The record reflects that at the time of the dissolution, Jane was a self-employed operator of a day-care center and that Leonard farmed and also worked full time at Vulcraft, a division of Nucor Corporation. A child support calculation worksheet prepared at the time of the dissolution hearing indicated that Jane was earning $433 gross per month and $370 net, while Leonard earned $1,665 gross per month and $1,185 net. Jane and Leonard's 1988 income tax return, the last tax return completed before the dissolution, reflected that Leonard earned $39,626 at Vulcraft, but had a farming loss of $22,620 with $11,523 in depreciation. The worksheet does not indicate whether Leonard's farming loss was taken into account or whether the depreciation was added back. The worksheet reflects only that his gross income was $1,665 per month, with a net of $1,185. Based on the figures on the worksheet, Leonard would have been obligated to pay $229.04 per month in child support. Apparently relying on the incomes reflected on the worksheet, the trial court ordered Leonard to pay $230 per month in child support. This award was not appealed.
At the modification hearing on November 26, 1991, Leonard's 1990 income tax return showed wages from Vulcraft in the amount of $33,070, a decrease of approximately $6,500 from 1988; a farming loss of $31,161; and a capital loss of $1,516, for a total taxable income of $1,089. Leonard's child support calculation worksheet admitted into evidence at the modification hearing showed a monthly gross income of $1,512.92 and a monthly net income of $1,151.18. Those figures were based on the following projections for 1991: Vulcraft wages of $33,510.49, a farming loss of $31,161, and added-back depreciation of $15,806.
At the time of the modification hearing, Jane was attending school full time at a local community college and was working part time at a restaurant. Her child support calculation worksheet showed $60.95 as her monthly net income and $2,792.54 as Leonard's monthly gross income. After allowing for tax deductions, Jane calculated Leonard's monthly net income to be $1,951. Based on those figures, Jane concluded that Leonard should be paying $371.54 per month in child support.
Jane mistakenly relies on Stuczynski v. Stuczynski, 238 Neb. 368, 471 N.W.2d 122 (1991), and Phelps v. Phelps, 239 Neb. 618, 477 N.W.2d 552 (1991), to support her assertion that in determining Leonard's income for purposes of calculating child support payments, the farming loss should not be used to offset Leonard's wages from Vulcraft. Neither Stuczynski nor Phelps are helpful to our analysis on this issue because they do not address the scenario presented in the case before us, where the parent paying child support derives income from two full-time occupations in which he has been engaged since before the marriage of the parties. Leonard points out that both incomes were used in arriving at the child support figure to which Jane agreed at the time of the dissolution. We find nothing in Nebraska law to suggest that it was improper for the court, at the dissolution hearing and at the modification hearing, to consider Leonard's farming losses in determining his income for purposes of calculating child support payments. Perhaps in retrospect Jane is not satisfied with the way the numbers came out in the original calculation of the child support payments, but an appellate court does not treat an action to modify support as a retrial of the original case or a review of the equities of the decree. See Tworek v. Tworek, 218 Neb. 808, 359 N.W.2d 764 (1984).
*680 At the time of the dissolution, Leonard was earning wages from Vulcraft and was engaged in a farming operation incurring substantial losses. At the time of the modification hearing, Leonard was earning lower wages at Vulcraft and his farming operation was still incurring substantial losses. His monthly net income was less at the time of the modification than it was at the time of the original hearing. With regard to Leonard's earning capacity, there has been no material change of circumstances that was not contemplated by the parties at the time the decree was entered.
Although we find no material change of circumstances concerning Leonard's earning capacity, that does not conclude our inquiry into whether there has been a material change of circumstances warranting modification of child support. As we noted above, paragraph P of the child support guidelines was adopted only 12 days before the modification hearing at issue. It is quite possible that at the time of the hearing the trial court was not yet apprised of the necessity of conducting a paragraph P analysis. Nonetheless, the Nebraska Supreme Court has stated that the child support guidelines must be applied to child support orders entered before the adoption of the guidelines:
We noted in Schmitt [v. Schmitt, 239 Neb. 632, 477 N.W.2d 563 (1991),] that the implementation of certain federal and state statutes "may well render the concept of `material change of circumstances' of much less concern," and held that the adoption of the Nebraska Child Support Guidelines effective October 1, 1987, constituted a material change of circumstances sufficient to justify consideration of proposed modification of child support orders entered before that date.
Phelps, 239 Neb. at 621, 477 N.W.2d at 555. Applying this rationale to the guideline at issue, we find that paragraph P must be considered in this action for modification. Although Leonard's financial circumstances do not appear to have changed, at least not for the better, since the entry of the child support order in 1989, Jane's financial circumstances have changed dramatically for the worse. Thus, it is necessary for the trial court to apply paragraph P and calculate Leonard's child support obligation after factoring in Jane's decrease in earning capacity.
In order for there to be a rebuttable presumption of a material change of circumstances such that Leonard should pay increased child support, application of the child support guidelines would have to result in an increase in Leonard's child support obligation of at least 10 percent ($23 per month). If the numbers indicate an increase in Leonard's obligation of 10 percent or more and if the trial court determines that the increase is due to financial circumstances which have lasted 6 months and can reasonably be expected to last for an additional 6 months, then a rebuttable presumption of a material change of circumstances will have been established. In that event, Leonard should have the opportunity to challenge the presumption.
For the reasons discussed above, we vacate the judgment of the trial court finding no material change of circumstances sufficient to justify modification of child support and remand this cause to the trial court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
2. JARED'S HEARING IMPAIRMENT
The trial court did not order an increase in child support payments in response to the discovery of Jared's hearing impairment. However, the court properly exercised its authority to make arrangements for future medical expenses when it ordered each party to pay one-half of any necessary medical expenses not covered by insurance. See Druba v. Druba, 238 Neb. 279, 470 N.W.2d 176 (1991) (a trial court may make appropriate orders as to the manner in which future medical expenses not covered by insurance are to be shared).
The provision calling for equal sharing of Jared's future medical expenses is not specifically mentioned in Jane's assignment of error on this issue. However, we interpret Jane's argument to be that given her current financial position as a full-time student with a monthly net income of $61, she should not have been ordered to pay any *681 portion of Jared's future medical expenses related to his hearing impairment. Leonard argues that Jane's income is actually greater than $61 per month because she received a $1,200 Pell Grant for her education and because she receives Supplemental Security Income (SSI) payments for Jared. We determine from the record that the Pell Grant funds were used for Jane's school expenses and should not be considered income. We also note that SSI is a means-tested public assistance benefit that would not be included in calculating monthly income under the child support guidelines. See Nebraska Child Support Guidelines, paragraph D. Therefore, we accept Jane's characterization of her financial position and find that the district court abused its discretion in ordering Jane to pay one-half of Jared's future medical expenses.
We modify the order filed January 9, 1992, by directing that Leonard pay all reasonable and necessary medical expenses related to Jared's hearing impairment that are not covered by Leonard's medical insurance or other available sources.
3. LEONARD'S CROSS-APPEAL
Citing Neb.Rev.Stat. § 25-824 (Reissue 1989), Leonard assigns as error the trial court's failure to award him attorney fees for defending the modification action. Leonard claims that Jane's petition for modification was a vexatious and unfounded action prompted by an earlier contempt proceeding filed by Leonard. In view of our decision to remand on the issue of material change of circumstances and our modification ordering Leonard to pay all of Jared's reasonable and necessary medical expenses, this assignment of error is without merit.
Appellant is awarded $1,000 for attorney fees in this court.
AFFIRMED IN PART AS MODIFIED, AND IN PART VACATED AND REMANDED FOR FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.

=== CASE 2229969 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:33.164141+00 ===

687 N.E.2d 945 (1997)
178 Ill. 2d 92
227 Ill. Dec. 463
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Appellee,
v.
Leonard KIDD, Appellant.
No. 78445.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
September 18, 1997.
Rehearing Denied December 1, 1997.
*949 Cook County Public Defender, Chicago, Andrea Monsees, Asst. Cook County Public Defender, Chicago, for Leonard Kidd.
Richard A. Devine, State's Atty., Cook County, Criminal Appeals Div., Chicago, Jim Ryan, Atty. Gen., Criminal Appeals Div., Chicago, Sally Dilgart, Asst. State's Atty., Cook County, Chicago, for the People.
Justice HARRISON delivered the opinion of the court:
Upon remand of this cause to the circuit court of Cook County for a new trial (People v. Kidd, 147 Ill. 2d 510, 169 Ill. Dec. 258, 591 N.E.2d 431 (1992)), a jury found the defendant, Leonard Kidd, guilty of one count of arson and 10 counts of murder in the deaths of 10 children who died as the result of a fire on October 28, 1980, in a residential building comprised of five apartments. At a separate sentencing hearing the same jury found defendant eligible for a death sentence and thereafter, upon consideration of aggravating and mitigating circumstances, determined that there were no mitigating circumstances sufficient to preclude the imposition of a death sentence. At the phase of his trial in which his guilt was determined, defendant represented himself, and the trial court appointed the public defender as standby counsel. However, at both phases of the sentencing hearing, defendant wished to be, and was, represented by the public defender, who filed a post-trial motion seeking a judgment of acquittal or, in the alternative, a new trial and a new sentencing hearing. At the hearing on the post-trial motion, conducted on December 16, 1994, defendant's counsel tendered to the court three pro se post-trial motions by defendant for a new trial. Following that hearing, the trial court denied defendant's post-trial motions, including that filed by counsel as well as those proffered by defendant pro se, and sentenced him to death accordingly upon the convictions of murder. The cause comes directly to this court for review (Ill. Const.1970, art. VI, § 4(b); 134 Ill.2d R. 603). Defendant presents for our consideration 13 issues, many of which consist of numerous subissues. We affirm the judgment of the circuit court.
Initially, defendant contends that this cause should be remanded for a new trial because he was taking psychotropic drugs "under medical direction" during trial and was entitled to a fitness hearing but did not receive one. Upon this court's remand of this cause for retrial through the conclusion on September 14, 1994, of the aggravation and mitigation phase of defendant's sentencing hearing, section 104-21(a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (725 ILCS 5/104-21(a) (West 1992)) provided in relevant part that "[a] defendant who is receiving psychotropic drugs or other medications under medical direction is entitled to a hearing on the issue of his fitness while under medication." However, no hearing is required where the defendant's right to a fitness hearing pursuant to section 104-21(a) is not established (People v. Britz, 174 Ill. 2d 163, 196, 220 Ill. Dec. 388, 673 N.E.2d 300 (1996)) and the trial court has not abused its discretion in concluding that no bona fide doubt of unfitness is present. People v. Kinkead, 168 *950 Ill.2d 394, 411, 214 Ill. Dec. 145, 660 N.E.2d 852 (1995). We note that defendant appears to make no, claim that the trial court so abused its discretion as to bona fide doubt of fitness.
In the first of defendant's pro se post-trial motions, he makes, among others, the following two assertions: (1) "At the time of the trial I Leonard Kidd was using drugs. Also befor [sic] the trial I had some weed" and (2) "With the coc [sic] I had in me I did not understand everything was going on and I did not no [sic] about the law." In the third of his pro se post-trial motions, he asserts,
"1. Not only in Judge Schreier [sic] courtroom [where the instant case was tried] but also in Judge Christy Berkos [sic] courtroom [where an unrelated case against the defendant was tried] I was on drugs.
2. The pysch medication I was on would always have me feeling sleep [sic] & I did tell Judge Berkos I did not understand everything was going on when I was in his courtroom.
3. When I was doing drugs it would be cocaine or weed. The case's [sic] was to [sic] much on my mind."
At the hearing on his post-trial motion, the trial court expressed the wish that defendant testify under oath concerning the allegations he had made in his pro se motions so that a determination of credibility could be made for the record. Testifying that during the trial he was using marijuana and cocaine, defendant added, "And time that I wasn't using that, I was, I would be taking my Synaquan (Phonetic) before I come over here and it make me drowsey [sic] a lot of times." In response to the defendant's claim that he was "high" on drugs during his trial in the instant case, he named the drugs he used as follows: "Cocaine, marijuana. When I didn't have that I used my Synaquan." Although defendant indicated during his testimony that he had taken the drugs prior to being searched before being brought to court, he subsequently testified that he had had the drugs in his mouth when he was searched prior to being brought to court and that when he had arrived at the courtroom, he had used "cocaine and reefer in the washroom." Defendant stated that he had obtained the cocaine and "reefer" he used "[t]hrough the jail" from inmates. He described the effects of marijuana and cocaine upon him: "Had me high enough lost my mind, if you want to know what that is."
At the conclusion of defendant's testimony, the trial court found that his testimony "lacks any credibility" and that "[i]t is just a ploy, a maneuver, a machination to try to undue [sic] this conviction." The trial court found further as follows:
"[B]ecause defendant lacks credibility that in my judgment he was not using drugs during the trial in this Court, and I further find that he exhibited absolutely no sign of drug use.
He was competent, he was totally mentally fit, he was as sober as anyone in the Courtroom, and he didn't do a bad job as his own lawyer.
And he could not have done as well as he did under the influence of drugs."
In support of defendant's position that he was wrongfully denied a fitness hearing to which he was entitled pursuant to section 104-21(a), he maintains in his brief to this court that in testimony during his motion for a new trial the fact emerged that he was taking the "prescribed antidepressant[ ] Sinequan." However, absent from the record in the trial court is any evidence that the Sinequan defendant testified to having taken was prescribed for him or was in any way taken, as section 104-21(a) expressly requires, "under medical direction." A defendant must be receiving psychotropic drugs "under medical direction" to be entitled to a hearing on the issue of his fitness while under medication. By virtue of having failed to satisfy this element of section 104-21(a), defendant has necessarily failed to establish his entitlement to a fitness hearing with regard to his asserted taking of Sinequan. Hence, no new trial is warranted on this basis.
In further support of his contention that he was improperly denied a fitness hearing to which he was entitled under section 104-21(a), defendant declares in his brief that throughout his trial he was taking Dilantin *951 to control epileptic seizures and that "[according to the record in another case before this Court, People v. Kidd, No. 76490, from time-to-time [sic], Tegretol (another anti-seizure medication) and Elavil (a tricyclic antidepressant), were also prescribed for him." In Britz this court construed the reference in section 104-21(a) to "psychotropic drugs or other medications" as being limited to psychotropic drugs or other like medications, with the result that a nonpsychotropic medication is insufficient to trigger the operation of the statute. Britz, 174 Ill.2d at 196-97, 220 Ill. Dec. 388, 673 N.E.2d 300. In the unrelated case against this same defendant of People v. Kidd, 175 Ill. 2d 1, 18-19, 221 Ill. Dec. 486, 675 N.E.2d 910 (1996), which is the case to which he refers in his brief, we determined, in reliance upon Britz, that Dilantin is not a psychotropic drug for purposes of the fitness provision of section 104-21(a) with the result that defendant was not entitled to a fitness hearing under that section. That determination applies equally to defendant's claim here concerning his use of Dilantin during trial and is dispositive of it.
With respect to defendant's claims about his use of Tegretol and Elavil as shown by the record in Kidd, we stated there that defendant had "found references in various portions of the record in this case to his prior treatment with two other drugs: Tegretol, another epilepsy medication, and Elavil, an antidepressant" (Kidd, 175 Ill.2d at 19, 221 Ill. Dec. 486, 675 N.E.2d 910). With regard to his use of Tegretol and Elavil in Kidd we concluded that "there is no indication in the record that the defendant was actually receiving a psychotropic drug at any point near the time of trial or sentencing in this case. The references to his earlier treatment all predate, by substantial periods, the beginning of the defendant's trial, in May 1993" (Kidd, 175 Ill.2d at 20, 221 Ill. Dec. 486, 675 N.E.2d 910). We declined to adopt his argument there and, thus, to "order a remand for development of a further evidentiary record" concerning these two medications, as he had requested, because to do so "would mean that a remand must be available in every case in which the record contains some reference to the defendant's long-ago treatment with a psychotropic drug" (Kidd, 175 Ill.2d at 20, 221 Ill. Dec. 486, 675 N.E.2d 910). In light of our disposition there and the fact that retrial in the instant case occurred well over a year after his trial in that case began in May of 1993, we find his contentions here concerning the use of Tegretol and Elavil singularly unpersuasive.
Defendant contends next that he did not knowingly and intelligently waive the right to assistance of counsel because he is "a brain-damaged and epileptic retarded man who depended on anti-seizure medication and who also received anti-depressants." Asserting that his "very condition prevented a knowing and intelligent waiver," he argues, inter alia, that he lacked "the requisite comprehension" to waive the right to counsel intelligently and knowingly; that in light of his "disabilities," the record demonstrates that he did not knowingly and intelligently waive the right to counsel; that his "mental deficiencies shape the totality of circumstances surrounding his purported waiver of rights"; that his "history of mental retardation, his brain damage, his epilepsy," all establish that, however willingly he waived counsel, he did not do so knowingly or intelligently; that the admonishments he received in no way cured or corrected his "underlying disabilities"; and that his waiver was unknowing because the admonishments were not given in a way suited to his "mental limitations." He cites examples of his conduct while representing himself that, in his view, support his claims concerning his disabilities and concomitant failures of understanding and maintains that People v. Lego, 168 Ill. 2d 561, 214 Ill. Dec. 264, 660 N.E.2d 971 (1995), and Godinez v. Moran, 509 U.S. 389, 113 S. Ct. 2680, 125 L. Ed. 2d 321 (1993), govern this case and call for reversal.
As we said in Lego, although a court may deem a defendant's decision to represent himself unwise, if he makes his decision freely, knowingly, and intelligently, the court must accept it out of that respect for the individual which is the lifeblood of the law. Lego, 168 Ill.2d at 564, 214 Ill. Dec. 264, 660 N.E.2d 971. Because an accused who manages his own defense relinquishes many of the traditional benefits associated with the *952 right to the assistance of counsel, in order to represent himself the accused must knowingly and intelligently forgo those relinquished benefits. Faretta v. California, 422 U.S. 806, 835, 95 S. Ct. 2525, 2541, 45 L. Ed. 2d 562, 581 (1975); Lego, 168 Ill.2d at 564, 214 Ill. Dec. 264, 660 N.E.2d 971. A waiver is, ordinarily, an intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known right or privilege. Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U.S. 458, 464, 58 S. Ct. 1019, 1023, 82 L. Ed. 1461, 1466 (1938); Lego, 168 Ill.2d at 564, 214 Ill. Dec. 264, 660 N.E.2d 971. When a defendant seeks to waive counsel, the trial court must not only determine that he is competent to stand trial but also, satisfy itself that his waiver of this constitutional right is both knowing and voluntary. Godinez, 509 U.S. at 400, 113 S. Ct. at 2687, 125 L.Ed.2d at 333. Although a defendant need not possess the skill and experience of a lawyer in order competently and intelligently to choose self-representation, he should be made aware of the dangers and disadvantages of such representation, so that the record will establish that "`he knows what he is doing and his choice is made with eyes open.'" Faretta, 422 U.S. at 835, 95 S. Ct. at 2541, 45 L.Ed.2d at 581-82, quoting Adams v. United States ex rel. McCann, 317 U.S. 269, 279, 63 S. Ct. 236, 242, 87 L. Ed. 268, 275 (1942); Lego, 168 Ill.2d at 564-65, 214 Ill. Dec. 264, 660 N.E.2d 971. The requirement of knowing and intelligent choice calls for nothing less than a full awareness of both the nature of the right being abandoned and the consequences of the decision to abandon it. Patterson v. Illinois, 487 U.S. 285, 292, 108 S. Ct. 2389, 2395, 101 L. Ed. 2d 261, 272 (1988); Moran v. Burbine, 475 U.S. 412, 421, 106 S. Ct. 1135, 1141, 89 L. Ed. 2d 410, 421 (1986); Lego, 168 Ill.2d at 564-65, 214 Ill. Dec. 264, 660 N.E.2d 971. The determination of whether there has been an intelligent waiver of the right to counsel must depend, in each case, upon the particular facts and circumstances of that case, including the background, experience, and conduct of the accused. Johnson, 304 U.S. at 464, 58 S. Ct. at 1023, 82 L.Ed, at 1466; Lego, 168 Ill.2d at 565, 214 Ill. Dec. 264, 660 N.E.2d 971.
The defendant's claims of brain damage and mental retardation appear to be based largely upon the testimony of Dr. Linda Wetzel, a neuropsychologist, whom defendant called to testify during the aggravation and mitigation stage of his sentencing hearing. Dr. Wetzel testified that in her practice she administers, interprets, and evaluates neuropsychological tests, which are tests of brain behavior and are primarily designed to measure any brain impairment. This witness gave defendant a battery of neuropsychological tests while he was in jail in May of 1993. Prior to testing defendant, Dr. Wetzel had in her possession an IQ test administered by Dr. Karen Smith as well as school records of IQ tests performed when defendant was approximately 7, 10, and 15 years old. Subsequent to the testing performed while defendant was in school, he was classified as educationally mentally handicapped. Dr. Wetzel did not repeat the IQ test that had recently been administered to defendant by Dr. Smith but did administer the wide range achievement test, which is a test measuring the grade level of reading, mathematics, and spelling, and the multilingual aphasia examination, which is a test designed to measure the expression and comprehension or understanding of the English language.
Dr. Wetzel testified that in 1993 Dr. Smith measured defendant's full scale IQ at 73 and that an IQ between 70 and 75 is documented as "at the high end of the mentally retarded range of intelligence." Dr. Wetzel stated that Dr. Smith classified defendant as "borderline mental retarded" and not mentally retarded; later Dr. Wetzel expressed her own opinion that defendant is "borderline mental retarded." Concerning the results of the tests that Dr. Wetzel had administered herself, the witness said that on the wide range achievement test she found defendant's reading and spelling ability at or below the third-grade level and his mathematics ability at the third-grade level. While she found his concentration "very poor," which made it difficult for him to learn or remember new information, she found his language fluent and grammatical, adding, "He's good at expressing himself." With respect to his comprehension of sentences, however, she found that if the sentences became too complex, a lot of repetition became necessary and the witness had to slow down, even in explaining *953 how defendant was to complete some of the tests. For the witness, the need to repeat during testing indicated poor comprehension and, in his case, difficulty in concentrating. She also found his memory, visual motor ability, and capacity for abstraction to be impaired as well as his ability to learn "just a list of words" that she repeated to him several times.
Dr. Wetzel testified that she was aware of defendant's treatment with Dilantin, which she described as a common medication for a seizure disorder; such a disorder was, for her, "strong evidence of an impairment of the brain." She stated that she had learned from the defendant that as the result of a car accident at the age of 14 he had had a head injury involving a loss of consciousness. Defendant's scores on the neuropsychological tests fell within "an impaired range," she said, ranging from mildly to severely impaired on all the tests she administered to him. Describing defendant as a man with considerable neuropsychological brain impairment, she expressed the opinion, based upon the results of her testing, that defendant has "impaired brain functions."
On cross-examination the witness testified that she had spent a total of approximately three hours with the defendant and that the neuropsychological tests she had administered to him require the cooperation of the person taking the test. Asked whether the person being tested could easily provide misleading information, Dr. Wetzel responded, "I think that there is [sic] certain patterns we expect to see, especially when we spend 2 or 3 hours administering tests, which oftentimes indicate when a person is not responding accurately and at his full level of cooperation." When she gives the wide range achievement test, she said, she gives the person being tested words to write out until he or she makes 10 consecutive errors, whereupon the test is stopped; in defendant's case he was able to write three words and then made 10 consecutive errors, whereupon she stopped the test, in accord with the standard administration of it. She testified that persons with epilepsy are usually able to function normally when they take Dilantin. She defined "malingering" as "faking on tests to make yourself look worse than you really are."
During this phase of the sentencing hearing, defendant called also as a witness Dr. George Savarese, a clinical social worker who had reviewed available records and had conducted interviews to prepare a psychosocial developmental evaluation of him. Among those Dr. Savarese had interviewed were Dr. Wetzel and Dr. Smith. Dr. Savarese testified that defendant had been diagnosed as being mentally retarded on three separate occasions, that is, at the ages of 7, 10, and 15, with scores of 63, 67, and 64, respectively, at those ages, scores that were, he said, "[a]ll well within the mental retardation range." He stated further,
"For the issue of mental retardation, though, is not simply an issue of IQ that indicates that. There have to be other areas of social adaptation as it's referred to, ways to [sic] functioning and living in the community that also need to show some kind of impairment as well.
Specifically there were 3 key areas that it appears that Leonard had difficulties in terms of this functioning. With regard to the social deficits, skills and relating with other people appears to be markedly impaired. Tremendous tendency to act very impulsively in close interactions with other people. And particularly with problems with peers that he had at school was a lot of difficulty."
Dr. Savarese also noted that defendant had had problems with self-direction, which is another area of social functioning considered to be within the framework of understanding a diagnosis of mental retardation, as well as problems in the area of "home living," another area of social functioning, which pertains to the ability to function "within a home, in a neighborhood, in one's environment."
In rebuttal during this stage of the sentencing hearing, the State presented a stipulation between it and defendant that if Dr. Albert Stipes were called as a witness, he would testify that he is a licensed psychiatrist employed by the Psychiatric Institute of the circuit court of Cook County; he would be qualified as an expert in the field of forensic psychiatry; and he would testify *954 that on December 9, 1985, pursuant to a court appointment, he had examined defendant and had concluded that the defendant was malingering.
Defendant bases his contention that he was unable to waive his right to the assistance of counsel knowingly and intelligently, in part, on facts that are disputed in the record. Whereas in Lego the testimony of the defendant's expert witnesses stood unrefuted, here evidence crucial to defendant's claim of mental impairment is contradicted. Although Dr. Wetzel described an IQ such as defendant's as falling "at the high end of the mentally retarded range of intelligence" and expressed the opinions, primarily on the basis of defendant's performance on tests, that he suffered from impaired brain functions and is "borderline mental retarded," Dr. Stipes concluded that defendant was malingering, defined by Dr. Wetzel as "faking on tests to make yourself look worse than you really are." Moreover, although defendant relies, in part, on the fact that he was taking anticonvulsant medication to support his claim concerning waiver of the right to the assistance of counsel, Dr. Wetzel testified on cross-examination that persons with epilepsy taking the anticonvulsant Dilantin are usually able to function normally. With respect to defendant's further reliance in support of this claim on his having received "anti-depressants," we are mindful of the trial court's assessment of defendant as "totally mentally fit" during trial after the trial court heard defendant's testimony concerning his alleged use of drugs at trial, including the antidepressant Sinequan. While we are uncertain whether by "anti-depressants" defendant refers as well to the antidepressant Elavil, as he did in the prior issue presented for review, if such a claim is, indeed, intended in support of his contention of invalid waiver of his right to the assistance of counsel, we deem it meritless for the reasons already expressed in our consideration of the prior issue. Thus, on the basis of the record before us we are unable to say that the defendant's purported mental limitations and disabilities precluded his knowing and intelligent waiver of the right to the assistance of counsel.
Defendant contends that his waiver of the right to the assistance of counsel was invalid for the further reason that in admonishing him pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 401(a) (134 Ill.2d R. 401(a)), the trial court stated incorrectly both the charges and the minimum sentence upon conviction. Although one of the charges against the defendant was arson, the trial court admonished him that he was charged with aggravated arson.[1] Further, although the trial court admonished defendant that the minimum sentence was 20 years, defendant was convicted on May 19, 1993, of murdering four persons on January 12, 1984, with the result that these four prior murder convictions mandated a minimum term of natural life imprisonment in the instant unrelated case; an amendment, to section 5-8-1(a)(1) of the Unified Code of Corrections (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1979, ch. 38, par. 1005-8-1(a)(1)), effective July 1, 1980, provided that for first degree murder "if the defendant has previously been convicted of murder under any state or federal law or is found guilty of murdering more than one victim, the court shall sentence the defendant to a term of natural life imprisonment." 730 ILCS Ann. 5/5-8-1, Historical & Statutory Notes, at 795 (Smith-Hurd 1992).
The record reveals that in court on August 23, 1994, the assistant public defender who was representing defendant following remand notified the court that defendant had informed him "after a recent jail visit that it's his desire in this matter to go, pro se." Counsel indicated to the court that his relationship *955 with defendant "goes back approximately 10 years" and that he had explained to defendant that "absolutely, he has a right to go pro se" but that it was "probably not in his best interest" to do so. After counsel said that defendant wished to address the court on the issue, the following colloquy between defendant and the trial court occurred:
"DEFENDANT KIDD: Yeah, I feel in my best interest to go, pro se.
THE COURT: Well, of course, I would disagree. I think you would be absolutely and totally foolish to undertake this trial without a good lawyer, an experienced lawyer in this case. A lawyer who has already fault [sic] one trial for you and knows the case and has always been extremely vigorous and energetic and conscientious in trying to defend you.
You know very well that you can receive the death penalty on this case. You were for 20 years in the Illinois Department of Corrections through natural life to the death penalty, and you would be called upon to make your own arguments, to make your own objections, gather your own legal written instructions at the end of the case, to introduce evidence.
You have, I think, a good idea from your trials, all that it takes to conduct a trial, to conduct a defense. And you would be called upon to do so.
DEFENDANT KIDD: Yeah.
THE COURT: Well-so, I really urge you not to try to undertake to defend yourself, but to stay with your lawyer.
DEFENDANT KIDD: It looks like that's my only way out. It's [sic] looks like my best way out, though.
THE COURT: Think about it again and see if you still have the same thought on September 7th, which is the trial date. It is going to go ahead on September 7th, whether you are your own lawyer or you wish Mr. Strunck [the assistant public defender] to keep defending you.
But particularly in this case, which is not a simple case, requires presentation of a good cross[-] examination, involves the death penalty, which calls all kind [sic] of things that you know about since you went through this trial already.
I have real doubt whether you can do it yourself.
DEFENDANT KIDD: People sit right there on the stand and lied to you. I do it myself. I ain't going to go through what I did.
THE COURT: We'll see. You better rethink it. We'll see you September 7th."
Later that day, during a discussion of deadlines associated with the trial, defendant stated, "That's cutting it short. I'll do what I can." The trial court replied, "That's another problem one has when you know, you in custody, trying the defend [sic] yourself. But do the best you can." In turn, defendant responded, "But sometimes you have no choice, when people sit right there on the stand and lie, too."
Approximately a week later, after defendant indicated to the trial court that he wished still to proceed pro se, the trial court admonished him as follows:
"THE COURT: You have to understand that you are charged with-you're charged with first degree murder and, I believe, aggravated arson as well.
MS. LACY [Assistant State's Attorney]: I'm not sure if the aggravated arson was nolle'd. I believe it was nolle'd.
THE COURT: You're charged with ten counts of murder and a count of arson, aggravated arson, I believe. And I must tell you then the nature of those charges, which I think you already know since you went through a trial on them.
Secondly, you should know that on the murder charges, the minimum is 20 years, and the maximum is the death penalty. You understand that that's the minimum and the maximum. 20 years is the minimum; the death penalty is the maximum.
* * * * * *
You also must be informed, and I'm sure you already know, that you have a right to counsel, and if you are indigent without money, counsel, Mr. Strunck, the public defender, will be appointed for you."
*956 Following the defendant's affirmative response to the trial court that he understood those admonitions, the trial court reiterated defendant's responsibilities in undertaking his own defense. Finally, the trial court asked defendant, "And knowing all those things, do you still wish to represent yourself," to which defendant responded, "Yeah." At this juncture the trial court stated that it wanted Strunck "here in the event that [defendant] changes his mind" and indicated for the record that Strunck was the standby counsel.
Rule 401(a) provides:
"Any waiver of counsel shall be in open court. The court shall not permit a waiver of counsel by a person accused of an offense punishable by imprisonment without first, by addressing the defendant personally in open court, informing him of and determining that he understands the following:
(1) the nature of the charge;
(2) the minimum and maximum sentence prescribed by law, including, when applicable, the penalty to which the defendant may be subjected because of prior convictions or consecutive sentences; and
(3) that he has a right to counsel and, if he is indigent, to have counsel appointed for him by the court." 134 Ill.2d R. 401(a).
Substantial compliance with Rule 401(a) is sufficient to effectuate a valid waiver of counsel if the record indicates the waiver was made knowingly and intelligently (People v. Coleman, 129 Ill. 2d 321, 333, 135 Ill. Dec. 834, 544 N.E.2d 330 (1989)) and the admonishment the defendant received did not prejudice his rights. People v. Haynes, 174 Ill. 2d 204, 236, 220 Ill. Dec. 406, 673 N.E.2d 318 (1996); People v. Johnson, 119 Ill. 2d 119, 132, 115 Ill. Dec. 575, 518 N.E.2d 100 (1987). Where a defendant knows the nature of the charges against him and understands that as a result of those charges he may be sentenced to death, his knowledge and understanding that he may be eligible to receive a lesser sentence pales in comparison. Coleman, 129 Ill.2d at 334, 135 Ill. Dec. 834, 544 N.E.2d 330.
Here the record shows that the trial court complied substantially with Rule 401(a), informing defendant of the nature of the charges against him, explaining to him that the death penalty was the maximum sentence, and advising him of his right to counsel. Thus, we must determine next whether defendant's waiver of counsel was made knowingly and intelligently, despite the incorrect admonishment concerning one of the charges and the minimum sentence. See Coleman, 129 Ill.2d at 334, 135 Ill. Dec. 834, 544 N.E.2d 330.
Defendant urges that the record "does not show that his waiver did not hinge on the area of non-compliance." We must disagree. The record indicates that defendant chose to waive his right to the assistance of counsel because of his expressed belief that in an earlier trial witnesses had lied, apparently without defense counsel's having exposed their lies. There is no suggestion in the record that the trial court's misstatement concerning either the charge of aggravated arson or the minimum sentence played any part whatever in defendant's waiver of his right to the assistance of counsel. Moreover, although the trial court did err in stating that one of the charges against defendant was aggravated arson, rather than arson, we fail to see how misinformation to the effect that defendant was charged with a crime more serious than that with which he was actually charged (see People v. Johnson, 114 Ill. 2d 69, 72, 101 Ill. Dec. 882, 499 N.E.2d 470 (1986)) could have affected adversely his decision to proceed pro se, particularly where he was also informed that he was charged with 10 counts of murder. Defendant was fully apprised that he could receive the sentence of death actually imposed and, thus, suffered no prejudice as a result of the trial court's failure to state correctly the minimum penalty to which he would be subjected if convicted. See Johnson, 119 Ill.2d at 134, 115 Ill. Dec. 575, 518 N.E.2d 100. In spite of the trial court's incorrect admonishment concerning one of the charges against defendant and the minimum sentence, the record here indicates that he waived counsel knowingly and intelligently.
*957 Upon retrial the State marshalled an extensive array of evidence of defendant's guilt. Of the five apartments in the building that burned, three, all vacant, were located on the first floor, while two families lived in the two apartments on the second floor. In the second-floor apartment to the east, Brenda Boyd lived with her five children, four of whom died as a result of the fire; in the second-floor apartment to the west, Emma Burts lived with her four children, three of whom died in the fire. During the evening when the fire occurred, Emma's sister, Gertrude Armstrong, together with her five children, were in Emma's apartment while Emma worked as a nurse's aide and, according to Gertrude's testimony, Gertrude's 17-year-old daughter Diane baby-sat for Emma's children. Three of Gertrude's children, including Diane, perished in the fire. Eight of the children who died ranged in age from six months to nine years, while a ninth child was 13 years of age. One of Gertrude's daughters, Renee Armstrong, 14 years old at the time of the fire, was the girlfriend of defendant, who was visiting Renee at Emma's apartment on the evening of the fire. Defendant's father, Melvin Kidd, had owned the apartment building prior to his death and was a friend of Emma Burts' family.
Detective Ernest Rokosik, a police detective certified as an arson investigator, testified as an expert in the field of fire examination and cause and origin of fires. The witness arrived at the scene of the fire at 1512 East 65th Place in Chicago about 9 a.m. the morning after the fire. Evidence, including the absence of any fire damage at all beneath the first floor, indicated to the witness that the fire had not originated in the basement but had started on the first floor. In the front first-floor apartment there was primarily smoke damage and little or no fire damage, facts indicating that the fire did not start there.
Detective Rokosik testified further that approximately four or five feet into the second of the three first-floor apartments, that is, the apartment to the east, there was a pile of clothing and miscellaneous papers and books on the floor that appeared to have had surface burning on them. There was no damage to the floor under the pile of burnt papers. The witness found no accidental or providential causes of that fire and concluded that an open flame had been applied to the combustible material on the floor. The type of fire the witness saw evidence of there would not have caused a great deal of smoke. Other areas of the room showed no path of communication from this point to the heavier fire damage in the center of the building, and the amount of fire damage in this apartment was "very minimal."
According to Detective Rokosik, the area of heaviest damage occurred in the third of the first-floor apartments, that is, the apartment at the rear to the west. He determined that there was a point of origin in a makeshift closet on the east wall of the large front room of that apartment. In the northwest corner of the room, the witness noticed what he believed to be a second point of origin of the fire, smaller than the main point of origin within the closet on the east wall where fire had burned longest and the largest fire had occurred. In the opinion of the witness, the fire originating in the closet was an intentionally set fire caused, as was the fire in the northwest corner of the room, by the ignition of an available combustible by open flame. Debris samples indicated that no flammable liquids had been applied. The fire damage indicated that the fire did not start in the kitchen area but in the closet and then communicated upwards, burning through the ceiling of the closet into the area between the ceiling of the first floor and the floor of the second floor and, ultimately, through the roof. Detective Rokosik ruled out an accidental and providential cause of the fire in the building, expressing the opinion that to a reasonable degree of scientific certainty its cause was the intentional ignition of ordinary combustibles, that is, "[p]aper, rags, things of that nature," by some type of open flame, that is, "anything from cigarette lighter to a candle to a propane torch."
Renee Armstrong testified that at the time of the fire defendant had been her boyfriend for about three or four months. After defendant came to her aunt's apartment at about 7 *958 or 8 p.m. on the evening in question, he told Renee that he smelled smoke. The witness smelled none. Upon saying that he smelled smoke, defendant said that he was going to go downstairs to see if any of the apartments there had anything burning. Then he, the witness, and her mother went downstairs to the first floor. Renee smelled no smoke when she arrived downstairs and saw no evidence of a fire. Defendant went to the apartment to the east and twisted the doorknob, but the door was locked, whereupon he kicked in the door. Defendant went to no other doors on the first floor before kicking in the door of the apartment to the east. The three went to the back of that apartment and found a dresser thrown over some books with "a small fire under it." Defendant started looking for something with which to put out the fire and found a foot tub and some pails that they filled with water and used to extinguish it.
After the fire was out, defendant said that he wanted to go over into the other apartment and see if anything was burning there. He told Renee and her mother to stay where they were and kicked a hole in the wall through which he entered the apartment on the west side. Renee lost sight of defendant for about three to five minutes. When he returned, he said that nothing was burning there and found a blanket with which he covered the hole he had kicked in the wall.
Renee and defendant then went out to a McDonald's restaurant and were gone about 10 to 15 minutes. When they left the other children were asleep. When she and defendant returned to the apartment building, as they walked inside the hallway on the first floor, defendant said that he still smelled something burning. Renee smelled nothing and said so. She also told defendant, "I don't care what you're smelling. I'm going on upstairs and eating my food." She went upstairs alone, leaving defendant on the first floor. After she had begun to eat, defendant came upstairs and told her that he still smelled something burning. She still smelled nothing. When he told her mother that he smelled something burning, her mother got up. Renee heard then what seemed to be the sound of defendant kicking a hole in the bathroom and telling her mother that there was nothing burning. Then defendant and her mother went to the kitchen cabinets, which were on the west wall of her aunt's apartment and above the kitchen of the first-floor apartment on the west side. When defendant opened the cabinet, smoke came out. The three proceeded downstairs, whereupon defendant went toward the apartment on the west. The witness neither saw nor smelled smoke at that time. When defendant reached the door of that apartment, he told Renee to "tell Gert to get the kids out the building cause the building is on fire." Because her aunt had no telephone, Renee went to her own home nearby and called the fire department. When she returned, the first floor of the building was in flames.
Gertrude Armstrong's testimony corroborated that of Renee. Defendant, whom she had known for "[a] few years" through his father, arrived in the "late evening," asking whether she was cooking anything. When she told him that she was not, he said that he smelled something burning. The witness said she smelled nothing burning. When she informed defendant that she was going to see his brother, defendant responded, "I don't think you should go. I feel something gone [sic] happen." Then defendant said that he was going next door to see whether Brenda was cooking anything, because he still smelled something, and went next door. Thereafter defendant awakened Renee and said that he smelled something burning and was going downstairs to check. With defendant leading, the three proceeded downstairs, where defendant kicked in the door of the first-floor apartment to the east. They entered to find "[a] lot of books like telephone books, newspapers and old dresser" burning in a small fire. After they had completely extinguished the fire in the manner Renee described, defendant told them to stay there and that he was going next door to check. He entered the apartment next door by knocking a hole in the wall and covered the entire hole with a blanket upon his return. The witness stayed where she was until he returned, as he had instructed her to do.
*959 Gertrade Armstrong testified further that Renee returned to Emma's apartment alone after her 10- to 15-minute trip to McDonald's with defendant. About two to three minutes later, defendant returned to Emma's apartment saying that he smelled something burning. After knocking a hole in a wall of the bathroom, he went into the kitchen and opened the cabinet doors under the sink, from which smoke emanated. After defendant went downstairs to investigate, she heard him shout that she should call the fire department because the building was on fire. The witness ran to warn Brenda of the fire and then attempted to rescue her own and her sister's children. At about that time defendant returned to the second floor. He was burned in the fire and, following his release from the hospital, lived with Gertrude for about six to eight months. Gertrude had known defendant since 1973 and prior to the fire had looked upon him rather like a son.
Brenda Boyd testified that she had lived on the second floor of the building for about a year at the time of the fire and thought that when she moved in Melvin Kidd owned the building. Once after she moved in and while Melvin Kidd was still alive, defendant had told her, in her words, that "he was gone [sic] be owning the building, that the father had given it to him." On the evening the fire occurred the witness returned home with all of her children at about 9 p.m. Shortly thereafter defendant, she thought, knocked on her door and said that the building was on fire, whereupon she sent two of her children downstairs to see about it. When the boys returned, they told her that the fire was out. Approximately 20 minutes later someone knocked on the door again, and Linda Burts, one of Gertrude's daughters, and some other children came rushing in, offering help in removing the children from the building.
Emma Burts testified that she had known defendant as a friend of his family and had known his sister and his father. She had paid her rent most often to Melvin Kidd and had seen defendant with him around the building. However, after Melvin Kidd died in 1979, she said, she paid her rent to Deborah Kidd, who had told Emma to give it to no one but her. Early in 1980 Emma had a conversation with defendant concerning the ownership of the building; she testified that defendant "thought the building was his." After Melvin Kidd's death, defendant came to the apartment building in question almost daily.
Emma Burts testified further that before the fire she thought that she and defendant were "friends." The day after the fire she saw defendant at the hospital and "asked him did he do it," by which question, she said, she was asking whether he had set the fire because defendant had told her months before the fire that "his father taught him to set fires without hurting anybody." Early in 1980, after defendant's father had died, the witness had a conversation with defendant in which he had said, in her words, "Told me soon this building gone [sic] pay off." He made this remark after the "City" had posted a notice on the door, which notice Emma saw defendant remove in October, a few weeks before the fire occurred. Approximately a week after the fire, while defendant was staying at Gertrude's, Emma asked him again "did he do it"; defendant answered by saying, in Emma's words, "if he tell me what he know can I protect him" and walked away. About two weeks after the fire, at a benefit for the families of the children who died in it, Emma asked defendant again "did he do it"; defendant answered, "If I told you who I know will you protect me" and walked away.
During Emma Burts' cross-examination the State stipulated that a certain document is a certified copy of a warranty deed to the property commonly known as 1512 East 65th Place, dated February 7, 1980, from Melvin Kidd and Carrie Ruth Kidd as grantors to "Deborah Rene Kidc [sic] and Beverly Ann Kidd, sisters both single."
James Linn testified that on September 14, 1984, while he was an assistant state's Attorney, he advised defendant of his Miranda rights and defendant told him that he understood them. In the presence of three police detectives, defendant proceeded orally to answer questions posed by the witness about the fire nearly four years earlier. Although initially defendant gave an exculpatory account of the events of that evening, after one of the police officers, namely, Sergeant Murphy, *960 showed him photographs of some of the bodies of the victims of the fire, defendant trembled and swallowed and his breathing became very labored. After putting his head on his hands, he looked up at the witness and said, "[O]kay, okay. I don't want to run from this anymore. I was involved. I did start the fire." When the witness asked him why he had started the fire, defendant responded, "I have a lot of reasons. I want to get this off my chest. I want to explain. I don't want to run from this anymore." The witness stated further, "He said there was a problem with my father, meaning his father. There was something about his father that that was one of the reasons that he started the fire. And he said this is very important you understand. He say [sic] I want to tell you everything." However, defendant indicated that he wanted to talk first with his mother and his grandmother because he wanted them to hear this information initially from him rather than the television or newspaper. Defendant indicated that after he spoke with his mother and grandmother he would provide the witness with "all details and fill you in with everything."
After the witness attempted to locate defendant's mother and grandmother, he returned to the room in which defendant was sitting with Sergeant Murphy, who stated to defendant, "Leonard, why don't you tell them what you just told me?" Defendant agreed to do so and said, "I'm looking at these pictures. You don't have the picture that shows the exact location where I started the fire." When the witness asked defendant what he meant, defendant "pointed, took one of [sic] pictures which is a picture of the building, the burned out frame of the building. He said you don't have it here. The place where I started the fire was in a closet." Defendant pointed to a window in the picture and indicated that the closet was near it. When the witness asked defendant what he used to start the fire, defendant told him "there was old clothing, scraps of things, that's what he ignited to start the fire with." Again defendant told those present "that the reason he did it concerned a very personal matter involving his father. That he wanted to talk to his mother and grandmother personally to explain it to them first. And then he would go on and tell [those present] more about it after that." The witness added, "As I recall there was something about his father had died and there was problem about who inherited some real estate that his father owned that had caused him a great deal of anguish." The witness made further attempts to reach defendant's mother and grandmother. Although defendant's mother arrived later at the State's Attorney's office, defendant did not avail himself of the opportunity to speak with her and declined to talk further to the witness.
Defendant called as a witness his mother, Clara Kidd, who testified that she and Melvin Kidd had owned the building in question but that after she and Melvin had separated, she did not know what happened to the building except that Beverly Kidd owned it. To her knowledge there was no insurance on the building. She indicated that Melvin Kidd had given defendant a different building at another location but that it had "burned up" while defendant was in jail.
As defendant's third contention of error, he maintains that his first degree murder convictions must be reversed because they are based on void counts of felony murder that the grand jury predicated on the unconstitutional offense of aggravated arson. The grand jury charged defendant by indictment with felony murder (Ill.Rev.Stat.1979, ch. 38, par. 9-1(a)(3)) in the deaths of each of the 10 victims, the predicate forcible felony of which was aggravated arson. On September 15, 1987, prior to defendant's first trial in this cause, the trial court allowed the State's motion, over defendant's objection, to amend each charge of felony murder by interlineation, striking the word "aggravated" in each charge so that the predicate forcible felony became arson. Defendant contends that this amendment was impermissible. The grand jury also charged defendant with first degree murder as to each of the 10 victims pursuant to both of the other two subsections of section 9-1(a) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill.Rev.Stat.1979, ch. 38, pars. 9-1(a)(1), (a)(2)), that is, subsection (1), under which defendant could be convicted if the jury found that he intended to kill or do great bodily harm to the victim or another or knew *961 that his actions would cause the death of the victim or another, and subsection (2), under which defendant could be convicted if the jury found that he knew that his acts created a strong probability of death or great bodily harm to the victim or another. Defendant was retried upon the original indictment as amended. The jury, upon retrial, returned 10 general verdicts in which it found him guilty of murder.
At the sentencing phase upon retrial, the State alleged the existence of two statutory aggravating factors as bases for his eligibility for a sentence of death, namely, that the defendant has been convicted of murdering two or more individuals (Ill.Rev.Stat.1979, ch. 38, par. 9-1(b)(3)) and that the murdered persons were killed in the course of another felony, specifically arson, if the murdered persons were actually killed by the defendant and in performing the acts which caused the death of the murdered persons, the defendant acted with the intent to kill the murdered persons or with the knowledge that his acts created a strong probability of death or great bodily harm to the murdered persons or another (Ill.Rev.Stat.1979, ch. 38, par. 9-1(b)(6)). The jury found defendant eligible for a death sentence solely upon the statutory aggravating factor of defendant's having been convicted of murdering two or more individuals.
Defendant asserts that "[a]t death-eligibility, immediately after the guilt verdicts, it became clear that the jury had returned murder convictions solely on the charges asserting felony-murder" under section 9-1(a)(3). He reasons that the jury's having "declined to find death-eligibility based on felony-murder with intent to kill or with knowledge of the strong probability of death or great bodily harm" on the heels of rendering its verdict of guilty "showed that the jury did not unanimously conclude that [defendant] intentionally and knowingly caused the deaths," pursuant to section 9-1(a)(1), and "also showed that the jury did not unanimously conclude that he caused death knowing that there was a strong probability of death or great bodily harm," pursuant to section 9-1(a)(2). "By not finding Leonard Kidd death-eligible on felony-murder grounds," defendant avers, "the eligibility verdicts reflected a mental state that was legally inconsistent with any possible finding that Leonard Kidd guilty [sic] of murder on Sections 9-1-A-(1) and (2)."
During its deliberations concerning defendant's eligibility for a death sentence, the jury sent a note to the court inquiring whether the jurors could decide eligibility on the basis of only one statutory aggravating factor or whether the jurors were required to be in agreement as to both such factors. In the note the jurors asked whether the form pertaining to a finding of eligibility on the basis of the statutory aggravating factor having to do with the murdered individual's having been killed in the course of another felony "base[s] the eligibility on the arson conviction alone, or both felony convictions." The jurors stated further in the note, "There is some confusion with the language, and whether the idea of `intent' is critical with the arson conviction." The note concluded with the question, "Do we need to sign both eligibility forms?" In a written response made over the defendant's objection, the trial court instructed the jury, "You may sign only one eligibility verdict form." The jury did so, leaving the other eligibility verdict form unsigned. Defendant argues in his reply brief that "the jury note makes it clear that the impetus to return only one verdict came from the jury itself."
A general finding of guilty is presumed to be based on any good count in the indictment to which the proof is applicable. People v. Cardona, 158 Ill. 2d 403, 411, 199 Ill. Dec. 667, 634 N.E.2d 720 (1994). In Illinois it is well established that where an indictment contains several counts arising out of a single transaction and a general verdict is returned, as occurred here, the effect is that the defendant is guilty as charged in each count to which the proof is applicable. See Cardona, 158 Ill.2d at 411, 199 Ill. Dec. 667, 634 N.E.2d 720; People v. Scott, 148 Ill. 2d 479, 555, 171 Ill. Dec. 365, 594 N.E.2d 217 (1992). There is in this record abundant applicable proof that defendant knew, at the very least, that his acts created a strong probability of death or great bodily harm to those who died. Thus, defendant is *962 guilty as charged in each of the counts of knowing murder as to the 10 victims.
We can ascribe no significance to the jury's failure to sign the other eligibility verdict form beyond the fact that, in response to the jury's question whether it needed to sign both eligibility verdict forms, the trial court had informed the jury that it could sign only one. Although not all aspects of the note from the jury are clear, the jury's question whether it needs to sign both eligibility forms is unambiguous and the trial court's answer clear. The jury plainly acted in accord with the trial court's response to its question. Since the jury indicated to the trial court that there was "some confusion with the language" of the other form and the trial court then informed the jurors that they need sign but one of the two eligibility verdict forms, it is not surprising that the jurors did not sign the form about which they had expressed confusion. To reason from the jury's failure to sign the other eligibility verdict form its intention effectively to acquit defendant of knowing murder is unwarranted on the basis of this record, and we consider no further the third issue defendant presents. Accordingly, we make no determination concerning the propriety of the trial court's granting of the State's motion to amend by interlineation the original indictments charging felony murder.
In another issue defendant raises for review, he contends that when the police and assistant State's Attorney interrogated him about the instant offenses while he was in custody and represented by counsel concerning the unrelated case to which we have previously referred, his counsel in the unrelated matter was attempting to see him, first, by going to the jail where defendant was incarcerated and then, upon being informed that defendant had been taken to the office of the State's Attorney, by going there. At the time of the interrogation in question defendant had not been charged with any of the instant offenses. Defendant states that at the office of the State's Attorney, his attorney in the unrelated matter, that is, Paul Stralka, attempted to contact the assistants trying the unrelated case but was told that they were in conference and could not be disturbed. He states further that when Paul Stralka asked the receptionist whether defendant was in the office, she told him that she had "no information" and that no one informed defendant that his attorney was trying to see him while he was being questioned. He maintains that the confession obtained in consequence of that interrogation should be suppressed and the conviction reversed on the authority of People v. McCauley, 163 Ill. 2d 414, 206 Ill. Dec. 671, 645 N.E.2d 923 (1994), in which this court determined that under our state constitution due process is violated when police interfere with a suspect's right to his attorney's assistance and presence by affirmatively preventing the suspect, exposed to interrogation, from receiving the immediately available assistance of an attorney hired or appointed to represent him. However, the record is insufficient to support defendant's claim since it does not show that defense counsel attempted to see defendant before he made the inculpatory statements about which James Linn testified. Thus, we address this issue no further.
In still another issue defendant advances on review, he contends that he should receive a new trial because of two errors that "prejudiced his right to present a defense" and another error that "curtailed his right to confront and cross-examine State witnesses." Defendant cites as one of the asserted errors prejudicing his right to present a defense the trial court's refusal to allow him to call Paul Stralka as a witness in his own behalf. In attempting to call this witness, defendant explained to the trial court his reason for doing so:
"For the purpose that he can witness and verify that when he come to the jail to see me on an unrelated matter, he was notified that I was at the assistant state's attorney office on the 14th floor which is right next door to this building, and that he was indeed in fact trying to get in to see me or be with me during this interview, and he was denied that."
Following further argument by the parties, the trial court denied the defendant's request to call this witness, reasoning:
"I know a defendant can show the circumstances under which a statement was made, but I think this Stralka's testimony *963 would be collateral and apart from the circumstances under which the defendant allegedly made his statement.
It's obvious from what has just been said that Mr. Stralka did not witness any part of the statement. It's also obvious from what the defendant has said that the defendant did not know Stralka was there. So it could not have any effect on Kidd's state of mind as he either made a statement or did not make a statement to police and an assistant state's attorney.
Stralka witnessed nothing of the alleged statement, and so, therefore, whether Stralka was or was not at a receptionist desk somewhere in the state's attorney's office I don't think has any bearing or any indirect bearing as to whether the defendant made a statement, whether the statement was made voluntarily or not, and finally as to whether or not, as the defendant has indicated, he never did make a statement. Stralka simply is not a witness to any of this."
Defendant asserts that by denying him the opportunity to call Paul Stralka as a witness, the trial court denied him the opportunity to contest the evidentiary weight of the confession attributed to him. Had the jury been made aware of the circumstances under which his confession was made, he argues, the jury could have inferred that these conditions undermined the reliability and credibility of the testimony of James Linn about the defendant's admissions to him. We note with respect to the circumstances under which defendant's confession was made that following defendant's first trial he claimed unsuccessfully in this court that his oral confession had been obtained in violation of his fifth amendment right to counsel. That fact aside, however, in light of the overwhelming evidence of defendant's guilt adduced at trial, even if we assume that the trial court erred in refusing to allow defendant to call Stralka as a witness, we are compelled to conclude that the State has proved beyond a reasonable doubt this refusal did not contribute to the jury's verdict and such error was, at most, harmless. See Satterwhite v. Texas, 486 U.S. 249, 256, 108 S. Ct. 1792, 1797, 100 L. Ed. 2d 284, 293 (1988).
With respect to this same issue, defendant contends that the trial court's refusal to allow him to call Renee Armstrong as a defense witness, concerning a relatively minor evidentiary matter, prejudiced his right to present a defense and that the trial court's limitation of his cross-examination of Detective Rokosik curtailed his right to cross-examine that witness. Defendant sought to cross-examine Detective Rokosik concerning reports by persons other than the witness himself, but the trial court limited his cross-examination in this regard to those reports that the witness himself had signed or authorized, advising defendant that he could not try to contradict the witness by someone else's report and that he must call or question the author of the report or someone with personal knowledge of it. Having read the entire record on appeal and considered the defendant's assertions concerning these two claims, we have determined that they are without merit. Once again, in view of the overwhelming evidence of defendant's guilt, the State has proved beyond a reasonable doubt that neither of these two errors-assuming that they are, indeed, error-contributed to the jury's verdict, with the result that any such error was harmless. See Satterwhite, 486 U.S. at 256, 108 S. Ct. at 1797, 100 L.Ed.2d at 293.
Likewise without merit is defendant's contention, in a separate issue raised for review, that prosecutorial misconduct during opening statement and closing argument warrants reversal of the judgment and remand for a new trial. He identifies several instances of such misconduct, none of which, should they be found to be error, could, alone or in combination, have been more than harmless in light of the extent of the evidence of defendant's guilt.
Raised for the first time on review as plain error in this, his second, appeal is defendant's contention that his confession, given prior to the first trial, should be suppressed for two reasons, namely, because his "mental disabilities meant that it was not made pursuant to a knowing and intelligent waiver of rights" and because it resulted from a conflict of interest on the part of one *964 of his former attorneys in the unrelated case, Earl Washington, who represented him before Paul Stralka did so. With respect to the first of these two reasons, he argues that when Assistant State's Attorney Linn informed him of his Miranda rights and questioned him and when Sergeant Murphy questioned him, defendant "labored under the combined debilitating effects of mental retardation, organic brain damage, and epilepsy, and he was taking at least one prescribed medication (either Dilantin or Tegretol) to control his seizures, and he may have been taking at least one prescribed antidepressant-either Elavil or Sinequan." For the same reasons that we are unable to say, on the basis of the record before us, defendant's purported mental limitations and disabilities precluded his knowing and intelligent waiver of the right to the assistance of counsel, we are unable to say that they precluded his knowing and intelligent waiver of his fifth amendment rights.
With regard to the latter of the two reasons defendant advances for the suppression of his confession, as we stated in our disposition following defendant's first trial (Kidd, 147 Ill.2d at 527, 169 Ill. Dec. 258, 591 N.E.2d 431), for approximately two or three months after defendant's arrest on January 12, 1984, on the unrelated charges (see People v. Kidd, 129 Ill. 2d 432, 136 Ill. Dec. 18, 544 N.E.2d 704 (1989)), private attorney Earl Washington represented both defendant and his half brother Leroy Orange as codefendants. In the unrelated case, in which defendant was charged with murder, armed robbery, aggravated arson, and concealment of homicidal deaths, the bodies of three adults and a child were found on January 12, 1984, bound and gagged, the victims having been stabbed repeatedly; two separate fires had been set inside the apartment. See Kidd, 175 Ill.2d at 13, 221 Ill. Dec. 486, 675 N.E.2d 910. Leroy Orange was also arrested on January 12, 1984. People v. Orange, 121 Ill. 2d 364, 369, 118 Ill. Dec. 1, 521 N.E.2d 69 (1988). On April 19, 1984, Earl Washington withdrew from his representation of defendant because of a conflict of interest, and Assistant Public Defenders Stralka and Stopka were appointed to represent him. Earl Washington continued to represent Leroy Orange. The causes of the two codefendants were severed at an early stage in the proceedings. Kidd 175 Ill.2d at 13, 221 Ill. Dec. 486, 675 N.E.2d 910. After Earl Washington withdrew from his representation of defendant, Leroy Orange indicated to Washington that he believed defendant had been involved in the fire in the instant case, whereupon Washington approached someone in the State's Attorney's office and related this information, thereby prompting the State's Attorney's office to interrogate defendant. Kidd, 147 Ill.2d at 527, 169 Ill. Dec. 258, 591 N.E.2d 431.
At the hearing on defendant's motion to suppress his custodial statements, conducted on August 5, 1986, prior to his first trial, Earl Washington testified that during his representation of defendant in the unrelated matter he was unaware of the offenses in the instant case and that the only matter he had discussed with defendant during his representation of him "related to a quadruple homicide and arson." Earl Washington explained that he could not continue to represent both defendant and his half brother because "Mr. Kidd informed me and also Mr. Orange and the Court that he was desirous of becoming a witness for Mr. Orange's defense, and that he was prepared to admit that he committed the murder and arson in connection with that case [that is, the quadruple homicide] before Judge Cieslik." Stating that defendant subsequently testified on behalf of Leroy Orange, Earl Washington testified further,
"[W]hile we were in court, Mr. Orange informed me of his belief that Mr. Kidd had been involved in this particular arson [that occurred on October 28, 1980] and requested that I inform the state's attorney of that fact to buttress his theory that Mr. Kidd also committed arson involving a quadruple homicide, and I spoke to Mr. Kaplan, Mr. Richard Kaplan [an assistant State's Attorney at the time] on this very same day about that homicide or about that arson. I didn't know any of the particulars other than what Mr. Orange had informed me."
On redirect examination the witness said that he had learned of the defendant's possible involvement in the offenses that occurred on *965 October 28, 1980, originally from Leroy Orange; that during the entire time he had represented defendant between January and April of 1984 neither defendant nor Leroy Orange had broached the subject of the offenses committed on October 28, 1980; that he and defendant had discussed only the case of quadruple homicide that was pending; and that when he had spoken to Kaplan he was acting upon the specific request of Leroy Orange.
Defendant contends that his custodial statements introduced at trial through the testimony of Assistant State's Attorney Linn are directly traceable to Earl Washington's conflict of interest, so that the use of those statements against him violated both federal and state guarantees of due process and his right to the effective assistance of counsel. He argues that the "conflict that Washington created by informing against Leonard Kidd and by destroying his defense in [the case of quadruple homicide] extends into this case" and that Earl Washington's "betrayal" triggered the interrogation during which defendant made the statements he seeks to suppress.
He maintains that Washington engaged in conduct prohibited by Rule 1.9(a) of the Rules of Professional Conduct (134 Ill.2d R. 1.9(a)), which provides,
"A lawyer who has formerly represented a client in a matter shall not thereafter:
(1) represent another person in the same or a substantially related matter in which that person's interests are materially adverse to the interests of the former client, unless the former client consents after disclosure; or
(2) use information relating to the representation to the disadvantage of the former client, unless:
(A) such use is permitted by Rule 1.6; or
(B) the information has become generally known."
Rule 1.6(a) of the Rules of Professional Conduct (134 Ill.2d R. 1.6(a)) provides that, except under certain circumstances, "a lawyer shall not, during or after termination of the professional relationship with the client, use or reveal a confidence or secret of the client known to the lawyer unless the client consents after disclosure."
During the course of Washington's simultaneous representation of both Kidd and Orange, a conflict of interest developed that led him to withdraw from the representation of Kidd. Washington acquired no information about the instant offenses from Kidd and in disclosing information about them to the State's Attorney's office could, therefore, have breached none of Kidd's confidences. He had long since ceased to represent Kidd when his remaining client, Leroy Orange, provided the information about the instant offenses to him and asked that he reveal it to the State's Attorney. At no time did Earl Washington represent defendant in the instant case, which is essentially unrelated to the one of quadruple murder in which he had been defending Kidd and continued to represent Orange. Thus, there is no validity to defendant's claim that his confession in the instant case arose out of a conflict of interest on the part of his former counsel, Earl Washington, in the quadruple murder case.
Also raised for the first time on review as plain error is the defendant's contention that Detective Rokosik's testimony and all evidence introduced through him should have been suppressed pursuant to Michigan v. Clifford, 464 U.S. 287, 104 S. Ct. 641, 78 L. Ed. 2d 477 (1984), and Michigan v. Tyler, 436 U.S. 499, 98 S. Ct. 1942, 56 L. Ed. 2d 486 (1978), because it was obtained as a result of Detective Rokosik's warrantless entries. The State responds, inter alia, that defendant lacks standing to raise this claim.
A fourth amendment violation can be urged successfully only by those whose rights have actually been violated by the search itself, not by those who have been aggrieved solely by the introduction of damaging evidence. People v. Keller, 93 Ill. 2d 432, 439, 67 Ill. Dec. 79, 444 N.E.2d 118 (1982). Capacity to claim fourth amendment protection depends, not upon a property right, but upon whether the aggrieved person has a legitimate expectation of privacy in the place invaded. Rakas v. Illinois, 439 U.S. 128, 143, 99 S. Ct. 421, 430, 58 L. Ed. 2d 387, 401 (1978); see People v. Bolden, 152 *966 Ill.App.3d 631, 635, 105 Ill. Dec. 550, 504 N.E.2d 835 (1987). A subjective expectation of privacy is legitimate if it is one that society is prepared to recognize as reasonable. Minnesota v. Olson, 495 U.S. 91, 95-96, 110 S. Ct. 1684, 1687, 109 L. Ed. 2d 85, 92 (1990). Whether one has a legitimate expectation of privacy in a place is measured by an objective standard drawn from common experience. Bolden, 152 Ill.App.3d at 635, 105 Ill. Dec. 550, 504 N.E.2d 835. Property ownership, while it is not dispositive, is a factor to be considered in determining whether an individual has standing to test the constitutionality of a search and seizure. People v. Johnson, 114 Ill. 2d 170, 191, 102 Ill. Dec. 342, 499 N.E.2d 1355 (1986), citing United States v. Salvucci, 448 U.S. 83, 91, 100 S. Ct. 2547, 2553, 65 L. Ed. 2d 619, 628 (1980). Other factors relevant in determining the existence of a reasonable expectation of privacy include whether the defendant was legitimately present in the area searched; whether the defendant had a possessory interest in the area or the property seized; whether the defendant had previously used the area searched or the area seized; whether the defendant had the ability to control the property or to exclude others from using it; and whether the defendant had a subjective expectation of privacy in the property. Johnson, 114 Ill.2d at 191-92, 102 Ill. Dec. 342, 499 N.E.2d 1355. The question whether a defendant has a reasonable expectation of privacy in the area searched or in the items seized must be answered in light of the totality of the circumstances of the particular case. Johnson, 114 Ill.2d at 192, 102 Ill. Dec. 342, 499 N.E.2d 1355.
This record provides evidence of not even a single factor indicative of a reasonable expectation of privacy by defendant in either the place searched or any property seized. On the evening the fire occurred, many hours before the search took place, defendant was for a short time a guest of his 14-year-old girlfriend of some months and her mother in an apartment not their own. Defendant appears not to have been present during the search of the burned premises the next morning. He did not own the property searched and seems to have had at the time in question neither a possessory interest in it nor the ability either to control the property or to exclude others from using it. Under the totality of circumstances in the present case, defendant had no reasonable expectation of privacy in the area searched or in any property taken from it. Hence, he lacks the capacity to claim fourth amendment protection and may not urge a fourth amendment violation with respect to Detective Rokosik's warrantless search of the building after the fire.
Defendant presents a number of issues arising out of the sentencing stage of his trial. With respect to his contention that multiple errors at the eligibility phase of his sentencing hearing require reversal of the jury's verdict finding him eligible for the imposition of a death penalty, he claims, inter alia, that the jury's finding of eligibility, pursuant to section 9-1(b)(3), providing for the statutory aggravating factor of multiple murder, violated his fifth amendment guarantee against double jeopardy because his eligibility was based solely on his convictions in the unrelated case in which he was found guilty of the first degree murder of four persons and was sentenced to death. He reasons that the use of these convictions to establish his eligibility for death in the instant case has resulted in the imposition of multiple punishments for the same offense, from which the fifth amendment guarantee against double jeopardy affords protection (North Carolina v. Pearce, 395 U.S. 711, 717, 89 S. Ct. 2072, 2076, 23 L. Ed. 2d 656, 664-65 (1969)).
However, section 9-1(b)(3) neither creates a new or independent criminal offense nor increases the punishment for the previously committed offense. People v. Franklin, 135 Ill. 2d 78, 107, 142 Ill. Dec. 152, 552 N.E.2d 743 (1990). That section merely
"dictates when an individual, who has been found guilty of murder under section 9-1(a), may be eligible to receive the death penalty as a result of a previous murder conviction. The punishment is for the new crime, not the prior crime, and the penalty is enhanced only because the individual was found guilty of more than one murder." *967 Franklin, 135 Ill.2d at 107, 142 Ill. Dec. 152, 552 N.E.2d 743.
In People v. Edgeston, 157 Ill. 2d 201, 228, 191 Ill. Dec. 84, 623 N.E.2d 329 (1993), the defendant claimed that his fifth amendment guarantee against double jeopardy had been violated because the State had been allowed to relitigate his mental state in a prior murder case in order to prove his eligibility for the death penalty in the subsequent one at bar. We found the argument in Edgeston without merit and determined that the State's use of the prior murder conviction to establish his death eligibility under section 9(b)(3) did not increase the punishment the defendant had received in the prior case but, rather, enhanced the penalty he was eligible to receive in the subsequent one. Likewise, in the instant case, the use of the four prior murder convictions to establish defendant's eligibility for the imposition of a death sentence under section 9-1(b)(3) resulted in no further punishment for the four prior murder convictions. The punishment that has been imposed as a consequence of using these convictions for eligibility is the punishment for the subsequent, instant crime. Therefore, defendant's argument that he has been punished a second time for the four previous murder convictions by virtue of their having been used to establish his eligibility for the death penalty in this case is not well taken.
Among the errors put forth by defendant as having occurred at the eligibility phase of his sentencing hearing is a violation of due process occasioned by the failure to admonish him of his right to elect the statute under which he would be sentenced. He was found eligible for the imposition of a death sentence pursuant to the version of section 9-1(b)(3) in effect at the time the offenses occurred in 1980, providing that a defendant may be sentenced to death if
"the defendant has been convicted of murdering two or more individuals under subsection (a) of this Section or under any law of the United States or of any state which is substantially similar to Subsection (a) of this Section regardless of whether the deaths occurred as the result of the same act or of several related or unrelated acts so long as the deaths were the result of either an intent to kill more than one person or of separate premeditated acts." Ill.Rev.Stat.1979, ch. 38, par. 9-1(b)(3).
He maintains that when he was sentenced in 1994, he should have been permitted to elect to be sentenced under the version of section 9-1(b)(3) in effect at that time and that under the terms of that version of the statute, he was not eligible for the imposition of a death sentence. At the time of his sentencing in 1994, this section provided that a defendant may be sentenced to death if
"the defendant has been convicted of murdering two or more individuals under subsection (a) of this Section or under any law of the United States or of any state which is substantially similar to subsection (a) of this Section regardless of whether the deaths occurred as the result of the same act or of several related or unrelated acts so long as the deaths were the result of either an intent to kill more than one person or of separate acts which the defendant knew would cause death or create a strong probability of death or great bodily harm to the murdered individual or another." 720 ILCS 5/9-1(b)(3) (West 1994).
Arguing that the prior statute required proof of only separate premeditated acts without the intent to kill or knowledge of the likelihood of death, defendant relies upon his position, advanced with respect to the third issue presented for review, that the jurors could not conclude unanimously that he was eligible for the imposition of a sentence of death on the basis of his having committed felony murder "because they doubted that he intended to cause the deaths resulting in this case and doubted that he knew there was a strong probability of death or great bodily harm." Thus, he concludes, had the jury been instructed according to the version of section 9-1(b)(3) in effect when he was sentenced, the jury would have found him ineligible because the deaths were not the "result of either an intent to kill more than one person or of separate acts which the defendant knew would cause death or create a strong probability of death or great bodily harm." However, we have already determined that there is abundant proof in the record that defendant knew that his acts *968 created a strong probability of death or great bodily harm to those who died. Consequently, there is no merit to his contention that he would have been ineligible for the imposition of a death penalty had he been sentenced under the version of section 9-1(b)(3) in effect in 1994. He suffered no prejudice as a result of any failure to admonish him of his right to elect to be sentenced under that version of the statute and no violation of his right to due process in this regard.
We have examined all of defendant's other contentions of error with respect to the eligibility phase of his sentencing hearing as well as his numerous claims of error concerning the aggravation and mitigation phase of his sentencing hearing and conclude that they are not meritorious.
The final issue defendant presents for our review consists of eight constitutional challenges to the Illinois death penalty statute, each of which this court has previously considered and rejected. Defendant articulates no persuasive reasons why we should reconsider our decisions concerning any of these challenges, and we decline to do so.
Therefore, for the reasons stated above, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County. We hereby direct the clerk of this court to enter an order setting Wednesday, January 14, 1998, as the date on which the sentence of death entered by the circuit court of Cook County is to be carried out. The defendant shall be executed in a manner provided by law (725 ILCS 5/119-5 (West 1994)). The clerk of this court shall send a certified copy of the mandate in this case to the Director of Corrections, to the warden of Stateville Correctional Center, and to the warden of the institution where defendant is now confined.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  The defendant was originally charged by indictment with one count of arson, on which the jury rendered a verdict of guilty upon retrial, and two counts of aggravated arson, in addition to the multiple counts of first degree murder. Subsection (a)(1) of section 20-1.1 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 20-1.1(a)(1)) was held to be unconstitutional in People v. Johnson, 114 Ill. 2d 69, 101 Ill. Dec. 882, 499 N.E.2d 470 (1986). Defendant was charged with one count of aggravated arson under that subsection. In People v. Wick, 107 Ill. 2d 62, 89 Ill. Dec. 833, 481 N.E.2d 676 (1985), subsection (a)(3) of section 20-1.1 (Ill.Rev.Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 20-1.1(a)(3)) was held to be unconstitutional. On September 15, 1987, prior to defendant's first trial in this cause, the trial court granted the motion of the State, made pursuant to the holdings in Johnson and Wick, for a nolle prosequi as to the two aggravated-arson counts.