=== CASE 9737074 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:14:47.026821+00 ===

OPINION OF THE COURT
Chief Judge Kaye.
Defendant appeals his convictions of assault in the first degree and resisting arrest, asserting that an out-of-court, hearsay *304statement made by the victim of the assault was improperly admitted at trial as an excited utterance. The Appellate Division affirmed. Because we conclude that the trial court’s error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, we also affirm.
On February 5, 2000, Police Officer Jerrold Lutz and his partner came to the aid of Val Grey, a homeless man who had been stabbed twice in the eye. When the police arrived on the scene, defendant, also homeless, was holding in his right hand an ice pick with traces of blood on it while struggling with the victim, who had pinned defendant’s right arm against a wall. Upon seeing the police, the victim screamed, “[H]e stabbed me, he stabbed me.” The police arrested defendant1
2and Grey staggered to a nearby laundromat, where he wiped the blood from his eye with a wet paper towel. One to two minutes later, Lutz entered the laundromat and the victim asked the officer whether “his eye was still intact.” Grey, accompanied by Lutz, was then taken to Bellevue Hospital by ambulance. Throughout the ride, as emergency medical technicians began to treat him, Grey continued to state that he had been stabbed, and continued to express concern that he had lost his eye, asking repeatedly whether it was still there.
Grey was given further treatment upon his arrival at the hospital. Finally, approximately one hour after the stabbing, he was interviewed by Lutz and made, in substance, the following statement to the officer about the circumstances leading up to the stabbing:
“[H]e was traveling down the stairway, at the subway station, and he saw a steel garbage can come rolling down the stairs next to him. He informed me that he was under the impression that that garbage can was intended to hit him. He then went back up the stairs to confront whoever threw the garbage can down the stairs. He did not see who threw it. [He stated he was informed by passersby that Mr. Johnson had thrown the can done (sic) the stairs.][2] Mr. Johnson was standing approximately fifteen or so yards away. Approximately. Mr. Grey then went and confronted Mr. Johnson. A struggle ensued. Which resulted in Mr. Grey being stabbed.”
*305Later that night, the victim’s cognitive function began to deteriorate, resulting in the need for emergency brain surgery. After several months of treatment in Bellevue’s rehabilitation program, Grey left the hospital without being discharged. Despite a diligent search by the police and prosecution, Grey could not be located for trial and the People sought to introduce his hearsay statements as excited utterances. On this appeal, defendant does not challenge Grey’s statements at the scene, in the laundromat or in the ambulance, but claims that the final statement to the officer, quoted above, should not have been received in evidence.
The trial court held a hearing on the People’s motion to introduce the statements at trial, at which Lutz testified. According to the testimony adduced at the hearing, when the police first approached defendant and the victim, who were then struggling with each other, the victim was bleeding heavily from his eye. The victim was “very agitated, very excited, he was confused about what was happening.” Specifically, “[h]is speech was very high pitched, he was screaming at times. He was very unsteady in his movement.” Similarly, when the officer entered the laundromat approximately one to two minutes later, the victim’s demeanor had not changed in any way. Still distraught, the victim stated that he thought he had lost his eye and he asked the officer whether his eye had been “cut out.” The victim “continued to be very agitated” and kept asking the officer how this happened. The victim “was having a little bit of difficulty hearing” the officer. “He was distracted by the amount of pain he was in. He was moaning.” He was also “giving a lot of attention to his left eye. He was very distracted by what was happening to it.”
By the time the officer spoke with the victim in the hospital, however, Grey’s demeanor had become more relaxed in that “[h]e wasn’t moving, he wasn’t fidgeting, he was lying still.” Moreover, Grey’s hospital records, also introduced into evidence at the hearing, reflected that at the time of his admission he was awake, alert and oriented; he was able to follow complex instructions; and his speech was fluent.
Discussion
The familiar common-law hearsay exception for excited utterances, formerly called spontaneous declarations, has been recognized by this Court for nearly a century (see People v Del Vermo, 192 NY 470, 483-487 [1908]). The principle is easily *306stated. An out-of-court statement is properly admissible under the excited utterance exception when made under the stress of excitement caused by an external event, and not the product of studied reflection and possible fabrication. “Underlying this exception is the assumption that a person under the influence of the excitement precipitated by an external startling event will lack the reflective capacity essential for fabrication and, accordingly, any utterance he makes will be spontaneous and trustworthy” (People v Edwards, 47 NY2d 493, 497 [1979]). Accordingly, “under certain circumstances of physical shock, a stress of nervous excitement may be produced which stills the reflective faculties and removes their control. . . . [An excited] utterance is made under the immediate and uncontrolled domination of the senses, and during the brief period when considerations of self-interest could not have been brought fully to bear by reasoned reflection” (People v Marks, 6 NY2d 67, 71 [1959], quoting 6 Wigmore, Evidence § 1747 [I] [3d ed]).
Stating the rule is simple. Determining a declarant’s mental state—that is, whether at the time the utterance was made a declarant was in fact under the stress of excitement caused by an external event sufficient to still his or her reflective faculties—is considerably more difficult.3
Among the factors to be considered by a trial court is the period of time between the startling event and the out-of-court statement. As we have several times noted, there can be no definite or fixed period of time within which the declaration must have been made, and each case must depend upon its own circumstances. “The test is whether the utterance was made before there has been time to contrive and misrepresent, i.e., while the nervous excitement may be supposed still to dominate and the reflective powers to be yet in abeyance” (People v Brown, 70 NY2d 513, 518 [1987] [internal quotation marks omitted]). Ultimately, “the time for reflection is not measured in minutes or seconds, but rather is measured by facts” (People v Vasquez, 88 NY2d 561, 579 [1996] [internal quotation marks omitted]). Nor does the fact that statements are made in response to po*307lice questioning, “standing alone—any more than do other specific circumstances—defeat the admissibility of the responses as excited utterances” (Brown, 70 NY2d at 522).
While any serious injury may be a significant factor in determining whether the declarant remains under the stress of a startling event, it is not the only factor (see Steven Zeidman, Who Needs an Evidence Code?: The New York Court of Appeals’s Radical Re-Evaluation of Hearsay, 21 Cardozo L Rev 211, 220-221 [1999]). There is, in short, no “injury” exception to the hearsay rule. Indeed, we have never held that any statement made by an injured victim about the event leading to the injury, however long after the trauma, constitutes an excited utterance merely because the victim continues to suffer pain caused by the injury. Even in the case of serious injury, the test remains what it has always been: whether the declarant is capable of studied reflection and therefore capable of fabrication.
On the combined facts before us, we cannot say that the declarant’s capacity for reflection and deliberation remained stilled by the time of his final statement to the police. The challenged declaration was made—in narrative form and in response to prompting—a full hour after the startling event (cf. People v Cotto, 92 NY2d 68, 79 n 3 [1998] [statement made in ambulance less than 10 minutes after declarant was shot admissible as excited utterance]; Edwards, 47 NY2d at 498 [statement made in response to a “simple inquiry”]). Moreover, the declarant had become more relaxed. According to his uncontroverted medical records, he was awake, alert and oriented; he was able to follow complex instructions; and his speech was fluent. In this condition, despite pain, clearly declarant was no longer without the ability to engage in reasoned reflection upon the content of his statement. Indeed, when asked by the prosecutor whether there had been “any pauses or a long time to reflect” when the victim explained his version of events to the officer at the hospital, Lutz responded, “There were moments of reflection.”
Given the victim’s disappearance, this case had to proceed to trial in the absence of a live complaining witness subject to cross-examination.4 Where the only direct evidence of a defendant’s guilt is in the form of hearsay testimony, courts must be especially vigilant to ensure that only evidence that *308rises to the level of “inherent reliability” (Edwards, 47 NY2d at 499) underlying such firmly rooted hearsay exceptions as excited utterances is admitted at trial (see 6 Framer and Biskind, Bender’s New York Evidence—CPLR § 24.03 [1], at 24-8 [2003] [factors in determining whether a declaration constitutes an excited utterance include “the fact that the complainant was subject to cross-examination”]).
Nevertheless, we conclude that the error here was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.5 Even without the victim’s final statement, eyewitness police testimony established that defendant was holding a blood-stained ice pick while straggling with the victim, who was bleeding heavily from his eye. The victim’s immediate cries—“[h]e stabbed me, he stabbed me”—properly admitted as excited utterances and not challenged on this appeal, proved the identity of defendant as the perpetrator of the crime. Moreover, Grey had been stabbed twice, negating any possibility of accident. Finally, inasmuch as defendant did not argue self-defense at trial, the People had no burden to disprove that defense beyond a reasonable doubt {see Penal Law § 25.00 [1]). Indeed, during the charge conference, the court—“just to make one thing a hundred percent clear”—stated for the record that there had been no evidence of justification. Defense counsel responded, “That is correct.” In short, the evidence of defendant’s guilt was overwhelming.
Finally, we have no disagreement with the bulk of the dissent: The right of confrontation is indeed a fundamental right; face-to-face cross-examination of witnesses is greatly to be preferred; and the hospital statement here—unlike the earlier statements—was erroneously admitted. We disagree only as to harmless error on these indisputable facts: Defendant stabbed the victim in the eye with an ice pick; as the medical evidence established, the victim was stabbed twice, negating any possible accident; defense counsel made it “a hundred percent clear” at trial that he was not arguing self-defense, or justification; and, although six other witnesses testified and were subject to cross-examination, the victim had vanished months earlier and could *309not be located. On these facts, the conviction should be sustained.
Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.
. Defendant resisted arrest and punched Lutz’s partner in the face. He was subdued only after being wrestled to the ground by the police. Defendant suffered no injury.
. The double hearsay contained in the bracketed portion of the statement was not admitted before the jury.
. Regrettably, there is no simple, sure-fire test such as that once proposed by the late Irving Younger: “How do you recognize an excited utterance? I can tell you. If hearsay is offered and it begins with ‘My God,’ and ends with an exclamation point, it is an excited utterance” (Younger, An Irreverent Introduction to Hearsay, at 33 [ABA Section of Litig Monograph Series No. 3, 1977]). Neither exclamation nor punctuation can be determinative. Rather, courts must take into account that a variety of circumstances may determine whether a declarant remains under the stress of a startling event.
. Six other witnesses did testify at trial: two police officers, the treating neurosurgeon, the victim’s physical therapist, and an assistant district attorney and her trial preparation assistant.
. Since the right to confront witnesses (see US Const Amend VI; NY Const, art I, § 6) may be implicated when a hearsay statement is introduced at trial, we apply a constitutional standard of harmless error (see People v Crimmins, 36 NY2d 230, 237 [1975]; Chapman v California, 386 US 18 [1967]). But we cannot agree with the dissent that a per se violation of the Confrontation Clause is dispositively established whenever a declarant fails to testify at trial and therefore is not subject to cross-examination.

=== CASE 9737075 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:14:47.032296+00 ===

G.B. Smith, J.
(dissenting). Defendant’s argument on this appeal is that a statement by the complainant in a hospital in answer to police questioning was not an excited utterance and violated his federal and state rights to confront witnesses and to due process. Because defendant’s conviction violated his federal and state constitutional rights to confront witnesses and to due process, I dissent.
Defendant was convicted of assault in the first degree and resisting arrest resulting from the stabbing of the complainant in the eye with an ice pick. The complainant did not testify before the grand jury or at the trial. The evidence was that two police officers came upon the defendant and the complainant while they were struggling with each other and defendant was holding the ice pick. Both men were homeless, the complainant smelled of alcohol and defendant appeared to be slightly intoxicated.
The only evidence of how the struggle between defendant and the complainant occurred resulted from statements of the complainant which were all admitted by the trial court as excited utterances. The first statement, made as the police approached the two men, was, “He stabbed me.” The second statement, made after the police had subdued defendant and after the complainant had wandered into a nearby laundromat, was that he had lost his eye and a question as to whether or not his eye was still there. In the third statement in the ambulance on the way to the hospital, complainant again said he was stabbed and continued to question whether he would lose his eye. The fourth statement, made at the hospital in response to police questioning about an hour after the incident, without quoting, was substantially as follows: Complainant stated that while he was in a subway station, a garbage can was thrown down the stairs. Complainant felt that the can was thrown at him. He ran up the stairs and someone told him that defendant had thrown the can. He confronted the defendant and during the struggle he was stabbed in his eye. He could not say how the stabbing occurred.
The trial court admitted all of the statements as excited utterances and defendant was convicted. The Appellate Division *310affirmed, stating, “The evidence clearly established that all of the victim’s statements were made while he was still under the influence of the stress caused by his serious injuries (see People v Brown, 70 NY2d 513; People v Edwards, 47 NY2d 493).” (299 AD2d 213, 214 [2002].) A Judge of this Court granted defendant leave to appeal.
At the time of the trial, defendant argued that his right to confront witnesses1 and to a fair trial would be violated by the admission of all of the statements as excited utterances. On this appeal, he argues only that the statement made to the police in the hospital should not have been admitted and that its admission denied him the constitutional rights to confront witnesses and to a fair trial.
Analysis of this case must begin with Pointer v Texas (380 US 400 [1965]). There, the Supreme Court of the United States, after noting that the Sixth Amendment right to counsel and the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination had been made obligatory on the states by the Fourteenth Amendment stated, “We hold today that the Sixth Amendment’s right of an accused to confront the witnesses against him is likewise a fundamental right and is made obligatory on the States by the Fourteenth Amendment” (380 US at 403). The Court went on to state the following with respect to cross-examination:
“It cannot seriously be doubted at this late date that the right of cross-examination is included in the right of an accused in a criminal case to confront the witnesses against him. And probably no one, certainly no one experienced in the trial of lawsuits, would deny the value of cross-examination in exposing falsehood and bringing out the truth in the trial of a criminal case” (id. at 404).
In Pointer, the Supreme Court reversed petitioner’s conviction for robbery because the testimony of the complainant at a preliminary hearing had been used at the trial held after the complainant had moved to California and did not intend to return to Texas. The petitioner did not have an attorney at the preliminary hearing and was denied the right to cross-examine the complainant.
*311The right to confront witnesses, in essence, the right to cross-examine them, is a sacred right enshrined not only in the Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution and article I, § 6 of the New York State Constitution but is ancient and is mentioned in a number of works that predate the Constitution, such as the Bible, and Shakespeare’s Henry VIII (see Lilly v Virginia, 527 US 116, 140, 141 [1999] [Breyer, J., concurring]). The right of confrontation permits the accused to face his accusers—to test their credibility, their trustworthiness and their veracity. Cross-examination is important because it is instrumental in “exposing falsehood and bringing out the truth in the trial of a criminal case” (Pointer v Texas, 380 US at 404). A Confrontation Clause violation may also constitute a violation of the right of due process and fair trial guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment and article I, § 6 of the New York State Constitution.
“The right to cross-examination, protected by the Confrontation Clause, ... is essentially a ‘functional’ right designed to promote reliability in the truth-finding functions of a criminal trial. The cases that have arisen under the Confrontation Clause reflect the application of this functional right” (Kentucky v Stincer, 482 US 730, 737 [1987]). According to Kentucky v Stincer, those cases reflect two broad and nonexclusive categories—first, that the Confrontation Clause is violated when hearsay evidence is admitted as substantive evidence against a defendant without an opportunity to question the declarant at trial and, second, when an out-of-court statement is admitted at trial without adequate indications of trustworthiness (id.).
In dealing with the relationship between the Confrontation Clause and hearsay evidence, the Supreme Court has stated, “The historical evidence leaves little doubt, however, that the Clause was intended to exclude some hearsay” (Ohio v Roberts, 448 US 56, 63 [1980], citing California v Green, 399 US 149, 156-157 nn 9, 10 [1970]). The Court in Ohio v Roberts went on to explain that the Confrontation Clause contained a preference for face-to-face cross-examination of witnesses (id.). Nevertheless, hearsay evidence was admissible but was restricted in two ways. First, the Sixth Amendment established a rule of necessity where usually the prosecution had to produce the declarant or demonstrate his or her unavailability (448 US at 65). Second, once the witness was shown to be unavailable, the hearsay statement was admissible only if its trustworthiness was such that it did not depart from the rule of face-to-face confrontation (id.).
*312Ohio v Roberts concluded that hearsay evidence could be admitted only if it bears “adequate ‘indicia of reliability’ ” (448 US at 66). “Reliability can be inferred without more in a case where the evidence falls within a firmly rooted hearsay exception. In other cases, the evidence must be excluded, at least absent a showing of particularized guarantees of trustworthiness” (id.). In Ohio v Roberts the Court held that the testimony of a witness at a preliminary hearing, where the witness had been subject to cross-examination, could be admitted into evidence at trial where that witness had failed to honor several subpoenas to appear.
In Idaho v Wright (497 US 805, 820 [1990]) the Supreme Court referred to excited utterances, dying declarations and statements made for medical treatment as firmly rooted hearsay exceptions which would normally be admitted without other indicia of reliability. But the Court went on to add that such statements had to be so trustworthy that little could be added by cross-examination (497 US at 821). There, the Court held that statements concerning sexual abuse made to a doctor by a three-year-old girl did not bear a sufficient indication of reliability and were improperly admitted into evidence.2
In this case, the defendant’s rights under the Confrontation Clause as articulated in Kentucky v Stincer were violated by the hearsay evidence admitted as substantive evidence without an opportunity for cross-examination and the admission of hearsay evidence without sufficient indications of trustworthiness. Defendant was convicted on the basis of a hospital statement that the majority agrees was inadmissible. Contrary to the decision of the majority, I cannot conclude that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt and that the introduction of the hospital statement did not contribute to the conviction (Chapman v California, 386 US 18 [1967]).
*313In Chapman the Supreme Court concluded that there are some constitutional errors which may be considered harmless:
“We conclude that there may be some constitutional errors which in the setting of a particular case are so unimportant and insignificant that they may, consistent with the Federal Constitution, be deemed harmless, not requiring the automatic reversal of the conviction” (id. at 22).
That a constitutional error can be harmless is not the only relevance of the Chapman case. As important is the Supreme Court’s determination of when an error is harmless. The Court stated:
“We prefer the approach of this Court in deciding what was harmless error in our recent case of Fahy v. Connecticut, 375 U. S. 85. There we said: ‘The question is whether there is a reasonable possibility that the evidence complained of might have contributed to the conviction.’ Id., at 86-87. . . . There is little, if any, difference between our statement in Fahy v. Connecticut about ‘whether there is a reasonable possibility that the evidence complained of might have contributed to the conviction’ and requiring the beneficiary of a constitutional error to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the error complained of did not contribute to the verdict obtained” (386 US at 23-24).
There are situations in which the fundamental interests served by the right to confront witnesses are not significantly impaired by the admission of a hearsay statement that falls under an exception (cf. Lilly v Virginia). In this case, however, the challenged statement does not even fall within a hearsay exception. The introduction of that statement violated defendant’s right of cross-examination and was prejudicial in that it gave only the complainant’s version of the events without cross-examination. Moreover, the complainant could not say how the stabbing occurred. Defendant had no burden at the trial and was presumed innocent.
The statements made at the scene, in the laundromat and in the ambulance, even assuming their admission was normally proper under Ohio v Roberts and Idaho v Wright, did not bear a sufficient indication of reliability. The complainant had a motive to lie because he went looking for the person who had thrown a trash can and sought a confrontation. Moreover, the fact that *314the complainant smelled of alcohol is an indication that he may have been under the influence of alcohol and “militates against finding that his statements were so inherently reliable that cross-examination would have been superfluous” (Lilly v Virginia, 527 US 116, 139 [1999]).
The evidence leaves little doubt that defendant stabbed the victim. The same cannot be said of the evidence that defendant did so intentionally. How the confrontation proceeded and how the stabbing occurred, whether deliberately or accidently during a struggle, are unknown. Had the complainant been subject to cross-examination, questions surrounding the incident would have been answered and the jury might have gotten a more complete picture of the confrontation.
I would reverse the conviction.
Judges Ciparick, Rosenblatt, Grafpeo and Read concur with Chief Judge Kaye; Judge G.B. Smith dissents and votes to reverse in a separate opinion.
Order affirmed.
. Both the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, § 6 of the New York State Constitution give a defendant the right to confront witnesses against him or her. The Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution and article I, § 6 of the New York State Constitution assure the right to due process and a fair trial.
. In White v Illinois (502 US 346 [1992]), the Supreme Court upheld the conviction of a defendant for aggravated criminal sexual assault, residential burglary and unlawful restraint based upon the spontaneous declarations and statements given for medical treatment of the four-year-old victim. The four-year-old victim had experienced emotional difficulty upon being brought to the courtroom on two occasions. The trial court was not asked to and did not make a finding that the child was unavailable to testify. The defendant did not attempt to call the witness to testify. In ruling that the child’s statements could be introduced, the Court held that the Confrontation Clause had not been violated. Thus, it is evident that in some cases an excited utterance can be admitted without violating the right to confront witnesses. It is also clear that the statements were made by a four-year-old girl and that there was other evidence of sexual misconduct against her.

=== CASE 9737142 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:17:08.074335+00 ===

BECKER, Justice.
I concur in this opinion insofar as it sustains judgment against Ford. I dissent from the majority’s dismissal of plaintiff’s case against the Carlem Corporation. It may have been reversible error for the trial court to assume, as it did, that Rodney was an employee of Carlem. Such error might well be grounds for resubmission of the case under proper instructions. It is not grounds for summary final dismissal. At the very least Rodney was entitled to have the jury determine his status as a fact question under proper instructions defining employee and to determine the question of liability under those instructions.
While the majority avows “We do not infer Carlem owed no duty to the boy but it was not that of an employer to an employee”, it proceeds to deny the boy a chance to prove liability under proper instructions.
As we said in Anthes v. Anthes, 255 Iowa 497, 504, 122 N.W.2d 255, “The allegations of the petition indicate that plaintiff was ' on the premises in some legal status. As an invitee, employee or even as a licensee whose presence was known to defendant the plaintiff might have been injured under conditions constituting actionable negligence. If plaintiff was rightfully on the premises he was entitled to proceed with evidence showing his status and breach of duty by defendant.” If this evidence, taken in the most favorable light available to plaintiff, failed as a matter of law to generate a jury question re the employer-employee relationship it should have been submitted on such status as could be found by the jury. But Carlem suggested no other status. It contended itself with the assertion that there was no evidence to support a finding Rodney was an employee.
For the purposes of this case the majority employs a strict definition of employee. “An employee or servant is a person bound by duty of service, subject to the master’s or employer’s command as to the manner in which the work shall be done, (citing cases)”
In Lembke v. Fritz, 223 Iowa 261, 265, 272 N.W. 300, 302, we quote this from Norton v. Day Coal Company, 192 Iowa 160, 164, 180 N.W. 905, 908. “The relationship of master and servant does not exist, unless there be the right to exercise control over methods and details, — to direct how the result is to be obtained. The power to direct must go beyond telling what is to be done, — to telling ‘how it is to be done’.”
We have not always required such strict proof of the right to direct the worker in the minutiae of his chores.
Ganzhorn v. Reep, 234 Iowa 495, 12 N. W.2d 154, involved two farmers who customarily helped each other in their farm work. No money changed hands except at silo filling time when one farmer needed enough additional help so the neighbor was paid. We held the existence or nonexistence of the master-servant relationship was for the jury, quoting from Napier v. Patterson, 198 Iowa 257, 260, 196 N.W. 73, 74: “To constitute the relation of * * * master and servant, it is not necessary that there be an express contract between them, or that the services be rendered for compensation. The relationship may be either express or implied.” We also noted Lembke v. Fritz, 223 Iowa 261, 266, 272 N.W. 300, 303: “All the cases agree that the test of the relationship of master and servant is not the actual exercise of power of control over the details and methods to be followed in *869the performance of the work, but the test is the right to exercise such control.”
Erickson v. Erickson, 250 Iowa 491, 94 N. W.2d 728 involved brothers who customarily helped each other with farm work. The case was tried without a jury. We upheld a finding of master-servant relationship. See also Aga v. Harbach, 127 Iowa 144, 102 N.W. 833; Restatement, Second, Agency, Section 5; Subagents and Subservants, Appendix, Section 5, page 36 et seq.; 68 Harvard Law Review 658, 56 C.J.S. Master and Servant, § 174, p. 860, Notes 39 & 48; 35 Am.Jur., Master and Servant, section 12 and section 156.
In Uhe v. Central States Theatre Corporation, 258 Iowa 580, 139 N.W.2d 538, we said: “This controversy centers around the employer’s responsibility for the payment of wages to the claimant, which is one of the necessary elements in an employer-employee relationship.” This statement relies on Usgaard v. Silver Crest Golf Club, 256 Iowa 453, 127 N.W.2d 636. These cases deal with our Workmen’s Compensation Law and Usgaard specifically states: “* * * ^he major elements of the employer-employee relationship for the purpose of our compensation act are: * * * (2) responsibility for the payment of wages by the employer.” (emphasis supplied)
Limited as they are to workmen’s compensation cases such holdings did not change Crum v. Walker, 241 Iowa 1173, 44 N.W.2d 701. “The payment of or right to collect wages is not essential to the existence of the relationship. It is sufficient if there be a lawful consideration for the contract of employment. 35 Am.Jur. Master and Servant, § 12; 57 C.J.S. Master and Servant § 563d, page 279 et seq.; Aga v. Harbach, 127 Iowa 144, 102 N.W. 833. Nor is an express contract of employment necessary to create the relationship. It may be implied from the general conduct of the parties in relation to the business. Aga v. Harbach, supra, 127 Iowa at pages 147, 148, 102 N.W. 833; 35 Am.Jur., Master and Servant, § 9 notes 4, 5; 57 C.J.S. Master and Servant, § 563, notes 48-51.
“It is earnestly argued that Harry was not an employee but a legally dependent person (under sections 252.1 and 252.2, I.C.A.) due to the crippled condition of his leg; that he had tried but had been unable to make a living by working for others; that he has been in the hospital; but that excepting for a few months he has lived at home all his life.” We held the question of master-servant relationship to be a fact question for jury determination. See also LaPointe v. Chevrette, 264 Mich. 482, 250 N.W. 272 where a tea company store manager hired plaintiff as a delivery boy and paid him out of the cash register in the store. The store manager testified he personally paid plaintiff and the company did not pay the boy. The store’s claim it was the policy of the company to make no deliveries (implying that it couldn’t be the boy’s employer) was not controlling in absence of information to customers and help, by advertising or otherwise, that such policy was in force. The Michigan court held existence of relationship of principal and agent was for the jury under proper instructions.
The jury could find this boy had been doing meaningful work to the corporation’s benefit for at least six months. This work was performed with defendant’s knowledge and defendant received the benefit not only of this boy’s work but that of the whole family. Compensation was supplied through payment to the father. But we sayihe boy was not an employee as a matter of law because there was no right of control. A purely gratuitous and empiric assumption. There is ample evidence Carlem had a right to control the boy’s actions and in fact did so through the father as agent.
Carlem’s general manager of the farm operation, Mr. Viet, testified Mr. Bengford, Rodney’s father, was the farm manager for the farm corporation, “Mr. Bengford was the type of worker that you didn’t have to check on every day. We told him what to do and he would see that it got done.” The father testified, “During the six or seven months between my going to work for the corporation and the day of the accident, *870Rodney and my other children helped with work on the farm. Rodney done a lot of work around there, like he would help me feed the turkeys when we had the small ones in the shed, filling the smaller feeders, and a lot of odd jobs around the farm.” Carlem chose to accept the benefit of Rodney’s labor. But we say this does not make him an employee, and, more important, the farm owner does not owe the child the same standard of care it owes the father-employee. We say this as a matter of law.
This is an important issue in this case. Where the minor child of a farm laborer actually works the farm for the owner’s benefit is he to be shunted aside as an invitee, — or a licensee, — or perhaps a trespasser? The majority would do this because there is no formal contract and we, not the jury but we, cannot see a right of control even though the evidence clearly shows it to be present.
I would reverse as to Carlem with instructions to submit the fact question of Rodney’s status to the jury under proper instructions.
RAWLINGS, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9737143 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:17:10.519589+00 ===

GALLAGHER, Senior Judge.
After a jury trial, appellant was convicted of (a) distributing, and (b) possessing with intent to distribute cocaine, D.C.Code § 33-541(a)(l) (1988). He had filed a pretrial motion “to suppress as evidence all tangible evidence and statements obtained as a result of his arrest.”
In support of this motion, appellant asserted:
On January 20, 1988, at approximately 5:00 p.m., an undercover police officer allegedly purchased a quantity of a controlled substance from an individual. The undercover officer allegedly handed a marked bill to the individual in exchange for the substance purchased. This purchase allegedly took place in or about a building carrying the address of 501 Virginia Avenue, S.E. The undercover officer allegedly radioed a description of the seller to members of an arrest team. The arrest team allegedly arrived on the scene at approximately 5:15 p.m.
At the time when the arrest team arrived, Mr. Best was standing outside the above address. While he was standing there, Mr. Best was confronted by a number of plainclothes police officers who ordered Mr. Best into the building. Mr. Best was then searched and arrested and a marked twenty dollar bill was allegedly retrieved from his pant pocket. After his arrest, Mr. Best allegedly stated: “you just missed him,” or words to that effect.
When Mr. Best was arrested and searched, the police did not have probable cause to believe that he had committed a crime. Mr. Best did not sell any controlled substance to the undercover officer. Since all he was doing was standing outside a building, the police could not have seen him engage in any activities sufficient to make up probable cause for an arrest.
Furthermore, on information and belief, the description of the alleged seller did not match Mr. Best’s appearance on the date and time in question.
Since the twenty dollar bill and the statement were obtained as a direct result of an illegal arrest, they should be suppressed.
The trial court denied the motion to suppress without a hearing (and without prejudice). In so ruling, the court relied upon our opinion in Duddles v. United States, 399 A.2d 59 (D.C.1979). Just before trial, appellant filed a motion to reconsider the order denying his motion to suppress without a hearing. Appellant there contended his allegations in support of his motion *968were sufficient to satisfy the requirements of Duddles v. United States, supra, 399 A.2d at 64. He asserted that denying him a hearing on his motion deprived him of “his due process right to litigate a colorable constitutional question.” The court denied the motion on the basis that in grounding it upon an assertion that he was not at the scene and therefore must have been misidentified, this fundamentally relates to a claim of innocence of the charges to be tried. The court ruled that the claim should therefore be litigated during the trial, rather than by pretrial motion.
Briefly stated, the trial evidence established that an undercover officer purchased cocaine from appellant and gave him a police pre-recorded twenty dollar bill in payment. The officer relayed a lookout for appellant with a description of him which stated he was wearing a baseball-style cap with a star on it, black jacket, gray jeans and tennis shoes, and it was also stated he was paid with a pre-recorded twenty dollar bill. The officer also relayed the street location where appellant was hiding his supply of cocaine behind a basement wall.
An arresting team soon located appellant from the description given them,1 and the purchasing undercover officer then rode by and confirmed the correct person was being detained. Appellant was then arrested and searched and the same pre-recorded twenty dollar bill was found in his pocket, and his hidden supply of cocaine was located.
On appeal, appellant argues that his motion to suppress presented the issues of (a) whether he “was correctly identified as the seller of a controlled substance when the description did not match [his] appearance on the date and time in question,” and (b) whether “the police lacked probable cause to believe he had committed a crime.” 2
The motion to suppress was based principally upon allegations that probable cause for the arrest was lacking because (a) appellant “did not sell any controlled substance to the undercover officer” and “[sjince all he was doing was standing outside a building, the police could not have seen him engage in any activities sufficient to make up probable cause for an arrest” and (b) “on information and belief, the description of the alleged seller did not match [his] appearance on the date and time in question.” 3
In determining whether to hold an evidentiary hearing on the motion to suppress, the trial court considered it was bound by our decision in Duddles v. United States, supra, 399 A.2d at 63 (later approved in Jackson v. United States, 420 A.2d 1202, 1206 (D.C.1979) (en banc)), holding that “allegations that are merely con-clusional” in support of a motion to suppress do not suffice to obtain a hearing on the motion. Rather, a defendant is required “to make factual allegations which, if established, would warrant relief....” Duddles v. United States, supra, 399 A.2d at 63. As the allegations in appellant’s motion are merely conclusory, the trial court did not err in denying the motion without a hearing.
In our recent opinion in In re F.G., 576 A.2d 724 (D.C.1990) (en banc), this court carefully restricted its decision to “a motion to suppress a showup identification.” Id. at 728. The court pointed out that an accused is present when an arrest is made or his environs are searched and the defendant usually has access to the facts, but where there is a showup identification, by its nature, the accused has little access to the evidence relating to it, in order to make factual allegations. Id. at 726. For reasons such as this, the court ruled that motions to suppress showup *969identification should be viewed as an exception to the rules of Duddles v. United States, supra, 399 A.2d at 63, and Jackson v. United States, supra, 420 A.2d at 1206. These cases require a factual showing in support of the motion in order to secure an evidentiary hearing. This court therefore decided that in a motion to suppress a showup identification, the defendant is, without more, entitled to an evidentiary hearing. Since the motion in this case does not involve a showup identification, however, the Duddles rule applies here.
The support for appellant’s motion to suppress was a mixture of assertions that indicated on the one hand that the police had arrested the correct person (“a marked twenty dollar bill was allegedly retrieved from his pant pocket”) and, on the other hand, conclusory statements to the contrary that (a) there was no probable cause because he was innocent of drug trafficking and (b) “on information and belief” the description of him given the police did not match his appearance.
Since these were simply conclusory assertions, they did not meet the factual specificity required by our decision in Duddles v. United States, supra, 399 A.2d at 63. Furthermore, we are now able to conclude after the trial that “a hearing upon the motion ... would have been fruitless for there was ample evidence to establish that there was probable cause for the arrest,” 4 United States v. Culotta, 413 F.2d 1343, 1345-46 (2d Cir.1969); and there would therefore be no point in going through another evidentiary hearing on remand which would be merely duplicative and fruitless.
Affirmed.
. He was wearing a Dallas Cowboy hat, matching the description given.
. In deciding whether a hearing on the motion to suppress should have been granted, we are bound by the motion as filed in the trial court, and not necessarily as related in the brief on appeal.
.Appellant in his motion also stated the (police) pre-recorded twenty dollar bill used for the purchase was obtained from him as a result of an illegal arrest and should be suppressed.
. The evidence obtained from the subsequent search, e.g., the pre-recorded twenty dollar bill, was not needed to show probable cause to arrest, which was independently established.

=== CASE 2209561 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:40.948934+00 ===

267 Cal. App. 2d 916 (1968)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
EDWIN ALFRED BAKER, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 15310.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Dec. 6, 1968.
Richard S. Buckley, Public Defender, and James L. McCormick, Deputy Public Defender, for Defendant and Appellant.
Thomas C. Lynch, Attorney General, Elizabeth Miller, Lawrence K. Keethe and Mark L. Christiansen, Deputy Attorneys General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
FOURT, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment of conviction of receiving stolen property.
In an information filed in Los Angeles on March 21, 1967, defendant was charged in count 1 with having burglarized the residence of Gayle E. Drum on January 27, 1967, and in count 2 with having received property which had been stolen from Gayle E. Drum. Defendant pleaded not guilty and made a motion under section 1538.5 of the Penal Code. The cause came on for trial and the matter was submitted upon the testimony contained in the transcript of the proceedings had at the preliminary hearing. Defendant was found guilty of receiving stolen property (count 2) and not guilty of burglary (count 1). At the time of sentencing the proceedings were suspended, defendant was fined $350 and probation was granted for four years. A timely notice of appeal was filed.
[1] Appellant asserts now that the appeal was taken because the trial judge erred in not granting his motion to suppress the evidence under section 1538.5 of the Penal Code.
A resume of some of the facts is as follows: on February 17, 1967, at about 4:15 p.m. Officer Brown, a police officer of eleven years experience in the Los Angeles Police Department and then working out of the Detective Bureau, Burglary--Auto Theft Division, Special Squad, went to defendant's residence at 5727 Harold Way, Apartment 3. Officer Brown was accompanied by Officer Smith of the same division. Officer *918 Brown had two warrants for the arrest of defendant for certain violations of the vehicle laws. At the time of the arrest the officers had heard from Sergeant Wheeling of the robbery division that defendant was a burglar and had two stolen furs in his apartment. Officer Brown upon arriving at the Baker apartment knocked on the door and defendant replied to the knock. Officer Brown asked defendant if he was the person named in the warrants and he replied that he was. The officers identified themselves and placed defendant under arrest and advised him of his constitutional rights. Defendant was partly dressed when he came to the door. He made inquiry as to the amount of the bail and when advised that it was $77 he asked if he might make a telephone call. He stepped back into a living room and the officers stepped in behind defendant. The telephone call was not completed and defendant asked if he could put on a shirt and received an affirmative reply from Officer Brown. On the living room floor in plain sight was an eight millimeter movie projector with an orange or yellow painted area at its base and it appeared as if something, such as a serial number, had been scratched off the surface of the painted area. Officer Brown stated that the Los Angeles City Board of Education, to identify property belonging to the schools, commonly painted an area at the base of movie projectors with yellow or orange paint and stamped thereon a serial number. Officer Brown formed the opinion that the projector might well have been stolen property. There was also a small television set on a coffee table in the room. Officer Brown asked defendant to whom the projector and television set belonged and defendant stated they belonged to a bartender friend of his but remained silent as to the man's name. Officer Brown then asked defendant if he might search the apartment and defendant said, "Yes, you can search my apartment." Shortly thereafter Officer Smith found Lawrence Higbee in the apartment and the latter stated that he knew nothing about the projector or the television set.
In the defendant's bedroom Officer Brown found two labels, one bearing the name Firman, and the other bearing the name Pelta and three monogram-type initials, G.E.D., which appeared to have been removed from some garment. In the closet of the bedroom Officer Brown found 155 reels of eight millimeter film of pornographic nature. In the living room closet in a shopping bag on the floor the officer found a fur stole from which the label inside the lining appeared to have been removed. There also was another movie projector in that closet. Officer Brown formed the opinion that the projector *919 on the living room table and the fur stole were stolen property.
Officer Brown then asked defendant if he might search defendant's car which was parked in the street and defendant said, "Yes, you can," and gave the car key to the officer. In the trunk of the car the officer found a second fur stole also with the label removed. The labels found in the defendant's bedroom were rectangular in shape while the three initials G.E.D., each one on a separate piece of cloth, were diamond-shaped. It appeared to the officers that the three diamond-shaped initials found in the defendant's bedroom were of the same type and shape as those which had been removed from the stole located in the trunk of defendant's car. Defendant never asked whether the officers had a search warrant and the subject of such was not mentioned.
Defendant testified that on the date and time in question the officers came to his apartment and identified themselves as policemen. Defendant was asked by his attorney, "At the time he [the officer] arrived at your apartment to your knowledge was there some goods in the apartment which were stolen?--When I say 'to your knowledge'--to your belief?" Defendant replied, "Well, there was a few articles I would say I was in doubt about the origin of them." He indicated that he had bought the projector from a fellow but had no bill of sale, that he had taken the labels out of the furs because he was going to give them to a girl friend.
Appellant now contends that the property found in the apartment should not have been received into evidence because it was the product of an illegal search and seizure in that the officers had no basis for a search. Further that it was error to receive the stolen items into evidence because appellant was not advised that he had a right to refuse to give a consent to search the apartment.
There is no merit to appellant's assertions.
There was no search in the first instance for the projector and the television set were in plain sight--the officers were where they had a right to be when they saw the items which were suspect. (See People v. Marshall, 69 Cal. 2d 51, 57-58 [69 Cal. Rptr. 585, 442 P.2d 665].)probable cause is "... a state of facts as would lead a man of ordinary care and prudence to believe and conscientiously entertain an honest and strong suspicion that the person is guilty of a crime." (People v. Ingle, 53 Cal. 2d 407, 412 [2 Cal. Rptr. 14, 348 P.2d 577].) A reasonable man in the position of Officer *920 Brown, seeing the projector with the painted area on the base and the appearance that a serial number had been scratched off, would have been led to believe and conscientiously entertain an honest and strong suspicion that appellant was guilty of some crime.
Appellant seems to argue now that it was unfair of the officer to make the arrest because he previously had been alerted that appellant was a burglar. All the officer did here was to be where he had a perfect right to be and to see that which was in plain sight. (See also People v. Kraps, 238 Cal. App. 2d 675, 680 [48 Cal. Rptr. 89].)
The appellant gave consent to the search in any event. The issue as to whether there was consent is a question of fact and that fact was determined by the trier of fact on conflicting evidence. There was substantial evidence to support the view that consent was given and this court under the circumstances should not disturb the finding of consent. The simple fact is obvious that the trial judge did not believe the appellant and he did believe the officers.
The request for permission to search did not require a warning to appellant that a consent might be refused. This court said in People v. Chaddock, 249 Cal. App. 2d 483, 485-486 [57 Cal. Rptr. 582]: [2] "There is no requirement in the law that an officer shall first advise a person of his constitutional rights and of his right to refuse to grant a consent to a search before the officer seeks a valid consent from the person to conduct a particular search. The mere asking of permission to enter and make a search carries with it the implication that the person can withhold permission for such an entry or search." (See also People v. Sjosten, 262 Cal. App. 2d 539, 546 [68 Cal. Rptr. 832]; People v. Dahlke, 257 Cal. App. 2d 82 [64 Cal. Rptr. 599]; People v. Smith, 63 Cal. 2d 779 [48 Cal. Rptr. 382, 409 P.2d 222].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Lillie, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737256 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:20:10.265788+00 ===

STATON, Presiding Judge.
On July 25, 1981, Daniel Vogelzang consumed alcoholic beverages in Plummer's Bar, which is owned by McCann Corp.1 Vogelzang left the bar intoxicated and began to drive his car. On the highway he crossed the centerline and collided with a car being driven by Paul Flagg. Flagg *77was injured and Tina Baker, a passenger in Vogelzang's car, was killed. Michael Baker (Baker) is the administrator of Tina's estate.
Flagg and Baker filed suit against McCann for negligently and unlawfully2 selling alcoholic beverages to Vogelzang. In its motion to dismiss, McCann argued that because it and Vogelzang were joint tort-feasors, separate releases executed by Flagg and Baker with Vogelzang also operate to release McCann from liability in connection with the automobile collision. The trial court granted McCann's motion and this appeal follows.
The issue we must address is whether a release which specifically excludes one joint tort-feasor results in the release of all joint tort-feasors.
Affirmed.
1.
Review
In its motion to dismiss, McCann argued that the complaint failed to state a claim for relief recognized in Indiana. The trial court granted this motion, and it is well settled that in an appeal of a dismissal on these grounds, we view the complaint from a perspective most favorable to the plaintiffs. Every inference will be drawn in their favor, and, if it appears a certainty that from the face of the complaint that the plaintiffs are not entitled to relief, we will not disturb the judgment of the trial court. Avery v. Faulkner (1984), Ind.App., 471 N.E.2d 1226, 1228, trams. den. (citations omitted). In the instant case, we must determine whether Flagg and Baker are entitled to relief despite the releases they executed with Vogelzang.
IL.
Releases
Flagg and Baker separately filed complaints against Vogelzang seeking recovery for injuries they sustained in the automobile collision. As co-plaintiffs, they also filed a complaint against McCann. Flagg and Baker reached a settlement with Vo-gelzang, and each of them executed an instrument entitled "Release." Flagg's release contained the following provision:
" ... I the undersigned, Paul E. Flagg, do hereby release, acquit and forever discharge Daniel 0. Vogelzang and Robert Vogelzang and any other person, firm or corporation charged or chargeable with responsibility or liability to Daniel O0. Vogelzang and Robert Vogel-zang except McCann Corporation d/b/a Plummer's Bar and John Doe, from all actions, suits, causes of action, claims or demands of any kind and nature whatsoever ..." R. 28.
Baker's release provided:
"... Michael D. Baker, as duly appointed and qualified Administrator of the Estate of Tina J. Baker, deceased, ... does hereby release, acquit and forever discharge Daniel 0. Vogelzang from any and all claims, demands, ... by reason of the aforementioned accident resulting in the death of Tina J. Baker.*
* Provided, however, that said Administrator does not release or discharge McCann Corporation d/b/a Plummer's Bar and John Doe. R. 81.
The essence of McCann's argument in its motion to dismiss was that the releases executed by Flagg and Baker were general releases of one joint tort-feasor which, by operation of law, released all joint tort-fea-sors. Cooper v. Robert Hall Clothes (1979), 271 Ind. 63, 390 N.E.2d 155.
In Cooper, supra, the Indiana Supreme Court reaffirmed the general rule that a release of one joint tort-feasor effectively releases all joint tort-feasors, despite language in the release which attempts to reserve a claim against one of the tort-fea-sors. Id., 890 N.E.2d at 156. One of the concerns expressed in Cooper was that a plaintiff might be able to obtain a total recovery in excess of his actual damages by arranging for successive settlements for the various tort-feasors in return for re*78leases. Id. To prevent that sort of abuse, the court in Cooper concluded that a reservation clause contained in a release of one joint tortfeasor should have no force and effect.3 The rationale for this result was explained as follows:
Joint tort-feasors constitute, in a sense, one entity, each of them being jointly and severally Hable for injury to the plaintiff. An unequivocal release of one is, as a matter of law, a determination that none of the joint tort-feasors in this "entity" is liable.
Id., 390 N.E.2d at 157.
Although Flagg and Baker acknowledge the holding in Cooper, supra, to avoid its consequences they attempt to distinguish the instant case by arguing that Vogelzang and McCann are not "one entity" because each claim involves an independent civil wrong. For the following reasons, we do not agree.
A case referred to us by Flagg and Baker clearly establishes that a tavern may be liable for the consequences of serving liquor to an intoxicated person whom the server knows or should have known. was driving an automobile. Elsperman v. Plump (1988), Ind.App., 446 N.E.2d 1027, reh. den. Too, there is no dispute that Vogelzang could have been liable for the injuries caused by the automobile collision. Thus, given the allegations contained in Flagg and Baker's complaint, that the acts of McCann and Vogelzang united in causing the injuries resulting from the car crash, we have little difficulty in determining that Vogelzang and McCann can be classified as "joint tort-feasors."
The term "joint tort-feasors" has been defined as "two or more persons jointly or severally liable in tort for the same injury to person or property." American Tobacco Co. v. Transport Co. (Va.1967), 277 F.Supp. 457, 461. It has also been used to mean "those who act together in commiting wrong, or whose acts if independent of each other, unite in causing single injury." Bowen v. Iowa Natl. Mut. Ins. Co. (1967), 270 N.C. 486, 155 S.E.2d 238, 242-43; Lasprogata v. Qualls (1979), 268 Pa.Super. 174, 397 A.2d 803, 805, n. 4.
The common thread running through these definitions is that the wrongful acts of several tort-feasors cause a single injury. The importance of the relationship between a single injury and several wrongdoers is explained in the following passage:
When more persons than one unite in the commission of a wrong, each is responsible for the acts of all, and for the whole damage; also, where separate and independent acts of negligence by different persons concur in causing a single injury, each is fully responsible for the trespass. Courts will not undertake to apportion the damage in such cases among the joint wrongdoers. The injured party has, at his election, his remedy against all, or any number.
Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago & St. Louis Railway Co. v. Hilligoss (1908), 171 Ind. 417, 423, 86 N.E. 485, 487 (Citation omitted).
The difficulty of apportioning damages between joint tort-feasors has lead to the following observation:
It is, and has long been, a generally recognized rule that there is no line of separation between the liability of joint tort-feasors. The tort is a thing integral and indivisible, and any claim for injuries arising therefrom runs through and embraces every part of the tort. The liability of one can not be carried into any portion of the joint tort that is not followed by an equal liability of the other tort-feasor.
*79Hoesel v. Cain (1944), 222 Ind. 330, 346, 53 N.E.2d 165, 171, reh. den., 222 Ind. 330, 53 N.E.2d 769. (Citation omitted). Thus, the concept of joint and several liability among joint tort-feasors is firmly established in Indiana jurisprudence.
Our determination that Vogelzang and McCann are one entity for purposes of the instant action is supported by a New York case. In Hurd v. Withey (1971), 67 Misc. 583, 324 N.Y.S.2d 605, 607, a court unequivocally held that bar owners who served liquor to an intoxicated patron were joint tortfeasors in an action brought by the victim of a car crash allegedly caused by the patron. Similarly, there is an Illinois case directly on all fours with the present action. In that case, although the court drew a technical distinction between joint and independent concurring tort-fea-sors, it concluded that the injury was indivisible. The rationale set down by the Illinois court is persuasive, and it is appropriate to reproduce it here.
At common law it was not a tort to either sell or give intoxicating liquor to a strong and able bodied man and such act was never held to be culpable negligence that would impose legal liability for damages upon the vendor or donor of liquor. Cruse v. Aden, 127 Ill. 231, 284, 20 N.E. 78, 3 LR.A. 327. Under certain circumstances a liability has been imposed by statute not only upon the person who sells intoxicating liquor but upon the owner of the premises where the liquor is sold. In the instant case there was no concert of action or cooperation between Jan Kerch [intoxicated driver] and appel-lees to accomplish the particular tort [car crash] which resulted in appellant being injured. Appellees and Jan Kerch were not joint tort feasors neither did they inflict upon appellant separate and distinct injuries. The injury appellant received was a single indivisible one as a result of the tortuous act of Jan Kerch. The damages he sustained are inseparable and the overwhelming weight of authority applicable under these conditions is that the ancient rule of the release of one operates to release all applies indis-eriminately, ie. to both types of tort fea-sors, joint and independent concurring tort feasors. Muse v. De Vito, 248 Mass. 884, 137 N.E. 730; McKenna v. Austin, 77 U.S.App.D.C. 228, 134 F.2d 659, 669, 148 A.L.R. 1253.
Manthei v. Heimerdinger (1974), 382 Ill. App. 335, 75 N.E.2d 132, 140.
There is also an Indiana case which is factually similar to the instant action. Brown v. Kemp (1919), 71 Ind.App. 281, 124 N.E. 777, involved a wrongful death claim of an intoxicated man who was killed by a railroad train. The decedent's estate filed suit against the supplier of the liquor, but recovery was denied because the estate had executed an agreement releasing the railroad company from liability. Brown illustrates the rule which was reaffirmed in Cooper, supra, which we have determined to control the instant case.
Flagg and Baker's final attack on the releases they executed is that they never intended to release McCann, and that they did not receive full satisfaction for their claims. Wecker v. Kilmer (1973), 260 Ind. 198, 294 N.E.2d 132.
Intention and the amount of satisfaction are indeed relevant to our determination as to whether the agreement at issue should be characterized as a release, or a covenant not to sue, the latter being advocated by Flagg and Baker. That characterization is critical because once it is made, the effect is established by law. Sanders v. Cole Mun. Finance (1986), Ind. App., 489 N.E.2d 117, 120-21, reh. den.
In the instant action, the agreements with Vogelzang were entitled "Release," and they contained language which was consistent with their title. There is no doubt that Flagg and Baker fully intended to release Vogelzang when they entered into this agreement. Since a release is a relinquishment or abandonment of a claim for damages, Cooper, supra, 390 N.E.2d at 157, and given the Indiana rule that the release of one tort-feasor from an "entity" releases all, Id., 390 N.E.2d at 158. *80McCann was released from liability at the same time as Vogelzang.
The trial court's dismissal of this cause of action is affirmed.
HOFFMAN, J., concurs.
GARRARD, J., dissents with opinion.
. July 25, 1981, is before the effective date of Indiana's comparative fault statutes See, West's AIC 34-4-33-1 (Supp.1986).
. See, West's AIC 7.1-5-10-15.
. The decision in Cooper does not prevent a plaintiff from electing to proceed against one of several tort-feasors. Convenants not to sue, covenants not to execute, and loan receipt agreements accommodate such an election. Those agreements are distinguishable from a release, however, in that a release is a relinquishment of a claim for damages. Cooper, supra, 390 N.E.2d at 157. See also, Sanders v. Cole Municipal Finance (1986), Ind.App., 489 N.E.2d 117, 120, reh. den. (Garrard, J., concurring) (plaintiff's options discussed); Number One Beverage, Inc. v. Miller Brewing Co., (1982), Ind.App., 437 N.E.2d 508, trans. den. (plaintiff may proceed against one of several tort-feasors who is not party to covenant not to sue agreement).

=== CASE 2209735 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:43.015663+00 ===

182 Cal. App. 2d 546 (1960)
ADELE MOOREN et al., Appellants,
v.
ELMER KING et al., Respondents.
Civ. No. 6150.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist.
July 7, 1960.
Roby F. Hayes and Barbara Lang Hayes for Appellants.
Luce, Forward, Hamilton & Scripps, Arvin H. Brown, Jr., Robert G. Steiner, McInnis, Focht & Fitzgerald and William F. Fitzgerald for Respondents.
COUGHLIN, J.
This is an action arising out of an accident involving three automobiles, which occurred in the day-time on August 6, 1955, near Vista, California, on a 23-foot roadway known as Foothill Drive. The plaintiffs Mooren, who were husband and wife, were riding in a Ford station wagon jointly owned by them and driven by Mr. Mooren. While this automobile was proceeding southerly on the road-way in question along the course of a sharp curve, the defendant Garcia was driving a truck in a northerly direction along this curve. Garcia was an employee of the defendant Baldridge. At the same time, the defendant King was driving in a southerly direction along the same roadway to the rear of the plaintiffs. While negotiating this curve the plaintiffs' station wagon and Garcia's truck collided. The plaintiffs' vehicle stopped forthwith and was struck in the rear by the automobile of the defendant King.
Thereafter the plaintiffs commenced this action on account of the injuries sustained by Mrs. Mooren and damage to their automobile. Both defendants denied liability by appropriate answers, which included the defense of contributory negligence. In addition, the defendant King filed a cross- complaint against the plaintiffs and against the defendants Garcia and *549 Baldridge for the damages allegedly received as a result of the accident.
The matter was tried by a jury which rendered a verdict that plaintiffs take nothing by their complaint and that the cross-complainant King take nothing by his cross-complaint.
Judgment was entered accordingly from which the plaintiffs alone have appealed.
Two primary controversial issues with respect to liability were presented; one involved the speed of the automobiles; and the other the position of the plaintiffs' station wagon and the defendant Garcia's truck on the highway.
Evidence with respect to these issues was conflicting. Estimates of the speed of the plaintiffs' station wagon ranged from 20 to 25 miles per hour; of defendant Garcia's truck from 15 to 40 miles per hour; and of the defendant King's automobile from 20 to 25 miles per hour. Testimony with respect to the distance between the plaintiffs' automobile and the Garcia truck at the time each came into view of the other ranged from a matter of feet to that of two car lengths. The evidence respecting the position of the Garcia truck at the time of the accident indicated it either was a matter of inches or a foot to his left of the center, on the center or to his right of the center of the roadway. There was no painted line marking the center.
After the accident citations were issued to Mr. Mooren and Mr. Garcia charging violations of the Motor Vehicle Code. Mr. Mooren was charged with violating sections 510 and 511 of that code. The complaint filed pursuant to this citation alleged a violation of the basic speed law, i.e., Vehicle Code, section 510, and also a violation of the prima facie speed limit of 15 miles per hour when approaching or upon a curve when the view is obstructed, i.e., Vehicle Code, section 511. In answer to this citation and complaint, Mr. Mooren entered a plea of "not guilty" and the matter was set for trial. The records of the court in which the complaint had been filed indicate that at the time of trial Mr. Mooren withdrew his plea of "not guilty"; entered a plea of "guilty" and paid a fine of $10. However, Mr. Mooren testified that he did not withdraw his plea of "not guilty"; that at the time of trial he appeared with Mr. King, who was to be a witness on his behalf, and was told by the court that neither he nor his witness would be permitted to testify, whereupon Mr. Mooren stated: "I am not guilty, but I will pay the fine." Mr. King testified: "After he [the judge of the traffic court] refused *550 to let me testify, he said, 'I just want to know, are you guilty or not guilty?' Mr. Mooren says, 'I guess I'm guilty, then.' " The clerk of the court in which the traffic charge was filed against Mr. Mooren testified with respect to the contents of the court's record showing entry of a plea of "not guilty"; its withdrawal; and the entry of the plea of "guilty." The circumstances surrounding the events in question were presented by the testimony of Mr. Mooren and Mr. King.
As indicated, a citation also was issued against the defendant Garcia who posted and forfeited bail. He did not enter any plea to the complaint filed pursuant to the citation.
The plaintiffs urge seven alleged errors by the trial court as grounds for reversal. We have examined all of them and find each to be without merit for the reasons hereinafter set forth.
[1a] A written statement was taken from the plaintiff, Mr. Mooren, a few days after the accident occurred. At the trial, parts of this statement were used by the defendant King to impeach Mr. Mooren. The subject of this impeachment was the manner in which Mrs. Mooren had been injured and the allegedly slight effect caused by the collision between the King automobile and the Mooren station wagon. The plaintiffs objected to the introduction of any part of the written statement unless the whole thereof was admitted into evidence. The defendants Garcia and Baldridge objected to the introduction of the whole statement. Many portions of this statement attempted to place the blame for the accident upon Garcia and Baldridge and to exonerate the defendant King; included conclusions by Mr. Mooren respecting the issue of liability; and were not material to the impeachment inquiry. The plaintiffs contend that when part of a written statement is admitted into evidence by one party the whole of the same subject may be inquired into by the other. (Code Civ. Proc.,  1854.) By its terms the general rule confines the subsequent inquiry to the same subject covered by that part of the written statement introduced into evidence. [2] Portions of a statement not relevant to the part introduced properly may be excluded. (Crosby v. Martinez, 159 Cal. App. 2d 534, 539-540 [324 P.2d 26]; Estate of Nunes, 140 Cal. App. 2d 744, 746 [296 P.2d 29]; People v. Kent, 135 Cal. App. 2d 422, 428 [287 P.2d 402].) [1b] The refusal of the trial court to permit the introduction of the whole of Mr. Mooren's statement was not error.
[3a] The plaintiffs also contend that the court should *551 not have admitted evidence respecting the matter of Mr. Mooren's entry of a plea of guilty to the traffic offense with which he was charged. [4] A plea of guilty entered by a defendant in a criminal proceeding constitutes an admission of guilt and, if material, evidence thereof is admissible in a subsequent civil trial. (Olson v. Meacham, 129 Cal. App. 670, 675 [19 P.2d 527].) [3b] Plaintiffs urge that the court should not have permitted evidence with respect to the guilty plea in question because of the circumstances surrounding its entry; that in truth Mr. Mooren did not enter a plea of guilty or, if he did, that such plea was entered under duress. These factors go to the weight of the evidence and not to its admissibility. [5] With respect to this matter, the plaintiffs also contend that the court determined in advance of trial to admit evidence of Mr. Mooren's plea of guilty. Although the facts do not appear in the record, in their brief the plaintiffs claim that during a discussion in chambers with respect to the issues in the case, the trial judge announced that he had read the depositions and knew that one of the issues was whether evidence of the aforesaid plea would be admissible, and that he had decided that the evidence should be admitted. Assuming the facts to be as related, and without holding that the conduct in question was irregular, any alleged error is without prejudice as the determination of the trial court in the premises, whenever made, was proper.
[6] Among the court records which were read into evidence was a citation issued to Mr. Mooren which, in turn, referred to another citation by number. The plaintiffs sought to elicit the name of the person and the charge set forth in the latter citation. The court permitted testimony to the effect that this citation was issued to someone other than the defendant Mooren. From evidence presented to the court without the presence of the jury it appears that the subject citation had been issued to the defendant Garcia. The plaintiffs wished to establish this fact. However, Garcia had not entered a plea of guilty, and "it is well established that in the absence of a plea of guilty, neither the judgment in a criminal action nor the proceedings in connection therewith, such as arrest, is admissible in a civil proceeding." (Rednall v. Thompson, 108 Cal. App. 2d 662, 666 [239 P.2d 693]; Burbank v. McIntyre, 135 Cal. App. 482, 486 [27 P.2d 400].) The ruling of the trial court was correct.
[7a] The plaintiffs offered into evidence a property settlement agreement executed by them after the accident *552 whereby Mr. Mooren relinquished any right or interest he might have had in any cause of action arising out of injuries received by Mrs. Mooren, and agreed that any damages recovered on account of such injuries should be her separate property. An objection to the introduction of this agreement was sustained. The plaintiffs claim they were entitled to prove that Mr. Mooren had no community interest in the cause of action against the defendants on account of injuries sustained by Mrs. Mooren, or in the proceeds of any judgment which might be obtained on account thereof, in order to avoid application of the rule of law that the contributory negligence of a husband is imputed to his wife and bars recovery by her. One of the instructions proposed by the defendants and given by the court followed this rule. The plaintiffs claim further error because of this fact. Their position is without merit. [8] A post accident property settlement agreement between husband and wife whereby the husband relinquishes to his wife any right or interest in the cause of action accruing to her on account of an accident occurring prior to the enactment of Civil Code, section 163.5, in 1957, does not foreclose application of the rule that the contributory negligence of a husband, as a driver, is imputed to his wife, as a passenger in the automobile involved in the accident. (Kesler v. Pabst, 43 Cal. 2d 254 [273 P.2d 257]; Ferguson v. Rogers, 168 Cal. App. 2d 486, 488 [336 P.2d 234].) [7b] Moreover, in the case at bar the automobile operated by Mr. Mooren was owned jointly by him and his wife. There is no showing that it was community property. These circumstances would foreclose recovery by the wife in the event her husband was contributively negligent, independent of their husband and wife relationship. Under section 17150 of the Vehicle Code, formerly section 402, the negligence of the operator of an automobile is imputed to the owner thereof for all purposes of civil damages. (Milgate v. Wraith, 19 Cal. 2d 297, 299 [121 P.2d 10]; Spendlove v. Pacific Electric Ry. Co., 30 Cal. 2d 632, 634 [184 P.2d 873].) As a consequence, even though it be assumed that rejection of the property settlement agreement and giving the instruction on imputed negligence constituted error, the fact of joint ownership, and the resultant imputation of negligence preclude any claim of prejudice therefrom.
Finally, it is contended that the court erred in giving two separate instructions on the basic speed law, neither of which, standing alone, is criticized. The record does not support the *553 claim that the court thus emphasized a particular issue in the case, and no prejudice appears from the repetition.
The judgment is affirmed.
Griffin, P. J., and Shepard, J., concurred.

=== CASE 3784350 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:04.146745+00 ===

The application for exemption from taxation of the property in question was based on the provisions of Section 5349, General Code, exempting certain public colleges, academies and lands connected with public institutions of learning. Property to be exempt from taxation as a public college or academy or as land connected with a public institution of learning must be, at the time exemption is sought, owned and operated for such purpose, without any view to profit, by the state or a political subdivision thereof, or, if privately owned, must be used exclusively for the benefit of the public as a public charity, without any view to profit. Gerke, Treas., v. Purcell,25 Ohio St. 229, 242, 246; Ursuline Academy of Cleveland v.Board of Tax Appeals, 141 Ohio St. 563, 49 N.E.2d 674;College Preparatory School for Girls v. Evatt, Tax Commr.,144 Ohio St. 408, 59 N.E.2d 142. The institution here seeking to have its property exempted from taxation does not qualify under either category. Bloch v. Board of TaxAppeals, 144 Ohio St. 414, 59 N.E.2d 145.
However, the Board of Tax Appeals did not confine its consideration of the exemptibility of this property to the application as filed under Section 5349, General Code, but considered the application as though filed under Section 5353, General Code, exempting property used exclusively for charitable purposes, and held that the factual situation did not warrant exemption on that ground. This court cannot say that the decision of the Board of Tax Appeals as to the *Page 657
facts or as to the conclusions drawn therefrom was unreasonable or unlawful. Notwithstanding the claim that the school is open to the public generally, the evidence strongly supports the position that the institution occupying this property is a private denominational school.
In the case of Bloch v. Board of Tax Appeals, supra, this court held that a school organized and operated by a religious denomination for the sole purpose of training men to assume ministerial positions in such denomination and which provides no educational opportunities to the public generally is essentially a private institution, and that a building housing such a school is not exempt from taxation as being a public school or public institution of learning, or property used exclusively for a charitable purpose. The property here sought to be exempted from taxation does not qualify as being used exclusively for a charitable purpose.
The decision of the Board of Tax Appeals is affirmed.
Decision affirmed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., TURNER, MATTHIAS, ZIMMERMAN, SOHNGEN and STEWART, JJ., concur. *Page 658

=== CASE 3784351 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:04.207693+00 ===

Under the pleadings and the finding of facts by the Court of Appeals, it appears that there was a sale and transfer in bulk of the stock of merchandise and fixtures by Henley to the bank in violation of Sections 11102, 11103 and 11103-1, General Code (known as the Bulk Sales Act), and we are of *Page 373
opinion that the statute applies to a sale in bulk and transfer by the debtor to the creditor in extinguishment, total or partial, of his debt; and the bank having voluntarily abandoned its lien under the judgment and execution which it had issued, by receiving the entire stock of merchandise and fixtures in partial extinguishment of its debt, it cannot be restored to its position prior to the transfer of such merchandise and fixtures.
The remaining question is whether or not the bank should be excluded, as one of the known creditors of Henley, from sharing in the trust fund created.
The solution of this problem depends upon the construction to be given the words "such creditors" in Section 11103-1, General Code, wherein it is provided that any purchaser, transferee, shall at any time within ninety days after such sale, upon application of any of the creditors of the seller or transferor, become a trustee and be held accountable to such creditors for all the goods, wares, merchandise, fixtures, etc. This language has received construction in this court inUnited Sales Promotion Co. v. Anderson, 100 Ohio St. 58,125 N.E. 106, wherein it is held:
"Where one or more creditors commence a proceeding under favor of Section 11103-1, General Code, challenging the validity of a sale in gross, such action does not stop the running of the statute as to other creditors not parties thereto.
"Where such an action has been commenced in due time by one or more creditors of the seller, other creditors may intervene by cross-petition at any time before the expiration of ninety days from the date of purchase." *Page 374
The record discloses that on or about the 21st day of April, 1928, the sale by Henley to the bank took place. The only pleading of the bank filed in this case is the answer, filed November 18, 1929; so that more than ninety days elapsed between the date of the sale and the bank's filing anything in the premises as to its claim. Under United Sales Promotion Co.
v. Anderson, supra, the bank was too late; and under the construction given Section 11103-1 we are required to hold that only creditors who join in the application set forth in Section 11103-1, within the limitation prescribed therein, to wit, ninety days, are entitled to share in any fund arising from the enforcement of the Bulk Sales Law.
The Legislature not having seen fit to make provision in Section 11103-1, General Code, such as appears in Section 11104, General Code, for distribution of a fund arising under fraudulent transfers therein referred to, to be administered "for the equal benefit of the creditors of the debtor or debtors in proportion to the amount of their respective demands," and twelve years having elapsed since the interpretation placed on Section 11103-1, as given inUnited Sales Promotion Co. v. Anderson, supra, it would seem that the legislative intent was to produce the result of the strict and narrow effect of the words "such creditors," as appearing in Section 11103-1.
Apparently this was the interpretation of the judges of the Court of Appeals, and we are required to affirm their judgment in the premises.
Judgment affirmed.
JONES, ALLEN, KINKADE, and ROBINSON, JJ., concur. *Page 375

=== CASE 3784352 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:04.27468+00 ===

The first question for determination is whether it was prejudicially erroneous for the trial court to charge the jury on the subject of common-law negligence not involving the element of nuisance.
To simplify and shorten this discussion, it should be noted that the defendant municipality here acted in a governmental rather than a proprietary capacity in the construction and maintenance of its park with a swimming pool for the use and benefit of the general public. City of Mingo Junction v.Sheline, Admx., *Page 225 130 Ohio St. 34, 196 N.E. 897; 57 A. L. R., 402. This seems to be conceded by the plaintiff. Therefore under the settled rule the defendant incurred no liability in tort by reason of any common-law negligence. City of Akron v. Butler, 108 Ohio St. 122,  140 N.E. 324; City of Wooster v. Arbenz, 116 Ohio St. 281,  156 N.E. 210, 52 A. L. R., 518. Consequently it was erroneous for the trial court to charge the jury on this subject. However, the plaintiff seeks to avoid this difficulty in two interesting but untenable ways. First he insists that in fact the charge of the trial court related to nuisance and not to negligence. The difficulty with this contention is that it is not substantiated by the record. Nowhere in the written requests for special instructions or in the general charge is there a definition of the term "nuisance," or any reference whatsoever to the provisions of Section 3714, General Code, upon which the plaintiff bases his entire claim, and without which statute no such action would lie against the defendant municipality; the plaintiff made no oral request with reference thereto; and, when ruling upon the defendant's motion to elect, the trial court said, "I don't think he indicated it is a nuisance." The plaintiff's second contention in this respect is that even if the charge did deal with the subject of negligence and not with nuisance, this was entirely proper.
Section 3714, General Code, upon which his petition is based reads as follows:
"Municipal corporations shall have special power to regulate the use of the streets, to be exercised in the manner provided by law. The council shall have the care, supervision and control of public highways, streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, public grounds, bridges, aqueducts, and viaducts, within the corporation, and shall cause them to be kept open, in repair, and free from nuisance."
The plaintiff insists that under the provisions of this statute he is permitted to predicate his action upon *Page 226
negligence not involving the element of nuisance, although he cites no case in which this court has made such a pronouncement. The plaintiff, it should be noted, makes no claim that the swimming pool was not "open," or that it was not "in repair." Clearly, therefore, under the limited statutory language requiring a municipality to keep its public grounds "open, in repair, and free from nuisance," the plaintiff is relegated to the nuisance theory alone; and this should be especially evident when it is remembered that Section 3714, General Code, is in derogation of the common law. City ofWooster v. Arbenz, supra. Of course it must be conceded that the elements of negligence and nuisance frequently coexist, but the terms are not synonymous. It has been said that negligence is a failure to use such care as persons of ordinary prudence are accustomed to exercise under the same or similar circumstances, while a nuisance is that which causes hurt, inconvenience, annoyance or damage to the rights of another or the public. The latter term is derived from the French word "nuire," meaning to do hurt or annoy, and does not rest upon the degree of care used, but upon the injury done, irrespective of the care exercised. 30 Ohio Jurisprudence, 310; 20 Ruling Case Law, 381; 46 Corpus Juris, 663.
Thus the Court of Appeals properly reversed the trial court for charging the jury on the subject of negligence.
The remaining question to be considered is whether the Court of Appeals was correct in remanding the case for trial on the issue of nuisance. Does the record contain evidence tending to show that the swimming pool constituted a nuisance?
In his first cause of action the plaintiff presents this complaint partly as follows:
"Plaintiff further says that some time prior to June, 1932, the defendant constructed and maintained within said Waterworks Park a swimming pool to which the *Page 227
defendant invited the residents and citizens of the City of Cuyahoga Falls; that the defendant erected and maintained at one side of said swimming pool a spring diving board; that the water at this point where the said diving board was erected and maintained was of a depth of approximately three (3) feet; that there were no signs of any kind in the vicinity of this said diving board to indicate to this plaintiff and other users of said board the depth of the water at this point or to warn this plaintiff and other users that here said water was shallow; that the defendant gave this plaintiff no warning of any kind either by signs or otherwise of the depth of the water or of its shallow state at this diving board. Plaintiff says that this defendant had knowledge of all these facts and conditions which have hereinbefore been alleged and of the nuisance thereby created within said public park or grounds.
"Plaintiff further says that on or about the 29th day of June, 1932, he visited said Waterworks Park and pool for purposes of swimming; that this was the first time the plaintiff had ever visited said Park and pool for the purpose of swimming; that plaintiff dived from said spring diving board which the defendant had erected and maintained and into the shallow water of said pool at this place, striking his head against the bottom of said pool and causing the injuries to the plaintiff hereinafter set forth, which injuries were the proximate result of the nuisance created and maintained by the defendant within said public park or grounds."
The evidence shows the undisputed operative facts that the pool was oval in shape; that it was approximately 300 feet long and 125 feet wide; that the defendant municipality had constructed two diving boards — a small one and a large one; that the former projected from a platform erected on the west bank, while the large one was located on a float in the north central part of the pool; that the large board was 16 *Page 228
feet in length, and the small one was but 6 or 8 feet; that the large board was 3 or 4 feet above the level of the water, while the small one was but 1 or 2 feet above it; and that the depth of the water under the large board was 5 feet and under the small board 3 feet.
In his brief the plaintiff states that "the only disputed point of fact before the court was as to the existence or non-existence of a sign indicating the depth of the water * * *." Several of the defendant's witnesses testified affirmatively that there were such signs, while most of the plaintiff's witnesses stated that they did not see a sign. Therefore if this conflicting evidence be determinative of the question of nuisance, the matter should be submitted to a jury. However, assuming for the sake of argument that there was no evidence of the existence of signs, do these circumstances tend to show that this swimming pool constituted a nuisance? In other words, what was there about these conditions that should endanger the safety of the public? Manifestly this pool was constructed for the use and enjoyment of children and adults. The large, long, high diving board was properly located above the deepest water near the center of the pool. The small, short, low board was with equal propriety placed at the edge of the pool where the water was shallow. Had the position of these boards been reversed, or had there been but one board, undoubtedly severe criticism would have resulted. Of course if the defendant municipality maintained signs indicating the depth of the water, this was a highly proper and advisable thing to do; but even if it be assumed that this additional precaution was not taken, this court is clearly of the opinion that these circumstances alone do not tend to prove this swimming pool a nuisance. Consequently the Court of Appeals was in error in remanding the case for trial on this issue.
The defendant further contends that as an adult experienced swimmer the plaintiff was guilty of contributory *Page 229
negligence when he attempted a "jack knife" dive from the small board without first observing his surroundings. However, the views thus far expressed render it unnecessary to consider this or the remaining contentions of counsel.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals must be affirmed as to the issue of negligence and reversed as to the remand upon the question of nuisance. Final judgment is entered for the defendant.
Judgment reversed in part and affirmed in part,  and final judgment for appellant.
JONES, MATTHIAS and ZIMMERMAN, JJ., concur.
MYERS, J., not participating.

=== CASE 3784353 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:04.311213+00 ===

The plaintiff claims the right to collect interest computed at 6 per cent per annum on current unpaid balances and argues four propositions, viz.:
(1) The written agreement, on its face, provides for the payment of interest; (2) the law assumes the obligation to pay interest on the deferred installments of the purchase price of land when possession is taken by the purchaser; (3) under Section 8305, General *Page 570
Code, the "legal rate" of 6 per cent interest applies when no rate is specified; and (4) when no rate of interest is specified the instrument is similar to a note which provides for usurious interest, which usurious interest is stricken down and, in its place, collection of 6 per cent is authorized by Section 8306, General Code.
The meaning of this instrument should be determined by following the usual and well established rules of construction. The purpose of construction is primarily to determine the intent of the parties. State, ex rel. Maher, Pros. Atty., v. Baker,88 Ohio St. 165, 172, 102 N.E. 732.
In the paragraph which states the agreement as to price and manner of payment thereof this instrument is silent as to interest. It clearly states that the price is $1,600, payable $75 cash and the balance of $1,525 in monthly payments of $15 each. If the parties intended that interest should be paid, this was the place in the instrument to so stipulate. The court cannot rewrite the agreement and insert provisions which the parties must be presumed to have purposely omitted.
The appearance of the word "interest" in the two printed paragraphs later in the instrument does not create an obligation on the part of the purchaser to pay interest. In one such printed paragraph the language is, "* * * if any one of said installments, or the interest accrued thereon, shall not be paid when due * * *." No "interest thereon" could accrue for none was specified, except such as the law might cause to attach to past due installments. There was none past due. All installments were paid regularly. In the other printed paragraph the language is, "Now if the party * * * shall * * * pay the full purchase money aforesaid, with interest, taxes * * * at the time and in *Page 571
the manner above stipulated, then * * *." No time or manner of payment of interest was "above stipulated." The printed provisions of the agreement cannot be relied upon if in conflict with the typed provisions which were inserted at the time the contract was executed. Farmers National Bank v. Delaware Ins.Co., 83 Ohio St. 309, 94 N.E. 834.
No obligation to pay interest appears on the face of this instrument.
Authorities without number can be cited to support the rule that doubtful language in a contract is to be interpreted most strongly against the party who used it or the party who prepared the contract. See Farmers National Bank v. Delaware Ins. Co.,supra. Also, see statement of the rule in 12 American Jurisprudence, 795, Section 252, and 1 Restatement of the Law of Contracts, 328, Section 236.
The plaintiff, O'Neill, through his agent, Kistler, drew this instrument after several days of negotiation. Kistler was an experienced dealer in real estate. He used a printed form of agreement and typed in what the parties had agreed upon as to price and terms of payment. In that paragraph, he did not mention interest. If, as plaintiff claims, interest was discussed in the negotiations, failure to mention it in the written agreement is of even greater significance under the well recognized rule that all negotiations and prior conversations are merged in the final written instrument. 17 Ohio Jurisprudence, 513, Section 417, and cases cited therein; 12 American Jurisprudence, 755.
Furthermore, the conduct of the plaintiff and his agent, Kistler, over the period of nearly eight years following execution of the instrument is significant. During all that time monthly payments were received *Page 572
by Kistler and were entered on defendants' copy of the agreement as payments on "Principal." No part of the payments was entered as "Interest," and no claim of right to interest was asserted until the total amount paid by defendants substantially equalled the purchase price named in the instrument. The conduct of the plaintiff tends to support the defendants' position. State, exrel. Burgess  Niple, v. Linzell, Dir., 153 Ohio St. 545,93 N.E.2d 9; 12 American Jurisprudence, 787, Section 249.
The plaintiff has cited respectable authorities holding that, as a general rule, a purchaser of real estate who takes possession, under contract, is liable to the vendor for interest on that portion of the purchase price, payment of which is deferred. None of the authorities so cited involves facts similar to those of the instant case. In most instances the instruments indicated intent to charge interest. In none of them was the purchaser supported, in his defense, by conduct of the vendor as in the instant case.
The argument of plaintiff that he is entitled to 6 per cent interest under Section 8305, General Code, since no rate of interest is specified, is without merit. The 6 per cent rate specified in that section applies only "when money becomes due and payable." In the instant case the payments became due and payable monthly and were promptly paid. Hence, no interest can be claimed under this section of the General Code.
Plaintiff devoted considerable time to arguing an analogy between the treatment of usurious interest provisions and what he claims should be accorded this instrument where no rate of interest is specified. He undertakes to bring to his aid Section 8306, General Code. He argues that the striking down of usurious interest creates a situation exactly analogous to one *Page 573
where no interest is specified, and that the legal rate of 6 per cent, which the law substitutes for the usurious rate, should likewise be applied where no rate is specified. For many reasons that argument is unsound. It is sufficient to point out that in usurious transactions the parties clearly evidence their intent to charge interest, whereas in the instant case the intent seems equally clear not to charge interest at any rate.
It does not appear that the exact question now before this court has been previously decided in Ohio, but the case ofCrosby v. Glick, 22 Ohio App. 466, 153 N.E. 300, involved facts very similar to those involved herein and we consider the decision reached in that case as being in harmony with our conclusions herein.
We agree with the conclusion reached by the trial court and find that the Court of Appeals erred in reversing the trial court's judgment.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed, and the judgment of the Common Pleas Court is affirmed.
Judgment reversed.
WEYGANDT, C.J., ZIMMERMAN, STEWART, TAFT, MATTHIAS and HART, JJ., concur. *Page 574

=== CASE 2208702 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:32.634702+00 ===

804 N.E.2d 849 (2004)
Franklin E. PATTERSON, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
Daniel W. DYKES, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 48A05-0306-CV-267.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
March 12, 2004.
Patrick R. Ragains, Smith & Ragains, Anderson, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
James W. Wilson, Bingham, Farrer and Wilson, P.C., Elwood, IN, Attorney for Appellee.
John W. Longnaker III, Anderson, IN, Attorney for Amicus Curiae.
OPINION
RILEY, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Appellant-Defendant, Franklin Patterson (Patterson), appeals the trial court's *850 grant of summary judgment in favor of Appellee-Plaintiff, Daniel Dykes (Dykes).[1]
We affirm.
ISSUE
Patterson raises one issue on appeal, which we restate as follows: whether the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Dykes and against Patterson.
Based on our determination of the issue raised by Patterson, we must also determine whether the trial court erred in ordering the incumbent councilman, Dykes, to hold over until the next general election of the council seat for Madison County Council, District 2.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Dykes and Patterson ran as candidates against one another in the general election of 2002 for a seat on the Madison County Council for District 2. Dykes, as the incumbent councilman, sought re-election as the Republican Party candidate. Patterson opposed Dykes as the Democratic Party candidate. Upon declaring their candidacy for office, each candidate was required to file a Declaration of Candidacy for Primary Nomination in which each certified that he met the specific requirements for the office of Madison County councilman. The declaration form includes the statement, "I am not ineligible to be a candidate due to a criminal conviction that would prohibit me from serving in this office." (Appellant's App. p. 28). At the November 5, 2002 general election, Patterson received the majority of votes 5047 votes to 4598 votes for Dykes. Patterson was to begin his term as councilman on January 1, 2003.
However, on December 12, 2002, Dykes filed his Complaint for Declaratory Judgment and Request for Permanent Injunction (Complaint) in the Madison County Court. In his Complaint, Dykes alleged that Patterson was ineligible to hold office because he had a prior felony conviction.[2] Dykes further requested the trial court to declare that, as the incumbent councilman for Madison County Council, District 2, Dykes should continue to serve until a successor is both elected and qualified, and that the Madison County Democratic Party be permanently enjoined from attempting to fill the Council seat because, as long as he is serving, no vacancy exists.
Thereafter, on December 20, 2002, Patterson filed his Petition for Clemency with the Indiana Parole Board, seeking a Pardon from Governor Frank O'Bannon. On December 27, 2002, subsequent to a joint attorneys' conference a few days before, the trial court ordered Dykes, as the incumbent of Madison County Council, District 2, to hold over in his council seat "without prejudice to the rights of any and all parties in interest." (Appellant's App. p. 15).
On February 4, 2003, Dykes filed his Motion for Summary Judgment and supporting documents. On March 5, 2003, Patterson filed his response in opposition to Dykes' Motion for Summary Judgment. On March 17, 2003, the trial court conducted a hearing on the motion and issued its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order on April 9, 2003, in which the trial court concluded as follows:
1. That there are no material factual issues and that there is no reason why *851 Summary Judgment should not be entered at this time.
2. That pursuant to Article 15, Section 3 of the Indiana Constitution, the last duly elected official, [Dykes], is to hold over until a successor is duly elected and qualified.
3. That the term of [Dykes] initially began on January 1, 1999.
4. That pursuant to [I.C. § 3-8-1-5(b) ] on November 5, 2002, [Patterson] was not eligible to be a candidate or to hold office in the State of Indiana.
5. That pursuant to [I.C. § 3-10-12-13(sic) and I.C. § 36-2-3-3], a County Councilman shall be elected at a general election and every four (4) years thereafter.
6. That the term of a "hold over" incumbent is four (4) additional years and until the next general election for said office.
7. That pursuant to [I.C. § 3-12-8-17] there is no statutory authority for the [c]ourt to order a special election in the present situation.
8. That a future possible pardon of Patterson will not make him eligible to hold office retroactively to January 1, 2003.
(Appellant's App. p. 60).
Patterson now appeals the trial court's grant of summary judgment in Dykes' favor. On August 14, 2003, subsequent to Patterson's Notice of Appeal, Governor Frank O'Bannon granted Patterson's Petition for Clemency. Additional facts will be supplied as necessary.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
I. Standard of Review
In reviewing the propriety of a trial court's ruling of summary judgment, we apply the same standard as the trial court. Schoknecht v. Hasemeier, 735 N.E.2d 299, 301 (Ind.Ct.App.2000). We do not reweigh the evidence designated by the parties. Id. Instead, we liberally construe the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Id. Summary judgment is appropriate only if the pleadings and evidence show: 1) the absence of a genuine issue of material fact, and 2) the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Id. at 301-02. A trial court's grant of summary judgment is "clothed with a presumption of validity." Id.
II. Effect of Pardon
A. Pending Petition for Clemency
Patterson argues that the trial court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Dykes. Specifically, Patterson contends that the trial court erred in concluding that his Petition for Clemency, pending at the time of the trial court's order, "would have no effect on the final determination as to who would be seated as the Madison County District 2 councilman." (Appellant's Br. p. 8).
On the other hand, Dykes contends that the trial court's grant of summary judgment in his favor should be affirmed. In particular, Dykes argues that the fact Patterson had a Petition for Clemency pending at the time the trial court granted Dykes' Motion for Summary Judgment did not present a genuine issue of material fact. We agree with Dykes.[3]
*852 At the outset, we note that we have not previously had the opportunity to consider the effect of a Pardon on the eligibility of a candidate for public office, when the Pardon is granted subsequent to the election. The instant appeal is taken from the trial court's entry of summary judgment in favor of Dykes on April 9, 2003. At the time of the trial court's order, Patterson had a Petition for Clemency pending, as it was not granted until August of 2003. Consequently, the issue before us is whether the pendency of Patterson's Petition for Clemency raised a genuine issue of material fact that makes the trial court's grant of summary judgment inappropriate.
As Patterson correctly sets forth in his Appellant's Brief, "this court is not permitted to search the record for, or make a decision based upon, materials that were not specifically designated to the trial court." McClain v. Chem-Lube Corp., 759 N.E.2d 1096, 1101 (Ind.Ct.App.2001); (Appellant's Br. p. 7). In the same vein, the resolution of his Petition for Clemency was not before the trial court at the time of summary judgment. Instead, as Dykes argues, the possible effect of a Pardon on the case, if granted, does not amount to a genuine issue of material fact, because it is not a fact; rather, it is speculation. See Briggs v. Finley, 631 N.E.2d 959, 964 (Ind. Ct.App.1994) (Free-flowing speculation cannot be construed as a fact which sheds doubt on the validity of other facts; opinions expressing a mere possibility with regard to a hypothetical situation are insufficient to establish a genuine issue of material fact). As a result, we limit our review to materials actually designated to the trial court at the time it considered Dykes' Motion for Summary Judgment.
Relevant portions of Indiana Code section 3-8-1-5(b) provide: "[a] person is disqualified from holding or being a candidate for an elected office if the person has been convicted of a felony." The record shows that, in 1974, Patterson was convicted of theft, a Class D felony. Thus, pursuant to I.C. § 3-8-1-5(b), he was disqualified from being a candidate for the Madison County Council seat. Nevertheless, Patterson ran for the office and won by a majority of votes. However, as a convicted felon, he is disqualified from holding the office. Under this review, we must affirm the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of Dykes, as Patterson raised no genuine issue of material fact to prevent the trial court's grant of summary judgment as a matter of law. See Schoknecht, 735 N.E.2d at 301.
B. Subsequent Grant of Pardon
Nonetheless, Patterson argues that the Pardon he received from the late Governor Frank O'Bannon on August 14, 2003, retroactively removes his felony conviction, thereby restoring his eligibility and victory as a candidate for the Madison County Council seat for District 2. In support of his contention, Patterson relies on Kelley v. State, 204 Ind. 612, 185 N.E. 453 (Ind. 1933), which adopted the rule set forth by the U.S. Supreme Court in Ex Parte Garland, 4 Wall. 333, 71 U.S. 333, 380-81, 18 L.Ed. 366 (1866), as follows:
A pardon reaches both the punishment prescribed for the offence and the guilt of the offender; and when the pardon is full, it releases the punishment and blots out of existence the guilt, so that in the eye of the law the offender is as innocent as if he had never committed the offence. If granted before conviction, it prevents any of the penalties and disabilities consequent upon conviction, from attaching; if granted after conviction, it removes the penalties and disabilities, and restores him to all his civil rights; it makes him, as it were, a new *853 man, and gives him a new credit and capacity.
Kelley, 185 N.E. at 458. However, we find Patterson's argument misplaced.
Here, we must focus on the fact that, at the time Patterson was a candidate for office and at the time he was elected to that office, he was ineligible, pursuant to I.C. § 3-8-1-5(b), both to be a candidate and to hold the office to which he was elected, due to his felony conviction. On August 14, 2003, the late Governor O'Bannon granted Patterson's Petition for Clemency, thereby obliterating his 1974 felony conviction. Clearly, the effect of a Pardon is retroactive; thus, from August 14, 2003, forward, Patterson is eligible to run for an elected office, because he no longer has a felony conviction in his criminal history. However, because Patterson was a convicted felon at the time of his candidacy and election to the Madison County District 2 Council seat, we affirm the trial court's conclusions that: (1) pursuant to I.C. § 3-8-1-5(b), on November 5, 2002, Patterson was not eligible to be a candidate or to hold office in the State of Indiana; and (2) the grant of a Pardon subsequent to the trial court's order would not make Patterson eligible to hold office retroactively to January 1, 2003. (Appellant's App. p. 60).
Furthermore, as part of our consideration, we note that allowing a Pardon obtained after an election to qualify an officeholder-elect retroactively would, for all intents and purposes, be a judicial sanction for otherwise ineligible persons to sidestep our state's statutory requirements for political candidacy. We hold that such an action would be a manifest violation of public policy. The idea that individuals contravene public policy when they violate the law is basic to our social and political order. McClanahan v. Remington Freight Lines, Inc., 517 N.E.2d 390, 393 (Ind.1988). In such instances, the penal code serves as a statement of public policy; thus, when the law is violated, so is the public policy. Id.
Accordingly, in light of our consideration, we find that the trial court properly granted summary judgment in favor of Dykes and against Patterson with regard to the effect of a Pardon on Patterson's eligibility to serve as councilman for Madison County Counsel, District 2, pursuant to the November 5, 2002, election.
II. Holdover Incumbent
Our determination above requires us to determine further whether the trial court erred in ordering the incumbent Dykes to hold over until the next general election of the council seat for Madison County Council, District 2. Dykes agrees with the trial court that he is the proper party to hold over in the Madison County Council seat, District 2, pursuant to Article 15, Section 3 of the Indiana Constitution, which provides as follows:
Whenever it is provided in this Constitution, or in any law which may be hereafter passed, that any officer, other than a member of the General Assembly, shall hold his office for any given term, the same shall be construed to mean, that such officer shall hold his office for such term, and until his successor shall have been elected and qualified.
The term referred to in this constitutional provision is known as the "contingent and defeasible term," which exists solely to avoid a vacancy in a public office. Swank v. Tyndall, 226 Ind. 204, 211-12, 78 N.E.2d 535, 538 (Ind.1948). Our supreme court explained this provision as follows:
When the elective term ends and no qualified person has been elected and qualified to take over the duties of the office, the person holding the office at the end of the elective term has a right and duty, commanded by Art. 15, § 3, [ ] *854 to hold the office and discharge its duties "until his successor shall have been elected and qualified." This service is not a part of his elective term, but is a constitutional term granted to avoid a vacancyand to assure an ever-continuing government in any and every emergency.
Id. 226 Ind. at 212, 78 N.E.2d at 538.
In the instant case, Patterson and Dykes were the only candidates for the District 2 council seat during the November 5, 2002, general election in which Patterson received the majority of votes. Upon determining that Patterson was disqualified from holding the office to which he was elected, the trial court ordered Dykes, as the incumbent councilman, to hold over in his office an additional four years until the next general election for that office, pursuant to Article 15, section 3 of the Indiana constitution and I.C. § 3-10-2-13.[4] We find no error in the trial court's conclusion of law ordering Dykes to hold over in the Madison County Council, District 2 council seat until the next general election for that office.
CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, we conclude that the trial court did not err in granting summary judgment in favor of Dykes and against Patterson. Further, the trial court did not err in ordering Dykes to hold over as Madison County councilman for District 2 until the next general election for that office.
Affirmed.
KIRSCH, C.J., and ROBB, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  On February 10, 2004, we held oral argument in this matter at Wabash College in Crawfordsville, Indiana. We would like to thank the parties for their presentations.
[2]  Patterson's 1974 felony conviction for theft is not in dispute.
[3]  The Madison County Republic Party (MCRP) filed an amicus curiae brief in this case. The interests of the MCRP are aligned substantively with those of Dykes'. It argues that the trial court's ruling should be upheld, particularly in the interest of resolving future elections involving disqualified candidates.
[4]  We note that the trial court erroneously cited to a nonexistent statute I.C. § 3-10-12-13 as the statute designating the term of a county council member as four years; the statute is actually I.C. § 3-10-2-13.

=== CASE 2208706 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:32.663319+00 ===

321 Md. 336 (1990)
582 A.2d 1231
PAUL HARRISON ET AL.
v.
JOHN F. PILLI & SONS, INC.
No. 43, September Term, 1989.
Court of Appeals of Maryland.
December 21, 1990.
Anthony P. Palaigos (Blum, Yumkas, Mailman, Gutman, & Denick, P.A., on brief), Baltimore, for petitioner.
John S. Simcox (Steven J. Parrott, Hartman and Crain, on brief), Annapolis, for respondent.
Argued before MURPHY, C.J., and ELDRIDGE, COLE, RODOWSKY, McAULIFFE and ADKINS[*], JJ., and MARVIN H. SMITH, Associate Judge of the Court of Appeals of Maryland, retired, Specially Assigned, JJ.
McAULIFFE, Judge.
In 1985, John F. Pilli & Sons, Inc. (seller) entered into contracts with petitioners for the sale of homes in the Fair Oaks subdivision in Anne Arundel County. Each of the six contracts involved in this case specified a particular lot and a particular home to be built by the seller on that lot, and required conveyance of the improved property within a specified time.
At the time the contracts were signed, § 14-118 of the Real Property Article of the Maryland Code (1974, 1988 Repl.Vol.) provided, in pertinent part, as follows:[1]
(a) A contract of sale of improved, residential real property shall disclose to the initial purchaser the estimated cost, as established by the appropriate water and sewer authority, of any deferred water and sewer charges for which the purchaser may become liable....
(b) Violation of this section entitles the initial purchaser to recover from the seller two times the amount of deferred charges he is required to pay.
None of petitioners' contracts disclosed the existence or amount of any deferred water or sewer facilities charges.[2] Indeed, one cannot determine from the printed form contract used in each instance whether the property was subject to deferred water or sewer charges of any kind. Each contract provided for adjustment at settlement of any such charges if they did exist, but also provided that "[t]he septic system and well, if any, are being installed under the direction of the county health officer...."
At settlement, or soon thereafter, petitioners learned that their lots were subject to a lien for the payment of deferred water and sewer charges. Each lot owner was obliged to pay annual charges of $240 for water facilities charges, and a like amount for sewer facilities. The deferred charges, which began in 1984, will continue until 2017.
In October of 1986, petitioners sued the seller in the Circuit Court for Anne Arundel County, seeking judgment for twice the amount of the deferred water and sewer charges, computed over the entire 31 year period of payments due subsequent to settlement. The seller denied liability, and each party moved for summary judgment. Judge Eugene M. Lerner granted petitioners' motion, finding that the seller was liable to each property owner for twice the amount of the deferred water and sewer facilities charges that had accrued at the time of the hearing.
Each party appealed to the Court of Special Appeals. The seller contended, among other things, that: 1) the contracts at issue were not for the "sale of improved, residential real property" within the meaning of the statute, because the lots were not improved at the time the contracts were signed; 2) the purchasers waived any right they may have had under the statute when they learned, at settlement, of the lien for deferred charges, and failed to object; 3) there was no evidence that Belleview Sewer and Water, Inc., the entity imposing the deferred charges, was an "appropriate water and sewer authority" within the meaning of the statute; and 4) in any event, damages should have been limited to twice the amount actually paid, rather than twice the amount of payments accrued.
The purchasers contended they were entitled to judgment for twice the amount of the entire deferred charges, without regard to the amount that had accrued or been paid. The Court of Special Appeals reversed the judgment of the circuit court, holding that the contracts were not for the "sale of improved, residential real property," and therefore the disclosure statute did not apply. Harrison v. John F. Pilli & Sons, 78 Md. App. 199, 204, 552 A.2d 971 (1989). The purchasers sought certiorari on the issue decided by the Court of Special Appeals. The seller filed a conditional cross-petition for certiorari, asking that in the event we agreed with the purchasers, we address the remaining questions the seller raised in the intermediate appellate court. We granted both petitions.
I.
We first address the applicability of the disclosure statute to the contracts involved in this case. As previously noted, § 14-118 of the Real Property Article required disclosure, in any "contract of sale of improved, residential real property," of any deferred water and sewer charges for which the initial purchaser might become liable. We conclude that under the clear language of the statute, these contracts are covered by the statute. In each instance, the purchaser agreed to buy and the seller agreed to sell a piece of property with a single-family residential dwelling on it. The purchase price in each instance was for the lot improved by the home. The subject matter of each contract of sale was, therefore, "improved, residential real property."
It is of no consequence that the lots were unimproved at the time the contracts were signed. The contracts required the seller to make the improvements in order to convey that which it had agreed to sell. The sale of "custom" homes forms a substantial part of the residential real estate market, and is every bit as much a "sale of improved, residential real property" as is the sale of a "speculation" home, i.e., one completed by the seller before being offered for sale.
In reaching a contrary result, the Court of Special Appeals was persuaded by two factors. First, that Court held that the statute must be strictly construed because it is in contravention of common law. 78 Md. App. at 203, 552 A.2d 971. The canon of construction relied on by the Court of Special Appeals may have efficacy in appropriate cases. It must be recognized, however, that most statutes have the effect of changing existing law, and therefore the canon "has been most commonly employed where the statute threatens to invade an existing property or contract right, or tends to interfere substantially with a cherished personal liberty." 3 Sutherland Statutory Construction, § 61.06 (4th ed. 1986 rev.). Moreover, as Chief Judge Murphy pointed out for this Court in State v. Fabritz, 276 Md. 416, 422, 348 A.2d 275 (1975), cert. denied, 425 U.S. 942, 96 S.Ct. 1680, 48 L.Ed.2d 185 (1976), even in the case of statutes ordinarily calling for strict construction, it is the intention of the legislature that governs and, like other statutes they "are to be fairly and reasonably construed, and courts should not, by narrow and strained construction, exclude from their operation, cases plainly within their scope and meaning." Finally on this point, we note that the statute is clearly remedial, and that there also exists a canon of statutory construction that remedial statutes are liberally construed to suppress the evil and advance the remedy. See State v. Barnes, 273 Md. 195, 208, 328 A.2d 737 (1974); Fisher v. Bethesda Discount Corp., 221 Md. 271, 157 A.2d 265 (1960); Smith v. Higinbothom, 187 Md. 115, 48 A.2d 754 (1946); 2 Sutherland Statutory Construction § 60.01 (4th ed. 1986 rev.). Conflicting canons of statutory construction are nothing new, as Judge Adkins pointed out for the Court in Kaczorowski v. City of Baltimore, 309 Md. 505, 512, 525 A.2d 628 (1987), for "[j]ust as in the science of Physics every action has an equal and opposite reaction, so it seems that every canon of statutory construction has an equal and opposite canon."
The cardinal rule of statutory construction is to determine the intent of the legislature. The logical starting place is with the language of the statute, and where that language is clearly consistent with the apparent purpose of the legislation, and does not produce any absurd results, further research may be unnecessary. Kaczorowski, supra, 309 Md. at 515, 525 A.2d 628; Taylor v. Dep't of Employment and Training, 308 Md. 468, 472, 520 A.2d 379 (1987). Here, the language of the statute clearly embraces the sales contracts involved in this case, and the result of this interpretation is entirely consistent with the obvious intent and purpose of this remedial legislation. Resort to conflicting canons of construction is neither necessary nor desirable in this case.
The second factor the Court of Special Appeals found persuasive is the definition of "property" within the Land Installment Contracts subtitle of the Real Property Article. Section 10-101(d) provides as follows:
`Property' means improved property or improved chattels real, occupied or to be occupied by the purchaser as a dwelling, or an unimproved, subdivided lot or lots intended to be improved for residential purposes.
The Court of Special Appeals reasoned that § 10-101(d) distinguished between improved real property and unimproved property intended to be improved for residential purposes. Additionally, the Court noted that § 14-118 had originally been enacted as § 10-109, and therefore had originally been included within the Land Installment Contracts subtitle.
We do not find it necessary to interpret § 10-101(d) as it applies to land installment sales contracts. It is clear to us the legislature never intended the definition provided by § 10-101(d) to apply to the disclosure requirements of a contract not involving installment sales. As the legislative history of § 14-118 makes clear, the initial placement of that section in the Land Installment Contracts subtitle of Title 10 was an error, and that error was corrected when the disclosure statute was moved to Title 14 in 1982. The Attorney General advised the Governor in 1977 that House Bill 712, the original disclosure statute, was incorrectly codified within the Land Installment Contracts subtitle, and suggested that the oversight be corrected by subsequent legislation.[3] Senate Bill 138, enacted as chapter 262 of the Acts of 1981, made the suggested correction by transferring the statute from Title 10 to Title 14 of the Real Property Article. The title of that bill provides, in part, that it is proposed:
For the purpose of altering the placement of certain provisions in the Annotated Code relating to contracts of sale of real property in order to clarify the intent of the legislature....
Thus, the definition of property in the Land Installment Contacts subtitle of the Real Property Article is not directly applicable because the disclosure statute had been removed from that subtitle before these contracts were executed, and the definition is of no value by analogy or history because it is apparent that the legislature never intended it to apply to this statute.
II.
Having determined that § 14-118 did require disclosure in the contracts at issue, we turn to the seller's contention that the rights granted by the statute were waived by the purchasers when they failed to interpose any objection at settlement. In Food Fair Stores v. Blumberg, 234 Md. 521, 531, 200 A.2d 166 (1964), this Court stated:
Waiver is the intentional relinquishment of a known right, or such conduct as warrants an inference of the relinquishment of such right, and may result from an express agreement or be inferred from circumstances.
Private rights conferred by statute, as well as those obtained by contract, may be waived. Hudson v. Maryland State Housing Co., 207 Md. 320, 330, 114 A.2d 421 (1955).
In this case, however, we find no evidence of waiver. The statute grants certain rights to purchasers when the required disclosure is not made in the contract of sale. These are not rights that need be, or could be, exercised at settlement. Indeed, the remedy granted by the statute  recovery by the initial purchaser of "two times the amount of deferred charges he is required to pay"  clearly contemplates that the purchaser will settle on the contract and take title to the property. Assuming that the purchasers had a right to rescind the contracts because of the failure of the seller to disclose these charges, but see Vincent v. Palmer, 179 Md. 365, 373, 19 A.2d 183 (1941) (unilateral rescission available only for substantial breach tending to defeat the object of the contract), the purchasers would waive that right by proceeding to settlement. But we are not concerned here with the right of rescission. Rather, we are concerned with the right to proceed with the contract and receive the damages provided by statute for the failure to disclose. This is not a situation, where, as in Hudson v. Maryland State Housing Co., supra, 207 Md. at 320, 114 A.2d 421, the statute granted a purchaser the right to avoid a land installment sales contract because of non-disclosure of information, and the purchaser waived that right by accepting the benefits of the contract for a year and a half and had indicated his satisfaction with the extent of the information that was provided. Id. at 330, 114 A.2d 421.
Section 14-118, as it appeared at the time the contracts were signed,[4] did not purport to grant a right of rescission, but rather contemplated settlement of the contract and a subsequent right of the purchaser to recover statutory damages. The purchasers in this case were not required to lodge any protest at settlement, and their failure to do so does not constitute a waiver of their rights under the statute.
III.
The seller next argues that the purchasers were not entitled to summary judgment because they did not show that Belleview Sewer and Water, Inc. (Belleview) was "the appropriate water and sewer authority." The record shows that the purchasers alleged that Belleview billed them for the deferred water and sewer facility charges, and copies of those bills were attached to the amended complaint. The purchasers also alleged that their obligation to pay the deferred charges was created by agreements recorded in the land records of Anne Arundel County in 1984, but those agreements are not in the record. The seller did not admit these allegations, and specifically argued that Belleview was not the appropriate water and sewer authority.[5]
The purchasers refer us to sections of the Anne Arundel County Code permitting the County to enter into agreements which allow developers to recoup from subsequent users certain costs of improvements made by the developer to the County's water or waste water system. The purchasers do not, however, offer any evidence of the existence or content of such an agreement between the County and Belleview. We do not propose to discuss, in a vacuum, the circumstances under which Belleview might properly be considered an "appropriate water and sewer authority" within the meaning of the statute. We cannot determine whether the facts that may be dispositive of that issue are contested, because those facts are not before us. It was incumbent upon the purchasers, if they were to have summary judgment, to produce uncontested facts which, as a matter of law, demonstrated that Belleview was an appropriate water and sewer authority. This they have failed to do, and we must therefore direct that the summary judgment entered in their favor be vacated.
IV.
The final question concerns the amount of damages awarded. The purchasers originally contended they were entitled to judgment for double the total amount of deferred water and sewer facilities charges. They have now abandoned that position, and we think appropriately so. The additional dispute that originally existed between the parties involved the question of whether the judgment should be based upon payments that have accrued during continued ownership of the initial purchaser, or are restricted to payments actually made during continued ownership of the initial purchaser. The parties agreed at oral argument that recovery should be based on payments actually made if the purchasers ultimately prevail in this case. Thus, no issue involving the computation of damages remains before us for resolution.
V.
In summary, we find that former § 14-118 (now § 14-117(b)) of the Real Property Article applied to the contracts in this case; that the purchasers did not waive their claim to statutory damages by failing to object at the time of settlement; that the purchasers were not, however, entitled to summary judgment, because the evidence of record does not establish that Belleview is "the appropriate water and sewer authority" within the meaning of the statute; and, that if the purchasers are entitled to damages, those damages shall be twice the amount of deferred water and sewer facilities charges actually paid by each initial purchaser during that purchaser's continued ownership of the property.
JUDGMENT OF THE COURT OF SPECIAL APPEALS VACATED; CASE REMANDED TO THAT COURT WITH INSTRUCTIONS TO VACATE THE JUDGMENT OF THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY AND TO REMAND THE CASE TO THAT COURT FOR FURTHER PROCEEDINGS NOT INCONSISTENT WITH THIS OPINION; COSTS IN THIS COURT AND IN THE COURT OF SPECIAL APPEALS TO BE PAID ONE-HALF BY PETITIONERS AND ONE-HALF BY RESPONDENT.
NOTES
[*]  Adkins, J., now retired, participated in the hearing and conference of this case while an active member of this Court but did not participate in the decision and adoption of this opinion.
[1]  The disclosure provisions of § 14-118 were transferred to § 14-117 of the Real Property Article by chapter 756 of the Acts of 1989.
[2]  A deferred water or sewer facilities charge represents the cost of installation of a water or sewer system, or a part thereof, that is fairly allocated to a particular piece of property served by the system, the payment of which is deferred in favor of annual payments over a stated number of years. Ordinarily, a lien for the deferred charges is imposed on the property. See, e.g., Maryland Code (1982, 1987 Repl.Vol.) § 9-949 of the Environment Article.
[3]  Letter of May 9, 1977, from Attorney General Francis B. Burch to Governor Marvin Mandel, currently found in the 1977 committee files relating to House Bill 712, Maryland Department of Legislative Reference.
[4]  Section 14-118 was amended by chapter 517 of the Acts of 1988 to modify the recovery available to the purchaser, and added, as a potential recovery "any deposit monies actually paid by the purchaser that were lost as a result of violation of this subtitle." We intimate no view concerning the possible effect of this change on the purchaser's right of rescission.
[5]  In support of its motion for summary judgment, the seller argued that Belleview was a private corporation, and therefore could not fit the definition of "authority" established by § 9-901(b) of the Environment Article, Maryland Code (1982, 1987 Repl.Vol.). At the time the contracts in this case were signed, that section of the Code did not apply to the part of Anne Arundel County in which these properties are located. Section 9-922 of the Environmental Article, Maryland Code (1982).

=== CASE 2208720 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:32.80088+00 ===

156 N.W.2d 790 (1968)
182 Neb. 664
Altha M. HANSEN, Appellant, Cross-Appellee,
v.
FIRST WESTSIDE BANK, Appellee, Cross-Appellant.
No. 36698.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
March 1, 1968.
*791 Eisenstatt, Morrison, Higgins, Miller, Kinnamon & Morrison, Omaha, for appellant.
Crossman, Barton & Norris, Omaha, for appellee.
Heard before WHITE, C. J., and CARTER, SPENCER, BOSLAUGH, SMITH, McCOWN, and NEWTON, JJ.
SMITH, Justice.
Plaintiff fell over a slideway of a retractable grille or barrier maintained by defendant bank. In this personal injury action the jury awarded her $253.50, the amount of her medical expenses. Defendant, cross-appellant, argues insufficiency of evidence to sustain the finding for plaintiff. Plaintiff argues that erroneous instructions on liability caused the jury to assess inadequate damages under the comparative negligence rule.
The grille was used during nonbusiness hours to block the south entrance to defendant's office located in the Crossroads Shopping Center, Omaha, Nebraska. The entrance floor, white vinyl with dark speckles, was flush with the off-white vinyl floor of the adjoining arcade. Legs supported the slideway with the top 4 inches off the floor, the two 12½-foot sections of the grille retracting from the center. During business hours both grille and slideway were stored out of sight. At the close of the business day and within the interval of 1 minute an employee moved them into place at the entrance.
Plaintiff, age 77, had no difficulty in walking, seeing, or hearing. On August 3, 1965, at 8:29 p. m., 1 minute before closing time, she entered the bank from the south to transact business. She knew nothing about the grille or slideway both of which were out of sight. Arriving at a teller's window located 12 feet north and east of the entrance, plaintiff faced east in transacting her business. When she turned 3 minutes later to depart, the grille was in place and almost closed. Tom Horeis, a bank teller, was standing there under instructions to warn of the slideway and to assist people through the exit.
When plaintiff was 3 feet away, Tom opened the grille. He offered her no assistance, but in a voice loud enough to be heard, he said, "Watch your step, please." Plaintiff did not hear the warning, and unaware of danger she walked into the opening. Both feet caught under the slideway, and she pitched forward on her knees. The fall left her breathless, dazed, and sore.
Plaintiff was seen on August 31, 1965, by Dr. Robert J. Fitzgibbons, her physician. She complained of pain in the left knee, and examination revealed swelling and tenderness in the front part of the kneecap. The doctor found some relaxation of the medial collateral ligament which supports the inside of the knee. X-ray photographs indicated a bone chip in the superior region of the patella, but the photographs might show only an arthritic deposit.
The injury responded slowly to treatment, Dr. Fitzgibbons seeing plaintiff on 13 occasions up to May 1966. On January 6, 1967, *792 she complained of pain associated with cold weather. Examination revealed minimal swelling, some tenderness, and normal flexion, extension, and stability. The fall had aggravated dormant osteoarthritis in the knee, but permanent damage was minimal, less than 5 percent.
A proprietor must take reasonable precautions to protect invitees from foreseeable dangers in arrangement and use of his premises. His duty does not ordinarily encompass dangers either known to the invitee or so obvious that the invitee may be reasonably expected to discover them. Beck v. Ideal Super Markets of Nebraska, Inc., 181 Neb. 381, 148 N.W.2d 839; Cook v. Lowe, 180 Neb. 39, 141 N.W.2d 430; Brown v. Slack, 159 Neb. 142, 65 N.W.2d 832; Prosser, Law of Torts (3d Ed.), s. 61, p. 402.
Defendant says that as a matter of law a reasonable man would have expected plaintiff to discover the danger. When she approached the grille, it was almost closed. A reasonable man would not have necessarily expected her to discover that the slideway did not retract with the grille. Tom's instructions demonstrate that defendant itself anticipated substantial risk of harm. The evidence sustains the finding on liability.
Plaintiff requested unsuccessfully an instruction intended to state that defendant had known of the dangerous condition. See, Rankin v. J. L. Brandeis & Sons, 135 Neb. 86, 280 N.W. 260; Rogers v. J. C. Penney Co., 127 Neb. 885, 257 N.W. 252. The court in instruction No. 5 submitted correctly the issues upon which the verdict was to turn. The court's instruction No. 12 reads: "A business inviter owes the duty to exercise ordinary care to keep his premises in a reasonably safe condition. * * * liability * * * is predicated on proof * * * of his superior knowledge, actual or constructive, of dangers to which an invitee is subjected and of which the invitee is unaware. Proof of knowledge, * * * may not be predicated upon conjecture * * *." Lingering over the theme in a paragraph of instruction No. 14, the court concentrated on notice of defects and reasonable opportunity for repair. The instructions are noticeably over-balanced against plaintiff, but no part of the evidence is emphasized directly or indirectly.
If contributory negligence is not in issue, the line separating liability from damages is ordinarily distinct. In a comparative negligence case a plaintiff's verdict may obscure the line. The rule concerning cure of error by verdict for the complaining party is therefore often inapplicable. Compare Prell v. Murphy, 178 Neb. 278, 133 N.W.2d 5, with Siedlik v. Schneider, 122 Neb. 763, 241 N.W. 535, and Gross v. Johnson, 174 Neb. 273, 117 N.W.2d 534 (semble). A misstatement of issues in an instruction tending to mislead the jury is erroneous. Zimmerman v. Continental Cas. Co., 181 Neb. 654, 150 N.W.2d 268. The finding of negligence implicit in a plaintiff's verdict should be considered in connection with the question of prejudice. Errors in instructions not prejudicial to the complaining party are not a ground for reversal of a judgment otherwise correct. Markey v. Hunter, 170 Neb. 472, 103 N.W.2d 221.
The evidence is undisputed that defendant created the condition and that it recognized the risk. The jury found negligence. Rules concerning superior knowledge had no tendency to confuse or mislead the jury in assessment of damages. The overbalance of instructions against plaintiff was nonprejudicial error. See Kraft v. Fundum, 175 Neb. 821, 124 N.W.2d 225.
The judgment is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2208735 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:32.925129+00 ===

804 N.E.2d 289 (2004)
CITIZENS ACTION COALITION OF INDIANA, INC., Appellant,
v.
NORTHERN INDIANA PUBLIC SERVICE COMPANY, et al., Appellees-Petitioner, and Statutory Party.
No. 93A02-0212-EX-1062.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
March 9, 2004.
*291 Michael A. Mullett, Jerome E. Polk, Mullett Polk & Associates, LLC, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellant.
Fred E. Schlegel, Peter L. Hatton, Gabriel Bender, Baker & Daniels, Daniel W. McGill, Stanley C. Fickle, Barnes & Thornburg, Indianapolis, IN, Attorneys for Appellees Northern Indiana Public Service Company.
*290 OPINION
BARNES, Judge.
Case Summary
The Citizens Action Coalition of Indiana ("CAC") appeals the final order ("42150 Order") of the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission ("Commission") relating to the rates and charges of Northern Indiana Public Service Company ("NIPSCO"). We affirm.
Issues
We address three issues in this appeal, namely:
I. whether the issues raised by CAC on appeal are waived because they were not raised before the Commission;
II. whether the 42150 Order violates the Indiana Administrative Code by permitting the exclusion of the return allowed pursuant to statute on NIPSCO's investment in certain clean coal technology ("CCT") from NIPSCO's Fuel Adjustment Charge ("FAC") earnings cap calculation; and
III. whether the 42150 Order violates the Indiana Administrative Code by providing an allocation among customer classes of the costs of NIPSCO's qualified pollution control property ("QPCP") based on the allocation methodology in the most recent cost study rather than in the latest base rates case.
*292 Facts
On January 4, 2002, NIPSCO requested that the Commission issue the required certificate for Selective Catalytic Reduction ("SCR"), Over Fire Air, and Low NOx (nitrous oxide) Burner projects at several of its generating plants. It petitioned the Commission for the issuance of the certificate pursuant to Indiana Code Chapter 8-1-8.7[1] for approval of certain CCT, approval of the use of the designated CCT as QPCP under Indiana Code Section 8-1-2-6.6, and approval of specified ratemaking treatment of the capital costs and operation and maintenance ("O&M") and depreciation expenses connected with the QPCP. NIPSCO proposed the use of the designated CCT to meet the requirements of the Indiana State Implementation Plan ("SIP") developed in response to federal rules regulating NOx emissions and the related Indiana NOx SIP Call promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA"). Generally, these rules require NIPSCO to reduce NOx emissions at its electric generating stations to a level of 0.15 lbs/mmBtu by May 31, 2004.
In February 2002, the United Steelworkers of America, Local 12775 ("Steelworkers") petitioned to intervene, as did LaPorte County and the City of Michigan City (collectively "Intervenors"). The Commission granted the petitions. Pursuant to statute, the Office of Utility Consumer Counselor ("OUCC") also participated as a party.
On June 20, 2002, NIPSCO and the OUCC filed a Stipulation and Settlement Agreement ("42150 Settlement") resolving all matters at issue in NIPSCO's petition. The Intervenors were not a party to the 42150 Settlement. The 42150 Settlement called for Commission certification of the CCT.
On August 12, 2002, NIPSCO moved to amend its petition to reference Indiana Code Section 8-1-2-6.8, which went into effect after the filing of NIPSCO's original petition, as another statute applicable to the proceeding. Because none of the parties opposed the amendment, the 42150 Settlement as filed took into consideration the new statute.
The next day, the Commission conducted an evidentiary hearing on NIPSCO's amended petition and the 42150 Settlement. Although the need for and nature of NIPSCO's QPCP was not at issue, the precise ratemaking treatment to be afforded NIPSCO's QPCP was an issue in the proceedings before the Commission. Thereafter, the parties filed their proposed orders. On November 26, 2002, the Commission entered its 42150 Order approving the 42150 Settlement.
In the 42150 Order, the Commission found that the proposed SCR, Over Fire Air and Low NOx Burner projects proposed *293 by NIPSCO constitute clean coal technology projects as defined in Indiana Code Section 8-1-8.7-1 and that those projects would serve public convenience and necessity. The Commission also approved the proposed rate treatment and costs contained therein. In the 42150 Settlement that was approved by the Commission, the parties had agreed that NIPSCO would file annually for Commission approval of its ongoing, five-year plan for environmental compliance, including details of NIPSCO's projected capital expenditures for the upcoming twelve-month period and actual expenditures for the most recent twelve-month period. The parties further agreed that NIPSCO would file semi-annually for Commission approval of a billing surcharge to reflect a return on environmental capital expenditures made. These surcharges are subject to refund until the Commission has completed its annual investigation of the costs and has approved them. Recovery of operating and depreciation expenses are to begin only after the related facilities commence operation and the Commission has found such expenses reasonably incurred. NIPSCO also agreed to file on an annual basis its request for recovery of actual CCT O&M and depreciation expenses incurred during the previous twelve months. Depreciation expenses will be predicated upon NIPSCO's current depreciation rates.
The 42150 Settlement also provided:
Allocation of demand related costs shall be based on the allocation methodology in the cost study shown in Respondent's Revised Exhibit RDG-2 and related work papers in IURC Cause No. 41746, reproduced as Petitioner's Exhibit RDG-2 in this Cause No. 42150. The parties agree that NIPSCO's return on its investment in CCT should be excluded from NIPSCO's FAC earnings cap calculation and that exclusion is a part of this Settlement Agreement....
Appellant's App. p. 21. To implement the ratemaking treatment called for in the 42150 Settlement, the Commission also approved two rate surcharge mechanisms denominated by NIPSCO as the "Environmental Cost Recovery Mechanism" ("ECRM") and the "Environmental Expense Recovery Mechanism" ("EERM") (collectively "environmental surcharges"). The environmental surcharges will increase customer rates by reference to certain formulae. The environmental surcharges allow NIPSCO in future proceedings to recover through its rates approved environmental costs, including a return on CCT costs in accordance with Indiana Code Sections 8-1-2-6.6 and 8-1-2-6.8, and its incremental operation, maintenance, and depreciation expense after commencement of commercial operation of the CCT.
In December 2002, CAC filed its Notice of Appeal with the Commission. Simultaneously, CAC filed with this court a verified petition to appeal final order of the Commission, a case summary, and a motion to consolidate this appeal with the already pending appeal in Cause No. 93A02-0210-EX-855, which related to the Commission's September 23, 2002 Final Order in Cause No. 41746 concluding an investigation into NIPSCO's base rates and charges.[2] In January 2003, we denied CAC's motion to consolidate but granted the verified petition to appeal. In April 2003, this court conducted a pre-appeal conference, the principal topic of which *294 was CAC's request that this appeal be held in abeyance pending final resolution of the appeal in the base rates appeal. We denied the request and now render a decision in this matter.
Analysis
As a threshold matter, we note our standard of review for appeals from administrative decisions. Our review of an administrative decision is limited to whether the agency based its decision on substantial evidence, whether the agency's decision was arbitrary and capricious, and whether it was contrary to any constitutional, statutory, or legal principle. PSI Energy, Inc. v. Indiana Office of Utility Consumer Counsel, 764 N.E.2d 769, 774 (Ind.Ct.App.2002), trans. denied. We are not allowed to conduct a trial de novo, but rather, we defer to an agency's fact-finding, so long as its findings are supported by substantial evidence. Id.
The first stage of our review examines whether the agency's "decision contain[s] specific findings on all of the factual determinations material to its ultimate conclusions," which is especially important when the agency's decision is a rate order. Id. Basic findings of fact are important because they enlighten us as to the agency's "reasoning process and subtle policy judgments" and allow for "a rational and informed basis for review," which lessens the likelihood that we would substitute our "judgment on complex evidentiary issues and policy determinations" better decided by an agency with technical expertise. Id. Requiring an agency to set forth basic findings also assists the agency "in avoiding arbitrary or ill-considered action." Id.
The second stage of the review process examines whether there is substantial evidence in the record to support the agency's basic findings of fact. Id. To determine whether there was substantial evidence sufficient to support the agency's determination, we must consider all evidence, including that evidence supporting the determination as well as evidence in opposition to it. Id. We may set aside agency findings of fact only when we determine, after a review of the entire record, that the agency's decision clearly "lacks a reasonably sound basis of evidentiary support." Id.
Additionally, however, it is well established that the substantial evidence test cannot be utilized to analyze the reasonableness of the conclusions of ultimate fact inferred by an agency from its findings of basic fact. Id. Therefore, even though an agency's findings of fact may represent inferences drawn by the agency and thus not be susceptible to scrutiny for evidentiary support, the reasonableness of the agency's inferences is an appropriate judicial determination. Id. Moreover, any agency determination that is not in accordance with the law may be set aside because we owe no deference to an agency's conclusions of law. Id.
I. Waiver
The first issue we address is that of waiver. NIPSCO contends that the issues and grounds for appeal asserted by CAC were neither raised nor preserved before the Commission and are, therefore, waived for purposes of appeal. The statute pursuant to which CAC filed its appeal provides:
Any person, firm, association, corporation, limited liability company, city, town, or public utility adversely affected by any final decision, ruling, or order of the commission may, within thirty (30) days from the date of entry of such decision, ruling, or order, appeal to the court of appeals of Indiana for errors of law under the same terms and conditions as govern appeals in ordinary civil actions, except as otherwise provided in *295 this chapter and with the right in the losing party or parties in the court of appeals to apply to the supreme court for a petition to transfer the cause to said supreme court as in other cases. An assignment of errors that the decision, ruling, or order of the commission is contrary to law shall be sufficient to present both the sufficiency of the facts found to sustain the decision, ruling, or order, and the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain the finding of facts upon which it was rendered.
Ind.Code § 8-1-3-1. CAC maintains that because it had the statutory authority to appeal pursuant to this section, it was permitted to raise issues not raised below because it was not a party to those proceedings.
Our supreme court addressed the question as to which issues CAC may raise when bringing an appeal pursuant to Indiana Code Section 8-1-3-1 in Citizens Action Coalition of Indiana, Inc. v. Public Serv. Co. of Ind., Inc., 582 N.E.2d 330 (Ind.1991). In that case, our supreme court addressed the issue that is before us today, namely whether CAC, in pursuing an appeal from an order of the Commission, can raise issues not presented to the Commission below. Id. In holding that CAC was not precluded from raising new issues, our supreme court reasoned:
[N]otwithstanding the contention of PSI to the contrary, this interpretation of I.C. 8-1-3-1 effectively requires potential appellants to intervene in the Commission proceeding in order to preserve for appeal specific arguments which may be made that the Commission's decision was in error. PSI maintains that adversely affected ratepayers who fail or choose not to intervene in proceedings before the Commission may bring an appeal from a rate order under the statute, but that in that appeal the ratepayer may challenge the order only on grounds advanced by one of the parties or intervenors which appeared before the Commission. The situation at hand illustrates the miscreant nature of this position. Only one argument was advanced in the proceeding below, and that argument was to make no adjustment to PSI's retail rates despite a 12% drop in one category of that utility's operating expenses. According to PSI, adversely affected ratepayers indeed had the right to appeal the Commission's order as erroneous but, unfortunately, no arguments upon which to base their appeal remained viable because all parties and intervenors were in agreement that this was the appropriate treatment of PSI in the wake of the Tax Reform Act. In order to assure the proper preservation of arguments to be made on appeal under PSI's interpretation of the statute, CAC, or any other party who might later consider itself to be "adversely affected" by the Commission's decision and wish to avail itself of the opportunity for judicial review afforded by I.C. 8-1-3-1, would have to intervene in the proceeding and make sure those particular arguments were made even though such participation is not a prerequisite to appeal under the terms of the statute. PSI's interpretation of I.C. 8-1-3-1 makes a sham of the right to challenge a Commission decision subsequent to the proceeding that the legislature has afforded to all ratepayers, whether participants in the Commission proceeding or not, and it effectively forecloses judicial review of a Commission decision if those appearing before the Commission enter into what amounts to a consent decree. This is clearly an intolerable result.
Id. at 334 (emphasis supplied).
CAC's ability to raise issues not raised below was clearly established by that case.
*296 NIPSCO acknowledges this holding, but argues that the holding is impacted by the subsequent adoption of Indiana Appellate Rule 5(C)(2),[3] which deals with appeals from agency decisions. This rule provides:
1. Jurisdiction. The Court of Appeals shall have jurisdiction to entertain actions in aid of its jurisdiction and to review final orders, rulings, decisions and certified questions of an Administrative Agency.
2. Assignment of Errors. No party shall file an assignment of errors in the Court of Appeals notwithstanding any law, statute, or rule to the contrary. All issues and grounds for appeal appropriately preserved before an Administrative Agency may be initially addressed in the appellate brief.
App. R. 5(C)(2) (emphasis supplied). The term "Administrative Agency" includes the Commission. See App. R. 2(A).
NIPSCO argues that the new appellate rule specifically limits issues and grounds on appeal to those "appropriately preserved" before the Commission and thus, the rule overrides Indiana Code Section 8-1-3-1 to the extent the statute allows strangers to a Commission proceeding to raise new issues on appeal. In short, NIPSCO argues that because the grounds for appeal set forth in CAC's brief were not raised before the Commission, they necessarily have not been "appropriately preserved before [the] Administrative Agency" as required by the rule. Appellee's Br. p. 9.
By concentrating on the last sentence of the rule, NIPSCO takes it out of context. To properly understand the purpose of the rule, it is necessary to consider the rule in its entirety. The first portion of the rule defines the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeals in appeals from administrative agencies. The second portion of the rule addresses the "Assignment of Errors." That portion specifically prohibits the filing of an assignment of errors, thereby abandoning the former requirement that an assignment of errors be filed in appeals from decisions by administrative bodies such as the Unemployment Board and the Commission. See Scott Paper Co. v. Public Serv. Comm'n, 164 Ind.App. 565, 567, 330 N.E.2d 137, 139 (1975) (holding that the assignment of errors in such a statutory appeal was the initial pleading in the reviewing court and served the same function as the complaint in special statutory proceedings in a trial court; without the filing of an assignment of errors, the jurisdiction of this Court was not initiated, and the power of review could not be pursued).
Rather than setting forth the grounds for appeal in a separate assignment of errors, parties are now permitted to raise all "appropriately preserved" issues for the first time in the appellate brief. Thus, those litigants who were parties to the proceedings before an administrative agency are now able to list the grounds of appeal in their appellate briefs rather than an assignment of error, but those grounds would be limited to those properly preserved below. See National Rural Util. Co-op. Finance Corp. v. Public Serv. Comm'n, 552 N.E.2d 23, 29 (Ind.1990) (holding that an appellate court will not review issues on appeal that were never before and, therefore, never ruled upon, by an administrative body). In other words, "appropriately preserved" for those litigants would mean sufficiently preserved below.
*297 However, "appropriately preserved" does not hold the same meaning when applied to those litigants who are appealing an administrative decision via Indiana Code Section 8-1-3-1 and were not parties below. Our supreme court has unequivocally held that those litigants are permitted to raise issues in their appeals that were not addressed below. Thus, for them, issues do not have to have been raised below to have been "appropriately preserved" for purposes of Appellate Rule 5.
We recognize that Indiana Code Section 34-8-1-3 provides that "[t]he supreme court has authority to adopt ... rules of court that govern and control practice and procedure in all the courts of Indiana," and "all laws in conflict with the supreme court's rules have no further force or effect." We see no indication in the Appellate Rule promulgated by our supreme court after its holding in Citizens Action Coalition of Indiana, Inc. v. Public Serv. Co. of Ind., Inc. that it intended to extinguish the ability to raise new issues by parties appealing pursuant to Indiana Code Section 8-1-3-1. Because that case was existing law at the time of the rule promulgation, we conclude the rule would have had to much more clearly indicate an intended change in the law. Cf. South Eastern Indiana Natural Gas Co. v. Ingram, 617 N.E.2d 943, 953 (Ind.Ct.App. 1993) (holding that the General Assembly has the power to abrogate or modify the common law, but when it fails to do so either in express terms or by unmistakable implication, we must presume that the legislature is aware of the common law and does not intend any change). We will not read an intent to extinguish the ability to raise new issues into the adoption of the rule and will instead construe the rule and the supreme court precedent in harmony unless and until our supreme court gives clear guidance to the contrary. To hold otherwise would be to render the ability of litigants appealing pursuant to Indiana Code Section 8-1-3-1 essentially meaningless by binding them to the issues addressed below. Our supreme court has already rejected such an outcome. See Dragon v. State, 774 N.E.2d 103, 107 (Ind. Ct.App.2002) (holding that supreme court precedent is binding upon us until it is changed either by that court or by legislative enactment), trans. denied. The grounds for appeal raised by CAC are not waived.
II. FAC Earnings Cap Calculations
The 42150 Settlement as approved by the Commission expressly provided that "NIPSCO's return on its investment in CCT should be excluded from NIPSCO's [Fuel Adjustment Charge] earnings cap calculation and that exclusion is part of this Settlement Agreement." Appellant's App. p. 21. CAC challenges the approval of this language and argues that the earnings were required to be added to NIPSCO's net operating income ("NOI").
Indiana Code Section 8-1-2-6.6(b) provides:
Upon the request of a utility that began construction after October 1, 1985, and before March 31, 2002[4] of qualified pollution control property that is to be used and useful for the public convenience, the commission shall for ratemaking purposes add to the value of that utility's property the value of the qualified pollution control property under construction....
*298 The Commission rule at 170 Indiana Administrative Code Section 4-6-21 follows, stating in relevant part:
(a) A utility that receives ratemaking treatment under this rule (170 IAC 4-6) for the value of its qualified pollution control property under construction shall do the following:
(1) Add the approved CWIP earnings to its net operating income authorized by the commission for purposes of IC 8-1-2-42(d)(2) and IC 8-1-2-42(d)(3) in a fuel adjustment charge proceeding.
170 IAC 4-6-21(a)(1) (emphasis supplied).
Under Indiana Code Section 8-1-2-42(d), an electric generating utility may apply for a change in its fuel charge as often as once every three months. When a utility files such an application, it is required to show the Commission the change in the cost of fuel it uses to generate electricity and the cost of fuel included in the cost of electricity it purchases from other suppliers over the period between its last order from the Commission approving fuel costs in its basic rates and the latest month for which actual fuel costs are available. The resulting charge is commonly known as a FAC. An important component of the FAC procedure is the "earnings test," which requires the reduction of a proposed FAC to the extent it would result in cumulative excess or "over" earnings by a utility above its authorized NOI. See I.C. §§ 8-1-2-42(d)(3) and 42.3.
The first step in the "earnings test" is a determination of whether the utility's actual NOI for the prior twelve months exceeded the authorized NOI in the utility's last base rates case. Indiana Code Section 8-1-2-42(d) states in pertinent part:
[T]he commission ... shall grant the electric utility the requested fuel cost charge if it finds ... (3) the fuel adjustment charge applied for will not result in the electric utility earning a return in excess of the return authorized by the commission in the last proceeding in which the basic rates and charges of the electric utility were approved. However, subject to section 42.3 of this chapter, if the fuel charge applied for will result in the electric utility earning a return in excess of the return authorized by the commission, in the last proceeding in which basic rates and charges of the electric utility were approved, the fuel charge applied for will be reduced to the point where no such excess of return will be earned....
CAC contends that a conflict exists between the 42150 Settlement provision permitting NIPSCO's return on its QPCP investment to be excluded from its FAC earnings cap calculation and 170 IAC 4-6-21(1) directing that approved CWIP earnings be added to NOI for purposes of a FAC proceeding. CAC argues that the conflict between the 42150 Settlement provision and the rule has "significance with respect to the treatment of excess or `over' earnings under both the statutory earnings test found in Ind.Code § 8-1-2-42(d)(3) and a provision of the Commission's final order of September 23, 2002 in Cause No. 41746."[5] Appellant's Br. p. 11. CAC contends *299 that under the 42150 Settlement, the amount of earnings on QPCP that would avoid consideration in the statutory earnings test and the 41746 Order sharing mechanism would be substantial, eventually surpassing $18 million per year.[6]
NIPSCO asserts that excluding the QPCP-related return from the actual return realized for purposes of the FAC earning test, as provided for in the 42150 Settlement, is the economic equivalent of increasing the overall allowed return by the amount of authorized return on QPCP. In support of its petition, NIPSCO presented the testimony of David Vajda, the Vice President of Finance and Administration for the Merchant Business Unit of NiSource, which includes the electric generation and transmission business of NIPSCO. Vajda testified that there was no intent to do anything different than what is required in the regulation. When asked how NIPSCO will treat the earnings associated with CWIP Ratemaking Treatment, Vajda replied:
In accord with 170 IAC 4-6-21, NIPSCO will add all CWIP earnings to its authorized NOI for purposes of the FAC (d)(2) and (d)(3) tests. For example, NIPSCO's current approved electric utility NOI is $225 million. Assuming $1.0 million in CWIP earnings, the Company will utilize a $226 million NOI for purposes of the earnings test under IC 8-1-2-42(d)(2).
Appellee's App. pp. 9-10. As to whether there was a difference between that explanation and the Settlement provision, Vajda answered no and explained:
[By] adding the earnings to the authorized net operating income for purposes of the fuel adjustment clause, you're in effect excluding the effect of those incremental earnings.
So I think we're saying the same thing. I thinkI mean the source of confusion is, are we looking at adding to NOIif you add to the NOI, you in effect exclude those earnings from the FAC test.
If you don't change the NOI for those tests, what would happen is they would come through your actual charges and there would be an impact on the FAC. So by doing it the way I'm proposing in my answer to Question 24, we are in effect excluding it from the earnings test calculation.
*300 Appellee's App. p. 119. He further addressed the policy that electric utility companies should be able to recover a return on substantial investments required for environmental compliance without risking the loss of those returns, stating:
From a logical perspective, the legislature found it important enough to make these expenditures and provided that opportunity.
It wouldn't make sense for the utility to make the expenditures, be allowed the additional return, and then through the return mechanism, have to immediately refund those incremental revenues that the statute granted for those [CCT] investments.
In essence, it would be granting the recovery and the return on the investment with one hand and taking it back through the other hand.
Appellee's App. p. 120.
Cathy Hodges is the Director, Rates and Structure, for Energy Supply Services of the Merchant Business Unit of NiSource, which includes the electric generation and transmission business of NIPSCO. She explained:
NIPSCO proposes a semi-annual letter filing process for the ECRM billing factors, with an annual hearing. As proposed, the Commission will conduct annually an evidentiary hearing to approve NIPSCO's ongoing five-year compliance plan and its estimated environmental expenditures. The annual hearing will also serve to reconcile actual sales with estimated sales and resolve any issues involving the actual expenditures for the prior twelve-month period and remove all refund obligations related to such expenditures. The ECRM collection will be based upon actual environmental compliance expenditures. I.e., NIPSCO will not use estimated CCT costs for purposes of determining the ECRM billing factors.
As proposed, new ECRM factors shall be filed with the Commission semi-annually and be based on CCT costs incurred since the prior semi-annual revenue requirement, and the forecasted six-month kWh sales. The ECRM will require NIPSCO to file with the Commission five business days prior to the beginning of each recovery period the proposed tariff sheets containing the billing factors, together with supporting documentation and a revised Appendix C in the Company's tariff to become effective without an additional hearing.
Appellee's App. pp. 78-79. In her Supplemental Direct Testimony, she confirmed that the proposed cost recovery mechanisms permit the recovery of only actual costs of environmental law compliance.
NIPSCO responds that CAC's "argument that under the Commission's Order, NIPSCO could over-earn on its QPCP investment (because the return authorized is excluded from the FAC earnings test fails), is simply wrong." Appellee's Br. p. 16. It states that CAC's examples of possible over-earning situations "wholly ignore" the ECRM true-up mechanism. Appellee's Br. p. 16. NIPSCO posits that because the overall return of 7.7% will be applied to actual expenditures, the only way NIPSCO could "overearn" on its CCT investment would be if it sold more mWh of electricity than projected in its semi-annual filings. However, NIPSCO contends that if more mWh than projected are sold, the ECRM's true-up mechanism calls for actual earnings to be compared with projected earnings, with any excess of revenues realized over revenues projected to be flowed back to NIPSCO's ratepayers in a future ECRM proceeding.
CAC's primary concern appears to be that the "intent and effect" of the Settlement *301 is to preclude the Commission from considering any over-earnings caused by NIPSCO's receiving the CCT return. However, we are satisfied with NIPSCO's response that adding the QPCP return to the authorized NOI has the same result as excluding it from realized earnings for purposes of the excess earnings test, and the "true-up" provision of the mechanism approved assures that there will be no "overearnings." There was evidence presented that NIPSCO's exclusion of its return on its investment in QPCP from its FAC earnings cap calculations is the financial equivalent of adding the earnings to the NOI. Evidence was also presented to establish that the true up provision would prevent any excess earnings.[7] Thus, the evidence supports the conclusion that the end result is the same from a financial perspective.
Our supreme court has repeatedly said that "when the meaning of an administrative regulation is in question, the interpretation of the administrative agency is given great weight unless the agency's interpretation would be inconsistent with the regulation itself." State Bd. of Registration for Prof. Engineers v. Eberenz, 723 N.E.2d 422, 427-28 (Ind.2000). The evidence supports the conclusion that the spirit and goal of 170 Indiana Administrative Code 4-6-21 have been satisfied here. We cannot conclude that it was erroneous for the Commission to allow NIPSCO's approach, effectively finding that it sufficiently complied with the rule. We have indicated our preference to place substance over form. See MDM Invs. v. City of Carmel, 740 N.E.2d 929, 933 (Ind.Ct.App.2000). Our role is simply to determine whether the Commission's decision clearly "lacks a reasonably sound basis of evidentiary support," not whether the accounting principles espoused by the experts are accurate. See PSI Energy, 764 N.E.2d at 774. Because there is evidentiary support for the Commission's decision on this point, we find no error.
III. Cost of Service Study
The final issue to be addressed is CAC's contention that the Commission violated it own regulations by approving the 42150 Settlement directing that allocation of NIPSCO's QPCP costs among customer classes should be based on the allocation methodology in the cost study presented in Cause No. 41746.[8] The allocation of QPCP *302 costs among a utility's customer classes is controlled by the Commission rule codified at 170 IAC 4-6-15. This rule provides:
A utility's jurisdictional revenue requirement that results from the ratemaking treatment of qualified pollution control property under construction under this rule (170 IAC 4-6) shall be allocated among the utility's customer classes in accordance with the allocation parameters established by the commission in the utility's last general rate case.
170 IAC 4-6-15.
CAC argues that for the 42150 Settlement to comply with this rule regarding QPCP cost allocation, it would necessarily follow that the Commission would have considered Cause No. 41746 to be NIPSCO's "last general rate case" for purposes of Cause No. 42150. CAC asserts that for purposes of all the other ratemaking parameters it set in Cause No. 42150 except for QPCP cost allocation among customer classes, the Commission considered NIPSCO's "last general rate case" to be Cause No. 38045 ("1987 study"), not Cause No. 41746.[9]
In support of its argument that the revenue requirement allocation called for by the 42150 Settlement is inconsistent, CAC claims that the "results of this inconsistency in revenue requirement allocation were well understood by the parties and the Commission." Appellant's Br. p. 17. CAC argues:
The NIPSCO cost of service study submitted in Cause No. 38045 and followed in allocating the customer credits in Cause No. 41746 recommended an "across-the-board" allocation of any change approved in the utility's revenue requirement, i.e. the same percentage increase or decrease in rates for each customer class, whether residential, commercial or industrial. As the Commission expressly found in the 41746 Order:
In our view, the proposed $225 million of Guaranteed Credits should be allocated "across the board" to eligible customers. No party in this case argued for anything other than an "across the board" application of any change in rates. The Greneman study confirms that an "across the board" application of any rate change is appropriate. Indeed, the Greneman study confirms the appropriateness of continuing the rate design underlying the rates and charges approved in the 1987 Order. [T]he Greneman cost of service study is being used here, as well as in Cause No. 42150.
However, using only the demand-related allocators in the cost study submitted in Cause No. 41746 to determine the proportion of increased QPCP costs to be borne by each customer class, the 42150 Settlement and Order definitely did not allocate NIPSCO's increased revenue requirement for QPCP costs "across the board." Instead, the ratemaking treatment contemplated by the 42150 Settlement and Order assured that NIPSCO's residential customers would pay significantly larger Environmental Surcharges than other customer classes, especially NIPSCO's industrial customers, would pay significantly smaller Environmental Surcharges than an "across-the-board" allocation would entail.
*303 Appellant's Br. pp. 17-18 (emphasis original) (internal citations omitted).[10]
NIPSCO argues that the purpose of the rule requiring that allocation among customer classes be governed by the utility's last general rate case is to allow utilities to avoid the necessity of preparing a costly cost of service study every time they seek authorization for QPCP investments. It argues that the rule is not intended to preclude use of newer and more accurate studies in situations where they have already been prepared for other reasons.
Over the years since NIPSCO's last general rate case in 1987, approximately twelve new rate schedules and corresponding customer classes have been created. Therefore, Rule 15-which provides for QPCP costs to "be allocated among the utility's customer classes in accordance with the allocation parameters established by the Commission in the utility's last general rate case" (emphasis added)is literally impossible to apply in this case. The "allocation parameters" in NIPSCO's 1987 general rate case cannot be used to allocate the costs "among [NIPSCO's] customer classes," because the 1987 Study did not have allocation parameters addressed to customer classes that then did not exist.
Appellee's Br. p. 19 (internal citation omitted).[11]
Robert Greneman is an Associate Director in the Markets, Finance and Regulation group with the firm of Stone & Webster Consultants, Inc. He produced the study ("Greneman study") relied upon in the 42150 Settlement that was approved by the Commission. NIPSCO points to his testimony during the proceedings below that the use of the 1987 cost of service study would be "totally inappropriate." Appellee's App. p. 114. Greneman explained that the QPCP rates will be developed by dividing the costs allocated to each customer class by forecasted kilowatt hour sales to each class. Greneman posited that because the 1987 study allocated costs based on the demands of each class in 1987, use of that study with current forecasted sales would erratically and inappropriately result in very high and very low rates for classes that have experienced substantial change since 1987.[12]
NIPSCO witness Hodges confirmed that NIPSCO's customer classes and the numbers of customers taking service within *304 those classes had substantially changed since 1987. She stated:
170 IAC 4-6-15 specifies that the utility's jurisdictional revenue requirement related to QPCP is to be allocated among the utility's customer classes in accordance with the allocation parameters used in its last general rate case. NIPSCO's last general rate case was in 1987, and it requests that the Commission, for purposes of this allocation, approve the use of the more recent cost of service study allocation parameters, based on the allocation by Robert Greneman of the production-related portion of the NIPSCO proposed rate base in Cause No. 41746, as shown in Mr. Greneman's work papers filed in that case in support of, Respondent's Exhibit RDG-2 in Cause No. 41746. Copies of the pertinent workpapers are contained in Petitioner's Exhibit RDG-2 in this case. Mr. Greneman's allocation percentages are based on more recent usage and were used in calculations set forth in Exhibit CEH-8. NIPSCO believes this later study establishes a better allocation of costs on its electric system, because it is more current. NIPSCO's costs by customer class and by rate schedule, and the numbers of customers taking service within rate schedules have substantially changed since 1987, as have the rate schedules, themselves.
Appellee's App. p. 76. She further stated that almost a dozen new rate schedules had been approved since the time of the 1987 study.
During the administrative proceedings, NIPSCO requested the Commission's permission to use the more recent Greneman study rather than the 1987 study. CAC attempts to make an issue of the fact that the 42150 Order "is devoid of any language approving such a waiver" to use the Greneman study. Appellant's Br. p. 18. By virtue of the fact that the Commission used the Greneman study, it necessarily permitted its limited use rather than the 1987 study for purposes of allocating NIPSCO's QPCP costs among customer classes. The Commission inherently granted the waiver, even if it did not do so expressly.
Given the evidence before the Commission on the benefits of using the more recent study, we cannot conclude that doing so was erroneous. NIPSCO presented testimony explaining the Greneman study and establishing a basis for using it rather than the 1987 study, namely that the 1987 study would produce an inaccurate and inequitable result by over-assigning costs to the old rate classes and assigning no costs at all to the classes added since 1987. Enforcing strict compliance with 170 IAC 4-6-15 by requiring the Commission to use the 1987 study would produce the illogical result of having NIPSCO allocate costs based on outdated data when a more recent study is available. Again, we note that we have indicated our preference to place substance over form. See MDM Investments, 740 N.E.2d at 933. In doing so here, we cannot conclude that the Commission erred in permitting NIPSCO to rely on Greneman's study. See Robinson v. Gazvoda, 783 N.E.2d 1245, 1250 (Ind.Ct. App.2003) (stating that we are required to determine and then apply the legislative intent underlying the statute and to construe the statute in such a way as to prevent absurdity and hardship and to favor public convenience; in so doing, we consider the objects and purposes of the statute, as well as the effects and consequences of such an interpretation), trans. denied.
Furthermore, Greneman addressed the fact that the 1987 study is still being used on other costs associated with NIPSCO's *305 operations and concluded that it was appropriate to do so for those costs and not do so with respect to QPCP costs. He stated:
My concerns are technical, and I think I've verbalized my technical concern with respect to the Clean Coal Technology trackers. However, with respect to cost per service, they are selfif you will, self-normalizing, and I can explain that.
What we haveif you design rates properly and classesload factors change between classes or customers migrate between classes, there will be different cost allocations to those classes as a result of customers moving because of load factors changing.
The rates are well designed. The revenues will track the cost. And, indeed, the cost-of-service study I recently performed showed that the revenues produced from the rates of 1987 still yield relatively sound rates of return across all customer classes.
* * * * * *
So those are two technical reasons why one is appropriate for one and the other is appropriate.
Appellee's App. pp. 115-116. We are not persuaded by CAC's logic that using the two studies for different purposes is erroneous in light of Greneman's testimony. The Commission's approval of NIPSCO's reliance on the two studies is supported by sufficient evidence in the record. We find no error.
Conclusion
The grounds for appeal raised by CAC are not waived on appeal because its statutory right to become a party on appeal protects its ability to raise issues not addressed by the Commission. The Commission's approval of NIPSCO's exclusion of its QPCP return from the FAC earnings test was supported by the evidence and was not erroneous. The Commission's approval of NIPSCO's use of the most recent cost of service study was also supported by the evidence and not erroneous. We affirm.
Affirmed.
DARDEN, J., and MAY, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  CCT is defined in Indiana Code Section 8-1-8.7-1 as technology that reduces airborne emissions of sulfur- or nitrogen-based pollutants associated with the combustion of coal that either: (a) was not in general use at the same or greater scale in new or existing facilities in the United States as of January 1, 1989; or (b) has been selected for funding by the U.S. Department of Energy under its CCT program and was finally approved for such funding on or after January 1, 1989. Indiana Code Section 8-1-8.7-3 requires that before a utility may use CCT at its generating facilities, it must obtain from the Commission a certificate stating that the public convenience and necessity will be served by such use. Indiana Code Section 8-1-8.7-4 further requires that to issue the certificate, the Commission must approve the utility's estimated cost of constructing the CCT. Indiana Code Section 8-1-8.7-7 provides that an applicant for a CCT certificate may elect to undergo ongoing review of its construction and construction costs, in which case the utility must periodically submit progress reports and cost estimate revisions to the Commission.
[2]  On October 14, 2003, a panel of this court issued an opinion in that case affirming a settlement negotiated by NIPSCO, NIPSCO Industrial Group, and the OUCC. Citizens Action Coalition of Indiana, Inc. v. Northern Indiana Public Service Co., 796 N.E.2d 1264 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. pending.
[3]  The rule limiting administrative agency appeals to grounds appropriately preserved for appeal before the agency was originally adopted in 1995 as Appellate Rule 4(C) and became Appellate Rule 5(C)(2) with the 2001 revisions.
[4]  Indiana Code Section 8-1-2-6.8 applies to QPCP, the construction of which began after March 31, 2002.
[5]  In its final order in Cause No. 41746, the Commission recognized that its approval of the 41746 Settlement could well result in earnings by NIPSCO during the next four years over the $225 million level of NOI that the 41746 Settlement authorized, let alone the lower earnings levels recommended by the Commission's Staff and the non-settling parties, including CAC. The Commission ordered:
The Settlement Agreement specifies that the authorized return is to remain the same and the earnings bank to continue. However, the Settlement does not specifically address how the over-earnings should be handled. While we agree that the Credits provide immediate benefits to NIPSCO's customers, in order to clarify what NIPSCO is allowed to earn we find it in the public interest to address how the over-earnings will be handled on a going-forward basis. The Commission, charged with balancing the interests of consumers and the interests of the affected utility, finds it appropriate to include a sharing mechanism between the utility and ratepayers. The sharing mechanism provides for a sharing of the over-earnings reported by NIPSCO in each FAC on a yearly basis. The earnings will be calculated as is done currently in each FAC. If the earnings calculation demonstrates an over-earning for the most recent twelve-month period, that amount will be divided by four for each three-month period of an FAC. The over-earnings amount is then shared and forty percent will inure to the benefit of the ratepayers and be passed back to the ratepayers through each FAC filing in the form of bill reduction. The remaining portion will be retained by NIPSCO and allowed to continue to offset the cumulative under-earnings since the last rate order as currently calculated in each FAC. This mechanism balances the interests of the ratepayers as well as the utility.
Citizens Action Coalition v. Northern Ind. Pub. Serv. Co., No. 41746, slip op. at 19 (Ind.Util. Reg.Comm'n, Sept. 23, 2002).
[6]  CAC arrives at this number by multiplying $235 million (the amount NIPSCO estimated that its QPCP would increase the value of its rate base over time) by 7.70% (NIPSCO's projection of an authorized rate of return on this increment to its rate base).
[7]  CAC challenges the true up provision in its Reply Brief by arguing that it is not adequate because it does not reconcile projected and actual earnings but rather reconciles projected and actual revenues. CAC also claims that the true up mechanism does not track whether there is any difference between projected and actual expenses associated with QPCP investments. To the extent CAC challenges the adequacy and substance of the true up mechanism, it does so for the first time in its Reply Brief, and, therefore, waives the issue. See Ind. Appellate Rule 46(C) ("No new issues shall be raised in the reply brief."); Wheatley v. American United Life Ins. Co., 792 N.E.2d 927, 933 (Ind.Ct.App.2003), trans. denied. The ECRM true up mechanism is designed to monitor and reconcile NIPSCO's expenditures and earnings with respect to environmental compliance endeavors. Had CAC intended to challenge the adequacy of that mechanism, it should have done so in a separate issue in its Appellant's Brief, including citations to authority and evidence to support its argument, in addition to or instead of challenging the manner in which the 42150 Settlement addressed FAC calculations.
[8]  That study, which was prepared by Robert Greneman, was based on the audited financial results of NIPSCO's electric operations for the 12 months ending December 31, 1999, adjusted for changes that were known, fixed, and measurable thereafter and within the 12 months ending December 31, 2000. The class demands used in that cost study were based on control area peaks and NIPSCO load research data for calendar year 2000, which was used because of abnormal weather conditions in 1999 and more normal weather conditions in 2000.
[9]  It points to examples where the Commission stated in the 42150 Order, "The cost rate for common equity and customer deposits will be those approved in the Company's last electric rate case, Cause No. 38045" and "NIPSCO will now depreciate the QPCP projects using the same depreciation rates ordered by the Commission in Cause No. 38045." Appellee's App. pp. 13-14.
[10]  CAC maintains that NIPSCO projected the initial Environmental Cost Surcharge for Rate 811 (the basic residential rate) would be $0.000099 per kwh, or 2.68 times the $0.000037 per kwh for Rate 833 (the large industrial rate.). Similarly, CAC maintains that the initial Environmental Expense Surcharge for Rate 811 would be $0.000944 per kwh, or 2.31 times the $0.000409 per kwh for Rate 833.
[11]  In its Reply Brief, CAC makes much ado about NIPSCO's use of the term "literally impossible," arguing that "the Commission's order includes no finding and cites no evidence that compliance with its rule was `literally impossible.'" Reply Br. p. 8. This argument somewhat misconstrues NIPSCO's point, which we read to mean that as a practical matter it would be impossible to accurately allocate costs among the customer classes as required by 170 IAC 4-6-15 by using the 1987 study because there are numerous classes that exist now that did not in 1987. We do not understand NIPSCO's argument to be that it was asserting an actual impossibility defense to its alleged failure to comply with the regulation.
[12]  Other than advocating an across-the-board allocation technique, CAC does not explain what it would consider a proper allocation to be. Furthermore, it does not address the concern that using the outdated data from the 1987 study would produce an inequitable distribution among classes whereby the distribution would only be among those classes in existence in 1987 and not at all among those classes established since that time.

=== CASE 2208738 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:32.974274+00 ===

804 N.E.2d 620 (2004)
345 Ill. App. 3d 1127
281 Ill. Dec. 655
Jeffrey L. ROPER, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Alyson L. JOHNS, n/k/a Alyson L. Bennett, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 5-02-0778.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
January 28, 2004.
*622 Michael R. Glenn, Nokomis, for Appellant.
William F. Trapp, Brown, Hay & Stephens, Springfield, for Appellee.
Presiding Justice CHAPMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
The parties, who were never married, are the parents of Christopher L. Johns. The father appeals from an order increasing his child support obligation. He argues that the trial court (1) erred by deducting only a portion of his student loan payments in calculating his net income for child support purposes and (2) abused its discretion by not ordering child support in an amount below the statutory guideline amount. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand with directions.
I. BACKGROUND
Christopher L. Johns was born on May 2, 1991. His parents, Alyson L. Johns, now known as Alyson L. Bennett, and Jeffrey L. Roper (Jeff), were in high school at the time. On January 18, 1996, Jeff filed a petition to establish paternity. He sought visitation with the child but asked that the court reserve a determination of child support because he was then a full-time student in his junior year at the University of Illinois. Alyson, who is two years older than Jeff, had apparently finished her education by this time and was working as a licensed physical therapist assistant. It is not clear from the record what level of education Alyson attained.
On July 29, 1996, the court entered a judgment declaring Jeff to be Christopher's father and incorporating the visitation schedule to which the parties had agreed. On April 4, 1997, the court entered an agreed order providing that Jeff would pay to Alyson the following: (1) child support in the amounts of $20 per week during the school year and $200 per month during the summer months, (2) half of the cost of Christopher's health insurance premiums and medical expenses not *623 covered by insurance and 40% of the cost of daycare, and (3) $6,635 for a portion of Alyson's pregnancy and childbirth expenses and Jeff's obligations for child support and Christopher's medical expenses from his birth until the entry of the order.
In May 1997, Jeff graduated from the University of Illinois with a bachelor's degree in business administration. That fall, he enrolled at Washington University School of Law. While attending law school, Jeff decided to enroll in a combined degree program, which meant that he would earn both a law degree and a master's degree in business administration and finish in four years instead of three. In May 2001, Jeff graduated from law school. Prior to graduation, he had accepted a position with Deloitte and Touche, which was to pay him $75,000 per year.
On June 18, 2001, Alyson filed a petition for a modification in child support, seeking an increase based on the increase in Jeff's income. On August 12, 2002, the trial court held a hearing in the matter. By that time, Jeff had been laid off from his position with Deloitte and Touche, although he has since found another position. The primary issue at the hearing was whether Jeff's student loan payments would be deducted from his income as payments on a debt that was reasonable and necessary for the production of income. See 750 ILCS 5/505(a)(3)(h) (West 2002). Jeff testified that his total student loan debt was $180,000 and his minimum monthly payments on the loans were $2,100 per month. The record is not clear about how much of the debt represents loans Jeff took as an undergraduate at the University of Illinois and how much represents law school loans. Presumably, at least a portion represents undergraduate loans, while the bulk of the debt was incurred attending Washington University.
In an August 23, 2002, docket entry, the court determined Jeff's child support obligations. The court noted that most of the benefit of Jeff's advanced degrees would be realized after Christopher had reached the age of majority and that it would therefore be unjust to deduct the entire debt from child support payments. The court ruled that Jeff was entitled to a deduction for a portion of his student loan payments, however. For one period of Jeff's child support obligationsDecember 1, 2001, until August 23, 2002the court deducted $375 per month in calculating Jeff's income. Using this deduction, the court found that Jeff's income for that period for child support purposes was $2,014.56 biweekly, and the court ordered Jeff to pay child support for that period in the amount of $403 biweekly, representing the statutory guideline amount of 20% of that figure (750 ILCS 5/505(a)(1) (West 2002)). On October 25, 2002, the court entered a written order incorporating the findings from its docket entry. This appeal followed.
II. ANALYSIS
The trial court enjoys broad discretion in determining the modification of child support, and we will not overturn its decision unless it results from an abuse of discretion. In re Marriage of Davis, 287 Ill.App.3d 846, 852, 223 Ill. Dec. 166, 679 N.E.2d 110, 115 (1997). Jeff's primary contention on appeal is that the trial court abused its discretion in deducting only a portion of his student loan debt in calculating his net income. As an alternative to this argument, he contends that the court abused its discretion by not ordering child support in an amount below the statutory guideline amount of 20%. We may reject this argument at the outset. The statutory guidelines create a rebuttable presumption that child support in the guideline amount is appropriate. Stockton v. Oldenburg *624 305 Ill.App.3d 897, 902, 238 Ill. Dec. 1013, 713 N.E.2d 259, 263 (1999). The proponent of a deviation from the guidelines bears the burden of producing evidence that compelling reasons exist to justify the deviation. Department of Public Aid ex rel. Nale v. Nale, 294 Ill.App.3d 747, 752, 229 Ill. Dec. 5, 690 N.E.2d 1052, 1056 (1998). We need not determine whether Jeff's evidence of his debt burden was sufficient to overcome this presumption, because he did not request that the trial court deviate from the guidelines in setting support. A trial court does not abuse its discretion by failing to deviate sua sponte from the presumptively appropriate guidelines. We now turn to Jeff's argument that the trial court erred in calculating his income.
The statutory definition of "net income" for child support purposes is the total of the non-custodial parent's income from all sources, less certain specified deductions. 750 ILCS 5/505(a)(3) (West 2002). The only such deduction relevant here is the deduction for the repayment of loans for "reasonable and necessary expenses for the production of income." 750 ILCS 5/505(a)(3)(h) (West 2002). This court has recognized that student loans fall within this category.. In re Marriage of Davis, 287 Ill.App.3d at 854, 223 Ill. Dec. 166, 679 N.E.2d at 116. Although we held that the loans at issue in In re Marriage of Davis were deductible in their entirety (see In re Marriage of Davis, 287 Ill. App.3d at 856, 223 Ill. Dec. 166, 679 N.E.2d at 117), our opinion should not be read as holding that student loan payments will always be completely deductible. Like other debt payments deductible under this provision, student loans must be both reasonable and necessary for the production of income. See In re Marriage of Davis, 287 Ill.App.3d at 853, 223 Ill. Dec. 166, 679 N.E.2d at 115 ("simply because an expense falls into the category of a debt repayment does not mean that it is necessarily deductible").
Jeff does not contend otherwise. Rather, he contends that the court erred in finding his loan payments to be only partially deductible. He argues that once the court found that the debt Jeff had incurred was reasonable and necessary at all, it was obliged to find that the loan payments were, deductible in their entirety. We disagree. This court has previously found a debt incurred for the production of income to be only partially deductible. In re Marriage of Heil, 233 Ill.App.3d 888, 892, 174 Ill. Dec. 622, 599 N.E.2d 168, 171 (1992). There, we held that a noncustodial father's mortgage payments on a hunting lodge that he used to entertain business clients were only partially deductible. We found that only half the debt incurred in buying the lodge was reasonable and necessary for the production of income, because the father used the lodge for personal purposes approximately half the time. In re Marriage of Heil, 233 Ill.App.3d at 892-93, 174 Ill. Dec. 622, 599 N.E.2d at 171. We see no principled reason to treat a student loan debt differently from other debt in this regard.
Moreover, our examination of the purposes to be served by allowing the deduction in the context of student loan payments convinces us that trial courts must have the flexibility to find that a partial deduction is warranted. Because Illinois courts have not previously had the occasion to consider this issue in depth, we look to the decisions of other jurisdictions. In State ex rel. Elsasser v. Fox, 7 Neb. Ct. App. 667, 584 N.W.2d 832 (1998), cited by Jeff, the Nebraska Court of Appeals explained that policy as follows:
"[I]t is clear that [the noncustodial father] incurred his student loan in order to obtain the education necessary to gain *625 employment as a teacher. By setting the initial child support at $50 per month, the trial court made it possible for [him] to obtain his present income. Most courts recognize that fostering further education of young parents in such a fashion benefits the child throughout the child's life. It seems undesirable to undermine that policy by ignoring the fact that such students must later repay the student loans they incurred in the process." (Emphasis added.) Fox, 7 Neb. App. at 672, 584 N.W.2d at 835.
In Fox, the father's student loan debt was low, only $178 per month, and it financed an undergraduate degree that enabled the father to begin his professional career as a teacher. Further, the father finished his education and began working as a teacher when his child was two years old. The reasonableness of the debt incurred was not at issue. In subsequent cases, however, Nebraska courts have held that deductions for student loans are not unlimited. See Noonan v. Noonan, 261 Neb. 552, 564-65, 624 N.W.2d 314, 324-25 (2001) (a trial court abused its discretion in allowing a deduction for student loan payments where the noncustodial parent presented no evidence of the loan terms, the total amount owed, whether he could reduce his monthly payments, or how he had spent the loan proceeds) (citing Sears v. Larson, 259 Neb. 760, 612 N.W.2d 474 (2000)).
Another court to consider the reasons for allowing parents to deduct their student loan payments in determining net income for child support purposes was the Minnesota Court of Appeals in In re Marriage of Svenningsen, 641 N.W.2d 614 (Minn.App.2002). Unlike its Illinois counterpart, the Minnesota statute there at issue contains a provision limiting to 18 months a child support reduction based on debt incurred for expenses necessary for the production of income. In re Marriage of Svenningsen, 641 N.W.2d at 615-16 (citing Minn.Stat. § 518.551, subd. 5(f) (2000)). Whether and to what extent the debt incurred was reasonable and necessary was not at issue. Rather, the court had to determine whether the provision, which stated that any further reduction of child support due to debt repayments was limited in duration to 18 months, was applicable where the only reduction was for the father's student loan debts. In re Marriage of Svenningsen, 641 N.W.2d at 616. Nevertheless, we find relevant and persuasive the court's discussion of the public policy behind allowing but limiting the deduction. The court stated, "[C]hildren are entitled to benefit from increases in a parent's income, particularly as those increases benefit the parent's standard of living." In re Marriage of Svenningsen, 641 N.W.2d at 616. The court went on to explain that it found the time limit applicable, given this policy, because "[depriving the child of the full benefit of [the parent's] increased income and standard of living for 10 years while he repays his long-term debt is not in the child's best interest." In re Marriage of Svenningsen, 641 N.W.2d at 616.
We agree with the Nebraska court that fostering the education of a young parent such as Jeff, by considering student loans in the child support determination, benefits the child. But we also agree with the Minnesota court that the benefit to the child is elusive if the child is not allowed to share in the parent's increased income, because the difference in support is all but eliminated by such a deduction. Our statutory requirement that a debt incurred for the production of income be reasonable and necessary in order to be deductible is itself a compromise between these competing policy concerns. It would undermine this policy to hold that deductibility must be an all-or-nothing proposition. The instant case provides an excellent example of *626 the flaw inherent in such an inflexible rule. As we will discuss in more detail later, the court below apparently found that it was reasonable and necessary for Jeff to pursue a law degree but that, in light of the circumstances, it was not reasonable and necessary for him to incur the level of debt that he did. Were the trial court to find the debt deductible in its entirety, it would prevent Christopher from sharing in the benefits of Jeff's enhanced earning potential. On the other hand, were the court to find that the debt could not be deducted at all, it would discourage parents in Jeff's position from pursuing any higher education that could benefit themselves and their children financially, as well as in less tangible ways. Neither of these results is desirable in light of the policy embodied in our child support statute. Thus, we conclude that courts must have the flexibility to find student loan debt partially deductible.
With these principles in mind, we next consider whetherand to what extentthe debt Jeff incurred in pursuing his education was reasonable and necessary. Illinois courts have defined "necessary" expenses as "`those expenses outlaid by a parent with a good-faith belief his or her income would increase as a result, and which actually did act to increase income[] or would have done so absent some extenuating circumstances.'" In re Marriage of Davis, 287 Ill.App.3d at 853, 223 Ill. Dec. 166, 679 N.E.2d at 115 (quoting Gay v. Dunlap, 279 Ill.App.3d 140, 149, 215 Ill. Dec. 691, 664 N.E.2d 88, 95 (1996)). We have defined "reasonable" as not immoderate, extreme, or excessive considering the relationship between the amount of the expenditure and the amount by which the parent's income is expected to increase as a result. In re Marriage of Davis, 287 Ill.App.3d at 853, 223 Ill. Dec. 166, 679 N.E.2d at 115 (citing Gay, 279 Ill.App.3d at 149, 215 Ill. Dec. 691, 664 N.E.2d at 95).
In the instant case, Jeff's combination of degrees enhanced his earning capacity and was, therefore, necessary for the production of income. However, we do not believe that the expenditure was reasonableat least not in its entiretyfor two reasons. First, it was entirely possible for Jeff to attain those degrees without incurring such an overwhelming level of debt. He could have found a job using the skills he had acquired with his undergraduate business degree and either attended law school part time while working full time or waited a few years between college and law school so he could pay down some of his undergraduate loans and save money towards his law school tuition and expenses. Further, he could have applied to law schools with lower tuition. Second, we agree with the trial court that the amount of debt incurred was excessive in relation to the extent to which Jeff's income was enhanced.
We note that the trial court did not expressly state that it found the amount of the debt to be unreasonable. Rather, the court expressed its rationale in terms of fairness to Christopher. Citing the Fourth District Appellate Court's decision in Gay v. Dunlap, Jeff contends the court erred in so doing. In Gay, the court stated as follows:
"A trial court decision about whether to apply the statutory guidelines involves carefully balancing many factorsnot limited to those listed in the statute. [Citation.] The determination of net income, on the other hand, should be a straightforward, rigorous process." Gay, 279 Ill.App.3d at 146, 215 Ill. Dec. 691, 664 N.E.2d at 93.
The court further observed:
"[T]he purpose of subsection (a)(3) (including subsection (h)) is simply to define *627 the noncustodial parent's net income. (750 ILCS 5/505(a)(3)(h) (West 1992)). Subsection (a)(3) is not intended to determine what the `fair' amount of child support is, nor does it have anything to do with how much child support is to be paid. All it does is define net income. Expenses which it would be improper to deduct under subsection (a)(3) can still play a role in a trial court's decision regarding departure from the statutory guidelines." Gay, 279 Ill.App.3d at 147-48, 215 Ill. Dec. 691, 664 N.E.2d at 94.
We believe that Jeff cites this language out of context. The court made these observations in holding that business expenses that were not for the repayment of debt could not be deducted under this provision. Gay, 279 Ill.App.3d at 148, 215 Ill. Dec. 691, 664 N.E.2d at 94. In rejecting the father's argument that the business expenses must be deductible in fairness to the father, the court merely pointed out that the father could have asked the court to consider these business expenses as a reason to deviate below the guideline amount (see 750 ILCS 5/505(a)(2) (West 1992)).
Significantly, the Gay court went on to analyze whether the father's lease payments on a car used for business purposes were properly deductible, and the court explained the requirement that debts incurred must be "reasonable":
"[W]e find [that] it applies to the relationship between the amount of the expense and the amount by which income is in good faith expected to increase as a result. This definition implies [that] the same expense could be reasonable in one context and not in another. For instance, a mechanic's $10,000 debt for the purchase of a full set of tools-through which the parent expects his or her income to increase by $7,500 per year-may be reasonable, in contrast to a debt for the same amount incurred on the expectation of earning $5 to $10 per week doing odd jobs for neighbors." Gay, 279 Ill.App.3d at 149, 215 Ill. Dec. 691, 664 N.E.2d at 95.
Thus, we read the opinion as recognizing the need for some discretion in determining income for child support purposes. See also In re Marriage of Takata, 304 Ill.App.3d 85, 92, 237 Ill. Dec. 460, 709 N.E.2d 715, 721 (1999) (noting that trial judges must exercise some discretion in determining income).
Moreover, in considering the benefit to Christopher that might flow from Jeff's education, the trial court in fact analyzed the relationship between the amount of the debt incurred and the extent to which Jeff's education enhanced his earning capacity, which is precisely the analysis required to determine if the loan amount was reasonable. The fact that the order does not expressly state that its analysis was to determine what portion of the debt was reasonable and necessary for the production of income is not dispositive.
Nor do we find inappropriate the court's focus on the relationship between the debt burden and Jeff's enhanced earnings during Christopher's childhood. As we have stated, the courts of other jurisdictions that have considered the effect of student loan payments on child support have expressly considered the benefit to the child in finding the loan payments deductible. In Illinois, too, courts have an obligation to set child support in accordance with the best interest of the child. In re Marriage of Sheetz, 254 Ill.App.3d 695, 698, 194 Ill. Dec. 38, 627 N.E.2d 154, 157 (1993). In determining whether the level of debt accrued was reasonable, Jeff's responsibility for supporting Christopher is inherently relevant. See Stockton, 305 Ill.App.3d at 901, 238 *628 Ill.Dec. 1013, 713 N.E.2d at 263 (parents are jointly responsible for the support of their child). An expenditure that might be reasonable for a student who does not have the responsibility of a young child may not be reasonable for a parent. We seriously question whether any custodial parent would have felt free to remain a full-time student for eight years. Thus, we believe that the trial court's analysis of the relationship, between the debt and the increase in Jeff's income while he continues to be responsible for Christopher's support was proper.
Having concluded that the trial court properly found that only a portion of Jeff's debt was reasonable and necessary for the production of income, we must decide whether the court correctly determined the amount. The court noted that there is very little guidance for determining an amount that was commensurate with the benefit of the debt, and we agree. The court determined that, were Jeff to spread out his loan payments over a 40year career, he would have to pay $375 per month. This calculation creates a fiction wherein the burden of the debt is spread out evenly among the paychecks enhanced by the education. In doing so, it arrives at a proportion that represents the relationship of the debt to the benefit gained by the degree, as meaningfully as possible. Given the lack of definitive methods for determining what amount of the loan was reasonable, we find that the trial court properly exercised its discretion in adopting the method it did.
Although we approve of the method employed by the trial court in determining how much of the loan payments may be deducted, we agree with Jeff that its calculations fail to account for the interest on the loans. The statute does not distinguish between interest and principal on loan payments that are deductible. Although Jeff failed to provide the detailed loan statements requested by Alyson's attorney, the record contains enough evidence for us to estimate the actual amount of principal and interest that Jeff will pay, at least with respect to some of Jeff's loans.
Jeff submitted the following evidence with respect to his student loans: (1) a statement showing a $98,789.51 consolidated loan with an estimated total payment amount of $223,267.20, (2) a letter from the AFSA Data Corp. (AFSA) informing him that $2,126.57 in interest had accrued on a $9,500 loan, (3) a finance charge disclosure statement from AFSA indicating that he had taken a $3,750 loan to be paid over 10 years at 2% interest for an estimated total of $4,140.52, (4) a finance charge disclosure statement from AFSA showing a $4,000 loan to be paid over 10 years at 5% interest for an estimated total of $5,091.01, (5) a billing statement from the United States Department of Education's direct loans program indicating a loan with a remaining balance of $16,442.70 and monthly payments of $189.28, (6) a monthly billing statement from Sallie Mae indicating a remaining balance of $46,215.98 and monthly payments of $959.09, and (7) a promissory note for a $2,000 Federal Perkins Loan to be repaid at 5% interest.
We reiterate that it was Jeff's burden, as the proponent of the deduction, to submit evidence that would allow the court to determine the proper amount to deduct for loan payments. See In re Marriage of Minear, 181 Ill. 2d 552, 560, 230 Ill. Dec. 250, 693 N.E.2d 379, 382-83 (1998) (without sufficient evidence of the basis for a claimed deduction, a trial court acts within its discretion in refusing to deduct the expense). Thus, we need only consider those repayment obligations of which Jeff has presented sufficient evidence.
*629 Jeff's evidence demonstrates that he will make payments totaling $223,267.20 for the consolidated loans and $4,140.52 and $5,091.01 for the two AFSA loans for which he submitted finance charge disclosure statements. With respect to the remaining four loans, it is impossible to calculate Jeff's total payments because we do not know the repayment period for each. Jeff has shown, however, that he will be paying at least the principal amount on all four loans, plus $2,126.57 in accrued interest on the $9,500 AFSA loan. Considering only these proven repayment obligations, our calculations yield a total of $308,783.98.
We note that we are considering only the interest that Jeff will actually pay on his loans, not the interest that might be hypothetically charged for a 40-year repayment period. This is because the trial court's formula is merely designed to determine a portion of his actual debt that is reasonable and necessary. Applying the trial court's formula, we arrive at $7,719.60 per year that is deductible ($308,783.98 divided by 40)which means that Jeff is entitled to a deduction of $643.30 per month, $296.90 per two-week pay period, or $148.45 per week in calculating his income for child support purposes.
The trial court's written order of October 2002 orders Jeff to make a one-time payment of $1,227, representing 20% of a sign-on bonus he received from Deloitte and Touche, and pay $438 biweekly as child support from August 2001 (when he began receiving his salary from Deloitte and Touche) through November 2001 (when he began to repay his loans). These amounts are unaffected by our holding. The court also ordered Jeff to pay $403 biweekly from December 1, 2001, to August 23, 2002, and $105 per week for the period during which he received unemployment compensation. On remand, the trial court should calculate child support for these periods considering the interest Jeff has actually demonstrated he will pay on the loans. The court will also need to set child support based on the salary Jeff receives in his new position.
III. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the order of the trial court in part, but we reverse in part and remand with directions to recalculate child support as stated.
Affirmed in part and reversed in part; cause remanded with directions.
GOLDENHERSH and HOPKINS, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9737082 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:02.919995+00 ===

T. M. Kavanagh, J.
Plaintiffs filed a law action in the circuit court to recover damages for alleged *122breach of contract. The trial court, sitting without a' jury, entered a judgment in favor of plaintiffs in the amount of $10,917.64. Defendant appealed to the Court of Appeals, which reversed the trial court and ordered that a judgment of no cause of action might enter in. the Court of Appeals, 2 Mich App 305. Plaintiffs are here on leave granted. (377 Mich 708.)
On November 9, 1959, defendant entered into a contract with the city of Saginaw, through its housing commission, for construction of a low-rent housing project. The contract provided that no subcontractor would be allowed to work on the project without prior written approval of the commission. In the spring of 1960 plaintiffs and defendant entered into an agreement in writing under which plaintiffs as independent subcontractors agreed to furnish all labor, power tools, and equipment to complete the carpentry work as provided in the specifications for the project.- For this defendant agre.ed to pay plaintiffs $136,170 plus $4.70 per hour for extras. Other pertinent provisions of the agreement were:
“Terms: Net less 10% holdback for all billings received by the first of the month.
“7. * * * Any waiver of strict compliance with the terms hereof by Knapp-Stiles, Inc., shall not constitute a waiver of its right to insist upon strict compliance with the terms of this order thereafter. * # *
“10. On all subcontracts, payment shall be made for work done and material furnished at such intervals as may be agreed in writing between Knapp-Stiles, Inc., and the subcontractor; provided, however, that 10% of the amount of such labor and material payments to be made shall be retained by Knapp-Stiles, Inc., and shall be paid to the subcontractor at such time as the operations covered *123by this order are completed and accepted by the owner and Knapp-Stiles, Inc.”
Plaintiffs were not immediately approved, by the housing commission as subcontractors, and their employees were placed on defendant’s payroll pursuant to a separate letter agreement between plaintiffs and defendant, which read in pertinent part as follows:
“At such time as approval is received- of your operating as a subcontractor, we will then deduct from the total amount of your contract the amount paid out by us to your men. This will include the base rate plus health and welfare benefits, social security, unemployment insurance, and insurance. Tools and equipment will still be furnished by you during this period.”
From April 11, 1960, through the pay period .of August 15, 1960, defendant carried plaintiffs’ employees on its payroll. On August 15, 1960, plaintiffs having been previously approved as subcontractors, the parties orally agreed that plaintiffs should pay their own employees-. They further orally agreed, contrary to the original contract, that defendant’s payments to plaintiffs would be limited to the amount of plaintiffs’ payroll. The payments under this arrangement were to be kept in a separate account by plaintiffs and were to be used solely for payroll purposes. This arrangement was followed until October 13, 1960.
In October, 1960, plaintiffs discovered an overpayment made to them by defendant in excess of $1,800, which plaintiffs had-inadvertently used. Defendant then refused to advance more than plaintiffs’ net payroll less the overpayment. Plaintiffs were granted one week to raise the required funds locally, and when this failed, defendant paid plaintiffs’ October 14th payroll in the amount of $1,576.90, and *124the events which followed resulted in this lawsuit.. There is a dispute in the testimony whether plaintiffs left the job or were not permitted to continue.
. In this nonjury trial, the trial court made the following specific findings of fact: (1) defendant did not permit plaintiff to continue on the job; (2) defendant was not justified in so doing; and (3) thousands of dollars were still due and owing plaintiffs under the terms of said contract for extra work and labor, so an adjustment could have been made for said overpayment. The trial court entered a judgment of $10,917.64 for plaintiffs.
The court arrived at the amount of the judgment by taking the contract price of $136,170 and adding $15,831.59 for certain extras which the court found were ordered by defendant and performed by plaintiffs prior to October 14, 1960, for a total contract price of $152,001.59. The court then deducted amounts paid by defendant to plaintiffs and plaintiffs’ employees and clerical costs rendered by defendant in behalf of plaintiffs prior to August 15, 1960, totaling $130,963.29. The court also allowed defendant $10,088.16 for carpentry labor needed to complete the contract after October 14, 1960, and $32.50 for clerical changes to complete the contract, totaling $10,120.66, leaving the balance for which judgment was entered.
Defendant appealed to the Court of Appeals. Plaintiffs stipulated defendant was entitled to a further credit for payments made by it in the amount of $1,576.90, reducing the judgment to $9,340.74.
The Court of Appeals determined in its opinion:
“It should be noted that plaintiffs had no money due them from defendant on October 14, 1960. The trial court so found when it determined a further advance from defendant to plaintiffs on October 14, 1960, would have to be from the 10% retention, that *125plaintiffs were not entitled to nntil their work was completed.” (p 310)
The Conrt of Appeals then concluded that defendant had not breached the contract and that plaintiffs’ alleged breach in not meeting its payroll on October 14, 1960, was a substantial breach entitling defend' ant to dismiss plaintiffs from the job. It held the trial conrt should be reversed and a judgment of no cause of action entered in the Conrt of Appeals.
The Court of Appeals made findings of fact directly contrary to the findings set forth in the opinions of the trial court.
An examination of the record discloses much of the testimony was in conflict. The trial court, however, after weighing the testimony of the witnesses and seeing them testify, concluded: (1) that defendant did not permit plaintiffs to continue on the job; (2) that defendant was not justified in so doing; and (3) that thousands of dollars were due and owing on the contract so that an adjustment could have been made. These findings of fact by the trial court were not against the clear preponderance of the evidence.
We have repeatedly held in law cases tried without a jury, that' the trial judge may give such weight to the testimony as-,in his opinion he feels it should receive. In McCarty v. Mercury Metalcraft Company (1964), 372 Mich 567, 577, we said:
“This Court, in reviewing controverted issues of fact in a law case tried without a jury, does not consider the case ele novo as if it were in equity. Schneider v. Pomerville, 348 Mich 49.”
In such cases we do not reverse unless the judgment is against the clear preponderance of the evidence. Allen v. Kroger Grocery & Baking Co. (1944), 310 Mich 134; Marquette Lumber Co. v. Burke (1944), *126308 Mich 698; Stevenson v. Brotherhoods Mutual Benefit (1945), 312 Mich 81; George Wagsohal Associates, Inc., v. West (1961), 362 Mich 676; Liberty Mutual Insurance Company v. City of Bay City (1962), 367 Mich 8; Siller v. Laitila (1963), 370 Mich 373; Lud v. Sams (1963), 371 Mich 680; Insurance Company of North America v. Schuneman (1964), 373 Mich 394.
These rules apply equally to the Court of Appeals.
The Court of Appeals, relying on the fact that plaintiffs’ inability to meet their payroll of October 14, 1960, was a failure of performance constituting a prior breach of contract which prevented plaintiffs from recovering in this lawsuit, applied the rule of Jones v. Berhey (1914), 181 Mich 472, which was reaffirmed in Ehlinger v. Bodi Lake Lumber Company (1949), 324 Mich 77, 89:
“He who commits the first substantial breach of a contract cannot maintain an action against the other contracting party for failure to perform.”
In the case of McCarty v. Mercury Metalcraft Co., supra, this Court, after quoting the rule adopted in Jones, supra, said (p 574):
“That case and this Court’s other decisions on that point indicate that the words ‘substantial breach’ in the ruling must be given close scrutiny. Such scrutiny discloses that the application of such a rule can be found only in cases where the breach has effected such a change in essential operative elements of the contract that further performance by the other party is thereby rendered ineffective or impossible, such as the causing of a complete failure of consideration (Kunzie v. Nibblelink, 199 Mich 308) or the prevention of further performance by the other party (Stahelin v. Sowle, 87 Mich 124).”
The instant case does not involve a breach of the original contract, but at most a breach of an *127oral agreement in regard to accounting. The trial court specifically found that thousands of dollars were due and owing on the contract so that an adjustment could have been made. The breach of the oral agreement in regard to accounting does not affect an element so essential as to amount to a breach contemplated by the rule as “substantial.” Therefore, the rule of J ones, sufra, reaffirmed in Ehlinger, supra, does not bar the plaintiffs’ suit.
As the Court of Appeals did not pass on the other questions presented to it by the defendant, we would normally remand the case to that Court for a determination of such questions. However, those questions also call for review of the facts as found by the trial court. As to those fact questions, a reading of the record discloses the trial court’s findings are not against the clear preponderance of the evidence. The record would not permit the Court of Appeals to find otherwise; therefore, there is no reason to remand the case to that Court,
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed. The judgment of the trial court, as amended by the stipulation, in the' amount of $9,340.74 is affirmed. Plaintiffs shall have costs.
Kelly, Black, Souris, and Adams, JJ., concurred with T. M. KavaNagh, J.

=== CASE 9737083 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:02.924754+00 ===

O’Hara, J.
{dissenting). Although I disagree with Mr. Justice T. M. Kavanagh’s result, I am in complete accord with his statement “in law cases tried without a jury, * * * the trial judge may give such weight to the testimony as * * * he feels it should receive.” Such is the settled law, and of course binds the Court of Appeals.
However, I do not read the Court of Appeals’ opinion as contravening that principle. The Court *128of Appeals made no findings of fact separate or different from those of the trial judge. It did come to conclusions of law different from those of the circuit judge, but that is the province of an appellate court on review.
The difference between the two is well expressed by the Supreme Court of California. Levins v. Rovegno (1886), 71 Cal 273, 275, 278 (12 P 161, 162, 164):
“The line of demarcation between what are questions of fact and conclusions of law is not one easy to be drawn in all cases. * * * If, from the facts in evidence, the result can be reached by that process of natural reasoning adopted in the investigation of truth, it becomes an ultimate fact, to be found as such. If, on the other hand, resort must be had to the artificial processes of the law, in order to reach a final determination, the result is a conclusion of law.”
The circuit judge found that “in October 1960 * * * plaintiffs discovered an overpayment in excess of $1,800.” This is a finding of fact. It may be said that the finding by the circuit judge “which lead to plaintiffs’ dismissal" from this job” is an inference of fact which he was entitled to draw from the previously found fact. However, when the trial court held that “said dismissal was not justified under the circumstances” he left the realm of fact finding and entered' into - the area of “artificial processes' of the law’', in order to reach a final determination.” Clearly to me this was a conclusion of law. The Court of Appeals recognized the rule contended for by Justice T. M. Kavanagh (2 Mich App 305, 309):
“While there is some dispute in the testimony whether plaintiffs left the job or were not permitted to continue, the record supports the finding of the *129trial court that defendant refused to allow plaintiffs to continue.” (Emphasis supplied.)
The Court of Appeals then accepting this finding of fact recites:
“This is the breach relied on by plaintiffs.”
The Court of Appeals then goes to the question of plaintiffs’ failure of performance “constituting a prior breach of contract which prevents plaintiffs from recovering”. The fact relied upon by the Court of Appeals to support this legal conclusion was “plaintiffs’ inability to meet their payroll of October 14, 1960.” This fact is uncontroverted. Justice T. M. KavaNagh seems to recognize this by his statement “defendant paid plaintffs’ October 14th payroll.” If plantiffs had met it, there would have been no occasion for defendant to have done so. The Court of Appeals then applies settled Michigan law to that fact (p 309):
“He who commits the first substantial breach of a contract cannot maintain an action against the other contracting party for failure to perform.” Ehlinger v. Bodi Lake Lumber Company (1949), 324 Mich 77, 89.
Correctly, then, to support its legal conclusion the Court of Appeals goes to the next legal step (p 309):
“The question becomes whether plaintiffs’ failure to meet [the] payroll on October 14th, was a substantial breach.”
The Court then examines this question in terms of the law of contracts.
Quoting the test of substantiality of breach in 1 Restatement of the Law of Contracts, § 275, the Court applies the test to the case at bar. The Court carefully notes (p 310):
*130“That plaintiffs bad no money due them from defendant on October 14, 1960. The trial court so found when it determined a further advance from defendant to plaintiffs on October 14, 1960, would have to be from the 10% retention that plaintiffs were not entitled to until their work was completed.”
The Court of Appeals then makes its eminently proper decisional conclusion of law (p 311):
“We conclude plaintiffs’ breach in not meeting its payroll October 14, 1960 was a substantial breach.”
This substantial breach, having occurred first, defeats plaintiffs’ action alleging breach of the same contract.
I find no error in the decision of the Court of Appeals nor in the process by which it reached it.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals should be affirmed. Cost to defendant appellee.
Dethmees, C. J., and BreNHAN, J., concurred with O’Hara, J.

=== CASE 3177940 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-02-17 20:24:41.574228+00 ===

People v Marin (2016 NY Slip Op 01201)
People v Marin
2016 NY Slip Op 01201
Decided on February 17, 2016
Appellate Division, Second Department
Published by New York State Law Reporting Bureau pursuant to Judiciary Law § 431.
This opinion is uncorrected and subject to revision before publication in the Official Reports.
Decided on February 17, 2016
SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK
Appellate Division, Second Judicial Department
THOMAS A. DICKERSON, J.P.
L. PRISCILLA HALL
SHERI S. ROMAN
SANDRA L. SGROI, JJ.
2015-09995
(Ind. No. 1029/10)
[*1]The People of the State of New York, plaintiff,
vMaximo Marin, defendant.
Lynn W. L. Fahey, New York, NY (Benjamin S. Litman of counsel), for defendant.
Richard A. Brown, District Attorney, Kew Gardens, NY (William H. Branigan of counsel), for plaintiff.
DECISION & ORDER
Application by the defendant for a writ of error coram nobis seeking leave to file a late notice of appeal from a judgment of the Supreme Court, Queens County, rendered October 3, 2011.
ORDERED that the application is granted, and the defendant's notice of appeal is deemed to have been timely filed.
The defendant has established his entitlement to the relief requested (see People v Syville, 15 NY3d 391).
DICKERSON, J.P., HALL, ROMAN and SGROI, JJ., concur.
ENTER:
Aprilanne Agostino
Clerk of the Court

=== CASE 2208721 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:32.80145+00 ===

191 Cal.App.2d 866 (1961)
MAURICE GOLDSMITH, Appellant,
v.
CALIFORNIA STATE BOARD OF PHARMACY, Respondent.
Civ. No. 23679.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
May 9, 1961.
Arthur C. Cooper, Jerome Weber, Bertram S. Harris and John N. Frolich for Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and Lynn Henry Johnson, Deputy Attorney General, for Respondent.
FOURT, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment which in effect discharged an alternative writ of mandate, denied a peremptory writ of mandate, and gave costs to the respondent, California State Board of Pharmacy, hereinafter referred to as the "Board."
A resume of some of the facts is as follows:
The appellant, prior to January 29, 1957, was licensed as a pharmacist, had a license in the firm name of "Medical Guild Pharmacy," had a permit to sell hypodermics, syringes, needles, hypnotic drugs and a retailer's permit to sell prophylactics. The premises from which appellant operated were located at 4747 Vineland Boulevard, North Hollywood. Because of a violation, the nature of which we are not now concerned with, appellant on January 29, 1957, by action of the respondent Board had his license to practice as a licentiate in pharmacy suspended for one year (effective February 1, 1957). Execution of that order of suspension was suspended *868 for a period of three years and appellant was placed on probation under certain terms and conditions, one of which was to the effect that he should comply with all of the laws of the State of California and the United States, and with the rules and regulations of the respondent Board.
The case hereinafter will sometimes be referred to as Case Number 255. The decision therein became final.
On April 10, 1957, Martin Denkin, a deputy sheriff of Los Angeles County, who was working in association with an investigator of the Board, at about 3:50 p.m., went into appellant's store and talked with him. Denkin presented to appellant a prescription bottle to be refilled. Prior thereto, on February 15, 1957, Denkin had two prescriptions filled at appellant's place of business. On April 10th Denkin told the appellant that he had tried to reach his doctor but could not do so and asked appellant to refill the prescriptions. Appellant asked Denkin with reference to the dexedrine tablets theretofore prescribed, "What do you need these for?" and Denkin replied that he was a fighter and usually took dexedrine to better his condition before a fight, and would also like some extras. Appellant refilled the prescription and further gave Denkin 100 extra dexedrine tablets without any prescription therefor and charged Denkin $5.00 for such extra tablets. Appellant stated at the time to Denkin that he did not know whether he should do it, that he might get into trouble and Denkin was further told by the appellant not to tell anybody of the sale. Denkin then made an appointment with appellant to secure 2,000 more dexedrine tablets on April 13th. Denkin did not see the appellant use the telephone at the visit on April 10th and appellant was in his sight during all of the time Denkin was in the store excepting for a matter of about one minute.
Denkin left appellant's store with the refilled prescription and the bottle containing 100 extra dexedrine tablets and met a special investigator of the Board and turned over the purchases to such investigator.
Appellant apparently suspected that perhaps Denkin was connected in some way with a law enforcement agency and apparently to build up a defense called Lieutenant Marlowe of the Los Angeles Police Department and told him that someone had come to his store, had purchased some dangerous drugs and had wanted to buy a further amount without a prescription and inquired of the lieutenant if he would be interested in trying to catch the person. The lieutenant suspected *869 that the appellant was then and there the subject of an undercover investigation and that the call by appellant was defensive in nature. The lieutenant advised the appellant not to furnish any drugs without a prescription.
On April 13th Denkin returned to the store and told appellant that he had the money and wanted to make the purchase of 2,000 tablets of dexedrine as previously contemplated. Appellant acted frightened and stated that he did not know what Denkin was talking about, that it was dangerous, that he did not have the tablets, that he could not do anything like that, that he had too much to lose, that he had thought it over and had decided that he did not want to make the sale. Denkin left the store and shortly thereafter explained the situation to the investigator of the Board. The Board investigator with Detective Gardner of the Los Angeles Police Department then entered the store. The investigator asked appellant for the prescriptions made out to Denkin. The appellant identified the prescriptions and stated that he had refilled them on April 10 at about 5 p. m. Inquiries were then made about the extra 100 tablets of dexedrine sold by appellant to Denkin on April 10 and appellant admitted that he had sold the same without a prescription, but that his purpose in doing so was to entrap the man who had made the purchase. Appellant was asked why he had not contacted the Board or its representatives if he was interested in trapping someone, and his answer was that he did not know. There was an entry upon the prescriptions to the effect that appellant had called the doctor who issued the prescription at 5 p. m. on April 10. The investigator checked with the doctor and the doctor did state that he had talked with appellant but he did not remember the exact time or occasion.
At the administrative hearing the appellant stated that he sold the 100 extra dexedrine tablets to Denkin in an attempt to put him away. Appellant further stated that from the very first occasion when Denkin came into the store and that he thought "this guy is a screwball"--"Well, to me it was phoney right from the start. I mean, the man wasn't all there, as far as I was concerned." Appellant further stated that when Denkin asked for 2,000 dexedrine tablets that he, appellant, spoke to an employee of his and said, "This guy's got to be put away." Appellant further stated that "I'll give him a hundred for bait, ..." and thereupon took the $5.00 for such 100 tablets. Near the conclusion of the administrative hearing the appellant's counsel asked the question: *870
"Q. And at the time that you delivered these additional dexedrine, what was your intention? A. Only one. I intended to__________. There was intent for bait only. An intent only to have this man picked up, because all I could figure was he was a pusher."
The appellant further testified that he had called the doctor who wrote the original prescriptions at about 4 p.m. on April 10. Appellant's wife testified that the call to the doctor was at about 5 p.m. When asked about the discrepancy in the time the appellant's answer was that the clock in the store must have stopped.
On July 11, 1957, in Case Number 255 a Board investigator filed a petition with the Board to revoke the probation theretofore granted to the appellant. It was therein charged that appellant had violated the provisions of sections 4227 and 4228 of the Business and Professions Code.  [fn. 1]
On September 5, 1957, in Case Number 283 an investigator for the Board filed with said Board an accusation charging the appellant with having violated the provisions of sections 4227 and 4228 of the Business and Professions Code. Such accusation reads in part as follows:
"That the respondent has violated the provisions of  4227 and 4228 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California, which is gound [sic] for disciplinary action *871 pursuant to  4357 of the Business and Professions Code, in the manner more particularly hereinafter alleged:"
"That on or about April 10, 1947 [sic] respondent furnished a bottle containing 100 tablets of a dangerous drug, to wit: dexedrine, to one Martin Denkin; that at this time said Martin Denkin did not have, nor did he offer, a prescription for the said drug from any physician, dentist, chiropodist or veterinarian."
Section 11503  [fn. 2] of the Government Code provides for the requirements of an accusation.
By stipulation the two matters, that is the petition to revoke the probation and the accusation as a new proceeding were consolidated and heard on January 30, 1958, before the Board with a hearing officer presiding. On February 11, 1958, the Board rendered its decision which was to the effect that appellant had violated the provisions of the Business and Professions Code, sections 4227 and 4228. In Case Number 255 the Board set aside its previous order, which was effective as of February 1, 1957 (suspending the one-year suspension), and ordered the suspension in full force and effect; however, it also made its order in Case Number 255 subject to its order in Case Number 283. In Case Number 283 it revoked appellant's license and stayed the revocation and placed appellant on probation, a part of the terms being that appellant not exercise the privilege of his license for six months, that he report to the Board whenever so ordered, and further that he comply with all of the laws and rules and regulations of the state. The Board made its Finding Number IV, among other things, as set forth herein.  [fn. 3]
Appellant filed a petition for a writ of mandate in an effort to compel the Board to set aside its decision. The Board *872 filed its answer and the matter was heard in court on August 27, 1958. On November 7, 1958, findings of fact, conclusions of law, and a judgment were filed. Findings 8 and 13 of the trial judge are set forth herein.  [fn. 4] The judgment ordered in effect that plaintiff take nothing by reason of his petition. The appeal is from that judgment.
It was stipulated that the transcript of the testimony taken at the administrative hearing held on January 30, 1958, might be transmitted to and considered filed with this court.
Appellant contends, among other things, that the accusation failed to state a cause of action upon which the Board could have proceeded to a hearing; that the petition to revoke probation did not state a cause of action upon which the Board could have proceeded to a hearing; that there was no finding by the Board in its decision that appellant was "guilty" and the suspension which followed was a void and illegal act; that there was insufficient evidence to support the findings of the Board and the findings of the trial court, and that the wrong law was applied by the Board and the court.
[1] We will first consider the contention as to whether a cause of action was stated. Government Code, section 11503, in part and one of the findings in the administrative proceeding have been heretofore set forth. It is noted that ordinary and concise language is used in the accusation, the date of the violation is set forth, the names of the parties are spelled out and the statutes are specified which were allegedly violated. Appellant insists that the statement in the accusation to the effect that the "bottle containing 100 tablets of a dangerous drug, to wit: dexedrine ..." is a conclusion of *873 law rather than a statement of fact. There is no merit to the contention. (See Rhode v. Bartholomew, 94 Cal.App.2d 272, 279 [210 P.2d 768].) The accusation set forth that appellant furnished dexedrine and that it is a dangerous drug. The ultimate facts are alleged. Furthermore, the objection under the circumstances would appear to be one which goes to the form of the accusation and such an objection is waived unless proper proceedings are taken within 15 days of the service of the accusation upon the person accused. (See Gov. Code,  11506, subd. (a).) No demurrer was ever filed in this case. There was no mention of the matter until the appellant was represented by his present and third set of attorneys on appeal. (See Rembold v. City & County of San Francisco, 113 Cal.App.2d 795, 798 [249 P.2d 58]; Beyne v. Van Aalst, 93 Cal.App.2d 325, 326 [209 P.2d 9].)
The appellant was represented by a competent lawyer at the administrative hearings and at the Superior Court hearing. No contention was ever raised at either of those hearings to the effect that the appellant did not know of what the charges consisted or that he was in anywise confused. His only defense was the novel one that he was attempting to lay low the purchaser of the dexedrine because he figured that the purchaser was "a pusher." (See Wright v. Munro, 144 Cal.App.2d 843, 848 [301 P.2d 997]; Marlo v. State Board of Medical Examiners, 112 Cal.App.2d 276, 278 [246 P.2d 69]; Nelson v. Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, 166 Cal.App.2d 783, 787 [333 P.2d 771].)
[2] The proceeding under Case Number 255 was merely a continuation of that original case. The appellant had been placed on probation. (See Bus. & Prof. Code,  4359.) When appellant saw fit to pursue the course of conduct which he did pursue in selling the 100 tablets of dexedrine without a prescription to the officer he obviously violated the law and thereby violated the terms of his probation. Appellant seems to argue that the only way any proceeding can be initiated under the law is by way of accusation. In other words, he seems to insist in effect that probation can be granted but a proceeding to revoke such probation as such cannot be instituted. The proceeding to revoke, as heretofore indicated, was simply a part of the original proceeding. The tribunal retained a continuing jurisdiction until the probationary term expired. It is difficult to ascertain what more could have been stated in the petition to revoke probation under the circumstances. *874 Certainly the appellant never had any doubt about what he was charged with and what he had to defend against nor did his then counsel ever indicate any doubt in the matter. The contention ought not to be raised or considered for the first time on appeal.
[3] Considering next appellant's assertion that the Board never did use the word "guilty" set forth in section 4359, Business and Professions Code, and therefore the order was void. The Board did state:
"Respondent has failed to comply with the provisions of sections 4227 and 4228 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California which constitute a cause for disciplinary action pursuant to Section 4357 of said Code."
We know of no rule which requires, under the circumstances, that the identical words of the statute be used. The Board did clearly state that the appellant had "failed to comply with the provisions of Sections 4227 ..." and clearly conveyed the thought that appellant had done that which he was charged with doing. We think that the omission of the word "guilty" is of little consequence under the circumstances of this particular case. (See Anderson v. George L. Barney Co., Inc., 1 Cal.App.2d 340, 343 [36 P.2d 717], and Stoner v. Security Trust Co., 47 Cal.App. 216, 224 [190 P. 500].)
[4] With reference to the contention that the evidence was insufficient--appellant overlooks the testimony. He argues, among other things, that there was no showing that dexedrine is a dangerous drug. There was testimony from Lieutenant Marlowe to the effect that appellant stated in effect to him that the tablets in question were "dangerous drugs." Appellant was a pharmacist and was engaged in that business. Having stated himself that the dexedrine tablets were "dangerous drugs" it would seem that no other proof was necessary. Our role in this case is to ascertain whether there is any substantial evidence to support the decision. (Blue v. Watson, 147 Cal.App.2d 582 at 590 [305 P.2d 911]; Martin v. Alcoholic Beverage Control Appeals Board, 52 Cal.2d 238, 246 [340 P.2d 1].) There was testimony from the investigator for the Board to the effect that appellant remembered selling the 100 dexedrine tablets to a man without a prescription, and that the man paid $5.00 therefor. Denkin testified that he went to the appellant's store to get a previous prescription refilled and that at the time appellant not only refilled the prescription but sold him the 100 extra *875 dexedrine tablets and appellant stated in effect at the time that he should not be selling such tablets under the circumstances. We think the evidence of guilt is clear, convincing and substantial.
[5] Considering the last contention of appellant; we are not clear as to what it is to which he refers. However, if it is because of the surplus conclusion of law which is unnecessary to sustain the judgment, we think it is harmless error, if in fact it is error at all. The trial judge found that the appellant furnished a dangerous drug to Denkin without a prescription on April 10, 1957. The judge concluded as a matter of law that appellant, by such conduct, violated the provisions of Business and Professions Code, section 4227 (furnishing a dangerous drug without a prescription) and section 4228 (furnishing a dangerous drug upon a prescription, but in a container improperly marked). Clearly the appellant could not violate section 4228 of the Business and Professions Code by furnishing a dangerous drug without a prescription. It is perfectly clear, however, that appellant did violate the provisions of section 4227, Business and Professions Code, and it is further clear that the judgment is supported by proper findings of fact and conclusions of law and that the court was right in adjudging that appellant take nothing by his petition. (See Stevinson Water District v. Roduner, 36 Cal.2d 264, 271 [223 P.2d 209]; McNutt v. City of Los Angeles, 187 Cal. 245, 249 [201 P. 592]; Davis v. Baugh, 59 Cal. 568, 576; Hay v. Allen, 112 Cal.App.2d 676, 681 [247 P.2d 94]; Hammond Lumber Co. v. Gordon, 84 Cal.App. 701, 706 [258 P. 612].)
For the reasons heretofore stated the judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Lillie, J., concurred.
"The provisions of this section do not apply to the furnishing of any dangerous drug, other than any hypnotic drug, by a manufacturer or wholesaler or pharmacy to each other or to a physician, dentist, chiropodist or veterinarian or to a laboratory under sales and purchase records that correctly give the date, the names and addresses of the supplier and the buyer, the drug and its quantity."
"No person shall dispense any hypnotic drug except upon the prescription of a physician, dentist, chiropodist or veterinarian, or upon the receipt of a properly executed official hypnotic drug purchase order form."
"A record of the hypnotic drug administered by any person exempt under Section 4225 shall be kept stating the date, name and address of the patient, name and amount of the drug administered. The provisions of this section with respect to the keeping of records do not apply when hypnotic drugs are combined or compounded with medicinal drugs which render such combination or compound unfit for hypnotic use."
Section 4228 Business and Professions Code: "No person shall dispense any dangerous drug upon prescription except in a container correctly labeled with the date, the name and address and prescription number of the furnisher, the names of the prescriber and of the person for whom prescribed, and the directions for use given by the prescriber."
"On or about April 10, 1957, the respondent sold and delivered a bottle containing 100 tablets of a dangerous drug, to wit: dexedrine, to one Martin Denkin and at the time of said delivery said Martin Denkin did not have nor did he offer a prescription for said drug from any physician, dentist, chiropodist or veterinarian."
"13. That this court carefully considered the Findings of Fact, Determination of Issues and Decision of respondent Board and after reviewing the entire administrative record, finds that the respondent Board did afford the petitioner a full and fair hearing as required by law and did not permit any abuse of discretion in its Decision; and that the court further finds that the respondent Board's Findings of Fact, Determination of Issues and Decision and each of them, are supported by substantial evidence and by the weight of the evidence in the light of the whole record; and further the court finds that the Decision of said respondent Board should not be set aside, annulled or vacated, but, on the contrary, should remain in full force and effect."
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Section 4227 Business and Professions Code: "No person shall furnish any dangerous drug, other than any hypnotic drug, except upon the prescription of a physician, dentist, chiropodist or veterinarian.
[fn. 2]  2. Government Code Section 11503: "A hearing to determine whether a right, authority, license or privilege should be revoked, suspended, limited or conditioned shall be initiated by filing an accusation. The accusation shall be a written statement of charges which shall set forth in ordinary and concise language the acts or omissions with which the respondent is charged, to the end that the respondent will be able to prepare his defense. It shall specify the statutes and rules which the respondent is alleged to have violated, but shall not consist merely of charges phrased in the language of such statutes and rules. ..."
[fn. 3]  3. "IV
[fn. 4]  4. "8. That, in the aforesaid Findings of Fact, Determination and Issues and Decision, the respondent Board found and this court now finds that, on or about April 10, 1957, the respondent sold and delivered a bottle containing 100 tablets of a dangerous drug, to wit: dexedrine, to one Martin Denkin and, at the time of said sale and delivery, said Martin Denkin did not have nor did he offer to respondent, a prescription for the said dangerous drug, dexedrine, from any physician, dentist, chiropodist, or veterinarian."

=== CASE 9737086 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:08.794763+00 ===

KAUFMAN, P. J.
Appellant, Beatrice Benson, pursuant to section 2801 of the Labor Code, filed this action for personal injuries against her employer, Adelaide Brady, the respondent herein. This appeal is from a judgment entered on a jury verdict in favor of the respondent. The only contentions on appeal aré that the trial court erred in its instructions to the jury on the effect of contributory negligence and the doctrine of comparative negligence.
As there were no witnesses besides the parties to the accident in which the appellant was injured, the record reveals a substantial amount of conflicting evidence. The appellant worked one day a week as a part-time domestic servant, at the respondent’s home at 2633 Vista Del Mar in Tiburón. The accident occurred on December 22, 1955, about 10:30 or 11 in the morning. At that time, it was daylight and raining lightly, but there had been a very heavy rain. The respondent drove the appellant to the Brady home and parked the car in the left-hand slot of the garage. The respondent’s home had a hillside entrance with a corrugated concrete driveway and walkway ramp leading downhill from the garage to the entrance of the house.
The respondent testified that she told the appellant to be *282careful on the way to the house. The appellant denied this and stated that after she had gotten out of the parked car on the passenger side and taken 2-3 steps down the driveway, her left foot slipped and she fell backward and was partially jammed under another parked car on the ramp about 3 feet away. Her left leg was broken and she sustained other minor injuries as a result of which she was unable to work for several months. The appellant stated that she was walking slowly and looked where she was going. The respondent testified that appellant was running down the driveway and that she heard the appellant stumble and fall.
The ramp was wet from the rain. As the appellant had been employed at the respondent’s home for several months, she was familiar with the entrance to the house. The appellant testified that she was wearing low heeled flat shoes. The respondent stated that the appellant was wearing unstable sling shoes. The appellant testified that she was carrying a shopping bag while the respondent testified that she was quite sure that the appellant was not carrying anything.
The appellant stated that she saw and felt grease in the garage on the morning of the accident. She did not, however, discover any grease on her shoes until several months after the accident. The respondent testified that there were always grease mats under the parking area in the garage but that there was no grease present on the day of the accident as the garage had been cleaned earlier that very morning.
The first contention on appeal is that the trial court erred in giving, on its own motion, the following instruction on contributory negligence:
“The issues to be determined by you in this case are these:
“First: Was the defendant negligent ?
“If you answer that question in the negative, you will return a verdict for the defendant. If you answer it in the affirmative, yon have a second issue to determine, namely:
“Was that negligence a proximate cause of any injury to the plaintiff?
“If you answer that question in the negative, plaintiff is not entitled to recover, but if you answer it in the affirmative, you then must find on a third question:
“Was the plaintiff negligent ?
“If you find that she was not, after having found in plaintiff’s favor on the other two issues, you then must fix the amount of plaintiff’s damages and return a verdict in her favor.
*283“If you find that plaintiff was negligent, you then must determine a fourth issue, namely:
“Did that negligence contribute as a proximate cause of the injury of which the plaintiff here complains?
“If you find that it did, your verdict must be for the defendant, but if you find that it did not, and you previously have found that negligence on defendant’s part was a proximate cause of plaintiff’s injury, you then must fix the amount of plaintiff’s damages and return a verdict in her favor.
“But, if you should answer that fourth question in the affirmative, thus finding that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence, you then must follow the law and procedure for arriving at damage and diminishing the same in proportion to the amount of negligence attributable to the plaintiff. This you will do in accordance with instructions that I have given and shall give on such matters.” [Emphasis supplied.]
Appellant argues that the above quoted instruction denied her the protection specifically provided by section 2801 of the Labor Code which reads as follows:
“In any action to recover damages for a personal injury sustained within this State by an employee while engaged in the line of his duty or the course of his employment as such, or for death resulting from personal injury so sustained, in which recovery is sought upon the ground of want of ordinary or reasonable care of the employer, or of any officer, agent or servant of the employer, the fact that such employee has been guilty of contributory negligence shall not bar a recovery therein where his contributory negligence was slight and that of the employer was gross, in comparison, but the damages may be diminished by the jury in proportion to the amount of negligence attributable to such employee.
“It shall be conclusively presumed that such employee was not guilty of contributory negligence in any case where the violation of any law enacted for the safety of employees contributed to such employee’s injury.
‘‘It shall not be a defense that:
“(a) The employee either expressly or impliedly assumed the risk of the hazard complained of.
“ (b) The injury or death was caused in whole or in part by the want of ordinary or reasonable care of a fellow servant.
“No contract, or regulation, shall exempt the employer from any provisions of this section.”
The applicable rules for eases under the statute were well *284stated in Mantonya v. Bratlic, 109 Cal.App.2d 244 [240 P.2d 667]. In that case, a ranch employee sued his employers on the theory that his injuries were caused by a defective tractor which his employers had failed to keep in repair. The only instruction on contributory negligence given was the following:
“No. 17. If you find from the evidence that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence in only a slight degree and that of the employer was gross, in comparison, then, in rendering a verdict, you shall diminish any award to the plaintiff in proportion to the amount of negligence attributable to the plaintiff as employee.”
The court, in reversing the judgment for the plaintiff-employee held at 250 and 251:
“Section 2801 of the Labor Code has the effect of qualifying but not abolishing the defense of contributory negligence, in cases coming under it. It provides that contributory negligence shall not bar a recovery where it is slight in comparison to that of the employer, but that in such a case the damages may be proportionately reduced. In Hontz v. San Pedro, etc. R. R. Co., 173 Cal. 750 [161 P. 971], the court said that this provision, then in the Roseberry Act, could have no application where the employer’s negligence, if any, was slight as compared with the negligence of the employee. In Tubbs v. Stone & Webster Const. Co., 30 Cal.App. 705 [159 P. 242], in discussing a similar provision, the court stated that the jury could not give a verdict for the defendants unless the plaintiff’s negligence was found to be more than slight in comparison with that of the defendant. Construed literally, section 2801 of the Labor Code seems to provide that contributory negligence will bar a recovery where such negligence is more than slight and that of the employer is less than gross in comparison. Whether or not that meaning was intended, the provision for a proportionate reduction in damages would have the effect of barring a recovery where the negligence of the plaintiff equalled or exceeded that of the defendants. In all fairness, some further guidance should have been given to the jury in applying this statutory provision to the close factual questions which were here presented.”
After giving the usual preliminary instructions defining negligence, the court in the instant case read the relevant portion of section 2801, and then instructed as follows:
“An employer is under a duty to furnish a safe working place for employees. This duty requires the employer to exercise ordinary care and to make a reasonably careful inspection *285at reasonable intervals to learn of dangers, not apparent to the eye.
‘‘The defendant was under a duty, which she could not delegate to others, to furnish the plaintiff with a reasonably safe place in which to work, and the omission on the part of the defendant, if any you find, to furnish a reasonably safe place in which to work is negligence, and renders the defendant liable in damages for the injury, if any, to the plaintiff caused by reason of such negligence, if any you find.
“It is the duty of the employer to inform the employee of any danger of which the employer is or ought to be aware, but of which the employee is ignorant.
“No inference of negligence arises from the mere fact that plaintiff fell, or from the mere fact that the sidewalk was slippery, if you find from the evidence such to have been the fact.
“To impose liability on the owner it must be shown that the claimed condition of the walk or passageway existed, and that the owner knew or should have known of it.
“You are instructed that if you should find in this case that there was negligence on the part of the defendant employer, and negligence on the part of the plaintiff, and that the negligence of both concurred and combined to produce the injury to the plaintiff, the law does not prevent the plaintiff from recovering. It is the doctrine of comparative negligence that applies in such an instance. You compare the negligence, and you do not, by reason of contributory negligence on the part of the plaintiff, deny recovery upon her part, if she is at all entitled to recover under my instructions.”
Appellant also complains of the following instructions on comparative negligence:
‘‘If you find that both the plaintiff and the defendant were negligent and that the negligence of the plaintiff which contributed to the accident exceeded that of the defendant or equaled it, then the plaintiff cannot recover.
“For the purpose only of illustrating how to apply the law that requires a proportional reduction of damages in the event of finding both the defendant and the plaintiff were guilty of negligence which contributed as a proximate cause to plaintiff’s injury, let us assume that a jury in a case similar to this has made such findings.
“Its next step would be to determine the amount of damages to which the plaintiff would be entitled under the Court’s instructions, if the factor of contributory negligence were *286not present and the other necessary elements of liability were present. Let us call that amount ‘X Dollars. ’
"The jiiry next would be required to view as a combined effect the negligence of the defendant and the negligence of the plaintiff which were proximate causes of the injury. Then, with that combined negligence in mind the jury would determine, in fractions or percentages, what portion of it, less than one-half, consisted of plaintiff’s own conduct.” [Emphasis supplied.]
Appellant complains particularly of the language in the above instruction which instructs the jury to view the combined effect of the negligence of both parties, and the language which implies that her own negligence had to be less than half of the total negligence in order to recover.
In following the rule of the Mantonya case, supra, the question here is, whether when the instructions are considered as a whole, as they must be (Gordon v. Aztec Brewing Co., 33 Cal.2d 514 [203 P.2d 522]), the particular instructions complained of, prevented the jury from receiving adequate guidance, in applying the provisions of section 2801 of the Labor Code, to the questions of fact here presented. It must also be noted that although the statute speaks in terms of "slight negligence” and "gross negligence,” both sides in the instant case stipulated that the court need not instruct the jury on the definition of these terms.  As stated in Alarid v. Vanier, 50 Cal.2d 617 at page 625 [327 P.2d 897] :
"No precise formula can be drawn for deciding whether there has been a miscarriage of justice. In each instance the determination whether the probable effect of an instruction has been to mislead the jury and whether the error has been prejudicial so as to require a reversal depends upon all the circumstances, including the evidence and the other instructions given....”
Viewing the instructions as a whole, we find no prejudicial error. The trial court substantially followed the rule of the Mantonya case and in view of the highly conflicting evidence as to the cause of this accident, we cannot say that the verdict of the jury does not find support in the evidence.
In view of the foregoing, the judgment of the trial court is hereby affirmed.

=== CASE 9737087 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:08.798905+00 ===

DOOLING, J., and DRAPER, J.
J.—  We concur. However, a word should be said as to a point raised by appellant at oral argument but not discussed in the above opinion. Ap*287pellant argued that the instructions erroneously directed the jury to determine the proportionate causal contribution of the parties to plaintiff’s injury, rather than their proportionate negligence. This question has not been determined in California. In other jurisdictions, the rule appears to be that, once causal connection of the negligence of each party with the injury is found, “the apportionment must be made on the basis of comparative fault rather than comparative contribution” (41 Cal.L.Rev. 1, 14-15). Assuming this doctrine to be applicable in California, the instructions here given are consistent with it. The jury was told to view the combined negligence of plaintiff and defendant, and then to determine what portion of it consisted of plaintiff’s own conduct. Thus the instructions are not vulnerable to the criticism made by appellant.
A petition for a rehearing was denied February 19, 1960, and appellant’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied March 16, 1960.

=== CASE 3027298 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:37:55.24891+00 ===

United States Court of Appeals
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
___________
No. 99-3218
___________
GS Roofing Products Company, Inc;        *
Hanson Aggregates West, formerly         *
known as Gifford-Hill & Company, Inc.;   *
Bean Lumber Company; Curt Bean           *
Lumber Company,                          *
*
Petitioners,               *
*
v.                                 *
*   Petition for Review
Surface Transportation Board; United     *   of an Order of the
States of America,                       *   Surface Transportation Board.
*
Respondents,               *
*
Arkansas Midland Railroad Company,       *
*
Intervenor on Appeal.      *
___________
No. 00-2213
___________
GS Roofing Products Company, Inc;        *
Hanson Aggregates West, formerly         *
known as Gifford-Hill & Company, Inc.;   *
Bean Lumber Company; Curt Bean           *
Lumber Company; Dardanelle &             *
Russellville Railroad Company; East      *
Texas Central Railroad Company,          *
*
Petitioners,               *
*
v.                               *
*
Surface Transportation Board; United   *
States of America,                     *
*
Respondents,             *
*
Arkansas Midland Railroad Company,     *
*
Intervenor on Appeal.    *
___________
No. 00-2740
___________
Arkansas Midland Railroad Company,     *
*
Petitioner,               *
*
v.                              *
*
Surface Transportation Board; United   *
States of America,                     *
*
Respondents,              *
______________________          *
*
GS Roofing Products Company, Inc.;     *
Hanson Aggregates West, Inc., formerly *
known as Gifford-Hill & Company;       *
Bean Lumber Company; Curt Bean         *
Lumber Company; Dardanelle &           *
Russellville Railroad Company; East    *
Texas Central Railroad Company,        *
*
Intervenors on Appeal.    *
-2-
___________
Submitted: January 10, 2001
Filed: August 20, 2001
___________
Before WOLLMAN, Chief Judge, FAGG, and HANSEN, Circuit Judges.
___________
WOLLMAN, Chief Judge.
This is the third time we have been called upon to address disputes related to the
Norman Branch, a 52-mile stretch of railroad in southwestern Arkansas. On May 5,
2000, after extensive administrative proceedings and subsequent to our decisions in
Caddo Antoine and Little Missouri Railroad Company v. United States, 95 F.3d 740
(8th Cir. 1996) (Caddo Antoine) and GS Roofing Products Company v. Surface
Transportation Board, 143 F.3d 387 (8th Cir. 1998) (GS Roofing I), the Surface
Transportation Board (Board) consolidated and issued rulings on three cases involving
the Norman Branch. First, pursuant to the feeder line provisions now found in 49
U.S.C. § 10907, the Board ordered the Arkansas Midland Railroad Company (AMR)
to sell the Norman Branch to the Caddo Antoine and Little Missouri Railroad Company
(Caddo Antoine), a noncarrier subsidiary of the Dardanelle & Russell Railroad
Company, and set the purchase price at the net liquidation value of the entire line (the
feeder line case). Second, the Board set compensation for trackage rights on the
southernmost three miles of the Norman Branch at $7.00 per car (the compensation
case). Finally, the Board found AMR liable to two shippers for damages in the amount
of $192,564.60 (the damages case). In this consolidated petition, we review each of
the Board’s holdings. We affirm in part and reverse and remand in part.
-3-
I. BACKGROUND
A. Relevant Facts
Our recitation of the relevant facts relies heavily on our opinions in Caddo
Antoine and GS Roofing I, as well as on the Board’s summary of the background of
this case in its May 5, 2000, decision.
AMR acquired the Norman Branch line from Union Pacific Railroad in 1992.
The line extends from milepost 426.87, near Gurdon, Arkansas, to milepost 479.2, near
Birds Mill, Arkansas. The principal shipper on the line, International Paper Company
(International Paper), is located approximately 3 miles from Gurdon, where the line
connects at its southern end with Union Pacific’s main line. The line also serves GS
Roofing Products Company, Inc. (GS Roofing), Hanson Aggregates West, Inc.,
previously known as Gifford-Hill & Company (Gifford-Hill), and Bean Lumber
Company and Curt Bean Lumber Company (Bean Lumber) (collectively, the shippers).
The shippers are all located on the northern part of the Norman Branch.
On or about December 3, 1993, a severe storm caused washouts at mileposts
475.9 and 477.2 of the Norman Branch. On December 15, 1993, AMR announced that
the resulting poor track conditions required it to embargo service to GS Roofing and
to Bean Lumber. AMR extended the embargo to Gifford-Hill on February 22, 1994.
It continued to provide service to International Paper Company, however, over the
southern section of the line.
After the embargo was imposed, the shippers entered into negotiations with
AMR and Union Pacific in an attempt to restore service on the Norman Branch.
Although Union Pacific offered financial assistance in excess of $1.1 million to aid in
re-establishing service on the line, AMR concluded that it required at least an additional
$500,000 to rehabilitate the Norman Branch and accordingly refused to make repairs
-4-
or restore service. In February of 1994, AMR indicated its intention to abandon the
entire Norman Branch. Shortly thereafter, however, AMR determined that it would
continue to provide rail service to International Paper by continuing to operate only the
southernmost section of track.
The prospect of discontinuance of rail service to the shippers precipitated three
related actions before the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC).1 First, at the
request of the shippers, Caddo Antoine filed a feeder line application under 49 U.S.C.
§ 10907 (formerly 49 U.S.C. § 10910) to acquire the entire Norman Branch and resume
service to the shippers (the feeder line case). Second, Caddo Antoine requested that
the ICC issue a directed service order pursuant to former 49 U.S.C. § 11125 that would
allow it to begin immediate operations over the entire Norman Branch (the
compensation case). Third, the shippers filed a complaint against AMR seeking
damages for injuries allegedly resulting from the embargo (the damages case).
After extensive administrative and judicial proceedings, as described below, the
Board directed the parties to work with an administrative law judge in an attempt to
reach a negotiated resolution of the three cases. On January 13, 1999, the shippers
notified the Board that mediation attempts with the ALJ had failed and requested that
the Board rule on the three pending cases. Accordingly, the Board consolidated the
three cases and, on May 5, 2000, issued the decision giving rise to this appeal. We
have jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2321(a) and § 2342(5).
1
The ICC Termination Act of 1995 (ICCTA), Pub. L. No. 104-88, 109 Stat. 83,
abolished the Interstate Commerce Commission effective January 1, 1996, and
transferred certain of the ICC’s responsibilities to the newly-formed Surface
Transportation Board. The Act also modified certain of the statutory provisions
relevant to this case. Section 204(b)(1) of the ICCTA provided, however, that
proceedings pending before the ICC prior to January 1, 1996, should be determined in
accordance with prior law if the ICC’s functions related thereto were transferred to the
Board. Accordingly, certain issues in this appeal are controlled by former provisions
of the United States Code.
-5-
B. Procedural History
1. The Feeder Line Case
The Staggers Rail Act of 1980, now codified at 49 U.S.C. § 10907, was enacted
to address concerns about the deteriorating rail service provided on some of the
secondary railroad lines throughout the country. Caddo Antoine, 95 F.3d at 744. In
furtherance of this goal, Congress authorized the Board, under particular circumstances,
to force the sale of a railroad line at its “constitutional minimum value” to a “financially
responsible person.” 49 U.S.C. § 10907(b)(1). The Act further provides that “the
constitutional minimum value of a particular railroad line shall be presumed to be not
less than the net liquidation value of such line or the going concern value of such line,
whichever is greater.” 49 U.S.C. § 10907(b)(2).
On March 18, 1994, in response to AMR’s service embargo, Caddo Antoine
filed a feeder line application for the forced sale of the Norman Branch. While this
application was pending, AMR entered into a lease and option to purchase agreement
with Glenwood & Southern Railroad Company for the northern portion of the line, the
section providing service to the shippers. After the ICC disallowed this action,
Glenwood & Southern filed a competing feeder line application for forced sale of the
Norman Branch, which the ICC also denied. Thereafter, on April 18, 1995, the ICC
partially granted Caddo Antoine’s feeder line application, forcing the sale of the 49-
mile northern portion of the Norman Branch, but refusing to direct the sale of the three-
mile southern section of track that AMR was continuing to operate to provide service
to International Paper. Caddo Antoine declined to acquire only part of the Norman
Branch and petitioned for judicial review of the Board’s decision. On September 13,
1996, we reversed the Board’s attempt to bifurcate the line and remanded for further
consideration of Caddo Antoine’s application to purchase the entire Norman Branch.
Caddo Antoine, 95 F.3d 740.
-6-
Accordingly, the Board reopened the feeder line proceedings and directed the
filing of additional evidence related to Caddo Antoine’s application to purchase the
Norman Branch, including updated information on the constitutional minimum value
of the line. In August of 1999, the Board granted Caddo Antoine’s feeder line
application for the sale of the Norman Branch, setting the purchase price at $1,628,727,
which was the sum of the net liquidation value (NLV) of the northern portion of the line
($901,834) and the going concern value (GCV) of the southern portion of the line
($726,893).
AMR subsequently sought administrative reconsideration of the purchase price,
arguing that the Board had underestimated the GCV of the southern segment of the line.
The shippers also urged reconsideration, arguing that our holding in Caddo Antoine
foreclosed the use of NLV for the northern part of the track and GCV for the southern
portion of the line and, alternatively, that the Board had erred in calculating the GCV
of the southern portion of the line.
In its May 5, 2000, decision, the Board reconsidered the purchase price of the
Norman Branch and concluded that its initial calculation of the GCV of the southern
portion of the line was inaccurate. The Board furthermore concluded that the
supplemented record did not contain sufficient information to calculate an accurate
GCV for the southern section of the Norman Branch. The Board also questioned the
propriety, in light of our holding in Caddo Antoine, of combining the NLV of the
northern part of the Norman Branch with the GCV of the southern portion of the line.
Accordingly, the Board revalued the Norman Branch at the NLV of the entire line,
setting the purchase price at $961,096.24.
2. The Compensation Case
In March of 1994, the ICC denied Caddo Antoine’s request for directed service
over the Norman Branch pursuant to former 49 U.S.C. § 11125, finding that Caddo
-7-
Antoine had failed to satisfy the statutory requirements. Instead, the Commission
issued a service order authorizing Caddo Antoine to provide voluntary interim rail
service over the northern portion of the Norman Branch, contingent on AMR’s
agreement and pursuant to former 49 U.S.C. § 11123(a). The ICC also authorized
Caddo Antoine to contract with AMR to operate “overhead” trackage rights on the
southern portion of the Norman Branch, thereby allowing Caddo Antoine to connect
with the Union Pacific line and operate over the southern section of the tracks still
owned and operated by AMR. The ICC ordered Caddo Antoine to compensate AMR
for these trackage rights at a “commercially reasonable rate.”
Caddo Antoine began operations in April of 1994 and continued until August of
1996, when the East Texas Central Railroad Company took over service. The railroads
have been unable, however, to agree on a commercially reasonable rate of
compensation for the trackage rights over the southern three miles of the Norman
Branch. Initially, Caddo Antoine offered $1.75 per car, and subsequently it increased
its offer to $3.72 per car. AMR sought payment of $7.00 per car. Eventually, at the
urging of the ICC, Caddo Antoine petitioned the ICC to determine the commercially
reasonable rate to be paid for trackage rights.
In June of 1995, the ICC directed the parties to submit evidence on the
commercially reasonable value of trackage rights over the southern tip of the Norman
Branch and determined that it would apply its standard formula in addressing the issue.
In June of 1996, the Board, acknowledging that the evidence in the record was not
entirely sufficient, set compensation at $9.75 per car. Caddo Antoine filed an
administrative appeal, which the Board denied in September of 1996. Subsequent to
our decision in Caddo Antoine, the Board reopened and stayed its orders in the
compensation case. Finally, in its May 5, 2000, decision, the Board reaffirmed the use
of its standard formula for determining trackage rights, but reduced compensation from
$9.75 to $7.00 per car, the amount originally requested by AMR.
-8-
3. The Damages Case
As common carriers, railroads have an obligation to provide rail service upon
reasonable request. 49 U.S.C. § 11101(a). This obligation is not absolute, however.
GS Roofing I, 143 F.3d at 391-92. A valid embargo, defined as “an emergency
measure placed in effect because of some disability on the part of the carrier which
makes the latter unable properly to perform its duty as a common carrier,” id. at 392,
will relieve a carrier of its obligation to provide rail service, id. To be valid, an
embargo must be reasonable. Id. If the Board determines that an embargo is
unreasonable, a rail carrier may be liable for damages pursuant to 49 U.S.C. §
11704(b).
The shippers filed a complaint against AMR on March 21, 1994, seeking
damages resulting from the embargo on the Norman Branch that were incurred from
December 15, 1993, through April 15, 1994. In March of 1997, the Board rejected the
claims for damages, finding that AMR had acted reasonably in suspending service after
the washouts and that it was reasonable for AMR not to repair the line.
On petition for review, we reversed the Board’s decision regarding the
reasonableness of AMR’s actions. GS Roofing I, 143 F.3d at 392. Although we
agreed with the Board that the initial embargo on the line was reasonable in light of the
flooding and washouts, we concluded that AMR’s failure to repair the track was
unreasonable and that AMR was accordingly liable to the shippers for damages. Id.
at 394-95. We therefore remanded the case so that the Board might calculate the
amount of damages owed to the shippers.
On remand, the Board concluded that AMR was liable for damages that occurred
from December 24, 1993, the date that AMR should have resumed service on the
Norman Branch, through April 15, 1994, when Caddo Antoine began providing service
on the line. Although the shippers sought damages totaling $707,278.41, plus interest,
-9-
the Board determined, inter alia, that claims for lost profits were too speculative and
that it had no authority to award compensation for attorney fees. The Board
accordingly limited damages to those related to alternate transportation utilized during
the embargo and the cost of the construction of an interim loading facility. Specifically,
the Board awarded $121,247.60, plus interest, to Bean Lumber, and $71,316.90, plus
interest, to GS Roofing.
II. DISCUSSION
A. Standard of Review
Our scope of review in this matter is narrow. GS Roofing I, 143 F.3d at 391.
We are required to give considerable deference to the Board’s interpretation of the
statutes and regulations it is entrusted to administer, Nat’l Grain and Feed Ass’n v.
United States, 5 F.3d 306, 308-09 (8th Cir. 1993), and we will not disturb the Board’s
decision absent compelling indications that the Board’s interpretations were incorrect.
Caddo Antoine, 95 F.3d at 746. We may “ask only whether, in those cases in which
Congress has not directly addressed the precise question at hand, the [Board’s] action
‘is based on a permissible construction of the statute.’” Id. (quoting Chevron, U.S.A.,
Inc. v. Natural Res. Def. Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 843 (1984)). Notwithstanding
this narrow standard of review, we are nevertheless obligated to ensure that “proper
legal standards were correctly applied.” City of Cherokee v. ICC, 641 F.2d 1220,
1226-27 (8th Cir. 1981).
B. The Feeder Line Case
Although AMR does not contest the Board’s decision to force the sale of the
Norman Branch, it petitions for review of the Board’s calculation of the constitutional
minimum value of the line. AMR argues that the Board violated 49 U.S.C. § 10907 by
failing to calculate a GCV and instead setting the purchase price at NLV. From
-10-
AMR’s perspective, the plain meaning of § 10907 requires the Board to calculate both
a NLV and a GCV figure for a line. The Board was therefore obligated, AMR
contends, to calculate GCV or to explicitly conclude that a line has a GCV of zero.
Stated otherwise, AMR contends that the Board’s obligation under the statute is to
“find two values” and then “pick the highest.” Because in this instance the Board
simply concluded that there was insufficient evidence to demonstrate GCV, AMR
argues we owe no deference to the Board’s decision and that the purchase price of
$961,096.24 must be set aside.
As previously discussed, 49 U.S.C. § 10907(b)(1) directs the Board to set the
purchase price for the forced sale of a rail line at “not less than the constitutional
minimum value,” which is defined as “not less than the net liquidation value of such
line or the going concern value of such line, whichever is greater,” 49 U.S.C. §
10907(b)(2). Contrary to AMR’s contentions, we conclude that the statute does not
require the Board to calculate a GCV when the Board reasonably concludes, as it did
in this case, that the evidence is insufficient to establish an accurate figure. Here, the
Board reached this conclusion only after receiving two rounds of evidence on the
constitutional minimum value of the Norman Branch. To require the Board to calculate
GCV under these circumstances would either obligate the Board to base its GCV figure
on unreliable evidence, which we are confident the statute does not require, or would
obligate the Board to consider potentially endless submissions of unreliable evidence,
a no more plausible procedure. We conclude that Congress intended neither of these
alternatives and that 49 U.S.C. § 10907 therefore does not require the Board to
calculate GCV when it concludes that the evidence is insufficient to enable it to do so.
We have reviewed the Board’s analysis of the valuation evidence, and we conclude that
it acted reasonably in finding that the evidence was insufficient to establish a reliable
GCV for the Norman Branch. We furthermore conclude that the Board’s decision to
establish the purchase price for the Norman Branch at the NLV of the entire line was
entirely reasonable given the lack of evidence establishing GCV.
-11-
AMR also contends that the Board arbitrarily misapplied its traditional burden
of proof rules in this case and that we must accordingly set aside the Board’s purchase
price. According to AMR, the Board’s feeder line regulations and case law place the
burden of proof on “all valuation issues” on the feeder line applicant. AMR therefore
argues that Caddo Antoine bore the burden of producing evidence on the constitutional
minimum value of the Norman Branch. AMR furthermore contends that because
Caddo Antoine failed to satisfy its burden, the Board was obligated to utilize AMR’s
GCV values in determining the constitutional minimum value of the line.
In our view, the record supports the Board’s contention that it does not, as a rule,
impose upon the appellant the burden establishing the constitutional minimum value of
a line, although we acknowledge that certain of the cases cited by AMR suggest that
the Board may have done so in certain past situations. See, e.g. Cheney Railroad Co.,
5 I.C.C.2d 250, 268 (1989) (“[v]aluation disputes are resolved according to the burden
of proof. The burden is on the offeror as proponent of the relief requested.”); Sandusky
Co., 6 I.C.C.2d 568, 575 (1990) (applicant “has the burden of proof. . .”). It is clear,
for example, that although the relevant statute requires that an applicant establish that
“public convenience and necessity require or permit the sale of a particular railroad
line,” 49 U.S.C. § 10907(c)(2), it says nothing about the burden of proof in establishing
the purchase price of the line. Furthermore, although the Board’s regulations require
that a feeder line applicant provide “a[n] estimate of the NLV and the GCV of the line
and evidence in support of those estimates,” 49 C.F.R. § 1151.3(a)(4), they do not
explicitly assign the burden of proof in establishing GCV. To the contrary, the Board
has made it clear that “applicants would be free to present any evidence that they
deemed persuasive and that it would be inappropriate to delineate the types of evidence
the parties should submit.” PSI Energy, Inc., 7 I.C.C.2d 227, 230 (1991) (internal
quotation omitted). Additionally, the Board has indicated that its regulations are not
intended to “to force an applicant to develop its case according to a GCV basis which,
according to the applicant, has no factual foundation in the case at hand.” Id.
-12-
We likewise reject AMR’s contention that, in light of Caddo Antoine’s failure
to produce evidence of GCV, the Board was obligated to adopt AMR’s estimate of
GCV. In support of this proposition, AMR relies on Chicago and North Western
Transportation Company, 363 I.C.C. 956, 961 (1981), in which the Board stated that
“where both offeror and offeree have submitted acceptable appraisals and where it is
impossible to determine which valuation is more accurate, we shall accept the figure
submitted by the offeree-railroad.” In this case, however, the Board explicitly
determined that the evidence of GCV submitted by AMR was insufficient and
inaccurate, and thus unacceptable. We accordingly reject AMR’s contention that the
Board’s prior cases require the Board to accept a GCV that it has determined to be
deficient.
In sum, we accept the Board’s representation that under its own precedent and
policy the purchase price in feeder line proceeding is determined on a “case by case
basis.” The Board allows all parties to present evidence of NLV or GCV, and then
bases the purchase price of the line on the evidence in the record as a whole.
In light of the foregoing, we find no error in the Board’s valuation of the
constitutional minimum value of the Norman Branch. The Board’s order establishing
the purchase price of the line at $961,096.24 is therefore affirmed.
C. The Compensation Case
According to the Board’s standard formula, the commercially reasonable value
of trackage rights consists of the sum of three components: (1) the variable costs
incurred by the owning carrier as a result of the tenant carrier’s use of the owning
carrier’s track; (2) the tenant carrier’s proportionate share of maintenance and operating
expenses for the track being used; and (3) an interest or rental component that
compensates the owning carrier for the tenant carrier’s use of its capital dedicated to
the track. Arkansas & Missouri R.R. v. Missouri Pac. R.R., 6 I.C.C.2d 619, 622
-13-
(1990). The Board initially concluded that the proper application of this formula to
trackage rights over the southern portion of the Norman Branch yielded a figure of
$9.75 per car. On reconsideration, however, the Board lowered its figure to $7.00, the
amount originally requested by AMR.
On petition for review, the shippers, Caddo Antoine, and East Texas Central
challenge the Board’s calculation of the compensation owed to AMR for overhead
trackage rights on the southern part of the Norman Branch during the time period that
AMR retained ownership of the portion of the Branch serving International Paper. At
oral argument, the shippers and the railroads stated that they do not challenge the
proper application of the Board’s traditional formula for allocating trackage rights
compensation. They contend, rather, that the Board utilized the incorrect figures in
calculating the specific components of the test. Specifically, the they argue that the
Board erred by relying on AMR’s system-wide costs, rather than line-specific figures,
in calculating AMR’s variable costs and the maintenance and operation costs
associated with the southern part of the line.
The Board concedes that it relied on AMR’s 1994 and 1995 system average
maintenance costs in its analysis, but contends that it was justified in doing so.
According to the Board, the only available information on AMR’s costs was evidence
of 1994 and 1995 system average costs and 1993 data on costs related to the entire
Norman Branch. The Board concluded that the system-wide data was the best
evidence of record. In support of this proposition, the Board notes that it routinely
utilizes system-wide data where line-specific data are unavailable. Furthermore, the
Board concluded that, because AMR is a small carrier, its costs are likely similar
across its system. The Board also expressed its concern that the 1993 cost data was
not representative of 1994 cost figures. Finally, although the shippers criticized AMR’s
cost evidence, the Board argues that they failed to produce their own evidence on
AMR’s costs associated with the southern portion of the Norman Branch.
-14-
We cannot say that the Board’s decision was unreasonable, although we believe,
as the Board acknowledges, that the use of line-specific data on AMR’s costs would
have preferable to system-wide cost data. In light of the Board’s conclusion that no
such evidence was available, however, and keeping in mind the level of deference that
we owe the Board in these matters, we conclude that the Board did not act arbitrarily
or capriciously by relying on system-wide costs. We further conclude that, in light of
AMR’s original request, the Board acted reasonably in lowering the trackage rights
compensation rate to $7.00 per car.
Finally, the shippers also argue that the Board erred in including a rental
component in its calculation of the proper compensation for trackage rights over the
southern three-mile portion of the line. They argue, in short, that the inclusion of a
rental component in the formula serves to compensate AMR for its illegal embargo on
the Norman Branch, and that this violates public policy. In light of the shippers’
concession that they are not challenging the method utilized by the Board to calculate
trackage rights compensation, we are unsure if this challenge to the inclusion of a rental
component in the formula has been withdrawn. Assuming that it has not, we reject it.
The Board has separately addressed the issue of damages incurred as a result of
AMR’s unlawful embargo. Furthermore, according to the Board’s representation, the
$7.00 figure ultimately arrived at by the Board does not include a rental component.
Moreover, even if it did, we conclude that the Board acted reasonably and in line with
its precedent by including the rental component in its calculation of the commercially
reasonable rate of compensation for trackage rights over the southern tip of the Norman
Branch. See Gibbons v. United States, 660 F.2d 225, 231-33 (7th Cir. 1981).
We accordingly affirm the Board’s order setting compensation for trackage rights
over the southern three miles of the Norman Branch at $7.00 per car.
-15-
D. The Damages Case
The shippers petition for review of the Board’s award of $192,564.50 in
damages to Bean Lumber and GS Roofing. They argue that the Board erred by failing
to award lost profits related to two contracts entered into by GS Roofing and by
denying the request of the shippers for damages in the form of attorney fees.
The shippers first argue that GS Roofing is entitled to recover profits in the
amount of approximately $240,975 that it would have earned, absent AMR’s embargo,
pursuant to a contract with Celotex Corporation. The shippers contend that on
December 24, 1993, the date that AMR’s embargo on the Norman Branch became
illegal, GS Roofing had a fixed-price contract with Celotex whereby GS Roofing
agreed to ship between 20,000 and 25,000 tons of granules to Celotex’s Houston,
Texas, facility. The shippers further contend that GS Roofing was forced to cancel the
Celotex contract solely because of AMR’s embargo, that AMR was aware of the
existence of the contract, and that substitute truck transportation was infeasible and
unavailable.
The Board concedes that it possesses the authority to award damages for lost
profits, see Louisiana Railcar, Inc. v. Missouri Pacific Railroad Co., 5 I.C.C.2d 542,
549 (1989), but it defends its decision to deny GS Roofing’s claim on the ground that
it is “speculative and remote.” The Board noted in its order that it was uncertain
whether the agreement between GS Roofing and Celotex had ripened into a contract
by the time AMR instituted the embargo. The Board also observed that it would have
been practical for GS Roofing to utilize trucks to transport the granules to Houston,
thereby mitigating its damages, that AMR was not responsible for the alleged limited
availability of truck transportation, and that there was no “independent verification” of
the terms and of the existence of the Celotex contract. Although the Board did not
question the existence of the contract in the proceedings below, the Board now
-16-
suggests that there is no evidence that Celotex ever accepted GS Roofing’s offer to ship
the granules to Houston.
Notwithstanding our limited scope of review, we conclude that there are
compelling indications that the Board erred in rejecting GS Roofing’s claim for lost
profits. See Caddo Antoine, 95 F.3d at 746. The record contains a copy of the letter
from GS Roofing to Celotex offering to deliver the granules and specifying both price
and quantity. In our view, and especially in light of the industry contracting practice
as described by the shippers, the record supports GS Roofing’s contention that it had
entered into a contract to ship a specified amount of granules to Celotex’s Houston
facility. In light of the distance that the granules were to be shipped and the financial
consequences associated with transporting the granules via truck, the Board’s
conclusion that truck transportation was a viable and available alternative for GS
Roofing is lacking in support.
Although we agree with the Board that damages in the form of lost profits are
difficult to establish, we nevertheless conclude that in this case GS Roofing has carried
its burden with relation to the Celotex contract. In short, there is nothing overly
speculative or remote about GS Roofing’s claim: the volume of granules under the
contract is known, the price was established, and GS Roofing provided evidence of its
production costs. The record also supports the shippers’ contention that GS Roofing
would have fulfilled its obligation under the contract in the absence of AMR’s unlawful
embargo. We accordingly conclude that the Board erred by rejecting GS Roofing’s
complaint for damages for lost profits related to the Celotex contract. Because we are
ill-equipped to address the question of the specific amount of damages due under the
contract, however, we remand the issue so that the Board may do so.
The shippers also challenge the Board’s failure to award GS Roofing damages
for lost profits under a contract to supply colored stone dust to Koch Oil’s Fontana,
California, facility. Although GS Roofing eventually shipped the order to Koch, it
-17-
argues, essentially, that in the absence of the embargo it would have shipped additional
product. Although GS Roofing’s claim is not without some persuasiveness, we
conclude that the Board acted reasonably in denying it. Unlike the complaint for
damages under the Celotex contract, GS Roofing has failed to produce specific
evidence on the profits it lost on the colored stone contract. We agree with the Board,
therefore, that “an assertion without specifics” that more product would have shipped
is insufficient to establish damages for lost profits.
Finally, the shippers argue that the Board erred by failing to award damages for
the attorney fees incurred by the shippers. Although the shippers concede that there
is no authority suggesting that the Board has the power to do so, they argue that the
attorney fees incurred in an attempt to mitigate damages are no different than other
expenses and that the Board has broad power to award damages for any expenses
related to mitigation attempts. The Board argues that it is does not possess the power
to award attorney fees, see CF Industries, Inc. v. Koch Pipeline Co., STB Docket No.
41685 (STB served May 9, 2000), slip op. at 2 n.2 (“we have no authority to award
attorney’s fees”), and that the bulk of the legal fees incurred by the shippers was not
the result of their attempts to mitigate damages.
Without categorically holding that the Board lacks authority to award attorney
fees, we conclude that the Board acted reasonably in denying legal fees in this case.
As the shippers concede, there is no authority requiring the Board to award legal fees,
and it has not done so in the past. Furthermore, we cannot say that the Board’s
conclusion that the bulk of the attorney fees incurred by the shippers was not related
to mitigation is unreasonable. Likewise, we cannot say that the Board erred in rejecting
the shippers’ claims for additional miscellaneous expenses.
The Board’s award of damages is affirmed in part. We reverse the Board’s
denial of damages for lost profits related to the Celotex contract, however, and remand
for a calculation of the amount of those damages.
-18-
III. CONCLUSION
The order of the Board in the feeder line case, requiring the sale of the Norman
Branch and setting the purchase price at $961,096.24, is affirmed. The Board’s order
in the compensation case, setting the price of overhead trackage rights at $7.00 per car,
is affirmed. Finally, the Board’s order in the damages case is affirmed in part, reversed
in part, and the case is remanded to the Board for an award of appropriate damages
related to GS Roofing’s contract with Celotex.
A true copy.
Attest:
CLERK, U.S. COURT OF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT.
-19-

=== CASE 2208760 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:33.161078+00 ===

177 Cal. App. 2d 770 (1960)
FRED SAVAGE, Respondent,
v.
CRAG LUMBER COMPANY, INC., et al., Appellants.
Civ. No. 9727.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
Feb. 11, 1960.
Morris M. Grupp for Appellants.
Spurr & Brunner for Respondent.
VAN DYKE, P. J.
This is an appeal from a judgment in a declaratory action which quieted respondent's title to two tractors and awarded him a separate money judgment against each of the appellants.
The trial court made the following findings of fact: On and prior to March 1, 1955, defendant Crag Lumber Company, Inc., (hereinafter called Crag) was the purchaser under contract of conditional sale of certain heavy logging equipment. The seller was Moore Equipment Company of Stockton (hereinafter called Moore). Title was reserved by Moore pending payment. As of March 1, 1955, there was unpaid the sum of $26,719.26 upon both tractors. Prior to March 1, 1955, plaintiff and defendant Crag entered into an oral agreement wherein Crag agreed to sell and plaintiff agreed to buy the tractors upon the following terms: Plaintiff should pay Crag an amount equal to the balance due to Moore, payment to be made by deducting, from his earnings, $2.00 per thousand board feet of all timber logged by him through his use of said equipment. When the balance owed by Crag to Moore should have been fully paid to Crag plaintiff would become owner of the equipment. Crag agreed to pay to Moore the balance due on its contract with Moore. The court further found that plaintiff requested *772 of Crag's general manager, one Ed Lessard, with whom he dealt, that the contract be put into writing, but Lessard refused, stating that a writing was not necessary, that his word was good, and that he would live up to his oral agreement. Soon after March 1, 1955, relying upon said oral contract and the said representations of Lessard that it would be performed as agreed, plaintiff took possession of the tractors. He repaired and restored them at a cost to him of some $3,000 and put them to work in the Crag woods for the purpose of producing logs for the Crag lumber mill. Pursuant to said agreement plaintiff paid Crag from March 1, 1955, through August, 1957, a sum in excess of $26,719.26, to wit: the sum of $28,394.68 and also paid to Eastshore Lumber Company from September 1, 1957, through December, 1957, $2,326.13. In December of 1956 Crag fully paid Moore the balance due under its contract with Moore. The overpayments made by plaintiff to Crag of $1,675.42, and to Eastshore Lumber Company of $2,326.13 were paid under mistake by plaintiff in the belief that he was making payments due under said oral agreement and without knowledge that he had paid to Crag the entire balance due from him by June 1, 1957. Not until the end of 1957 did plaintiff learn there was likely to be a change in management of Crag from Lessard to Eastshore Lumber Company and he first became suspicious that his contract with Crag would not be honored on August 29, 1957, when he demanded of Crag a statement of the balance due from him on the purchase price of the equipment. Thereafter, on September 5th, plaintiff for the first time learned that it was not the intention of Crag to honor his oral agreement and that Crag contended that his possession of the tractors was pursuant to the terms of a lease rather than a contract of sale. Before the end of August, 1957, Eastshore Lumber Company had acquired all the capital stock of Crag and effective September 1, 1957, took over the management of Crag and caused the assets of Crag to be transferred to Eastshore Lumber Company. By reason thereof Eastshore Lumber Company claimed to be the owner of the tractors, subject only to the right of plaintiff to possession as a lessee thereof. Plaintiff has title to said equipment and is entitled to possession thereof. The court gave judgment pursuant to said findings, including a money judgment against Crag of $1,675.42 and against Eastshore Lumber Company of $2,326.13.
[1] Appellants argue at length that they properly raised the defense of the statute of frauds and that, contrary to a *773 finding of the trial court, they never waived that defense. We need not discuss these matters, since it is conceded by respondent that the defense of the statute was an issue in the case and that the finding of waiver was without support. We may say we agree that the statute was properly in the case as a defense. However, the findings, supported by substantial evidence, show that the contract made was not within the statute of frauds since the property bargained for was delivered into the possession of respondent and while in his possession after such delivery was fully paid for. When the bargain was made respondent, a former employee of Crag, was in a hospital recovering from an accident involving the loss of a leg. There Lessard visited him and the two men came to the agreement found by the court. The evidence as to their conversation is conflicting and it is apparent that, as the trial judge once remarked, the bargain they made was somewhat "fantastic," but it was proved to the satisfaction of the trial court and we are bound by that court's findings. Respondent was an experienced logger and had been doing such work for Crag for some time. The generous nature of the bargain may have been in part motivated by the sympathy of Lessard for respondent's misfortunes and by a desire to help him. But Crag received ample consideration for the bargain made. The tractors were in bad shape, needing expensive repairs. Crag desired to get rid of the logging operation and yet obtain a supply of logs for its mill. If the price at which it sold, that is, the balance owed by it upon the tractors, was generous as to respondent, it was yet substantial. The evidence that the bargain was made was sufficient. As soon as respondent got out of the hospital he took delivery of the tractors and started logging for Crag. There was deducted $2.00 per thousand board feet from sums earned from logging and the same was credited upon the contract. Appellants dispute this credit and claim that there was no contract of sale and that the sums, instead of being credited upon the purchase contract, were a charge against respondent for rental of the tractors. We shall say more about this later.
[2a] There is another reason why the defense of the statute of frauds failed and that is because of the estoppel of appellants to assert the statute. As stated, the court found, and the finding is supported by substantial evidence, that when the bargain had been orally arrived at respondent requested that it be reduced to writing and Lessard refused, saying there was no need, that his word was good and he would live up to the oral contract. [3] The doctrine of *774 estoppel to assert the statute of frauds has been consistently applied by the courts of this state to prevent fraud that would result from refusal to enforce oral contracts in certain circumstances. Such fraud may inhere in the unconscionable injury that would result from denying enforcement of the contract after one party has been induced by the other seriously to change his position in reliance on the contract or in the unjust enrichment that would result if a party who has received the benefits of the other's performance were allowed to rely upon the statute. In many cases both elements are present. Thus not only may one party have so seriously changed his position in reliance upon, or in performance of, the contract that he would suffer an unconscionable injury if it were not enforced, but the other may have reaped the benefits of the contract so that he would be unjustly enriched if he could escape its obligations. (Monarco v. Lo Greco, 35 Cal. 2d 621, 624-626 [220 P.2d 737].) [2b] Either element may be sufficient and in this case we find both present. As will be seen later, respondent did not bargain to pay rent for the tractors. Collateral to the bargain to purchase the tractors or perhaps as a part of it, respondent undertook to log for Crag. There is evidence that in addition to the two tractors being purchased from Crag, plaintiff put to work in the Crag woods a third tractor which he was purchasing from another source and permitted the same deduction per thousand to be made for the work produced by this third tractor. He reasonably hoped, as the record shows, to get the benefit of his bargain by paying out on the purchase price of the tractors, thus obtaining title thereto and reaping, in addition, whatever profit he might derive from the enterprise. If the contract is not enforced he will have paid for the tractors and will not receive them. On the other hand, appellants will retain them and will have received the other benefits of the bargain. In addition, they will retain the sums by which respondent overpaid his obligation. The trial court found that these considerations amounted to an estoppel on the part of appellants to assert the statute and we think the evidence sustains the court's findings in this regard.
[4] Appellants contend further that the evidence does not support the court's findings as to the bargain made. Herein they rely upon the manner in which Crag and respondent kept account of respondent's payments through deduction by Crag from respondent's logging earnings. It appears that Crag recorded these payments as rental for the tractors; that these *775 accounts were kept by Crag's bookkeeper, who also did the bookkeeping for respondent during off-hours from his employment by Crag and that he kept respondent's records of payments in the same way, designating payments as rentals. On these and other factors which we think it unnecessary to fully relate, appellants argue that the evidence shows beyond dispute the real bargain was nothing more than a rental of the tractors by Crag to respondent for the purpose of performing logging in the Crag woods. But appellants cannot maintain this position in view of the record which, as we have stated, disclosed substantial testimony that the actual bargain made was as found by the court. The fact that in the bookkeeping records the parties may have designated the payments or deductions as rental rather than as payments upon the contract cannot suffice to overthrow the findings of the trial court based upon substantial proof as to what the bargain was. We think this point need not be labored as it seems clear to us that the court could find the bargain as it did notwithstanding facts and circumstances which might have justified the court in finding that no contract of purchase and sale had been made. Respondent and several witnesses who were present during at least a part of the negotiations between respondent and Lessard testified to the fact that the bargain made was a purchase of the tractors by respondent on the terms as found by the court. The court's findings must stand.
[5] Coming now to that portion of the judgment appealed from by which money judgments were awarded against Crag and Eastshore Lumber Company, little need be said beyond what has already been said. The bargain being what it was, and it being without dispute that respondent had paid more than the price of the tractors and that of the excess Crag had received the amount adjudged against it and Eastshore Lumber Company had received the amount adjudged against it, the result is that each had received money without consideration which they were, in good conscience, required to return to respondent. Having so received it, the law implied their promise to repay, which promise they broke when they refused to repay on demand. It was proper for the court to make the money awards which it did.
Nothing more need be discussed.
The judgment appealed from is affirmed as to both appellants.
Peek, J., and Schottky, J., concurred.

=== CASE 3027299 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:37:55.346029+00 ===

Opinions of the United
2007 Decisions                                                                                                             States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit
7-10-2007
Parker v. Google Inc
Precedential or Non-Precedential: Non-Precedential
Docket No. 06-3074
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007
Recommended Citation
"Parker v. Google Inc" (2007). 2007 Decisions. Paper 793.
http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007/793
This decision is brought to you for free and open access by the Opinions of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit at Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in 2007 Decisions by an authorized administrator of Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. For more information, please contact Benjamin.Carlson@law.villanova.edu.
NOT PRECEDENTIAL
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 06-3074
________________
GORDON ROY PARKER, Appellant
v.
GOOGLE, INC.; JOHN DOES # 1-50,000
____________________________________
On Appeal From the United States District Court
For the Eastern District of Pennsylvania
(D.C. Civ. No. 04-cv-03918)
District Judge: Honorable R. Barclay Surrick
_______________________________________
Submitted Under Third Circuit LAR 34.1(a)
March 23, 2007
Before: BARRY, CHAGARES AND ROTH, CIRCUIT JUDGES
(Filed July 10, 2007)
_______________________
OPINION
_______________________
PER CURIAM
This is an appeal from the District Court’s dismissal of Gordon Roy
Parker’s complaint against Google, Inc. (“Google”). We will affirm.
I.
Google is a Delaware corporation whose headquarters are in California.
Google operates a website at www.google.com. This website includes an Internet search
engine that allows users to search for websites, products and images among other things.
Google’s automatic search technology operates by “crawling” the Internet so that the
content can be organized in a searchable index. In the course of “crawling” the Internet,
Google makes a copy of each website and stores it in a “cache.” When a user conducts a
search, Google provides a list of results and often includes an excerpt from the matched
site.
Google also provides users with the ability to access, search and post
messages to the USENET. The USENET is a global system of online bulletin boards. In
2000, Google purchased an archive of USENET postings dating back to 1981. Google’s
USENET archive contains more than 845 million messages. A user can search the
USENET archive using several different criteria, including, but not limited to the author,
date, keywords, phrases and/or subject material.
In 2004, Parker filed a pro se complaint against Google. After Google filed
a motion to dismiss, Parker filed an amended complaint (“first amended complaint”). In
the first amended complaint, Parker alleged that he is an Internet publisher. He has
published works on the Internet under the name Snodgrass Publishing Group. Parker
stated that he owns a copyright for his work entitled “29 Reasons Not to be a Nice Guy.”
Parker alleged that a third-party copied “Reason #6” and posted it to the USENET
without his permission. Furthermore, Parker alleged that Google provided users with
links to websites that portrayed him negatively when users utilized Google’s Internet
search engine.
2
Parker’s first amended complaint contained the following claims: (1) direct
copyright infringement (“Claim I”); (2) contributory copyright infringement (“Claim II”);
(3) vicarious copyright infringement (“Claim III”); (4) defamation (“Claim IV”); (5)
invasion of privacy (“Claim V”); (6) negligence (“Claim VI”); (7) Lanham Act violations
(“Claim VII”); racketeering against Google (“Claim VIII”); racketeering against
seduction community (“Claim IX”); (10) abuse of process1 (“Claim X”); and (11) civil
conspiracy (“Claim XI”). Subsequently, Google moved to dismiss the first amended
complaint. On March 13, 2006, the District Court dismissed Claims I, II, III, IV, V, VI,
VII and X with prejudice pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6). Claims
VIII, IX and XI were dismissed without prejudice after the District Court determined that
these claims failed to comply with Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 8(a). Parker timely
filed a motion for reconsideration as well as a motion for leave to file a second amended
complaint.
As Parker’s motion for reconsideration and motion for leave to file a second
amended complaint were pending before the District Court, Parker requested an entry of
judgment pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 58(d). Parker explained that he
only wanted an entry of judgment in the event that the District Court denied his motion
for reconsideration and motion for leave to file a second amended complaint.
Subsequently, the District Court denied the motion for reconsideration and motion for
1
Parker withdrew this claim on appeal.
3
leave to file a second amended complaint. The District Court entered judgment against
Parker. Parker timely filed a notice of appeal.
II.
We first must determine whether we have appellate jurisdiction. We adhere
to the rule that “we lack appellate jurisdiction over partial adjudications when certain of
the claims before the district court have been dismissed without prejudice.” Fed. Home
Loan Mortgage Corp. v. Scottsdale Ins. Co., 316 F.3d 431, 438 (3d Cir. 2003)(citations
omitted). Nevertheless, an order is final and appealable where a plaintiff elects to stand
on a complaint. See Morton Int’l, Inc. v. A.E. Staley Mfg. Co., 460 F.3d 470, 477 (3d
Cir. 2006)(citation omitted). There is no “rigid requirement as to what a plaintiff must do
to stand on a dismissed complaint.” United States ex rel. Atkinson v. PA. Shipbuilding
Co., – F.3d –, 2007 WL 79483, at *8 (3d Cir. Jan. 12, 2007). Parker requested that the
District Court enter a judgment against him pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure
58(d) in the event that the District Court denied his motion for reconsideration and motion
for leave to file a second amended complaint. We interpret this request as Parker’s intent
to stand on his first amended complaint in the event that his motion for reconsideration
and motion for leave to file a second amended complaint were denied. Thus, we have
appellate jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291.
4
III.
Our standard of review over a District Court’s dismissal under Federal Rule
of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) is plenary. See Taliaferro v. Darby Twp. Zoning Bd., 458
F.3d 181, 188 (3d Cir. 2006)(citation omitted). We accept as true all allegations of the
complaint and all reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom. See id. We review
a dismissal of claims for failure to comply with Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 8 for
abuse of discretion. See In re Westinghouse Sec. Litig., 90 F.3d 696, 702 (3d Cir.
1996)(citations omitted). A denial of a motion to amend the complaint is also reviewed
for abuse of discretion. See Krantz v. Prudential Invs. Fund Mgmt. LLC, 305 F.3d 140,
144 (3d Cir. 2002)(citation omitted).
IV.
A. Direct Copyright Infringement
In the first amended complaint, Parker alleged that his work entitled “29
Reasons not to be a Nice Guy” is copyrighted. Parker alleged that an individual copied
“Reason #6” from this work and posted it to the USENET.2 Google archives postings on
the USENET so that they can be accessible to others who utilize the USENET. Through
this process, Parker alleged that Google directly infringed “Reason #6.”
To allege a claim for copyright infringement, a plaintiff must state: “(1)
ownership of a valid copyright; and (2) unauthorized copying of original elements of
2
Parker also alleged that, at one point, he himself posted “Reason #6 ” to the
USENET.
5
plaintiff’s work.” Kay Berry, Inc. v. Taylor Gifts, Inc., 421 F.3d 199, 203 (3d Cir.
2005)(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Additionally, to state a direct
copyright infringement claim, a plaintiff must allege volitional conduct on the part of the
defendant. See CoStar Group, Inc. v. LoopNet, Inc., 373 F.3d 544, 551 (4th Cir. 2004);
Religious Tech. Ctr. v. Netcom On-Line Commc’n Servs., Inc., 907 F. Supp. 1361, 1370
(N.D. Cal. 1995). The District Court determined that Parker failed to allege any
volitional conduct on the part of Google in archiving USENET posts.
In CoStar Group, the Fourth Circuit drew an analogy between an internet
service provider (“ISP”) and the owner of a traditional copy machine. We agree with this
analogy as it applies to Google in this case. The Fourth Circuit noted that “a copy
machine owner who makes the machine available to the public to use for copying is not,
without more, strictly liable under [the Copyright Act] for illegal copying by a customer.”
373 F.3d at 550. The Fourth Circuit further stated that “an ISP who owns an electronic
facility that responds automatically to users’ input is not a direct infringer.” Id. Thus, the
Court determined that “the ISP should not be found liable as a direct infringer when its
facility is used by a subscriber to violate a copyright without intervening conduct of the
ISP.” Id. The Court further noted that “[w]hen an electronic infrastructure is designed
and managed as a conduit of information and data that connects users over the Internet,
the owner and manager of the conduit hardly ‘copies’ the information and data in the
sense that it fixes a copy in its system of more than transitory duration.” Id. at 550-51.
Upon examining the complaint, we agree with the District Court that
6
Parker’s allegations against Google did not state a claim of direct copyright infringement.
Parker’s allegations failed to assert any volitional conduct on the part of Google.
B. Contributory and Vicarious Copyright Infringement
Next, Parker alleged a claim of contributory copyright infringement against
Google. Similar to his direct infringement claim, Parker alleged that a third-party copied
“Reason #6 ” to the USENET. Parker maintained that Google archived this post and
made it available to users when searching the USENET through Google.
While the Copyright Act does not expressly make anyone liable for the
copyright infringement of another, the law establishes doctrines of secondary liability.
See Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd., 545 U.S. 913, 125 S. Ct. 2764,
2776 (2005). To allege a claim of contributory copyright infringement, a plaintiff must
allege: (1) direct copyright infringement of a third-party; (2) knowledge by the defendant
that the third-party was directly infringing; and (3) material contribution to the
infringement. See Columbia Pictures Indus., Inc. v. Redd Horne, Inc., 749 F.2d 154, 160
(3d Cir. 1984)(quoting Gershwin Publ’g Corp. v. Columbia Artists Mgmt., Inc., 443 F.2d
1159, 1162 (2d Cir. 1971)). Parker failed to allege that Google had the requisite
knowledge of a third-party’s infringing activity.3 Therefore, this claim was properly
3
Parker attached several letters to the complaint. See Oshiver v. Levin, Fishbein,
Sedran & Berman, 38 F.3d 1380, 1384 n.2 (3d Cir. 1994)(stating that when reviewing a
complaint under Rule 12(b)(6), a court can “also consider matters of public record,
orders, exhibits attached to the complaint and items appearing in the record of the
case”)(citations omitted). These letters were addressed to Google and formed the basis of
Parker’s allegation that Google had notice of the infringing activity. However, as noted
7
dismissed.
Next, Parker alleged a claim against Google for vicarious copyright
infringement. Parker also based this claim on his allegation that a third-party posted a
copy of “Reason #6 ” to the USENET. A plaintiff alleges a claim for vicarious copyright
infringement when he alleges that the defendant “has the right and ability to supervise the
infringing activity and also has a direct financial interest in such activities.” Gershwin
Publ’g Corp., 443 F.2d at 1162. “Financial benefit exists where the availability of
infringing material acts as a draw for customers.” Ellison v. Robertson, 357 F.3d 1072,
1078 (9th Cir. 2004)(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). “There is no
requirement that the draw be ‘substantial.’” Id. at 1079. We agree with the District Court
that Parker failed to state a vicarious copyright infringement claim. Parker failed to
allege that Google had a direct financial interest in the purported infringing activity.
Thus, this claim was properly dismissed.
C. Defamation, Invasion of Privacy and Negligence
Next, Parker alleged claims against Google for defamation, invasion of
privacy and negligence. Parker’s defamation claim is based on comments posted about
Parker to the USENET as well as statements located on a website that was available
through Google’s Internet search engine. Parker also alleged that Google invaded his
privacy by creating an unauthorized biography of him whenever someone “googled” his
by the District Court, these letters make no mention of any specific copyrighted work
(most importantly, these letters do not mention “Reason #6 ”).
8
name into the search engine. Additionally, Parker alleged that Google was negligent
because it continued to archive a website which contained negative statements about
Parker even after Parker put Google on notice. The District Court found that Google was
immune from suit on these claims pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 230 of the Communications
Decency Act (“CDA”). We agree.
The elements required for Section 230(c) immunity are: (1) that the
defendant is a provider or user of an “interactive computer service;” (2) that the asserted
claims treat the defendant as the publisher or speaker of the information; and (3) that the
information is provided by another “information content provider.” See 47 U.S.C.
§ 230(c)(1); Dimeo v. Max, 433 F. Supp. 2d 523, 529 (E.D. Pa. 2006). The CDA also
states that “[n]o cause of action may be brought and no liability may be imposed under
any State or local law that is inconsistent with this section.” 47 U.S.C. § 230(e)(3).
Parker’s claims for defamation, invasion of privacy and negligence arise
from Parker’s allegations that Google failed to address harmful content posted by others
against him on the Internet. Parker did not assert in the first amended complaint that
Google is the information content provider of the statements at issue. We agree with the
District Court that Section 230 bars these three claims against Google. See Green v.
America Online (AOL), 318 F.3d 465, 471 (3d Cir. 2003).
D. Lanham Act Violations
Next, Parker alleged that Google republished a website called the
“RayFAQ.” Parker asserted that this website contained defamatory comments about him
9
and that users looking for Parker’s website through Google’s search engine would also
find the “RayFAQ” website. Parker asserted that these users would think that Parker
created the “RayFAQ” website. He alleged Google’s republication of this site constituted
a false designation of origin and represented unfair competition (“passing off”) under the
Lanham Act.
To state a claim pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1125(a) of the Lanham Act, a
plaintiff must allege: (1) that the defendant uses a false designation of origin; (2) that
such use of a false designation of origin occurs in interstate commerce in connection with
goods or services; (3) that such false designation is likely to cause confusion, mistake or
deception as to the origin, sponsorship or approval of the plaintiff’s goods and services by
another person; and (4) that the plaintiff has been or is likely to be damaged. See AT & T
Co. v. Winback & Conserve Program, Inc., 42 F.3d 1421, 1428 (3d Cir. 1994). Parker
failed to allege a likelihood of confusion with respect to the origin of his seduction works.
Therefore, his Lanham Act unfair competition claim was properly dismissed.
Parker also raised a trade disparagement claim under the Lanham Act. The
relevant section of the Lanham Act states:
Any person who, on or in connection with any goods or
services, or any container for goods, uses in commerce any
word, term, name, symbol, or device, or any combination
thereof, or any false designation of origin, false or misleading
description of fact, or false or misleading representation of
fact, which . . . in commercial advertising or promotion,
misrepresents the nature, characteristics, qualities, or
geographic origin of his or her or another person’s goods,
services or commercial activities, shall be liable in a civil
10
action by any person who believes that he or she is or is likely
to be damaged by such act.
15 U.S.C. § 1125(a)(1)(B). Parker did not allege that the purportedly disparaging
statements about him were made in the context of commercial advertising or promotion
regarding his texts. Thus, Parker’s Lanham Act claims were properly dismissed.
E. Racketeering and Civil Conspiracy Claims
The District Court dismissed these claims without prejudice pursuant to
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 8(a). Rather than attempt to replead these claims, Parker
stood on the allegations in his first amended complaint. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure
8(a) requires a plaintiff to include a “short and plain statement of the claim showing that
the pleader is entitled to relief.” Upon examining the first amended complaint, the
District Court did not abuse its discretion in dismissing these claims for failing to comply
with Rule 8(a).
F. Denial of Motion for Leave to File a Second Amended Complaint
Finally, Parker appeals from the denial of his motion to file a second
amended complaint. Parker filed this motion after the District Court dismissed his first
amended complaint. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 15(a) states that leave to amend
“shall be freely given when justice so requires.” “Among the grounds that could justify a
denial of leave to amend are undue delay, bad faith, dilatory motive, prejudice, and
futility.” Shane v. Fauver, 213 F.3d 113, 115 (3d Cir. 2000)(internal quotation marks and
citations omitted). “Futility” means that the proposed amended complaint would fail to
11
state a claim upon which relief could be granted. See id. (citation omitted). “In assessing
‘futility,’ the District Court applies the same standard of legal sufficiency as applies under
[Federal] Rule [of Civil Procedure] 12(b)(6).” Id. (citations omitted).
We hold that the District Court did not abuse its discretion in denying
Parker’s motion for leave to amend. Parker’s attempt to replead claims raised in the first
amended complaint suffered from similar defects as previously discussed. See id. (stating
that if a claim is vulnerable to dismissal under Rule 12(b)(6) and “the plaintiff moves to
amend, leave to amend generally must be granted unless the amendment would not cure
the deficiency”).
Parker also attempted to raise new claims in the proposed second amended
complaint. First, Parker alleged that he “is entitled to relief under the Lanham Act due to
Google’s term ‘Google Groups’ to describe USENET.” (Proposed Second Amend.
Compl. ¶ 101). To state a valid trademark infringement claim, a plaintiff must allege that
“(1) the marks are valid and legally protectable; (2) the marks are owned by the plaintiff;
and (3) the defendant’s use of the marks to identify goods or services is likely to create
confusion concerning the origin of the goods or services.” Opticians Ass’n of Am. v.
Indep. Opticians of Am., 920 F.2d 187, 192 (3d Cir. 1990)(citations omitted). Allowing
Parker leave to amend to add this claim would have been futile because Parker did not
allege that he owned the USENET mark in the proposed second amended complaint.
Second, Parker attempted to raise a different unfair competition claim
against Google in the proposed second amended complaint. Parker’s proposed second
12
amended complaint stated that “[b]ecause of Google, Plaintiff was forced to abandon his
project called ‘Linkway,’ a human-edited directory of links to generate revenue from
advertising and product partnerships.” (Proposed Second Amend. Compl. ¶ 44). Parker
further alleged that “Google’s massive copyright infringement through its USENET
archive, search engine, and cache constitutes unfair competition under the Lanham Act,
specifically against human-edited web directories, which are a viable alternative to
Google’s products, and which do not require copyright infringement or the risks of
lawsuits for the same.” (Id. ¶ 102). Parker’s allegations failed to state a Lanham Act
unfair competition claim with respect to the abandonment of his “Linkway” project. See
AT & T Co., 42 F.3d at 1428 (setting forth elements of Lanham Act unfair competition
claim). Additionally, Parker’s state law unfair competition claims were also futile
because they failed to state a claim. See e.g., Granite State Ins. Co. v. Aamco
Transmissions, Inc., 57 F.3d 316, 321 (3d Cir. 1995)(stating that Lanham Act is derived
from common law tort of unfair competition and its language parallels the protections
afforded by state common law)(citation omitted).
IV.
In conclusion, we will affirm the decision of the District Court to dismiss
Parker’s first amended complaint. While the first amended complaint was partially
dismissed without prejudice, Parker elected to stand on his first amended complaint when
he sought an entry of judgment. Additionally, the District Court did not abuse its
discretion in denying Parker’s motion for leave to file a second amended complaint.
13

=== CASE 2208765 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:33.210201+00 ===

156 N.W.2d 810 (1968)
182 Neb. 642
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Leonard WALLE, Jr., Appellant.
No. 36631.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
March 1, 1968.
A. Q. Wolf, Public Defender, Bennett G. Hornstein, Asst. Public Defender, Omaha, for appellant.
Clarence A. H. Meyer, Atty. Gen., Bernard L. Packett, Asst. Atty. Gen., Lincoln, for appellee.
*811 Heard before WHITE, C. J., and CARTER, SPENCER, BOSLAUGH, SMITH, McCOWN and NEWTON, JJ.
BOSLAUGH, Justice.
Leonard Wymer Walle, Jr., was convicted of second degree murder and sentenced to life imprisonment. His motion for new trial was overruled and he has appealed.
The record shows that Marilyn April Walle, the defendant's wife, was shot to death in their apartment in the Hamilton Hotel in Omaha, Nebraska, on September 1, 1966. Mrs. Walle was a dancer employed at the Roam Inn. She had given two performances on the evening preceding the murder and had returned to the hotel with the defendant at about 1:40 a. m.
Leona Forsberg, an employee of the Roam Inn and a friend of the deceased, testified that the defendant called her at about 3 a. m. on September 1, 1966, and asked her to come to the hotel. When she arrived at the hotel, the defendant told her that his wife was dead; that "`I shot her'"; and that "`* * * it wasn't one shot; it was lots and lots of shots.'" Miss Forsberg then called the police and the defendant was arrested.
The defendant denied that he had shot his wife, but offered no explanation for the murder other than it must have occurred while he was absent from the apartment, for about 5 minutes, or while he was bathing. The jury had the right to accept the testimony of Miss Forsberg and reject that of the defendant. The evidence sustains the verdict.
The State produced photographs of the deceased taken at the hotel and at the county morgue, six of which were received in evidence over the objection of the defendant. Later one photograph was withdrawn. The admission of the five exhibits is assigned as error.
Malice and a purpose to kill are essential elements of murder in the second degree. S. 28-402, R.R.S. 1943; State v. Marion, 174 Neb. 698, 119 N.W.2d 164. The burden was upon the State to prove both of these elements beyond a reasonable doubt.
A photograph of a homicide victim which tends to illustrate a controverted issue is admissible where there is proper foundational evidence. Washington v. State, 160 Neb. 385, 70 N.W.2d 378.
The evidence shows that eight bullets entered the body of the deceased causing eight primary entrance wounds, seven primary exit wounds, and four secondary entrance wounds. The hotel photographs served to illustrate testimony concerning the scene of the crime. The pathologist used the morgue photographs to illustrate his testimony, and this enabled the jury to visualize the wounds. The photographs were relevant and material to the issues concerning the cause and manner of death of the victim and were properly admitted.
The defendant's other assignment of error relates to the ruling on a pretrial motion for necessary aids to defense. The motion was made and overruled just before the trial commenced.
The defendant was represented by the public defender at the preliminary hearing and at his arraignment in district court. On January 17, 1967, the defendant filed a motion requesting appointment of defense counsel from outside the public defender's office. This motion was overruled on January 19, 1967.
On January 30, 1967, the defendant, in open court, elected to defend himself, and the public defender was appointed as his "technical adviser." This was within the discretion of the trial court. People v. Mattson, 51 Cal. 2d 777, 336 P.2d 937. At this hearing the defendant inquired as to whether he would have access "to any kind of court rules on courtroom procedure and *812 to any books." The trial court explained that the public defender would supply advice of a technical nature to the defendant upon his request. The case was then set for trial on February 14, 1967.
On February 14, 1967, there was a further hearing in chambers before the trial began. The defendant made an oral motion that he be granted a private cell for purposes of research and study; that he have access to a typewriter, carbon paper, and legal pads; and that he receive a transcript of all testimony for each and every court session by the day. This motion was overruled but the court requested that the sheriff place the defendant in a private cell if one was available. The court also directed the public defender, as technical adviser to the defendant, to supply the other things requested to the best of his ability.
The defendant argues that an indigent defendant is entitled to collateral aids in addition to trial counsel. He cites cases which hold that an indigent defendant is entitled to the services of an expert witness, such as a handwriting expert or a psychiatrist.
We think the trial court adopted the best solution possible for the problems that were presented in this case. The services of the public defender, as a technical adviser, are of much greater value to a defendant untrained in the law than access to a fully equipped law library.
Ordinarily, a daily transcript of testimony is not available to either party. Where no special arrangements have been made and such a transcript is not available to the State, the trial court is not required to furnish such a transcript to the defendant at the expense of the county.
The judgment of the district court is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2208769 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:33.232473+00 ===

177 Cal. App. 2d 187 (1960)
THE PEOPLE, Respondent,
v.
FERNANDO CERVANTES, Appellant.
Crim. No. 1267.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Dist.
Jan. 15, 1960.
Gilbert D. Lopez, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and Elizabeth Miller, Deputy Attorney General, for Respondent.
GRIFFIN, P. J.
Defendant appeals from judgment of conviction entered upon a jury verdict finding him guilty of an unlawful sale of a narcotic and of unlawful possession of a narcotic, each offense in violation of section 11500 of the Health and Safety Code. Defendant was also charged with a prior conviction of a violation of the same code section, which charge he admitted.
[1] The evidence revealed that George Alarcon, an undercover investigator for the Bureau of Narcotic Enforcement, was conducting an investigation of the narcotic traffic in Kings County. In the latter part of November 1958, Mr. Alarcon was introduced to the defendant and attempted to purchase marijuana from him. On December 5, 1958, Benito Rubio and Alarcon met the defendant at the latter's home. On this occasion, the defendant sold Alarcon three marijuana cigarettes and the defendant stated that he expected another supply of narcotics in a few days and that he would make some of this supply available to Alarcon when it arrived.
On the next afternoon, officers of the Kings County Sheriff's Department and the State Bureau of Narcotic Enforcement turned four five-dollar bills coated with a phosphorescent powder over to Alarcon to enable him to make the purchase *189 of marijuana from the defendant. The purchase could not be made on that day, but on December 9, 1958, the bills were returned to Alarcon and on that date he was able to effect a purchase of 19 grams of marijuana from the defendant. Rubio acted as intermediary in this purchase and he was observed by Alarcon to meet with the defendant and leave the meeting with the bag of marijuana in his hand. Alarcon informed the officers with whom he was working that this purchase had been made. They determined to arrest the defendant at his home in Corcoran on that same evening and obtained a search warrant authorizing them to search defendant's home. It was arranged for Alarcon to precede the party of officers to the defendant's home, determine if the latter was at home, and inform the officers of this fact by means of a prearranged signal. The defendant was at home. The signal was given and the officers converged on the scene and arrested him. A search of defendant's home revealed no evidence which was used in the case, but a quantity of marijuana was discovered in a hole in the ground to the rear of the house a few feet from the place defendant was standing when he was arrested. A search of defendant's person revealed that his wallet contained three five-dollar bills having the same serial numbers as those previously given by the officers to Alarcon, and a test with ultra-violet light revealed that these bills had been coated with a phosphorescent substance. Traces of a similar substance were found on the front of defendant's coat and on his right thumb and forefinger. At the time, defendant could not explain where he had obtained these bills, nor could he explain how they came to be coated with the phosphorescent powder.
Both Rubio and the defendant testified for the defense. Rubio testified that he had never gone with Alarcon to defendant's home; that he had never purchased any marijuana for Alarcon from defendant; and stated that the marijuana which he had given Alarcon on December 9, 1958 had been purchased from an unidentified person who lived near the city dump. The defendant testified that he had no knowledge of how the marijuana discovered near his house came to be there; that he had never sold marijuana to Alarcon or Rubio; and that he had obtained the three five-dollar bills found by the officers on his person from a person who accosted him in front of a bakery and who gave him four five-dollar bills in exchange for 20 one-dollar bills. Defendant filed his notice of appeal in propria persona and petitioned this court to appoint an attorney to represent him on the appeal. This court appointed *190 the attorney who handled defendant's case at the trial. The attorney has filed a report with a complete review of the record and states that he has failed to find any meritorious ground upon which to base an argument on this appeal. (Citing People v. Dodd, 113 Cal. App. 2d 682 [248 P.2d 965]; People v. Sutton, 115 Cal. App. 2d 751 [252 P.2d 633]; and People v. Hickok, 120 Cal. App. 2d 832 [262 P.2d 30].) Upon reviewing the entire record, we concur with counsel's opinion that no meritorious grounds for appeal are contained therein. The evidence is sufficient to support the verdict, remembering the well-settled rule that the existence of every fact which the jury could have reasonably deduced from the evidence must be assumed in favor of the verdict. It is clear that the record in this case contains ample evidence to sustain the conviction of both an illegal sale and possession of a narcotic. (Citing People v. Newland, 15 Cal. 2d 678 [104 P.2d 778]; People v. Wallace, 109 Cal. App. 2d 676, 679 [241 P.2d 264]; People v. Adame, 169 Cal. App. 2d 587, 595 [337 P.2d 477].) During the trial, defendant's counsel objected to the introduction of evidence as to the sale of the marijuana cigarettes to Alarcon on December 5, which sale was not charged as an offense in the instant case and further objected to the admission of these cigarettes into evidence, basing his objection upon the grounds that under the circumstances of the case the evidence of the prior offense was not admissible. [2] Although it is the general rule that evidence of other crimes is not admissible, it is also well settled that where relevant to the issues of the instant case such evidence can be admitted. [3] Thus, in a narcotics case, evidence of other offenses of a similar nature is admissible to show the defendant's knowledge of the narcotic nature of the substance or to show a common plan or scheme or the identity of the defendant. (People v. Torres, 98 Cal. App. 2d 189, 192 [219 P.2d 480]; People v. Ballard, 145 Cal. App. 2d 94, 98-99 [302 P.2d 89]; People v. Rodriguez, 151 Cal. App. 2d 598, 601 [312 P.2d 272].) [4] In the present case, the defendant denied any knowledge of the marijuana sold or possessed on December 9 and denied that he was the person who made the sale of the narcotic to Rubio on that date. It therefore became necessary for the prosecution to show that he was aware of the narcotic nature of the substance sold and that he was the person who dealt with Rubio on that date. Evidence of a sale to Rubio and Alarcon four days previously would be relevant to this issue.
[5] Defendant also objects to the manner in which the *191 search warrant was executed and the search of his house conducted. Since none of the evidence admitted at the trial was revealed by this search, these errors, if any were made, could not have been prejudicial. [6] The marijuana was found in close proximity to the place where defendant was originally arrested and since no objection under the state of the evidence could be made to the legality of his arrest, this in itself was enough to authorize the search that was conducted. (People v. Montes, 146 Cal. App. 2d 530, 533 [303 P.2d 1064]; People v. Scott, 170 Cal. App. 2d 446, 453 [339 P.2d 162].)
In the appendix to his counsel's report, defendant lists errors in spelling, punctuation and other minor errors in the record. We have examined each of the errors claimed by him to have been made and find that none of them relates to any material issue or point in the case, and they are not sufficient to prejudice him or require a reversal of the judgment. (Cal. Const., art. VI,  4 1/2; People v. Watson, 46 Cal. 2d 818, 835 [299 P.2d 243].)
It clearly appears that defendant was convicted upon ample and sufficient evidence and received a full and fair trial in which no prejudicial error was committed.
The judgment is affirmed.
Shepard, J., and Monroe, J., pro tem.,  [fn. *] concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9737088 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:15.22463+00 ===

CIRILLO, President Judge:
This is an appeal from the judgment of sentence entered in the Court of Common Pleas of Somerset County on August 8, 1989 against appellant Barry Lee Miller. We reverse and remand for a new trial.
The following is a summary of the relevant facts: Miller was charged with corruption of minors and indecent assault with respect to his two nieces, R.M. and H.M. The cases were consolidated for trial. Prior to trial, defense counsel *182attempted to discover the contents of reports prepared by the Erie Rape Crisis Center on R.M. and H.M. These reports were in the possession of the district attorney for the Commonwealth. The district attorney provided all the information that the defense had requested with the exception of the reports. In the hope of obtaining possible exculpatory evidence, Miller filed a motion to compel discovery pursuant to Pa.R.Crim.P. 305(A), requesting that psychological reports for both victims be disclosed to the defense. The trial court conducted an in camera review of the reports and Miller’s motion was denied on October 11, 1988. Consequently, Miller was denied access to these reports. Following a jury trial Miller was convicted of both charges with respect to R.M. A mistrial was granted with respect to the charges concerning H.M. Miller filed timely post-trial motions which were denied. On August 8, 1989, Miller was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not less than four months and not more than twenty-three months, and directed to pay the costs of prosecution and five hundred dollars to the office of the clerk of courts of Somerset County.1 Miller filed a petition for modification of sentence which was denied by the trial court on August 29, 1989. This appeal followed.
Miller raises six issues for our consideration:
1. Whether the evidence was insufficient to sustain a verdict of guilty on the counts of corruption of minors and indecent assault where only the testimony of R.M. was given to substantiate the allegations in the information.
2. Is the verdict against the weight of the evidence.
3. Whether the defendant was denied access to possible exculpatory evidence as well as evidence useful in cross-examination of the witness, R.M., when the trial court denied access to a psychological report on the alleged victim.
*1834. Whether or not the trial court committed an error in preventing the defendant from placing into evidence accusations by the alleged victim, R.M., against a neighbor of her grandfather accusing said neighbor of similar activities as she accused the defendant.
5. Whether or not the court improperly refused to grant a mistrial in the case of R.M. after a mistrial had been granted in the case involving H.M.
6. Did the court commit an error in refusing to grant the demurrer of the defense on the basis of the Commonwealth failing to meet the burden of proof where [the] sole evidence offered by the Commonwealth was testimony by R.M., which was confused, [was] poor[ly] recalled] and thus cast grave doubt as to the alleged act.
We find Millers’ third argument to be meritorious and hence only address that issue.
In his third issue, Miller claims that because he was denied access to a psychological report prepared by the Erie Rape Crisis Center on R.M., he was precluded from obtaining evidence that might have exculpated him and was prevented from using the information contained in the report to cross-examine R.M. Miller concedes that the trial court indicated that the psychological reports contained no exculpatory information but maintains, nonetheless, that the reports may have contained useful information regarding the motives and mental abilities of the victims. Miller contends that the trial court abused its discretion by denying him access to these reports. We agree.
The issue presented by Miller is controlled by our supreme court’s decision in Commonwealth v. Lloyd, 523 Pa. 427, 567 A.2d 1357 (1989). There, defendant Lloyd sought to discover records of the victim’s psychotheraputic treatment rendered by Psychiatric Institute of the Medical College of Eastern Pennsylvania. The trial court conducted an in camera review of the records, determined that Lloyd’s allegations that the victim was delusional and/or hallucina*184tory were unfounded, and denied defense counsel access to the records. The supreme court held that “under the confrontation clause of the Pennsylvania Constitution, [Lloyd] ... was denied his right to confrontation when his attorney was denied access to the contents of the victim’s psychotheraputic records.”2 Id., 523 Pa. at 431, 567 A.2d at 1359. The court further held that “the right to inspect these records is also mandated by the compulsory process clause of the Pennsylvania Constitution.” Id.
The court reasoned that Lloyd was entitled to view the records in camera so that his attorney might adequately prepare Lloyd's defense. The court acknowledged that the Commonwealth has an interest in preserving the confidentiality of a victim’s treatment by her psychotherapist, but that interest is overridden by a defendant’s right to confront and cross-examine the witness testifying against him. The information contained in a victim’s psychological treatment records may, therefore, provide the defendant with a defense which would be unavailable to him without such access. The court thus held that Lloyd’s counsel was entitled to see the hospital records in an in camera proceeding, and stated that the trial court may issue orders to insure confidentiality. Id., 523 Pa. at 432, 567 A.2d at 1360.
Applying the Lloyd holding to the present case, we find that Miller was denied his right under the confrontation clause and compulsory process clause of the Pennsylvania Constitution when his attorney was denied access to the contents of the report prepared by the Erie Rape Crisis *185Center on the victim, R.M.3 Miller, like Lloyd, is entitled to view the instant report in order to prepare his defense against the charges made against him and to knowledgeably confront his adverse witnesses through cross-examination. See Lloyd, supra; see also Commonwealth v. Carillion, 380 Pa.Super. 458, 552 A.2d 279 (1988) (Cirillo, P.J., concurring) (“the Commonwealth’s interest in the confidentiality of the information contained in the Children’s Services’ file must yield to the Commonwealth’s greater interest in promoting and protecting the defendant’s constitutional right to confront and cross-examine witnesses against him----[and therefore,] I would have recogniz[ed] a higher level of protection under our state constitution, and allowed] defense counsel complete access to the ... file”).4
*186In applying the holding of Lloyd to the present case we are recognizing that our constitution places limits on the discretion of the trial court to grant or to deny a defendant’s motion for pre-trial discovery of material in the Commonwealth’s file. See Pennsylvania Rule of Criminal Procedure 305(B)(2).5 When the nature of the evidence is such, however, that denying defendant the opportunity to review it in effect denies him his constitutional rights to confrontation and compulsory process, he is entitled to view that evidence, regardless of whether it is in the hands of the Commonwealth or a private institution. As our supreme court stated in Commonwealth v. Grayson, 466 Pa. 427, 353 A.2d 428 (1976),
Whether the statements ... would have been helpful to the defense is not a question to be determined by the prosecution or by the trial court. They would not be reading the statements with the eyes of a trial advocate engaged in defending a client. Matters ... may appear innocuous to some, but have great significance to counsel viewing the statements from the perspective of an advocate for the accused about to cross-examine a witness.
Id., 466 Pa. at 429, 353 A.2d at 429. Consequently, we conclude that constitutionally guaranteed rights may not be abridged by a rule of procedure which vests the trial court with the discretion to deny the defendant’s request for *187information in the possession of the Commonwealth merely because the trial court has concluded that such information is not material to the preparation of his defense.
Judgment of sentence is vacated and a new trial is ordered.
Brosky, J., joins opinion by CIRILLO, President Judge, and files a concurring opinion by BROSKY, J.
FORD ELLIOTT, J., dissents.
. The order of sentence states "[A]s agreed by defense counsel and the [commonwealth] the offense of indecent assault will merge into the offense of corrupting children."
. In all criminal prosecutions the accused hath a right to be heard by himself and his counsel, to demand the nature and cause of the accusation against him, to meet the witnesses face to face, to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and, in prosecutions by indictment or information, a speedy public trial by an impartial jury of the vicinage; he cannot be compelled to give evidence against himself, nor can he be deprived of his life, liberty, or property, unless by the judgment of his peers or the law of the land. The use of a suppressed voluntary admission or voluntary confession to impeach the credibility of a person may be permitted and shall not be construed as compelling a person to give evidence against himself.
Pa. Const, art. I, § 9.
. In its Pa.R.A.P. 1925 opinion, the trial court noted that it followed the procedure set forth in Pennsylvania v. Ritchie, 480 U.S. 39, 107 S.Ct. 989, 94 L.Ed.2d 40 (1987). While we agree that the trial court complied with Pennsylvania v. Ritchie, supra, that decision involved federal constitutional guarantees. See Lloyd, supra, ("while the minimum federal constitutional guarantees are equally applicable to the analogous state constitutional provisions, the state has the power to provide broader standards than those mandated by the federal constitution”). At oral argument, Miller’s counsel suggested that Miller’s claim arose under our state constitution and so we have analyzed it under our state constitution.
. We note the similarity between the present case and Commonwealth v. Higby, 384 Pa.Super. 619, 559 A.2d 939 (1989). In Higby, this court stated that 42 Pa.C.S. § 5945.1(b), which grants sexual assault counselors a privilege, is inapplicable where the defendant seeks to obtain disclosure of discoverable items in the possession of the Commonwealth. Id.-, see also Commonwealth v. Cacek, 358 Pa.Super. 381, 384, 517 A.2d 992, 994 (1986) (section "5945.1 does not grant the Commonwealth a privilege to prevent disclosing of discoverable items and information requested by a defendant pursuant to Pa.R.Crim.P. 305"). In Higby, appellant averred that certain statements were made to individuals at a rape crisis center, and that these statements were in the possession of the Commonwealth. Likewise, Miller claims that the report prepared by the Erie Rape Crisis Center contains information that may exculpate him and that the report is in the possession of the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth does not dispute that it has possession of the report. In Higby, we distinguished such a situation from the circumstances where a subpoena duces tecum was issued upon a rape crisis center. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Wilson, 375 Pa.Super. 580, 544 A.2d 1381 (1988). Because the Commonwealth disputed Higby’s contention that it had the statements in its possession, we were required to remand the case to the trial court to determine whether the Commonwealth did in fact have the statements. See Higby, supra.
. In all court cases, except as otherwise provided in Rule 263 ... if the defendant files a motion for pretrial discovery, the court may order the Commonwealth to allow the defendant's attorney to inspect and copy or photograph any of the following requested items, upon a showing that they are material to the preparation of the defense, and that the request is reasonable:
(a) the names and addresses of eyewitnesses;
(b) all written or recorded statements, and substantially verbatim oral statements, of eyewitnesses the Commonwealth intends to call at trial;
(c) all written or recorded statements, and substantially verbatim oral statements, made by co-defendants, and by any co-conspirators or accomplices, whether such individuals have been charged or not;
(d) any other evidence specifically identified by the defendant, provided the defendant can additionally establish that its disclosure would be in the interests of justice.
Pa.R.Crim.P. 305(B)(2).

=== CASE 9737089 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:15.228748+00 ===

BROSKY, Judge,
concurring.
I join the fine opinion authored by our colleague, President Judge Cirillo, but write separately to express one thought.
Our colleague, Judge Ford Elliott, expresses concern that our decision today renders illusory the discretionary judicial review regarding discoverability of the contents of the Commonwealth’s file under Rule 305. As I understand her opinion, she is concerned that the entire Commonwealth file will now, as a result of our decision, be subject to discovery. To be sure, it would seem that the entire Commonwealth file already is, and has been, subject to discovery and discoverable under the auspices of Rule 305. However, discoverability is also subject to the limitations set forth in Rule 305; that limitation being a discretionary review by the trial court of the defendant’s assertion that the documents are material to the preparation of a defense. Be that as it may, I do not view our decision today as diminishing the court’s role in the Rule 305 process, as outlined in the rule, with the notable exception of the specific subject matter at issue here. That is to say, I do not view this decision as establishing the proposition, nor am I lending the support of my vote in this case to a proposition, that the review process in general, as set forth in Rule 305, has been eliminated and an absolute right of review substituted. In short, I do not believe that either Commonwealth v. Lloyd, 523 Pa. 427, 567 A.2d 1357 (1989), or this case will allow a defense counsel an opportunity to peruse the Common*188wealth’s file prior to trial in search of information or statements counsel believes may be useful in establishing a defense.
However, with regard to the psychological reports in question, the right of review has been modified by the decision in Lloyd. Appellant made a specific request to review the psychological records of the alleged victims, and asserted error when the court refused to allow defense counsel an opportunity to review them. The Supreme Court in Lloyd, apparently unpersuaded by this court’s position set forth in Commonwealth v. Carrilion, 380 Pa.Super. 458, 552 A.2d 279 (1988), indicates that there is an absolute right to have defense counsel inspect these types of documents, and, as Judge Ford Elliott also surmises in her Dissenting Opinion, the trial court, under Lloyd, now appears to have no authority or discretion to limit the defendant’s review through its own in camera procedure. As such, it appears to me, the assertion of error was well taken.
But this absolute privilege of review set forth in Lloyd, as I read that case, extends only to the type of documents in question in Lloyd, which are also of the kind found in the present case. I do not see Lloyd as applying to everything contained in the Commonwealth’s file. I also do not see as viable an approach that would change the standard of review or right of defense counsel to review these documents based upon the manner that the request was made, or turning upon who had possession at the time the request was made. By this I mean that I do not perceive the fact that the request in this case was made in a Rule 305 motion, when the Commonwealth possessed the files in question, whereas in Lloyd a subpoena was served on the hospital in possession, as somehow conceding the absolute reviewability of these documents established in Lloyd and in its place substituting the discretionary standard set forth in the rule. I believe that the absolute reviewability status would remain even though requested under a Rule 305 motion. After all, the right of defense counsel to review these *189documents resulted from a specific holding and is grounded heavily in constitutional rights, whereas the discretionary review set forth in Rule 305 is a general standard governing requests under the rule. I believe under these circumstances the specific would govern over the general. However, this is where I appear to part company with my colleague, Judge Ford Elliott and join the Opinion authored by President Judge Cirillo.

=== CASE 9737090 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:15.232694+00 ===

FORD ELLIOTT, Judge,
dissenting:
I must respectfully dissent. The issue as framed by the appellant, and on which the majority would reverse, is whether the trial court abused its discretion in denying appellants’ Motion to Compel discovery of psychological reports of the victims within the possession of the District Attorney pursuant to Pa.R.Crim.P. 305(B)(2).1
I find the majority’s application of Commonwealth v. Lloyd, 523 Pa. 427, 567 A.2d 1357 (1989) inapposite to this issue as presented.
Our supreme court in Lloyd determined that the defendant had a state constitutional right to view the contents of a sexual abuse victim’s psychotheraputic records in the possession of a hospital. In so doing, the court determined that the trial court had no authority or discretion to limit the defendant’s review through its own in camera proce*190dure. By applying the reasoning of Lloyd to the instant case, the majority finds that the trial court had no discretion under Rule 305(B)(2) to limit appellant’s review of the Erie Rape Crisis Center records which were a part of the Commonwealth’s file. To apply Lloyd as the majority proposes today would make not only the Crisis Center reports subject to discovery but also the entire contents of the Commonwealth’s file.2 Although I admit with some candor, that a careful reading of the majority and dissenting opinions in Lloyd leaves several questions unanswered, I cannot discern from my review that Lloyd found the exercise of discretion designated to the trial court during the discovery process pursuant to Rule 305(B)(2) unconstitutional as violative of a defendant’s state constitutional rights to confrontation and compulsory process. Until such time as the highest court of this Commonwealth specifically addresses this issue, I choose to apply the reasoning of Lloyd very narrowly.
Rule 305 as promulgated under the rule making authority of our supreme court was specifically designed to satisfy the constitutional guarantees enunciated in Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83, 83 S.Ct. 1194, 10 L.Ed.2d 215 (1963). In sum, Brady affords a defendant the opportunity to discover information in the possession of the Commonwealth that may be material to his defense. The Rule has passed constitutional scrutiny on several occasions, most recently by this court in Commonwealth v. Carillion, 380 Pa.Super. 458, 552 A.2d 279 (1988), and Commonwealth v. Byuss, 372 Pa.Super. 395, 539 A.2d 852 (1988). Turning to the facts of the instant case, the psychological reports of the victims provided by the Erie Rape Crisis Center had been disclosed to the Commonwealth; therefore, the reports were no longer subject to any privilege as noted by the majority opinion at footnote 4. However, this did not make them any more *191discoverable under Rule 305. If exculpatory information was contained therein, it was subject to discovery by appellant. The Commonwealth refused disclosure of the reports and appellant properly sought relief from the trial court pursuant to a motion to compel discovery of the reports.
In response to appellant’s motion, the trial court conducted an in camera inspection of the reports and determined that they contained nothing of value to the defense. The procedure was in compliance with that provided for in Rule 305 and approved of most recently in Carillion and Byuss. I can find no abuse of discretion on the part of the trial court. Further, I cannot find that appellant’s rights of confrontation and compulsory process were violated by the procedures established under the rule.
Judge Brosky’s authored en banc decision in Carillion, which upheld both the trial court’s in camera inspection of discovery material and the release of such material to the defendant, is instructive to the case herein.
As in Byuss, we agree that appellee’s right to confrontation has been neither compromised nor even implicated under the State Constitution. Moreover, the applicable provision of Rule 305 under which appellee’s initial requests fell and which controlled Byuss’ pretrial application for discovery of the medical reports states that disclosure is discretionary with the trial court. See Pa.R. Crim.P. 305 B(2), infra, at note 5. Hence, the procedure set forth in Pennsylvania v. Ritchie, supra, and endorsed by Byuss that the trial court conduct an in camera inspection of the file after which, if the court first determines that the sought-after information is extant and material to the accused’s defense may, in its discretion, order the Commonwealth to make such disclosure to the accused is in keeping with the tenor of this Rule. The right here involved stemmed from appellee’s initial request for pre-trial discovery pursuant to Pa.R.Crim.P. 305 of what he believed to be significant portions of the file. Upon post-trial in camera inspection of the subject file, the trial court determined and we agree, that formerly *192withheld portions of this file were critical to appellee’s defense.
Commonwealth v. Carillion, supra, 380 Pa.Super. at 472-4, 552 A.2d at 286 footnote omitted. Accordingly, in the instant case, if the trial court had determined that the reports of the Erie Crisis Center had contained something of value to the defense, it would have turned over the material information requested by the defense pursuant to Rule 305. However, to the contrary, the court made a specific finding that there was nothing exculpatory or beneficial to the defendant in the records and therefore denied discovery. I cannot find that the trial court abused its discretion in this regard.
Finding no merit to appellant’s points of error, I would affirm the Judgment of Sentence.
. Discretionary With the Court. In all court cases, except as otherwise provided in Rule 263 (Disclosure of Testimony Before Investigating Grand Jury), if the defendant files a motion for pretrial discovery, the court may order the Commonwealth to allow the defendant’s attorney to inspect and copy or photograph any of the following requested items, upon a showing that they are material to the preparation of the defense, and that the request is reasonable:
(a) the names and addresses of eyewitnesses;
(b) all written or recorded statements, and substantially verbatim oral statements, of eyewitnesses the Commonwealth intends to call at trial;
(c) all written or recorded statements, and substantially verbatim oral statements, made by co-defendants, and by co-conspirators or accomplices, whether such individuals have been charged or not;
(d) any other evidence specifically identified by the defendant, provided the defendant can additionally establish that its disclosure would be in the interests of justice.
. In response to Judge Brosky’s concurrence in this matter, I find nothing in Commonwealth v. Lloyd, supra, which would limit its broad constitutional ruling regarding defendant’s rights of confrontation and compulsory process at the pre-trial stage only to sexual assault files or sexual assault cases.

=== CASE 2208781 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:33.341757+00 ===

582 A.2d 123 (1990)
TOYS, INC.
v.
F.M. BURLINGTON COMPANY d/b/a Burlington Square.
No. 88-200.
Supreme Court of Vermont.
August 10, 1990.
*124 Michael I. Green and Geoffrey W. Crawford of O'Neill and Crawford and Jarvis and Kaplan, Burlington, for plaintiff-appellee.
Robert B. Luce of Downs Rachlin & Martin, Burlington, for defendant-appellant.
Before ALLEN, C.J., PECK,[*] GIBSON and DOOLEY, JJ., and BARNEY, C.J. (Ret.), Specially Assigned.
DOOLEY, Justice.
F.M. Burlington Company, defendant below and appellant here, moved for summary judgment in this contract action pursuant to V.R.C.P. 56. The trial court not only denied the motion but awarded summary judgment on the issue of liability to plaintiff in the action, Toys, Inc. V.R.C.P. 56(c) ("Summary judgment, when appropriate, may be rendered against the moving party."). We agree with defendant that plaintiff should not have been awarded a summary judgment on all liability issues and reverse on that basis. We conclude, however, that the court was correct in awarding plaintiff summary judgment on the issue of whether a valid lease renewal option existed between the parties and also conclude that neither party is entitled to summary judgment on the remaining issues. Accordingly, we remand for trial.
On November 1, 1979, the parties entered into a lease for space in a shopping mall owned by defendant. The lease was for an initial five-year term, April 1, 1980 through February 28, 1985, and plaintiff was given an option to renew for five additional years. The option provision in the lease is as follows:
Tenant shall be provided one option to extend the lease for five years, provided that tenant was not in default of the lease at any time during the initial term upon the same terms and conditions except:
(a) there shall be no further right to renew;
(b) the fixed minimum rental shall be renegotiated to the then prevailing rate within the mall.
Should the tenant wish to renew, tenant shall give one year's written notice of intention to exercise the option.
On February 7, 1984, Toys Inc. wrote to F.M. Burlington, pursuant to the lease, and said, "[P]lease be advised that Toys, Inc. hereby notifies F.M. Burlington Company of its intent to exercise its option to renew." F.M. Burlington responded on February 24, 1984. In that letter defendant confirmed that plaintiff was exercising its option to renew and then stated the prevailing rate per square foot in the mall.
On March 1, 1984, plaintiff responded. This letter stated that "Toys, Inc.'s notice of intent to renew was premised on a substantially different understanding of the prevailing rate." It described a conversation with defendant's leasing agent that involved the quotation of a prevailing rental rate well below that stated in defendant's letter of February 24th and included the understanding that "we would be completely free to renegotiate the issue of a fixed minimum rent without being bound to a prevailing rate." The letter concluded, "I trust ... that in the coming months we will be able to renegotiate a mutually agreeable rent structure." On March 2, 1984, defendant responded by letter stating:
You are of course completely free to renegotiate the rate without reference to the prevailing rate. However, as far as the rights of the Tenant under the option are concerned, the prevailing rate ... is $10.00 [per square foot].
The prevailing rate is subject to change until such time as an agreement for renewal is reached.
On July 17, 1984, the parties met and seemed to come to an understanding as to a rent structure for the renewal term. The new rent structure was not significantly different from that specified by defendant in February, except that the first-year rent was lower than the prevailing rate and the last-year rent was higher than the prevailing rate. Over the five-year period, the new rent averaged to the prevailing rate. Defendant wrote to plaintiff the next day *125 describing the terms and stated "[i]f this offer is accepted, please have a copy of this letter executed and returned to me. This offer is valid through August 1, 1984." (Emphasis added.) Plaintiff responded with a request for more time to consider the offer and was given until August 15, 1984. On August 15, 1984, plaintiff wrote to defendant:
It is necessary for my clients at this time to ask for an additional two (2) week extension from [August 15, 1984], in which to accept your offer as set forth in your July 18, 1984 correspondence.
Please let me know if there is a problem with the above request.
Defendant did not respond, and plaintiff did not accept or reject the "offer" of July 17, 1984. During this time, plaintiff was seeking an alternative location for its toy store in case negotiations with defendant did not work out.
Sometime in the late summer or early fall, plaintiff began pursuing the purchase of a building in which to locate its store. In October, a loan application was submitted to a financing source for funds to purchase the building. The next communication between the parties to this action was a letter from defendant dated November 1, 1984 and informing plaintiff that "Burlington Square is listing store no. 20 for lease effective March 1, 1985." On November 9, 1984, plaintiff wrote to defendant:
On February 7, 1984, my clients informed you in writing of their intention to exercise the option to renew in the above matter. At this time we would like to be advised of the prevailing rate so that a lease can be signed as soon as possible.
In reference to your November 1, 1984[,] letter, we would consider any attempt on your part to lease store No. 20 to any party other than Toys, Inc., a breach of our lease.
Although the paper jousting continued, negotiations between the parties ceased. Defendant took the position that plaintiff had failed to accept the prevailing rate in February and that they had let the July offer lapse. Plaintiff stated that it had exercised the option to renew with the February 7th letter and defendant was bound at its prevailing rate. Plaintiff left the mall and purchased the building for which it earlier sought financing. Plaintiff then sued for breach of contract.
After discovery and based generally on the facts set forth above, defendant moved for summary judgment, arguing that: (1) the option provision in the lease is actually an unenforceable agreement to agree; (2) even if a valid option existed, it was never effectively exercised by plaintiff; (3) if plaintiff had a right of renewal, it waived it through its conduct. The trial court found that the lease provision created a binding option, that plaintiff exercised the option by letter on February 7, 1984, and that plaintiff never waived its acceptance of the renewal. Accordingly, it awarded summary judgment to the plaintiff. Defendant renews its same arguments here, urging that we grant it summary judgment or, alternatively, remand for trial.
We start by reviewing the standards for summary judgment under Rule 56. Summary judgment is appropriate only if there is "no genuine issue as to any material fact." V.R.C.P. 56(c). The party against whom summary judgment is sought is entitled to the benefit of all reasonable doubts and inferences in determining whether a genuine issue of material fact exists. See Creighton v. Town of Windsor, 154 Vt. ___, ___, 577 A.2d 681, 684 (1990). The facts bearing on the issue must be clear, undisputed or unrefuted. See id. In a case such as this where both parties are seeking summary judgment, both parties are entitled to these benefits when the opposing party's motion is being judged.
We agree with the trial court that summary judgment for plaintiff was appropriate on the first issue raised by defendant. The lease provision created a valid option for plaintiff to renew for an additional five years. Defendant characterizes the lease renewal provision as merely an agreement to agree and therefore not enforceable. If defendant's construction were correct, the lease provision would not create an enforceable *126 option. See Reynolds v. Sullivan, 136 Vt. 1, 3, 383 A.2d 609, 611 (1978). In Reynolds we held that a preliminary option agreement that was vague and uncertain in its terms "would be an impossibility to enforce." Id. The test is whether the option agreement contains "all material and essential terms to be incorporated in the subsequent document." Id. The agreement in Reynolds was labeled as preliminary and specifically provided that the parties "agree to enter an agreement for an option" and that "more specific terms will be stated in the option to purchase." Id. at 2, 383 A.2d at 610.
It is not necessary under Reynolds that the option agreement contain all the terms of the contract as long as it contains a practicable, objective method of determining the essential terms. See Krupinsky v. Birsky, 129 Vt. 400, 405, 278 A.2d 757, 760 (1971) (option contract valid even though it "did not fix a price certain" where "it did appoint a mode of determining the price"); Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 33 comment a, § 34(1) (1981) ("The terms of a contract may be reasonably certain even though it empowers one or both parties to make a selection of terms in the course of performance."). We must construe the option agreement in a way to give it binding effect if possible. See Agway, Inc. v. Marotti, 149 Vt. 191, 194, 540 A.2d 1044, 1046 (1988) (before voiding a contract for vagueness, indefiniteness or uncertainty of expression, Court must attempt to construe the contract to avoid the defect). We are also mindful that defendant drafted the language of the option clause and that a doubtful provision in a written instrument is construed against the party responsible for drafting it. See Trustees of Net Realty v. AVCO Financial Services, 147 Vt. 472, 475-76, 520 A.2d 981, 983 (1986).
The option agreement states that "the fixed minimum rental shall be renegotiated to the then prevailing rate within the mall." We believe that this language sets forth a definite, ascertainable method of determining the price term for the lease extension. Within days after plaintiff stated its original intent to exercise its option, defendant replied by quoting the "prevailing rate within the mall" at that time. Neither defendant nor plaintiff have disputed the accuracy of this calculation.
Defendant puts much emphasis on the use of the term "renegotiate" in the renewal clause, as showing an intent to reach a future agreement. While the choice of wording could have been more precise, we agree with the plaintiff that the term means that the then-existing "prevailing rate" would be determined by agreement, and does not mean that the parties would start from a clean slate in renegotiating a rent term. Even if we give defendant the benefit of all inferences and reasonable doubt, we find no genuine issue of fact bearing on whether there was an enforceable option to renew and hold as a matter of law that a valid option existed.
Defendant's second argument is that even if a valid renewal option existed, plaintiff did not properly exercise its option. An option is merely an agreement to hold open a specific offer to a specific party for a stated time. Harden v. Vermont Dep't of Taxes, 134 Vt. 122, 125, 352 A.2d 685, 687 (1976). The essence of the option must be accepted according to its terms in order to generate a binding contract. Bricker v. Walker, 139 Vt. 361, 364, 428 A.2d 1129, 1130 (1981); Buchannon v. Billings, 127 Vt. 69, 74-75, 238 A.2d 638, 642 (1968) (terms of the option "must be strictly complied with by the optionee"). The determination of whether an acceptance meets the terms of an offer is described in Ackerman v. Carpenter, 113 Vt. 77, 81, 29 A.2d 922, 924-25 (1943), as follows:
We agree with the defendants' contention that an acceptance which varies from the offer will not conclude a contract. But the reply may go beyond the terms of the proposal without qualifying the acceptance. The addition may be such as fairly to import a request instead of a condition. In determining what one party intended and the other ought to have understood, regard must be had to the situation and purpose of the parties, *127 the subject matter and course of the negotiations.
The question whether there was a contract between the parties does not depend alone upon the specified facts found but also upon the reasonable inferences to be drawn from them.
(Citations omitted.) While the basic facts in this action are clear and undisputed, we cannot say the same for the "situation and purpose of the parties" and the "reasonable inferences to be drawn from" the facts, two critical factors set forth in Ackerman.
Plaintiff's theory is that both it and defendant were bound as of February 7, 1984 as a result of the initial letter. While this is one interpretation of the facts, it is not the only one. The letter can be construed as an expression of intent only with the necessary action to await the determination of the prevailing rental rate. Indeed, the March 1 letter, which stated that the earlier notice of intent to renew was based on a substantially different understanding of the prevailing rate, is consistent with this view. It is difficult to reconcile plaintiff's theory with its actions in July when it refused to agree to terms that were slightly more favorable to it than those it says it became bound to in February. When we consider the overall course of dealings between the parties, their evident purposes, and the inferences to be drawn from the facts, we cannot say as a matter of law that plaintiff accepted the option according to its terms. It was error to award summary judgment to plaintiff on this issue.
While we do not believe it was appropriate to award summary judgment to plaintiff on this issue, we do not conclude that summary judgment for defendant would be appropriate. When we give plaintiff the benefit of all reasonable doubts and inferences, we cannot say as a matter of law that plaintiff failed to accept the option according to its terms. The question must be left to the factfinder.
The third issue is whether the actions of plaintiff subsequent to the purported exercise of the option constituted a waiver of that acceptance. As with the second issue, we find that this issue is not appropriate for summary judgment for either party. We have defined waiver of a contract right as:
the intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known right, and the act of waiver may be evidenced by express words as well as by conduct. Unlike an estoppel, it involves the act or conduct of one party to the contract only, and involves both knowledge and intent on the part of the waiving party. A waiver does not necessarily imply that one has been misled to its prejudice or into an altered position.
Lynda Lee Fashions, Inc. v. Sharp Offset Printing, Inc., 134 Vt. 167, 170, 352 A.2d 676, 677 (1976) (citations omitted).
Defendant argues that plaintiff's conduct subsequent to its initial letter exercising the option was so inconsistent with the intent to renew that plaintiff waived the taking of the option. It cites to the prolonged and inconclusive negotiations between the parties, the failure of plaintiff to respond to an overture to arbitrate the dispute, and plaintiff's active pursuit of real estate outside of the mall as evidence of this waiver. Plaintiff responds that it did nothing directly inconsistent with the February 7, 1984 renewal and that it was free to, and encouraged by defendant to, renegotiate its rent outside of the terms of the option, without impairing its acceptance of the option. See Ackerman, 113 Vt. at 81, 29 A.2d at 925 (reply to option may go beyond the terms of the proposal without qualifying the acceptance).
Again, the basic facts are clear but the inferences to be drawn from the facts and the intentions and purposes of the plaintiff are not clear. A factfinder could find a waiver based on this record, but that conclusion is not commanded as a matter of law. Summary judgment was in error.
Reversed and remanded.
NOTES
[*]  Justice Peck sat for oral argument but did not participate in the decision.

=== CASE 9737091 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:18.206523+00 ===

PAULSON, judge (on reassignment).
This is an appeal from a judgment rendered on a verdict against the appellant, Arthur Robinson Henderson, who was charged with violating Section 10-04-10 of the North Dakota Century Code, and from an order denying a motion in arrest of judgment.
The original information was amended just prior to trial, and Mr. Henderson, without objection, was arraigned on the amended information. The latter information charged the appellant with “offering for sale or selling securities without registering with the securities commissioner as a dealer or salesman”, the specific act complained of being the selling of a $1000 note to Alice Rodin on September 25, 1965.
The salient facts are that, during the period specified in the information, March 10, 1965, to November 1, 1965, the appellant was employed by Heartland International, Inc., a North Dakota corporation, to assist in raising money to be used by the corporation to purchase a Minot radio station from Heartland’s parent corporation, the People’s Radio Association of Denver, Colorado. During this period Mr. Henderson was not licensed with the North Dakota Securities Commissioner either as a salesman or as a dealer. The State proved, without contradiction, the sale of a note to the woman named in the amended information, and several other sales as well. The State offered further proof, through the testimony of an attorney who had advised Mr. Henderson, that Mr. Henderson had knowledge that the sale of the notes in question would require a North Dakota salesman’s or dealer’s license.
There are two preliminary matters to be decided prior to consideration of the basic issues raised by Mr. Henderson’s specifications of error. Both are in regard to the motion in arrest of judgment.
The State claims that this court has no jurisdiction of an appeal from the denial of the motion in arrest of judgment because the oral decision on the motion was rendered in open court on November 23, 1966, and the notice of appeal from that decision was not served until April 4, 1967, which period was not within the sixty-day limit set forth in Section 29-28-08, N.D.C.C.
The State’s contention cannot be upheld. Section 29-28-08, N.D.C.C., requires that an appeal be “from an order”. This court stated in State v. New, 75 N.D. 433, 28 N.W.2d 522, in paragraph 2 of the syllabus:
“An oral denial of a motion does not constitute an order denying the motion. An order must be in writing and must be signed by the judge.” [Emphasis supplied.]
Accord, State v. Wicks, 68 N.D. 1, 276 N.W. 690.
The rationale behind these decisions is clear; their purpose is to foster certainty and concreteness in the record to be reviewed on appeal. The written order denying the motion was filed with the clerk of court on March 12, 1967, and the notice of appeal from that order was served on April 4, 1967, and filed on April 13, 1967, or well within the sixty-day period. This court has jurisdiction of the appeal from *704the order, and the motion to dismiss that appeal is denied.
Henderson claims that the judgment entered against him is void because the order denying the motion in arrest of judgment was not entered prior to the rendition of the judgment. To support this contention, Henderson relies on Section 29-25-04, N.D. C.C., which reads as follows:
“A motion in arrest of a judgment shall be heard and decided before judgment is entered and after reasonable notice has been given to the state’s attorney by the defendant.”
Assuming, without deciding, that the provision of the foregoing section is mandatory, we conclude that it has been complied with by the court’s oral decision on the motion. Section 29-25-04 does not require a written order to be entered prior to judgment, but only that the motion “be heard and decided before judgment is entered.”
This provision is for the protection of the defendant, in that the granting of the motion would preclude the entry of a judgment against him. An oral decision on the motion sufficiently protects and informs the defendant, and does not affect his right to appeal from the written order when it is finally entered.
Mr. Henderson’s remaining specifications of error can be grouped under four main categories. We will first consider the claimed error in denying the motion in arrest of judgment.
This motion was based on three grounds: that the information did not charge a public offense; that the information charges more than one offense; and that the trial court did not have jurisdiction of the offense charged.
The information charged Henderson with “offering for sale or selling securities” in that he sold a note to one Alice Rodin. The language of Section 10-04-10, N.D. C.C., also refers to “securities”. The essence of Henderson’s argument in this regard is that the sale of a “note” is not the sale of “securities”. This argument is not well taken. Section 1-01-35, N.D.C.C., provides:
“Words used in the singular number include the plural and words used in the plural number include the singular, except when a contrary intention plainly appears.”
The contrary intention does not plainly appear in Section 10-04-10. The gist of the offense is selling, in a nonexempt transaction, without being registered. That offense is committed whether one security or many are sold. Further, the State proved, without contraversion, the sale, by Henderson, of several other notes, thus fulfilling Henderson’s contention that the “sale of securities” must be shown. The error in the information, if such it is assumed to be, is at best a technical error and did not affect any substantial right of Henderson and, therefore, it will be disregarded by this court. Sec. 29-28-26, N.D.C.C.
The second ground stated in the motion in arrest of judgment is that the information charges more than one offense. The contention is that the charge comprises four offenses: selling securities without registering as a salesman; selling securities without registering as a dealer; offering to sell securities without registering as a salesman ; and offering to sell securities without registering as a dealer. This contention cannot be sustained.
Section 29-11-10, N.D.C.C., sets out the method of charging a criminal offense in North Dakota. It states, in subsection 2, that a valid charge can be made:
“By stating so much of the definition of the offense or offenses in terms of the statute or statutes defining the offense or offenses, or in terms of substantially the same meaning, as is sufficient to give the court and the defendant notice of the offense or offenses which are intended to be charged.”
*705This subsection has been complied with. The penalty for selling is the same as the penalty for offering to sell, and the penalty does not change if one is found to have done either when acting as a dealer or as a salesman.
In State v. Gopher Tire & Rubber Co., 146 Minn. 52, 177 N.W. 937, 939 (1920), the court stated:
“The reason for the rule against duplicity is that the defendant ought not to be embarrassed or confused in making his defense by the necessity of meeting several distinct accusations founded on disconnected acts and requiring the production of evidence of a different nature.”
The reasons stated have not arisen in this case. Henderson was not embarrassed or confused in preparing his defense by having to meet several accusations. Proof on Henderson’s part that he was registered either as a dealer or as a salesman would have required an acquittal. The proof was un-contradicted that he was neither. The State’s proof that he made the sale charged in the information, and several others, also was uncontroverted.
Further, as this court said in State v. Simpson, 78 N.D. 571, 50 N.W.2d 661, 663:
“The name given or attempted to he given in an information is not controlling as a statement of the crime charged. When the facts, acts, and circumstances are set forth with sufficient certainty, the failure to properly name the offense is not fatal.” [Syllabus by the court.]
The act charged in the information, when considered in conjunction with the crime charged therein, was of sufficient certainty to apprise Henderson what the State would attempt to prove, and, on this basis, the trial court did not err in denying the motion in arrest of judgment.
The third and final ground stated by Henderson in his motion in arrest of judgment is that the trial court did not have jurisdiction of the offense charged. This ground is based on the contention that the particular statute claimed to have been violated by Henderson is not consistent with due process of law, in that it does not with reasonable clarity describe the prohibited conduct.
In United States ex rel. Shott v. Tehan, 365 F.2d 191, at page 198 (6th Cir.1966), a case involving a violation of the Ohio Securities Act, the court stated:
“Appellant further attacks the Ohio Securities Act by asserting that it violates the Fourteenth Amendment because the Act, as applied, is unconstitutionally vague and indefinite. * * *
⅜ ⅜ ⅜ H? ⅜ ⅜
“The Ohio Securities Act, prohibiting the sale of securities which are not otherwise exempt, forewarns of its reach and coverage. The language sufficiently conveys a definite warning as to the proscribed conduct, when measured by common understanding and commercial practice. * * *
“The Ohio Securities Act makes it plain that a security must be sold through a licensed dealer unless the security or the transaction is exempt. The burden is upon the issuer to determine initially whether a sale or transaction is exempt. The exemption of promissory notes not offered directly or indirectly for sale to the public is not unconstitutionally vague. * * * The statute clearly sets forth the conduct proscribed.”
Section 10-04-10, N.D.C.C., likewise conveys a definite warning as to the proscribed conduct, and provides:
“No dealer or salesman shall offer for sale or sell any securities within or from this state, except in transactions exempt under section 10-04-06, unless he is registered as a dealer or salesman pursuant to the provisions of this section. * * *»
*706The United States Supreme Court in United States v. National Dairy Products Corp., 372 U.S. 29, at page 32, 83 S.Ct. 594, at page 598, 9 L.Ed.2d 561 (1963), has set forth the standards for determining whether a legislative enactment which attempts to proscribe certain conduct is void for vagueness, as follows:
“Void for vagueness simply means that criminal responsibility should not attach where one could not reasonably understand that his contemplated conduct is proscribed.”
We hold that Section 10-04-10, N. D.C.C., when construed by the standards of commercial practice and common understanding, sets forth with reasonable clarity the proscribed conduct, and can be understood by the reasonable man. Therefore, Henderson was tried under a statute which is in accordance with due process of law, and the trial court had the necessary jurisdiction.
The second category under which Henderson’s specifications of error can be grouped is that the court erred in giving, or failing to give, certain instructions to the jury. The trial court submitted written instructions to both counsel and requested that they examine them and present any exceptions which they might have. Henderson’s trial counsel took no exceptions to these proposed instructions. Henderson is therefore foreclosed under Section 29-21-33, N.D.C.C., from having any error in the instructions given passed upon by this court. State v. Carroll (N.D.), 123 N.W.2d 659; State v. Alistad (N.D.), 98 N.W.2d 371; State v. Powell (N.D.), 73 N.W.2d 777.
The third grouping of specifications of error comes under the heading of an alleged violation of the attorney-client confidential relationship. The alleged inadmissible evidence was supposed to have arisen during the following interrogation of the witness Meschke by the trial judge:
“THE COURT: Mr. Meschke, did you ever tell Mr. Henderson that he couldn’t sell these notes to the public without being registered as a dealer or salesman?
“A Yes sir, yes sir Judge, I believe that I did on April 7th when Mr. Henderson and Mr. Helgeson conferred with me the subject of notes was discussed at that meeting and the only in — and my answer was ‘negative.’ The only transaction which they proposed which I approved of was the transfer of real estate from an individual to the corporation in exchange for notes.
“THE COURT: I have no further questions.
“MR. THOMAS: Was that April of ’65 that he had the conversation?
“A Yes sir.
“MR. STEVENS: I have one question. I take it from your answer that the provisions of such, Section 10-04 — 05, Subdivision 7, Promissory Notes as described there as being exempt securities was discussed ?
“A Yes sir.
“MR. STEVENS: That is all.”
It is to be noted that at no time during this colloquy did Henderson’s trial attorney object to the questions being asked by the judge. “A rule of evidence not invoked is ordinarily waived.” State v. Dietz (N.D.), 115 N.W.2d 1, 7.
Section 29-21-12, N.D.C.C., states:
“The rules of evidence in civil cases are applicable also to criminal cases, except as otherwise provided in this title.”
In Grenz v. Werre (N.D.), 129 N.W.2d 681, 687, the court stated:
“It is elementary that an assignment of error in the admission of evidence will not be reviewed by this court unless proper and timely objection is made to *707the admissibility thereof, and that the admissibility of such evidence cannot be challenged for the first time upon appeal.”
As has been pointed out, Henderson’s attorney did not challenge the admissibility of this evidence upon the trial, and is now attempting to raise the issue for the first time upon appeal.
The contention in Henderson’s brief that objecting to the admission of the alleged confidential communication would place Henderson in an untenable position has been considered by this court and rejected. We hold that any possible attorney-client privilege has been waived by Henderson for failure to object at the trial.
The final category of Henderson’s specifications of error consists of a number of claimed errors wherein the trial court either overruled or sustained objections by the prosecution or the defense.
A good deal of the claimed error occurring under this heading consists of the introduction of evidence by the State concerning the nonpayment of the notes which Henderson had sold, and the places of deposit of the money received from the sale of these notes. While it is true that this type of testimony was not strictly relevant to the offense charged, the trial court’s instructions to the jury were clear and we hold that this type of evidence did not prejudice Henderson’s rights.
Henderson further objects to the introduction of testimony tending to place emphasis on the religious background of the enterprise in which he was involved. This evidence, again, was not strictly relevant to the charge; however, it was part of the factual background of the case and, as such, permitted the triers of fact to better understand the charge by putting it in the proper context. In view of the concise instructions given to the jury, we conclude that this evidence (of the religious background of the enterprise) did not prej-udicially harm Henderson.
Henderson asserts as error the refusal to admit a securities license which had been issued to him by the North Dakota Securities Commissioner. The license had expired, and, furthermore, had been issued to Henderson as a salesman for People’s Radio Association, a business entity with which, during the time specified in the information, Henderson no longer was associated. The foregoing makes it abundantly clear that the securities license was completely irrelevant to the issues in the case at bar.
Mr. Henderson claims error in that one of the witnesses, Chester Fossum, whose name was endorsed on the amended information, was not called by the State. In his brief, Henderson makes much of what the testimony of Mr. Fossum would have been, had he been called. Near the close of the trial, Henderson’s attorney asked if Mr. Fossum was in the court room and the prosecution’s answer was that he was not. Following this, there was a discussion at the bench, which is not in the record before us, after which the defendant rested. Section 29-01-06, N.D.C.C., sets out the various rights of the defendant, including the following:
“To have the process of the court to compel the attendance of witnesses in his behalf; * * * ”
If Henderson felt that the testimony of Chester Fossum was of prime importance to his case he could have had issued a subpoena compelling his attendance. This court refuses to speculate on Henderson’s reasons for not doing so. In our adversary system if a witness is necessary to a proper presentation of a defendant’s case then the defendant should see that the witness is called. State v. Marmon, 154 N.W.2d 55 (N.D.1967).
Mr. Henderson, although again no objection was made to the arguments at the trial, urges that he was prejudiced by remarks of counsel for the prosecution made in the opening and closing summations to *708the jury. Those remarks included the use of the words “pray” and “prey”, as a play upon the initials of the People’s Radio Association, that is, PRA; together with a reference to Henderson as “Father Divine”. The control of the scope of counsel’s opening and closing arguments is a matter left largely to the judicial discretion of the trial court and this exercise of discretion will not be reversed by this court unless a clear abuse of discretion is shown. State v. Loyland (N.D.), 149 N.W.2d 713. We hold that there has been no such clear abuse of discretion in the instant case.
Henderson presents several other specifications of error which this court has carefully reviewed. We find that these specifications are either without merit or present only technical errors which this court must disregard in light of Section 29-28-26, N.D.C.C.
Our review of the record having shown no error prejudicial to Henderson’s rights, we hold that the judgment and the order denying the motion in arrest of judgment are affirmed.
' TEIGEN, C. J., and STRUTZ, ERICK-STAD and KNUDSON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9737092 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:18.210727+00 ===

On Rehearing.
PAULSON, Judge.
The appellant has petitioned for a rehearing in this case, asserting that this court overlooked certain points in determining that the attorney-client privilege had not been breached by the testimony of the witness Meschke. Appellant bases his assertions primarily on portions of two North Dakota statutes. Section 27-13-01 of the North Dakota Century Code states in pertinent part:
“Every attorney and counselor at law shall:
⅜ ⅜ ⅜ * * *
“4. Maintain inviolate the confidence, and at any peril to himself, preserve the secret, of his client * *
and Section 31-01-06, N.D.C.C., reads:
“ A person cannot be examined as a witness in the following cases:
“1. An attorney, without the consent of his client, cannot be examined as to any communication made by the client to him, nor as to his advice given thereon in the course of professional employment * *
We will comment on these two statutes in the order above presented. Assuming for the purposes of argument that Section 27-13-01, N.D.C.C., does not allow an attorney to testify concerning his client’s secret, regardless of waiver on the part of the client, we are of the opinion on the basis of the record before us, that no “secret” is involved here. The answer of the witness Meschke to the question by the court (which is set out in the principal opinion) clearly shows the non-confidentiality of the statement made to Mr. Henderson.
“In order that the rule as to privileged communications between an attorney and his client or its reason apply, it is inherently necessary that the communication made by the client to the attorney be confidential. Therefore if the client chooses to make or receive his communication in the presence of third persons, it ceases to be confidential and is not entitled to the protection afforded by the rule.” [In re Busse’s Estate, 332 Ill.App. 258, 75 N.E.2d 36.]
And see La Moore v. United States, 180 F.2d 49, 12 Alaska 556 (9th Cir. 1950).
Although the foregoing answers the contention of the appellant based upon Section 27-13-01(4), N.D.C.C., we do not retreat from our position, as taken in the *709principal opinion, that failure to object to the presentation of testimony by an attorney regarding a communication to or from a client waives the attorney-client privilege. Weisser v. Preszler, 62 N.D. 75, 241 N.W. 505 (1932); La Moore v. United States, supra. The soundness of this holding is pointed out by the situation presented in this case. Had the appellant objected to the testimony of the witness Meschke, the State would have been allowed to obviate the objection by an offer of proof concerning (1) the non-confidentiality of the communication and (2) the nonexistence of an attorney-client relationship. In contravention of this offer of proof, appellant could have offered testimony that the presence of Mr. Helgeson at the conference in which the alleged privileged communications took place was necessary to their efficacy, and, further, that a bona fide attorney-client relationship did exist. As with any claimed error presented for the first time on appeal, this court is faced, as a general rule, with an inadequate record on which to render a decision. However, in this case, we are able to determine from the record that the testimony given by the witness Meschke was not first uttered in a confidential setting, because of the presence of Mr. Hel-geson.
Appellant’s argument in regard to Section 31-01-06(1), N.D.C.C., is that an attorney can only be examined with the consent of the client, and that the consent can only be given in two ways, which are: (1) by express consent, and (2) under the terms of Section 31-01-07, N.D.C.C.
Section 31-01-07 provides:
“If a person testifies as a witness as to any subject which comes within the protection of any of the provisions of the first three subsections of section 31-01-06, he shall be deemed to have consented to the examination of an attorney, clergyman, priest, physician, or surgeon on the same subject matter.”
Appellant claims this method of consenting to testimony by an attorney is exclusive. That is, that the legislature provided for this method and intended to provide for no other. Appellant, of course, negates that argument in his own petition for rehearing when he states: “The client, of course, can specifically give consent to the testimony.” Be that as it may, appellant misconstrues the intent of the legislature in enacting Section 31-01-07, N.D. C.C. The obvious intent was to prevent the several privileges set out in Section 31-01-06, N.D.C.C., from being used as a sword instead of a shield [Steen v. First National Bank, 298 F. 36 (8th Cir. 1924)]; that is, to prevent the claimant of the privilege from testifying as to his version of the communications and then, by claiming the privilege, refusing to allow any testimony which could possibly rebut his version. In this regard, see Steen v. First National Bank, supra; Swanson v. Domning, 251 Minn. 110, 86 N.W.2d 716. The legislature did not intend, by the enactment of Section 31-01-07, N.D.C.C., to negate other possible methods of consenting to, or waiving, testimony regarding alleged privileged communications.
For the foregoing reasons the petition for rehearing is hereby denied.
TEIGEN, C. J., and STRUTZ, ERICK-STAD and KNUDSON, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2208786 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:33.395317+00 ===

177 Cal. App. 2d 691 (1960)
THE PEOPLE, Respondent,
v.
WEYMAN OTIS WILKES, Appellant.
Crim. No. 6775.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Two.
Feb. 8, 1960.
Morris Lavine for Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and Jack E. Goertzen, Deputy Attorney General, for Respondent.
FOX, P. J.
Defendant was convicted of three counts of violation of section 274  [fn. 1] of the Penal Code (abortion). He has appealed from the judgment.
It was initially alleged that defendant violated Penal Code, sections 274 and 664 (attempted abortion), by supplying and administering a "vaginal pack" to one Hilda Mary Muise. The district attorney made a motion to amend the information by interlineation by substituting the words "a substance" in place of "vaginal pack." The motion was denied. The district attorney then moved to dismiss. This motion was granted November 12, 1958.
A new information was filed on December 19, 1958, in which defendant was charged with three counts of abortion.  [fn. 2] The acts were alleged to have occurred on April 11, 12 and 19, 1958, respectively, and involved the supply and administration of "a substance" to the same female with the intent to procure a miscarriage. A jury found defendant guilty on all three counts. Probation was denied and defendant was sentenced to the state prison on each count; the sentences, however, were ordered to run concurrently. It is from this judgment that defendant has appealed.
In March, 1958, Hilda Mary Muise discovered that she was pregnant. She advised one Jerry Benson of her condition. They decided she would get an abortion. During the early *695 part of April Benson received a telephone call at his place of employment from a person with a male voice. Thereupon Benson went to his bank where he withdrew $700. On April 11th, at approximately 6 p.m., he returned to Mrs. Muise's home, at 642 Date Street, in Pomona, to keep an appointment with the man with whom he had talked on the telephone. Benson had $500 in cash with him. A short time thereafter defendant arrived carrying a black bag. He and Mrs. Muise went into her bedroom. There, with the aid of a vaginal speculum, defendant inserted a pack. He told her that she would get a little choking feeling in her throat and her throat would become dry; also, that she would start getting cramps more and more until eventually she would lose her pregnancy. Except for her pregnancy, Mrs. Muise was in good health.
Benson placed $500 on the kitchen table while defendant and Mrs. Muise were in the bedroom. Defendant came into the kitchen, picked up the money and counted it, and then put it in his pocket. Benson asked defendant what he should do if Mrs. Muise developed some kind of trouble or began to hemorrhage. Defendant told him to call a doctor  [fn. 3] or take her to a hospital but not to mention that she had had an abortion. In response to Benson's inquiry, defendant informed him that the operation was guaranteed.
Defendant returned to the Muise home the next evening, April 12th. She told him nothing had happened. Defendant then indicated he would insert another "packing." They went into the bedroom where the same procedure as the night before was followed by defendant. He told her it should work and he had never known it not to work. Upon one of the occasions Mrs. Muise recalled seeing the packing which she described as being long and narrow. Defendant did not tell her what was in the packing but merely stated it would be like a jelly substance, brownish in color. She noticed, following these treatments, that she was passing a substance "like brown jelly." On all the occasions that defendant inserted the packing Mrs. Muise could feel the object in her private parts.
On April 15th, defendant came by the Muise home about 1 p.m. She informed defendant that nothing had happened. Defendant told her and Benson that he had sent to New York for a stronger solution, and he would see them when he received it.
On Saturday morning, April 19th, defendant again called *696 on Mrs. Muise. Upon being informed that nothing had happened, defendant again went through the same packing process as upon the two previous occasions. Before defendant left, Mrs. Muise got a choking feeling such as defendant had told her she would get. He mentioned that this time it "should work," and that "it" was guaranteed. He also instructed her and Benson as to what to do in the event Mrs. Muise hemorrhaged a lot. The next day she passed a fetus. On May 4, Dr. Rebhun was called. He found her to be pale and weak and that she appeared to have lost a great deal of blood. She was immediately taken to the hospital where she was operated on a few hours later by Dr. Naujokaitis, who was a specialist in obstetrics and gynecology. It was his opinion that the pregnancy had been terminated a couple of weeks prior to his operation but the miscarriage had been incomplete.
Defendant testified in his own behalf. He stated that he had been a Doctor of Chiropractic for 11 years with offices in San Gabriel and Pomona, and that he had delivered babies in connection with his work. Defendant acknowledged that he had treated Mrs. Muise on the dates heretofore mentioned. He testified that on his initial call she told him she had taken some quinine capsules because she wanted to kill herself and that she had placed a catheter in her vagina or uterus. Defendant said he thought she might be aborting so he made an examination, using the speculum to examine her cervix. He found considerable inflammation so he made a rosebud pack and placed it against the cervix, removed the speculum, and put her back in bed. He denied that anything he did was with the intent or for the purpose of producing an abortion. He said the treatment he gave Mrs. Muise was necessary to preserve her life. He denied receiving any money from either Benson or Mrs. Muise.
Defendant admitted that when he was arrested by Officer Whitehead on July 24, 1958, the officer asked him whether he knew a Hilda Mary Muise, and he had told the officer that he did not; also that the officer asked him whether he had treated a patient on Date Street, and he told the officer that he had not. Defendant, however, testified that he had billed Mrs. Muise for his services at the 642 Date Street address some time prior to the time he told Officer Whitehead that he had never been to Date Street. He explained that the reason he told the officer he had not gone to Date Street was that he was confused about the address. Defendant admitted he told the officer that he did not know Jerry Benson. *697
Defendant moved to set aside the information on the ground that he had been denied a speedy trial and that the dismissal of the prior information was a bar to further proceedings in this case. His motion was denied.  [fn. 4]
[1] At the outset, defendant argues that the dismissal of the first information on November 12, 1958, was res judicata and that the trial that started in February, 1959, resulting in the judgment from which this appeal is taken violated his "constitutional guarantee of a speedy trial within 60 days." Defendant relies on a number of out-of-state cases. His argument, however, is effectively answered by Penal Code, section 1387, and the decisions of our courts. The cited code section provides: "An order for the dismissal of the action ... is a bar to any other prosecution for the same offense if it is a misdemeanor, but not if it is a felony." In commenting on this statutory provision the court, in People v. Vacca, 132 Cal. App. 2d 8 [281 P.2d 315], stated (p. 9): "Under this section, while the accused is protected from having criminal charges pending against him an undue length of time (and receive such protection in this case by having the information dismissed), such dismissal does not bar subsequent prosecution for the same offense, when the subsequent charge is a felony and is filed within the period of the statute of limitations." (Citations.) Here the offenses charged are felonies and the statute of limitations for abortion is three years. (Pen. Code,  800.) In People v. Ferrera, 149 Cal. App. 2d 850 [309 P.2d 533], the court held, at page 852, that the order granting the motion to dismiss the first information was not res judicata, and that no constitutional right of the defendant was invaded by prosecution on a second information. (See also People v. Cochran, 162 Cal. App. 2d 733, 736 [328 P.2d 532].)
[2] With respect to the 60-day period for bringing a case to trial (Pen. Code,  1382, subd. 2), the court stated in People v. Pierson, 149 Cal. App. 2d 151, 159 [307 P.2d 994]: "It seems to be the rule that the 60-day period is reinstated not only by a mistrial [citation], but by the filing of a new or amended pleading, whether or not a new or different charge is involved." (Citations.)
Since the order dismissing the first information was not res judicata (People v. Ferrera, supra), it follows that there is no foundation for defendant's further argument that the jurisdiction of the court was exhausted by such dismissal. *698
[3] Defendant filed a demurrer to the information on the ground that "the information charged the same offense twice." The court overruled his demurrer. The information charged defendant with three separate counts of administering "a substance" to Mrs. Muise. Each count was alleged to have involved the administration of "a substance" on different days, i.e., April 11, 12, and 19, 1958. He argues that in each count the act was the same; that it involved the same pregnancy, and that it was a splitting of the alleged offense into three parts. He therefore concludes that the demurrer to the information should have been sustained. In making this argument defendant misconceives the real basis of the offense. The gist of the crime is not the actual consummation of an abortion as such but rather the performance of any of the acts enumerated in section 274, Penal Code, with the intent to procure a miscarriage. The specific argument that defendant here makes was advanced in People v. Rhoades, 93 Cal. App. 2d 448 [209 P.2d 33]. In ruling against the contention the court stated, at pages 450-451:
"Defendant's argument in support of her first contention is ]that the crimes charged in counts one and two were in fact but one crime, in that by the testimony of the prosecution witness it was shown that although she received two treatments such treatments were administered with the intent to abort but a single pregnancy, and that therefore she was placed in double jeopardy by being charged and convicted twice for what was but one offense. Such contention is without merit since section 274 of the Penal Code provides that:"
" 'Every person who provides, supplies, or administers to any woman, or procures any woman to take any medicine, drug, or substance, or uses or employs any instrument or other means whatever, with intent thereby to procure the miscarriage of such woman, unless the same is necessary to preserve her life, is punishable by imprisonment in the state prison not less than two or more than five years.'"
"It is readily apparent that the gist of the crime is not the actual consummation of an abortion as such but rather it is the performing of any of the acts prohibited by said section with the intent to procure a miscarriage which constitutes the crime of abortion. Therefore despite the fact that the same single pregnancy was involved in counts one and two, nevertheless, as the information charged and the evidence conclusively shows, in each instance there was an 'intent to procure' a miscarriage by prohibited means which fact is *699 admitted by counsel for defendant. Consequently the complaint properly charged defendant with the commission of two separate crimes. (Citations.)"
In People v. Von Mullendorf, 110 Cal. App. 2d 286 [242 P.2d 403], an abortion case, it appears that count one charged defendant with performing certain illegal acts on the victim at his office on February 10, 1951, and count two dealt with acts committed by the defendant on Monday, March 12th, at a motel. Defendant contended, as he does in the instant case, that he was improperly charged in two counts with a crime that amounted to but one offense. In sustaining the conviction on both counts, this court stated (p. 290): "It is clear that defendant committed two separate and distinct acts upon this young woman with the intent to procure a miscarriage and was therefore properly charged in two counts."
In view of these authorities it is clear that the court properly overruled defendant's demurrer to the information.
[4] In passing on defendant's contention that the evidence is insufficient to sustain the verdicts, "we must assume in favor of the verdict the existence of every fact which the jury could have reasonably deduced from the evidence. ..." (People v. Newland, 15 Cal. 2d 678, 681 [104 P.2d 778].) [5] Thus viewed, the evidence is clearly sufficient to sustain the conviction. The meeting of Mrs. Muise and Benson with defendant; the statements of defendant as testified to by them; the state of Mrs. Muise's health prior to defendant's treatment; Benson's payment to defendant for the treatments; defendant's cautioning Benson to call a doctor in the event of an emergency, and not to mention that Mrs. Muise had an abortion; the passing of the fetus after being treated the third time by defendant, and Dr. Naujokaitis' subsequent treatment of Mrs. Muise and his opinion that she had been pregnant and had had an incomplete miscarriage, together with the inferences that the jury could reasonably draw therefrom, amply sustain their verdicts.
[6] Defendant particularly argues that "there is no evidence in the record as to what substance was used, or that the substance used did or could procure the miscarriage of Hilda Mary Muise." However, the evidence shows that on April 11 the defendant inserted a pack into her vagina; told her that she would have cramps until she would lose her pregnancy; that he repeated this treatment on her the next day, telling her that "it" should work and that he had never known "it" not to work. When Mrs. Muise told defendant *700 on April 15 that nothing had happened he informed her and Benson that he had sent to New York for a stronger solution. On April 19 defendant went through the same procedure as upon the previous occasions. He told Benson "it should work this time." Mrs. Muise recalled passing a substance "like brown jelly" following the treatments on April 11th and 12th. Defendant never advised her what was in the pack he used but did tell her it contained a "jelly like substance, brownish in color." She passed a fetus on April 20th. Dr. Naujokaitis was of the opinion that her pregnancy had been terminated a couple of weeks prior to May 4th.
From this evidence the jury could reasonably infer that the substance which the defendant used in the packs which he inserted was of such a character that it could and did, in fact, produce a miscarriage. The fact that the "substance" was not given a name or more particularly identified than as previously noted does not detract from the inference that it had sufficient potency to produce the intended result. (See People v. Wilson, 54 Cal. App. 2d 434, 447-448 [129 P.2d 149].)
Defendant emphasized his own testimony that he did not do anything to produce an abortion. He admitted using a "pack" but stated it was a "rosebud pack" to "support" the uterus, and not to procure an abortion. He also says that his testimony as to her physical condition and the necessity to give her the treatments that he did in order to save her life, is not contradicted by any other expert or person qualified to do so. But the testimony of the defendant only served to create a conflict in the evidence which the jury was called upon to resolve. Its resolution is binding on appeal. [7] The jury was not required to give full credence to the defendant's testimony, even though some portions of it were uncontradicted, in view of his obvious interest in the outcome of the case. [8] It is the exclusive province of the jury to determine the credibility of a witness and the truth or falsity of the evidence upon which a determination depends. (People v. Cahan, 141 Cal. App. 2d 891, 897 [297 P.2d 715].)
[9] Finally, in this connection, defendant says that: "In any event, as to counts 1 and 2 of the information, there could be no more than an attempt."
In People v. Berger, 131 Cal. App. 2d 127, 129 [280 P.2d 136], the court stated: "The Legislature could have made the actual inducement of a miscarriage the substantive offense, in which event the acts prohibited by Penal Code, section 274, would have constituted an attempt (in which case other *701 preceding acts might also be sufficient to constitute an attempt). But the Legislature has chosen to make those acts performed with intent to procure a miscarriage the substantive offense. ..." (Emphasis added.)
The evidence of the acts performed upon the victim on April 11 (count 1) and on April 12 (count 2) is ample to establish violations of the substantive crime denounced by section 274 of the Penal Code. These acts were not merely an attempt to violate said section. (People v. Rhoades, supra; and People v. Von Mullendorf, supra.)
[10] Defendant complains that the court erred in refusing to give certain of his requested instructions. The first of these reads as follows: "You are instructed that Dr. Wilkes is an expert whose opinion you must consider in the same light as any other expert, and under the same law as governs all expert testimony." The court gave the instruction as to expert testimony embodied in Penal Code, section 1127b. No further instruction on the subject of opinion evidence was required. (Pen. Code,  1127b.) [11] Furthermore, "it is established that a defendant testifying on his own behalf is placed in the same category as other witnesses and a trial judge should not single out the testimony of the defendant and make reference thereto. (Citations.)" (People v. Young, 88 Cal. App. 2d 129, 134 [198 P.2d 384].)
[12] The next refused instruction would have told the jury that if they found the defendant guilty on one count their verdict as to the other two counts must be "not guilty." This proposed instruction was obviously improper for it assumed that only one substantive offense was alleged, whereas there were three separate substantive offenses alleged, as heretofore pointed out. (People v. Rhoades, supra; People v. Von Mullendorf, supra.)
[13] The next proposed instruction which the court refused dealt with the theory that no abortion resulted from the acts alleged in counts 1 and 2, and that the offenses alleged could only have been attempted abortion. As previously pointed out, the acts charged in each of the counts were separate and distinct offenses in violation of section 274. The prosecution was relying upon the commission of those substantive offenses and not upon any theory of a mere attempt. The proposed instruction was patently inapplicable. For these reasons the court properly refused to give defendant's requested instruction embodying a definition of "attempt."
[14] The final proposed instruction which the court refused *702 sought to lift from the evidence certain matters that had been testified to and embody them in this proposed instruction, thus serving to call them specifically to the jury's attention. [15] An instruction that singles out and gives prominence to certain portions of the evidence may properly be refused. (People v. Hawes, 98 Cal. 648, 654 [33 P. 791].)
Examination of the record discloses that the jury was fully and fairly instructed.
The judgment is affirmed.
Ashburn, J., and Herndon, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. Penal Code, section 274, provides: "Every person who provides, supplies, or administers to any woman ... any medicine, drug, or substance, or uses or employs any instrument or other means whatever, with intent thereby to procure the miscarriage of such woman, unless the same is necessary to preserve her life, is punishable. ..."
[fn. 2]  2. There were two additional counts involving asserted violations of other sections of the Penal Code, but neither of these other charges is involved in this appeal.
[fn. 3]  3. Defendant was a chiropractor.
[fn. 4]  4. This ruling was not made by the trial judge herein.

=== CASE 2208836 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:33.885247+00 ===

177 Cal.App.2d 301 (1960)
THE PEOPLE, Respondent,
v.
ROE GARMON, Appellant.
Crim. No. 3012.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
Jan. 21, 1960.
Roe Garmon, in pro. per., for Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, Doris H. Maier and Lloyd Hinkelman, Deputy Attorneys General, for Respondent.
PEEK, J.
Defendant appeals from a judgment of conviction following a verdict of the jury finding him guilty of a violation of section 4531 of the Penal Code, in that while a prisoner lawfully committed to a state prison forestry camp he escaped.
The facts, which are undisputed, show that on March 5, 1959, defendant escaped from a state prison camp in Butte County. On March 15 he was arrested in Salinas by sheriff's officers of Monterey County. A complaint had previously been filed in Butte County on March 13 and a warrant for his arrest issued out of the Paradise Judicial District charging him with escape. However when he was apprehended it was because a sheriff's officer had become suspicious of defendant's actions while attempting to cash a check in a Salinas market. He readily admitted to the officer that he was an escapee from a state prison honor camp. Defendant was not taken before a magistrate but was turned over to correctional officers attached to Folsom Prison, and by them returned to that institution. On March 21 he was given a disciplinary hearing at the prison upon the charge that he had violated prison rules in escaping from the camp. As a result of that hearing he was ordered to serve 29 days in isolation. On April 10, after having served 19 days, he was taken before a magistrate in Butte County and the date for his arraignment set for April 17. On that date defendant waived his right to counsel and entered a plea of not guilty. The cause was set for trial on May 7, and on that date defendant moved to dismiss the information on the ground that he had been denied a speedy trial and was not brought before a magistrate within a reasonable time after his arrest; and that he was twice placed in jeopardy for the same offense. His motion was denied and the case proceeded to trial. During the course thereof he readily admitted the charge against him, stating, "I've never denied the fact that I escaped ... I admit that." Like contentions are now made on appeal.
[1] Defendant's argument in support of his first contention appears to be that the authorities failed to comply with sections 821, 825, 828 and 850 of the Penal Code. In this he has completely misconceived his position. Sections 821, 825 and 828 concern the procedures to be followed in the taking of an *303 arrested person before a magistrate, while section 850 relates to telegraphic warrants. None of these sections are applicable to defendant or to the situation in which he has placed himself. The record shows without conflict that from the 5th of March, the day of his escape, to the 15th of March, the day he was apprehended, and until April 13 when he was brought before a magistrate and arraigned on the charge of escape, defendant was an inmate of the Folsom State Prison serving a term of imprisonment pursuant to a legal commitment. As such his rights were governed by section 1381 of the Penal Code and not the sections upon which he has placed reliance. Under the provisions of that section a person serving a prison term and who is charged with a subsequent offense, may give written notice to the district attorney of his desire to be brought to trial, and that official must do so within 90 days. In the event the matter is not so brought to trial, the court in which the action is pending must dismiss the charge. (Osmulski v. Superior Court, 169 Cal.App.2d 444 [337 P.2d 520].) While the record before this court is barren of any evidence to indicate that defendant made any attempt whatsoever to comply with the provisions of said section or that his rights were in any way violated, such fact is of no consequence. This is true since in any event the record shows that well within the 90-day limit set forth in said section the defendant, on April 10, was brought before a magistrate and arraigned, had a preliminary examination on April 17, was held to answer in the superior court, and on May 7, following a trial in the superior court at which he represented himself, he was found guilty of the crime as charged in the information.
[2] Defendant's second contention is predicated upon the fact that upon his return to prison he was subjected to a disciplinary hearing by the prison officials for his escape and, being found guilty, was placed in solitary confinement. The time spent in isolation, he contends, constituted an illegal punishment in derogation of section 681 of the Penal Code, and the hearing before the prison officials constituted a jeopardy for the crime of escape. Such contention is wholly without merit. Throughout the entire time here in question defendant was an inmate of a state prison and subject to prison discipline. For his infraction of the rules and regulations of the institution he was subject to reasonable punishment. (See 39 Cal.Jur.2d, Prisons and Prisoners,  69 and 71.) The section upon which defendant relies (Pen. Code,  681) refers to a public offense. Here it is quite apparent *304 that defendant was not punished for a public offense but merely for an infraction of a prison rule, and hence that section does not apply. (People v. Conson, 72 Cal.App. 509 [237 P. 799].) The identical contention was raised in the case last cited, the only difference being that there the prison authorities merely declared all of the defendant's credits forfeited. As the court therein noted, "The hearing before the prison board was a mere inquiry by that body under the provisions of the Penal Code for flagrant disregard of the prison rules. The board has no jurisdiction to try anyone for a felony and it is manifest that it made no attempt to do so."
[3] Defendant's final contention is that he was denied the assistance of counsel. His argument in this regard is that although the record does not disclose the fact, he did request "assistance of counsel to assist him with the legal work," which request the trial court denied. The record does not support such contention. At the preliminary examination in the justice court of the Paradise Judicial District he was represented by Attorney Charles A. Skow. The minutes of his arraignment in the superior court state that "The court informs defendant of his legal right to counsel. Defendant waives right to counsel and states he prefers to represent himself, and requests use of law books or books to assist him in his defense." He further requested subpoenas for certain hospital records in the way of preparation for such defense. Pursuant to his request the court, by a subsequent order made that same day, ordered the district attorney to prepare any subpoenas necessary to obtain the records sought by defendant. Defendant does not contend, nor is there anything in the record to indicate that he did not understand the nature of the charge and the facts and circumstances of his case. In view of the state of the record and the presumption that that duty was duly performed (In re Connor, 16 Cal.2d 701 [108 P.2d 10]), and since the right to counsel may be waived, the final contention of defendant is likewise without merit.
The judgment is affirmed.
Van Dyke, P. J., and Schottky, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737093 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:29.530144+00 ===

WIEAND, Judge:
Where a police officer, without show of force, approaches a juvenile in a public railroad station and asks her questions and she, without coercion, consents to a search of the bag which she is carrying, are the drugs found in her bag subject to suppression as the fruits of unlawful police conduct? The trial court held that the juvenile, because of her youth, “was not of an age where consent was freely given” and suppressed the drugs found in her bag. After careful review, we reverse.
In reviewing an appeal taken by the Commonwealth from an order suppressing evidence,
we must consider only the evidence of the defendant’s witnesses and so much of the Commonwealth evidence that, read in the context of the record as a whole, remains uncontradicted. See Commonwealth v. Hamlin, 503 Pa. 210, 469 A.2d 137 (1983). Furthermore, our scope of appellate review is limited primarily to questions of law. See Commonwealth v. White, 358 Pa.Super. 120, 516 A.2d 1211 (1986). We are bound by the suppression court’s findings of fact if those findings are supported by the record. Id. Factual findings wholly lacking in evidence, however, may be rejected. Id.
Commonwealth v. Stine, 372 Pa.Super. 312, 314, 539 A.2d 454, 455 (1988). See also: Commonwealth v. James, 506 Pa. 526, 532-533, 486 A.2d 376, 379 (1985); Commonwealth v. Elliott, 376 Pa.Super. 536, 543, 546 A.2d 654, 657 (1988).
The only testimony at the suppression hearing was elicited from Ronald Bason, an Amtrak Police Officer. He said that on February 8, 1989, at or about 4:25 p.m., he had received information from Sergeant Ulrach, an Amtrak Narcotics Officer at Penn Station, in New York City, that a young female suspected of carrying narcotics, had boarded a train bound for Philadelphia’s 30th Street Station. The suspect was described as “a black female, approximately eighteen (18) to twenty-three (23) years old, one hundred *506twenty (120) pounds, 5'7", black medium length kinky hair, wearing a blue jean jacket, blue jean coat, black sneakers[,j ... a brown muslim type cap, carrying a black shoulder bag, and a white paper bag.” The basis for Ulrach’s suspicion was repeated by Bason as follows:
Officer Ulrach relayed to me he observed this individual at Penn Station, New York purchase a one-way ticket to 30th Street with cash. This individual then waited for the second call of the train before boarding.
Officer Ulrach told me this individual appeared to be nervous and concerned with his presence when she appeared to notice him standing there.
This individual then got up and walked to the train with Officer Ulrach following behind. As she was walking, she constantly kept looking over her shoulder at Officer Ulrach until she boarded the train. Upon sitting herself in the train, Officer Ulrach walked through the same car of the train which she was in. She remained in constant contact, eye contact, with him. Officer Ulrach exited the train and stood on the platform and positioned himself to her rear.
At that time, he observed her make a noticeable effort to keep eye contact with him.
When the train arrived at the 30th Street Station at 5:09 p.m., Bason, who was in plain clothes, was able to identify the suspect as she walked through the concourse. She was constantly looking around her and appeared to be very nervous. As she approached the Market Street exit, Bason, together with a second officer, walked up to her, identified himself as a. police officer and asked if he could speak with her. He described the subsequent events as follows:
She said, “Yeah.” I then asked her, “Did you just come in on a train,” and she said, “Yeah.”
I asked her, “Can I ask you where you came from,” and she said, “New York.” I asked her, “Do you have a train ticket or a receipt,” and she said, “No.” I asked her if she had any identification and she said no. I asked her what her name was and she said Kathleen Jermaine.
*507At this point she said, “Can you tell me why you’re stopping me because I did not do nothing.” At that time I informed her that I was a part of the Narcotics Interdiction Team, a team that was going to stop the flow of narcotics in Philadelphia by way of Amtrak trains.
I asked her, “Would you give me consent to search your bag,” and she just looked at me and she was also trembling very nervously. She did not say anything.
I then asked her again, “Miss, would you give me consent to search your bag.” She put her head down and said, “Yes,” and handed me her bag. At that point I opened the bag and I found a brown paper bag. Upon opening the brown paper bag, there was a plastic bag which contained a large amount of white powdery substance, whcch [sic] also was in the form of chunks.
Through my experience, I recognized this as possibly being cocaine.
I advised the defendant that she was under arrest. During Bason’s conversation with the girl, the second officer, who was also in plain clothes, stood about seven feet behind the girl.
The suppression court, in its opinion suppressing the contraband, reasoned that the police had lacked “reasonable suspicion” to believe that Jermaine was transporting drugs and that the stop, therefore, was unlawful. After the Commonwealth requested reconsideration of the court’s initial suppression order, the court concluded that the juvenile’s apparent consent to a search of her bag had been vitiated by her youth and the presence of the police. The Commonwealth, on appeal,1 argues that the encounter between Bason and Jermaine did not rise to an investigatory stop and did not implicate the juvenile’s Fourth Amendment rights. However, even if it did amount to an investigatory *508stop, the Commonwealth argues, Jermaine voluntarily consented to the search of her bag.
Not every encounter between a citizen and the police is so intrusive as to trigger the protections provided by the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution. See: Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 20 L.Ed.2d 889 (1968); Commonwealth v. Douglass, 372 Pa.Super. 227, 238, 539 A.2d 412, 417 (1988). There is nothing in the Constitution which prevents a policeman from approaching a person on a public street or in a public place in order to make inquiries of that person. Commonwealth v. Brown, 388 Pa.Super. 187, 190, 565 A.2d 177, 178 (1989). See also: Terry v. Ohio, supra at 34, 88 S.Ct. at 1886, 20 L.Ed.2d at 913 (White, J. concurring); Commonwealth v. Hall, 475 Pa. 482, 488, 380 A.2d 1238, 1241-1242 (1977); Commonwealth v. Jones, 474 Pa. 364, 370, 378 A.2d 835, 838 (1977); Commonwealth v. Williams, 298 Pa.Super. 466, 469, 444 A.2d 1278, 1279 (1982). “A seizure of a person sufficient to trigger the protections of the Fourth Amendment occurs ‘only if, in view of all the circumstances surrounding the incident, a reasonable person would have believed he was not free to leave.’ ” Commonwealth v. Ellis, 379 Pa.Super. 337, 354, 549 A.2d 1323, 1331 (1988), quoting Michigan v. Chesternut, 486 U.S. 567, 573, 108 S.Ct. 1975, 1979, 100 L.Ed.2d 565, 572 (1988). See also: INS v. Delgado, 466 U.S. 210, 215, 104 S.Ct. 1758, 1762, 80 L.Ed.2d 247, 255 (1984); Commonwealth v. Jones, supra 474 Pa. at 372-373, 378 A.2d at 840; Commonwealth v. Williams, supra 298 Pa. Super, at 469-470, 444 A.2d at 1279. Factors to be considered in determining whether an encounter with police rises to the level of a seizure of the person include “whether the officer makes a show of authority or exercises force, the officer’s demeanor and manner of expression, the location, and the content of any interrogatories or statements are relevant to the determination.” Commonwealth v. Williams, supra, 298 Pa.Superior Ct. at 470, 444 A.2d at 1279. See also: Commonwealth v. Jones, supra 474 Pa. at 371-372, 378 A.2d at 838-840.
*509The United States Supreme Court has elaborated on the difference between a “mere encounter” and a seizure of the person which implicates the Fourth Amendment in the following manner:
We adhere to the view that a person is “seized” only when, by means of physical force or a show of authority, his freedom of movement is restrained. Only when such restraint is imposed is there any foundation whatever for invoking constitutional safeguards. The purpose of the Fourth Amendment is not to eliminate all contact between the police and the citizenry, but “to prevent arbitrary and oppressive interference by enforcement officials with the privacy and personal security of individuals.” United States v. Martinez-Fuerte, 428 U.S. 543, 554, 49 L.Ed.2d 1116, 96 S.Ct. 3074 [3081 (1976)]. As long as the person to whom questions are put remains free to disregard the questions and walk away, there has been no intrusion upon that person’s liberty or privacy as would under the Constitution require some particularized and objective justification.
Moreover, characterizing every street encounter between a citizen and the police as a “seizure,” while not enhancing any interest secured by the Fourth Amendment, would impose wholly unrealistic restrictions upon a wide variety of legitimate law enforcement practices. The Court has on other occasions referred to the acknowledged need for police questioning as a tool in the effective enforcement of the criminal laws. “Without such investigation, those who were innocent might be falsely accused, those who were guilty might wholly escape prosecution, and many crimes would go unsolved. In short, the security of all would be diminished. Haynes v. Washington, 373 U.S. 503, 515, [10 L.Ed.2d 513, 83 S.Ct. 1336, 1344 (1963)].” Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. [218], at 225, 36 L.Ed.2d 854, 93 S.Ct. 2041 [2046 (1973) ].
We conclude that a person has been “seized” within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment only if, in view of all *510of the circumstances surrounding the incident, a reasonable person would have believed that he was not free to leave. Examples of circumstances that might indicate a seizure, even where the person did not attempt to leave, would be the threatening presence of several officers, the display of a weapon by an officer, some physical touching of the person of the citizen, or the use of language or tone of voice indicating that compliance with the officer’s request might be compelled. See Terry v Ohio, supra, at 19, n 16, 20 L Ed 2d 889, 88 S Ct 1868 [1879 n. 16], 44 Ohio Ops 2d 383; Dunaway v New York, 442 US 200, 207, and n 6, 60 L Ed 2d 824, 99 S Ct 2248 [2253, and n. 6 (1979)]; 3 W. LaFave, Search and Seizure 53-55 (1978). In the absence of some such evidence, otherwise inoffensive contact between a member of the public and the police cannot, as a matter of law, amount to a seizure of that person.
United States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.S. 544, 553-555, 100 S.Ct. 1870, 1877, 64 L.Ed.2d 497, 509-510 (1980) (Opinion Announcing Judgment of the Court per Stewart, J.) (footnote omitted). See also: Michigan v. Chesternut, supra 486 U.S. at 573-574, 108 S.Ct. at 1979-1980, 100 L.Ed.2d at 571-572; INS v. Delgado, supra 466 U.S. at 215-217, 104 S.Ct. at 1762-1763, 80 L.Ed.2d at 254-255; Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491, 497-498, 103 S.Ct. 1319, 1324, 75 L.Ed.2d 229, 236 (1983) (Opinion Announcing Judgment of the Court per White, J.); 3 LaFave, Search and Seizure, § 9.2(h) (2d ed. 1987). The Supreme Court has also observed that
police questioning, by itself, is unlikely to result in a Fourth Amendment violation. While most citizens will respond to a police request, the fact that people do so, and do so without being told they are free not to respond, hardly eliminates the consensual nature of the response. Cf. Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 US 218, 231-234, 36 L Ed 2d 854, 93 S Ct 2041 [2049-2051] (1973). Unless the circumstances of the encounter are so intimidating as to demonstrate that a reasonable person would have be*511lieved he was not free to leave if he had not responded, one cannot say that the questioning resulted in a detention under the Fourth Amendment. But if the person refuses to answer and the police take additional steps ... to obtain an answer, then the Fourth Amendment imposes some minimal level of objective justification to validate the detention or seizure. United States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.S., at 554, 64 L.Ed.2d 497, 100 S.Ct. 1870 [1877]; see Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S., at 21, 20 L.Ed.2d 889, 88 S.Ct. 1868 [1879], 44 Ohio Ops.2d 383.
INS v. Delgado, supra 466 U.S. at 216-217, 104 S.Ct. at 1762-1763, 80 L.Ed.2d at 255. See, e.g.: United States v. Garcia, 866 F.2d 147 (6th Cir.1989) (airport confrontation did not amount to seizure where police did not touch defendant, did not display weapons and did not raise voices or threaten defendant in any way); United States v. $25,000 U.S. Currency, 853 F.2d 1501 (9th Cir.1988) (encounter at airport not a seizure where police merely approached defendant, identified themselves, and asked him for identification and consent to search his bag); Gomez v. Turner, 672 F.2d 134 (D.C.Cir.1982) (mere status of police officer as figure of governmental authority does not, standing alone, constitute sufficient show of authority to transform encounter into seizure).
In analyzing Supreme Court decisions, LaFave has commented:
[A]n officer has not made a seizure if, for example, he interrogated “in a conversational manner,” “did not order the defendant” to do something or “demand that he” do it, did not ask questions which were “overbearing or harassing in nature,” and did not “make any threats or draw a weapon.” Even physical contact is acceptable if it is “a normal means of attracting a person’s attention.” On the other hand, an encounter becomes a seizure if the officer engages in conduct which a reasonable man would view as threatening or offensive even if performed by another private citizen. This would include such tactics *512as pursuing a person who has attempted to terminate the contact by departing, calling to such a person to halt, holding a person’s identification papers or other property, blocking the path of the suspect, physically grabbing and moving the suspect, and encircling the suspect by many officers____
“Offensive statements,” such as “unsupported outright accusations of criminal activity or suggestions that an innocent person would be willing to relinquish constitutional rights, are not irrelevant” in such an analysis. Indeed, it may be true in a more general sense that the subject matter of the conversation which ensues has some bearing upon whether it may be said that the person was subjected to a Fourth Amendment seizure. But this is not to say ... that “Fourth Amendment rights are implicated” whenever “the individual is stopped or detained because the officer suspects he may be personally involved in some criminal activity,” but not when “the officer acts for other proper reasons.”
3 W. LaFave, Search and Seizure, § 9.2(h) at pp. 412-415 and supp. p. 36 (2d ed. 1987 and 1990 Supplement) (footnotes omitted).
Under circumstances similar to those in the instant case, the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in United States v. Thame, 846 F.2d 200 (1988), cert. denied, 488 U.S. 928, 109 S.Ct. 314, 102 L.Ed.2d 333 (1988), held that a police officer’s non-threatening conversation with a suspect in the lobby of a train station had not risen to the level of an investigatory stop prior to the suspect’s giving consent to a canine sniff of his luggage. The defendant had traveled from Fort Lauderdale, Florida, to Philadelphia by train, where agents had been alerted by others in Florida that the suspect was believed to be carrying drugs. Upon the suspect’s arrival in Philadelphia, agents approached him, asked him his name, walked with him and ultimately obtained his consent to accompany them to an office so that a dog could sniff his luggage. As a result of a sniff search, a warrant was obtained, the bag was opened, and cocaine was *513found.2 In concluding that the defendant had not been detained unlawfully by the police, the Court reasoned that the encounter in the lobby of the train station had not ripened into a seizure of the suspect prior to his consent to the canine sniff search. The officers had merely questioned the defendant regarding his identification, examined his train ticket and sought his consent to a search. Moreover, the police had not physically restrained the defendant in any way, nor had they attempted to control his movement by *514retaining his travel documents. Under these circumstances, the Court concluded, the suspect had not been seized; and, therefore, the police were not required to have reasonable suspicion before approaching the defendant and seeking his cooperation. See also: United States v. Alvarez-Sanchez, 774 F.2d 1036 (11th Cir.1985) (mere fact that agent identified self as INS agent did not transform encounter with defendant into a seizure); United States v. Notorianni, 729 F.2d 520 (7th Cir.1984) (fact that agent told defendant he was conducting a narcotics investigation prior to asking for consent to search luggage did not make encounter a seizure); Commonwealth v. Sanchez, 403 Mass. 640, 531 N.E.2d 1256 (1988) (fact that policeman told defendant he was conducting drug investigation and then asked for consent to search did not make the encounter a seizure). But see: United States v. Gonzales, 842 F.2d 748 (5th Cir.1988).
The rationale of these decisions from other jurisdictions is persuasive. Applying the same rationale to the instant case, we conclude that Officer Bason’s encounter with appellee did not rise to the level of a seizure of her person which invoked Fourth Amendment protections. Ba-son approached Jermaine and asked her if he could speak with her for a moment. There was no display of a weapon or other show of authority to suggest coercion. The record also does not disclose evidence that Bason or his companion had physically blocked appellee’s path or spoken to her in a threatening manner. Rather, the evidence suggests that Bason merely identified himself as a police officer and asked appellee if she had any travel documents or identification. Although identifying himself as a part of the Narcotics Interdiction Team, Bason did not tell appellee that she was suspected of criminal activity. Under these circumstances, it is clear that Jermaine had not been seized by the police before being asked to consent to a search of her bag. Therefore, Fourth Amendment guarantees were not implicated, and the suppression court erred when it held otherwise.
*515The suppression court erred further by determining that the juvenile, because of her age and a police presence, had not voluntarily consented to the search of her bag. Because Bason merely approached the juvenile and inquired if she would answer a few questions, it cannot be said that she was faced with a threatening or coercive police presence. The fact that the juvenile was sixteen and one-half years old at the time of the search, moreover, did not prevent her from giving voluntary consent to a search of her bag. “Although age is one element to acknowledge in ascertaining whether consent was given willingly, minority status alone does not prevent one from giving consent.” Commonwealth v. Maxwell, 505 Pa. 152, 162, 477 A.2d 1309, 1315 (1984), cert. denied, 469 U.S. 971, 105 S.Ct. 370, 83 L.Ed.2d 306 (1984) (consent to search house given by sixteen year old was valid where record was devoid of any evidence of emotional immaturity or mental instability and indicated to the contrary that decision was rational).
We have examined the record and have found no evidence to support a finding that Jermaine was emotionally or mentally immature so as to be incapable of giving valid consent for the police to search her bag. To believe otherwise is to discount entirely the fact that the juvenile was sufficiently mature to purchase a train ticket in New York and travel alone to Philadelphia. The fact that she did not refuse to talk with Bason, as well she might have done, does not permit a finding that she was so immature as to be unable to consent validly to a search of her handbag. When all the surrounding circumstances are considered, we are satisfied that the Commonwealth demonstrated that appellee’s consent had been voluntarily given and had not been the product of duress or coercion, either express or implied. See: Schneckloth v. Bustamante, 412 U.S. 218, 93 S.Ct. 2041, 36 L.Ed.2d 854 (1973); Commonwealth v. Mamon, 449 Pa. 249, 255-256, 297 A.2d 471, 475 (1972). See also: Commonwealth v. Markman, 320 Pa.Super. 304, 467 A.2d 336 (1983); Commonwealth v. Lowery, 305 Pa.Super. 66, 74, 451 A.2d 245, 248-249 (1982).
*516The order suppressing the evidence seized from appellee is reversed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings. Jurisdiction is not retained.
POPOVICH, J., files a dissenting opinion.
. The Commonwealth may appeal from a trial court’s order suppressing evidence when it certifies in good faith that the suppression order will terminate or substantially handicap its prosecution of the case. See: Commonwealth v. Dugger, 506 Pa. 537, 486 A.2d 382 (1985). In the instant case, it is clear that the suppression order will substantially handicap the Commonwealth’s prosecution.
. These events were described in greater detail in the opinion of the Court as follows:
Philadelphia Police Officer Michael McCue, assigned to the Drug Enforcement Agency, followed Thame up from the platform to the lobby of 30th Street Station while DEA Special Agent John McCarty followed still further behind with Amtrak Investigator Doonan. In the lobby, McCue walked alongside Thame, identified himself, and asked if he could speak with Thame. Thame said that he did not mind. As they continued walking, McCue asked Thame if he had just gotten off the train from Florida, and Thame said that he had. McCue then asked Thame his name, and Thame replied "Albert Thame.” McCue then asked if he could see his train ticket. At this point, the two stopped walking as Thame reached into his pocket and produced his train ticket, bearing the name "B. Kelly.” Thame, in response to a question from McCue, explained that he was using the ticket of a friend who had to fly back. McCue then asked for identification, and Thame produced a driver’s license and old police identification in his correct name. Agent McCarty then joined McCue and Thame and identified himself. McCue handed the ticket and the identification to McCarty, who looked it over and handed it back to Thame. McCarty then explained that they were working with the Narcotics Interdiction Unit, seeking cooperation from passengers from source cities such as Miami and Fort Lauderdale, and asked if Thame would mind if McCue and McCarty looked in the luggage Thame was carrying. Thame declined, stating that he had "sensitive material” in his bag. McCarty replied that that was fine, that he had an absolute right to refuse, but asked whether it would be okay if they conducted the search in a more private place. Thame again declined. McCarty then asked whether Thame would object to a sniff search of the air around the bag by a dog, as this would be less intrusive. Thame agreed. McCarty then asked if Thame would mind accompanying them to the Amtrak police office, explaining that this would be more private and out of the way. Thame carried his own bag to the office. The entire conversation took about two minutes, and the walk to the Amtrak police office took less than a minute. At the office, a sniff search took place, and the dog indicated that there were drugs in Thame’s bag. The sniff search was repeated in another room. A warrant was then obtained, the bag was opened, and cocaine was found.
United States v. Thame, supra at 201-202.

=== CASE 9737094 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:15:29.535862+00 ===

POPOVICH, Judge,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent from the majority’s conclusion that “Officer Bason’s encounter with appellee did not rise to the level of a seizure of her person which invoked Fourth Amendment protections.” Majority opinion, p. 1063. Rather, I am convinced that a “seizure” did occur and that the police did not possess the requisite “articulable suspicion” to justify the stop of Kathleen Jermaine.
In United States v. Mendenhall, 446 U.S. 544, 554-555, 100 S.Ct. 1870, 1877, 64 L.Ed.2d 497, 509 (1980), the United States Supreme Court stated:
We adhere to the view that a person is “seized” only when, by means of physical force or a show of authority, his freedom of movement is restrained____
We conclude that a person has been “seized” within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment only if, in view of all of the circumstances surrounding the incident, a reasonable person would have believed that he was not free to leave____
In Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491, 497-498, 103 S.Ct. 1319, 1324, 75 L.Ed.2d 229, 236 (1983) (plurality), the Supreme Court explained:
[L]aw enforcement officers do not violate the Fourth Amendment by merely approaching an individual on the street or in another public place, by asking him if he is willing to answer some questions, by putting questions to him if the person is willing to listen, or by offering in evidence in a criminal prosecution his voluntary answers to such questions. (Citations omitted) Nor would the fact that the officer identifies himself as a police officer, without more, convert the encounter into a seizure requir*517ing some level of objective justification. (Citation omitted)
Instantly, I believe that Kathleen Jermaine was “seized” under the standards outlined in Mendenhall and Royer. Consider the facts: It is 5:30 p.m. on Wednesday, February 8, 1989, “rush-hour” at 30th Street Station in Philadelphia. Kathleen Jermaine, a juvenile who has just arrived from New York via Amtrak, is singled out of the crowded concourse by two plain clothes police officers. Officer Bason identifies himself as a police officer and asks if he may speak with her. The other officer moves to a position behind the young girl. After answering several questions, Kathleen questions, “Can you tell me why you’re stopping me because I did not do nothing.” To which Officer Bason responds, “I [am] a part of the Narcotics Interdiction Team, a team that [is] going to stop the flow of narcotics in Philadelphia by way of Amtrak trains.” Officer Bason then asks, “Would you give me consent to search your bag?” Kathleen, trembling and very nervous, did not respond. Again Officer Bason asked, “Miss would you give me consent to search your bag.” Only after the second request did Kathleen agree to the search and hand her bag to Officer Bason.
I am convinced that under the foregoing facts, a reasonable person would believe she was not free to leave. To hold otherwise would be to perpetuate the myth that a reasonable person, when confronted by police officers, actually believes she has the option of declining to listen to the officers and leaving without suffering further consequences. Although constrained to follow the judgment of the Supreme Court regarding what a reasonable person believes when confronted by a law enforcement officer, numerous Circuits of the United States Court of Appeal have recognized the artificiality of the Supreme Court’s test. See United States v. Thame, 846 F.2d 200, 202 (3rd Cir.1988), cert. denied, 488 U.S. 928, 109 S.Ct. 314, 102 L.Ed.2d 333 (1988) (“Although we have our doubts whether a reasonable person who is greeted by federal agents and *518asked for identification feels free to simply ignore the agents____”); United States v. Notorianni, 729 F.2d 520, 522 (7th Cir.1984) (“Maybe this is a wrong guess about what the average person feels in this situation____”); United States v. Cordell, 723 F.2d 1283, 1286 (7th Cir.1983), cert. denied 465 U.S. 1029, 104 S.Ct. 1291, 79 L.Ed.2d 693 (1984) (Swygert, J., concurring) (“I believe that as a factual psychological matter people who are stopped for questioning of this kind by police officers ... generally do not feel ‘free to leave’____”); see also Note, The Drug Courier Profile and Airport Stops: Reasonable Intrusions of Suspicionless Seizures?, 12 Nova L.Rev. 273, 284 (1987) (lower courts recognize “the artificiality of the test”).1 We are not so constrained and are free to use Article 1, § 8 of the Pennsylvania Constitution to guard individual privacy rights against unreasonable searches and seizures more zealously than the federal courts do under the United States Constitution. Commonwealth v. Melilli, 521 Pa. 405, 555 A.2d 1254 (1989); Commonwealth v. Beauford, 327 Pa.Super. 253, 475 A.2d 783 (1984), allocatur denied, 508 Pa. 319, 496 A.2d 1143 (1985).
When Kathleen asked Officer Bason why she was being detained, Officer Bason told her he was part of the Narcotics Interdiction Team.2 Thus, he implicitly informed Kathleen that she was the target of a narcotics investigation. This fact, combined with the other circumstances surround*519ing the stop of Kathleen, compels a conclusion that Kathleen was seized at the time Officer Bason revealed he was on the Narcotics Interdiction Team and requested to search her bag. Certainly, under the facts sub judice, a reasonable person (not to mention a juvenile) would not feel free to leave with the fear of formal detention. See Thame, 846 F.2d at 203 (“Statements which intimate that an investigation has focussed on a specific individual easily could induce a reasonable person to believe that failure to cooperate would only lead to formal detention.”); United States v. Gonzales, 842 F.2d 748 (5th Cir.1988) (a statement by a law enforcement officer that an individual is suspected of illegal activity is persuasive evidence that the Fourth Amendment has been implicated); United States v. Borys, 766 F.2d 304, 311 (7th Cir.1985), cert. denied, 474 U.S. 1082, 106 S.Ct. 852, 88 L.Ed.2d 893 (1986) (same); United States v. Berry, 670 F.2d 583 (5th Cir.1982) (en banc) (same).
The majority asserts that Kathleen was not informed that she was a suspect of a narcotics investigation, and therefore, compares this case to Thame, supra, where no investigatory stop was found when an officer approached an individual, identified himself as a member of the Narcotics Interdiction Team seeking cooperation from passengers from source cities and then requested a consent search. However, the facts of Thame, supra, differ in two significant respects. First, the defendant in Thame, supra, was an ex-police officer who undoubtedly had a greater awareness of his rights than Kathleen, a juvenile. Second, Thame was informed of his absolute right to refuse to talk to the officers or consent to a search of his bags; Kathleen received no such warning. Rather, immediately after informing her of his status as a narcotics investigator, Officer Bason requested consent for a search, and, when Kathleen did not respond, he again asked. I have little doubt that an individual faced with the same circumstances would believe he or she was the suspect of a drug investigation. And, I *520submit such belief is reasonable.3
Since I would find that Kathleen was seized within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment, I must next determine whether reasonable suspicion for the stop existed. In Florida v. Rodriguez, 469 U.S. 1, 105 S.Ct. 308, 83 L.Ed.2d 165 (1984), the Supreme Court of the United States commented:
Certain constraints on personal liberty that constitute “seizures” for the purpose of the Fourth Amendment may nonetheless be justified even though there is no showing of “probable cause” if “there is articulable suspicion that a person has committed or is about to commit a crime.” Florida v. Royer, supra, 460 U.S., at 498, 103 S.Ct., at 1324 (opinion of WHITE, J.). Such a temporary detention for questioning in the case of an airport search is reviewed under the lesser standard enunciated in Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 20 L.Ed.2d 889 (1968), and is permissible because of the “public interest involved in the suppression of illegal transactions in drugs or of any other serious crime.” Royer, supra, 460 U.S. [at] 498-499, 103 S.Ct. [at] 1324-1325.
Instantly, I agree with the court below that articulable suspicion for the stop did not exist. As stated by Judge Reynolds in his opinion in support of the decision to suppress the seized evidence:
Kathleen Jermaine, a slight 17 year-old black girl, purchased a one way ticket at Pennsylvania Station in New York City to Philadelphia (N.T. p. 4). The only suspicious conduct that the officer was able to articulate was that she appeared to be “nervous and concerned with his presence when she appeared to notice him standing there.” (N.T. p.4)
When the defendant went to her train, the officer followed her, maintaining constant eye contact with her (N.T. p. 5). This court believes that any young *521woman at Penn Station in New York City who was subjected to eye to eye contact by a man in civilian clothes and then followed to her train would be nervous and watchful. (Emphasis in original.)
Once at 30th Street Station, Officer Bason has offered no evidence of suspicious action except for Kathleen’s nervousness displayed once approached by the police. Certainly, the facts of this case do not rise to the level of reasonable suspicion, and the evidence seized as a result of the stop must be suppressed. Accordingly, I would affirm the suppression order of the court below.
. In his concurring opinion in Mendenhall, Mr. Justice Powell, joined by Mr. Chief Justice Burger and Mr. Justice Blackmun, stated, "For me, the question of whether the respondent in this case reasonably could have thought she was free to 'walk away' when asked by two Government agents for her driver’s license and ticket is extremely close.” Mendenhall, 446 U.S. at 560 n. 1, 100 S.Ct. at 1880 n. 1. Thus, Mr. Justice Powell appears to recognize the folly in assuming reasonable persons feel free to disregard an officer’s questions and walk ' away.
. I note that Officer Bason never informed Kathleen that she was free to leave in response to her question of "Can you tell me why you’re stopping me ... ?” This is further evidence that Kathleen did not believe she was free to go. Similarly, a reasonable person would not believe she was free to leave when after questioning the reasons for the stop, the officer did not give a responsive answer but instead informed her that he was investigating narcotics trafficking.
. One wonders how many times a day police officers stop and intrude upon the privacy rights of innocent travelers without finding contraband. One must remember cases like this only come before us when drugs are found. This fact should not be used to justify an otherwise unreasonable invasion of privacy.

=== CASE 2208826 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:33.779809+00 ===

9 Mich. App. 187 (1967)
156 N.W.2d 48
PEOPLE
v.
McGRANDY.
Docket No. 1,716.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided December 7, 1967.
*188 Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, Robert B. Currie, Prosecuting Attorney, and Bruce J. Scorsone, Chief Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
William J. Ginster, for the defendant.
BURNS, J.
A circuit court jury found Mrs. Edna Marie McGrandy guilty of manslaughter. CL 1948, § 750.321 (Stat Ann 1954 Rev § 28.553). The facts[*] of this case for the purposes of this opinion can be stated as follows:
On May 1, 1965, defendant and her husband, both of whom had been out drinking much beer and some whiskey, returned to their second floor apartment. Without getting into the details of what occurred upon their arrival, suffice it to say that Mr. McGrandy stood in the kitchen doorway with a loaded rifle in his hands. It is defendant's claim that her husband cocked the rifle and intended to use it on her. Mrs. McGrandy then grabbed a butcher knife, and in an alleged attempt to "get him out of my way so I [Mrs. McGrandy] could get out," Mr. McGrandy was fatally stabbed.
Defendant might have avoided a confrontation with her husband by retreating out another kitchen doorway which led to the apartment's rear porch and stairway. The jury was made very aware of this alternative route of escape.
*189 In support of defendant's argument of self-defense counsel for defendant, citing People v. Stallworth (1961), 364 Mich 528, requested a jury instruction that a person is not obliged to retreat from his dwelling. The trial court, however, gave the following instruction:
"Now, in justification of the offense herein charged, the defendant interposed a plea of self-defense. Under certain circumstances this is a good defense. To make a plea of self-defense, it must appear that the defendant was without fault on her part. If she herself was the aggressor in the conflict, she cannot invoke the doctrine of self-defense as an excuse for the killing unless she was at that time, as she saw it, in imminent danger of losing her own life or suffering some grievous bodily injury, and there was no way open for her to retreat, as she saw it. Self-defense will not justify the taking of a human life unless you jurors shall be satisfied from the testimony, first that the defendant was not the aggressor bringing on the difficulties as has just been pointed out. Secondly, that there existed at the time of striking the fatal blow in Marie McGrandy's mind a present and impending necessity to save herself from death or some great bodily harm, and third, there must be no way open whereby she could have retreated, as it appeared to her, at that time, to a place of safety and thus avoid the conflict.
"Unless you find all three of these elements in the case, then the plea of self-defense fails." (Emphasis supplied.)
The general rule in cases where self-defense is asserted is that the defendant must do "all which is reasonably in his power to avoid the necessity of extreme resistance, by retreating where retreat is safe." Pond v. People (1860), 8 Mich 150, 176. The Pond Case, also recognized an exception to this rule (p 177):
*190 "A man is not, however, obliged to retreat if assaulted in his dwelling, but may use such means as are absolutely necessary to repel the assailant from his house, or to prevent his forcible entry, even to the taking of life."
There is a split of authority throughout the country in the applicability of this exception when the assailant and the assailed share the same living quarters where the alleged attack occurred. Justice Cardozo in People v. Tomlins (1914), 213 NY 240 (107 NE 496, Ann Cas 1916c, 916) reasoned:
"It is not now and never has been the law that a man assailed in his own dwelling is bound to retreat. If assailed there, he may stand his ground and resist the attack. He is under no duty to take to the fields and the highways, a fugitive from his own home. * * * The rule is the same whether the attack proceeds from some other occupant or from an intruder. It was so adjudged in Jones v. State (1884), 76 Ala 8, 14. `Why,' it was there inquired, `should one retreat from his own house, when assailed by a partner or cotenant, any more than when assailed by a stranger who is lawfully upon the premises? Whither shall he flee, and how far, and when may he be permitted to return?'"
Also, see Watts v. State (1912), 177 Ala 24 (59 So 270); State v. Leeper (1924), 199 Iowa 432 (200 NW 732); State v. Phillips (1936), 38 Del 24 (187 A 721); and State v. Grantham (1953), 224 SC 41 (77 SE2d 291).
In People v. Stallworth, supra, the defendant killed her husband by stabbing him when the deceased attempted to put her out of the home forcibly. The Court quoted from the Pond Case, supra:
"`A man is not * * * obliged to retreat if assaulted in his own dwelling.'"
*191 The Court continued:
"If the testimony of Mrs. Stallworth at the trial which bore directly on the fatal episode were to be accepted at face value, it would appear to meet the tests of self-defense spelled out above."
In our opinion the Stallworth Case, supra, aligns Michigan jurisprudential thinking with the above cited authorities.
The failure to give defendant's requested instruction resulted in prejudicial error. Defendant's other assignments of error are without merit or do not require consideration because of our disposition of the case.
Reversed and remanded for new trial.
HOLBROOK, P.J., and McGREGOR, J., concurred.
NOTES
[*]  Defense counsel's statement of facts consisted of 39 pages of almost uninterrupted quoted material from the transcript. This practice of setting forth select rambling samples of testimony must be criticized as violating GCR 1963, 813.2 (as amended in 373 Mich lv). We strongly urge the few lawyers who are prone to stating facts in such a manner to comply with the rule before warnings precipitate into more drastic action on our part.

=== CASE 2208831 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:33.829817+00 ===

582 A.2d 150 (1990)
Timothy STANHOPE
v.
LUMBERMENS MUTUAL INSURANCE CO.
No. 89-559.
Supreme Court of Vermont.
September 5, 1990.
Before ALLEN, C.J., and PECK, GIBSON, DOOLEY and MORSE, JJ.
ENTRY ORDER
Plaintiff was injured in a one car accident in which he was a passenger. The driver was the named insured in an automobile insurance policy issued by defendant. The policy limited coverage to $20,000 for a named insured's liability and $20,000 for uninsured motorists' liability. The defendant paid plaintiff $20,000 to settle the liability claim against the driver (its insured).
Alleging that his damages exceeded $20,000, plaintiff claimed an additional $20,000 from defendant under the policy's uninsured (underinsured) coverage. Defendant declined to honor the claim and this suit followed. Summary judgment was entered *151 in favor of defendant and plaintiff appealed.
The outcome of this case is dictated by the plain meaning of 23 V.S.A. § 941(f), which states:
a motor vehicle is underinsured to the extent that its personal injury limits of liability at the time of an accident are less than the limits of uninsured motorists coverage applicable to any injured party legally entitled to recover damages under said uninsured motorist coverage.
Since the policy limit for personal injury liability ($20,000) was not "less than the limit[] of uninsured motorists coverage" ($20,000), the motor vehicle in question was not underinsured. Brunet v. American Ins. Co., 660 F.Supp. 843 (D.Vt.1987).
Affirmed.

=== CASE 2208850 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:34.007485+00 ===

804 N.E.2d 1176 (2004)
In re the Matter of the ESTATE OF Michael LONG, Deceased,
Roger Long, Personal Representative.
No. 38A02-0306-CV-526.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
March 18, 2004.
*1177 George O. Lopez, Hinkle, Racster, Lopez & Clamme, Portland, IN, Attorney for Appellant.
Douglas K. Mawhorr, Brooke Mawhorr, PC, Muncie, IN, Attorney for Appellee.
OPINION
ROBB, Judge.
Roger Long, personal representative of the estate of Michael Long, and Shelly King Long, ex-wife of Michael Long (collectively referred to as the "Petitioners"), appeal the trial court's order on their Petition to Determine Heirship and denial of their request for DNA testing. We reverse and remand.
Issue
Petitioners raise the following issue for our review: whether the trial court properly *1178 denied their request for DNA testing and determined Q.L. to be an heir to Michael's estate without considering any of their proffered evidence.
Facts and Procedural History
Michael and Shelly Long had three children from a marriage which ended in divorce. Michael then married Tammy Long, and he was still married to her when he died on February 8, 2002. Q.L. was born to Tammy on October 7, 2002.
A supervised estate was opened for Michael and Roger Long was appointed a co-personal representative.[1] After Q.L. was born, the Petitioners filed a Petition to Determine Heirs and for DNA Testing. Following a hearing and an opportunity for each party to brief the issues, the trial court issued the following order denying the Petitioners' requests:
The parties, by counsel, having appeared before this Court and having submitted their respective briefs relative to the above entitled motions, the Court, after a thorough reading of Lamey and consideration of the parties' arguments now finds the argument of P.R. Shelly Long King[2] contrary to law and therefore denies the Petition for D.N.A. testing.
As pertains to the request the Court determine the heirs of the estate, the parties agree that the decedent and [Q.L.]'s mother were lawfully married at the time of the decedent's death, that [Q.L.] was conceived during the marriage, and that he was born within 300 days of the date of death. The Personal Representative orally moves the Court to determine only the status of [Q.L.] as an heir.
Based on the stipulations made of record on April 30, 2003, the Court now finds [Q.L.] is an heir of the decedent.
Appellant's Appendix at 6 (footnote added).[3] Petitioners sought and were granted permission to pursue this interlocutory appeal. Additional facts will be supplied as necessary.
Discussion and Decision
I. Standard of Review
We generally review interlocutory orders under an abuse of discretion standard. Hollingsworth v. Key Benefit Adm'rs, Inc., 658 N.E.2d 653, 655 (Ind.Ct. App.1995), trans. denied. "An abuse of discretion may occur if the trial court's decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court, or if the trial court has misinterpreted the law." Id. (internal citation omitted).
II. Petition to Determine Heirship
The Petitioners acknowledge that because Michael and Tammy were married at the time of Michael's death and because Q.L. was born within 300 days of Michael's death, Q.L. is presumptively Michael's heir. See Ind.Code § 31-14-7-1(1)(A). They contend, however, that the trial court erred in determining Q.L. to be Michael's heir without allowing them the opportunity to rebut that presumption, by DNA testing or otherwise. Tammy responds that upon *1179 Michael's death, the presumption became irrefutable, and because the parties stipulated that she and Michael were married and Q.L. was born within 300 days of Michael's death, the trial court properly declined to order a DNA test or consider the Petitioners' other evidence.
A. Estate of Lamey v. Lamey
Both parties relied on Estate of Lamey v. Lamey, 689 N.E.2d 1265 (Ind.Ct.App. 1997), trans. denied, for their respective positions. The trial court also relied on Lamey in issuing its order. The parents in Lamey were married in 1978 and V.L. was born in 1985. The parents divorced in 1995, and father died intestate in 1996. Mother, on behalf of V.L., opened an estate, and father's brother (the "uncle") filed a petition to determine heirship and moved for an order for blood tests relating to V.L. The trial court granted the motion, and the case came to this court on interlocutory appeal.
We first noted that Indiana Code section 29-1-6-6(a) allows "any interested person" to file a petition to determine heirship, and as the uncle was a potential heir of father's if V.L. were deemed not to be his heir, he was an "interested person" and had standing to petition the court as he did. Id. at 1267. We next noted that the probate code indicates an intention for all heirship relationships to become absolute at death, except as provided for after-born children. Id. at 1267-68 (citing Ind.Code §§ 29-1-1-3, 29-1-2-6). Because V.L. was not an after-born child, her status as the sole heir to her father's estate was established upon his death. In an attempt to circumvent this result, the uncle contended that the probate code allowed him to request paternity blood testing as long as he did so within five months of the father's death. He relied on Indiana Code section 29-1-2-7, which provides:
For the purpose of inheritance (on the paternal side) to, through, and from a child born out of wedlock, the child shall be treated as if the child's father were married to the child's mother at the time of the child's birth, if:
(1) the paternity of the child has been established by law in a cause of action that is filed:
(A) during the father's lifetime, or
(B) within five (5) months after the father's death; or
(2) the putative father marries the mother of the child and acknowledges the child to be his own.
We noted several problems with the uncle's position. First, the above-quoted statute provides only a limited opportunity for paternity of a child born out of wedlock to be established by the child or the putative father, not disestablished by a third party. Id. at 1268. Second, father was presumed to be V.L.'s biological father because he and mother were married when V.L. was born. See Ind.Code § 31-14-7-1. Although direct, clear and convincing evidence can rebut a presumptive father's paternity, the uncle had no standing under the paternity statutes to try to establish or disestablish V.L.'s paternity because he was not also asserting paternity in himself. 689 N.E.2d at 1268-69. Third, because father and mother had explicitly acknowledged V.L. as a child of the marriage in their divorce decree, father would be unable to challenge his paternity at this stage if he were still alive, and the uncle was attempting to do what the father could not. Id. at 1269.
Ultimately, we held that the uncle was not entitled to challenge V.L.'s paternity in an heirship proceeding and the trial court erred in ordering blood testing. Id. at 1270. Judge Kirsch filed a written opinion concurring in result in which he noted his reluctance to join in the majority's conclusion *1180 that the paternity of a child born during an intact marriage cannot be challenged in heirship proceedings under any circumstances, but noting that under the circumstances of this case, he had no such reluctance in concluding that the trial court had erred. Id.
B. Lamey's Applicability to This Case
Tammy asserts that the facts of this case are very similar to those of Lamey and although she acknowledges that there are a few facts that distinguish this case from Lamey, she contends that the applicability of the holdings of Lamey are not affected by those differences. We disagree.
The child in Lamey was born both during her parents' marriage and during her father's lifetime, whereas Q.L. was born after Michael's death. Thus, the Lamey court was not confronted with the question of the paternity of an after-born child, and this distinction is critical. In fact, we see this case as presenting circumstances to which Judge Kirsch referred in his concurring in result opinion in Lamey. Tammy summarizes the applicable law and the Lamey holdings as they relate to this case as: "[i]f the after-born heir is born within Three Hundred (300) days of their father's death, they are presumed a child of the decedent/father and entitled to inherit from their father. The presumption may be rebutted by direct, clear and convincing evidence. However, the presumption of paternity and heirship is irrefutable once the father dies." Appellee's Brief at 2 (emphasis added). Tammy apparently fails to recognize the inherent contradiction in her position, which illustrates the very reason why Lamey is inapplicable to a case such as this: because the rebuttable presumption of paternity of an after-born child can arise only after it is known that the child is born within 300 days of the putative father's death, the presumption cannot also previously have become irrefutable upon the father's death.
C. The Applicable Law
Tammy's assertion that the Lamey court's holding that all heirship relationships become absolute at a decedent's death is contrary to Indiana Code section 29-1-2-6, which provides:
Descendants of the intestate, begotten before his death but born thereafter, shall inherit as if they had been born in the lifetime of the intestate and had survived him. With this exception, the descent and distribution of intestate estates shall be determined by the relationships existing at the time of the death of the intestate.
The statute clearly provides an exception to the "time of death" rule for determining heirship relationships for after-born children, of which Q.L. is one. To determine whether Q.L. is a descendant of Michael's for purposes of inheriting from his estate, we turn to the paternity statutes, which provide:
A man is presumed to be a child's biological father if:
(1) the:
(A) man and the child's biological mother are or have been married to each other; and
(B) child is born during the marriage or not later than three hundred (300) days after the marriage is terminated by death....
Ind.Code § 31-14-7-1(1). The presumption may be rebutted by direct, clear, and convincing evidence that the man: (1) is impotent; (2) was absent so as to have no access to the mother; (3) was absent during the entire time the child must have been conceived; (4) was present with the mother only in circumstances which clearly prove there was no sexual intercourse; (5) *1181 was sterile during the time the child must have been conceived; or (6) is excluded as the child's father based upon blood grouping test results. Cooper v. Cooper, 608 N.E.2d 1386, 1387 (Ind.Ct.App.1993). This list is not exclusive; "it is possible that other evidence can constitute direct, clear, and convincing evidence capable of rebutting the marriage presumption." Minton v. Weaver, 697 N.E.2d 1259, 1260 (Ind.Ct. App.1998), trans. denied.
Nonetheless, Tammy contends that because the Petitioners are not seeking to establish paternity in themselves, they are precluded from seeking DNA testing or otherwise introducing evidence which would rebut Michael's presumptive paternity of Q.L. The paternity statute limits the persons who can bring a paternity action to the child's mother, a man alleging he is the child's father, the child, and in certain circumstances, the county division of family and children or the prosecuting attorney. Ind.Code § 31-14-4-1. In K.S. v. R.S., 669 N.E.2d 399 (Ind.1996), our supreme court held that a third party is permitted to try to establish his own paternity of a child born into an intact marriage where the husband is statutorily presumed to be the child's father. In Lamey, we narrowly construed the K.S. holding to be applicable only when a third party was seeking to establish paternity over a child born into an intact marriage and not when a third party was attempting to disestablish paternity. Lamey noted that there was no practical difference between an action to determine heirship and a paternity action in that case and therefore the uncle could not try to accomplish through the heirship determination what he could not do in a paternity action. See also Johnson Controls, Inc. v. Forrester, 704 N.E.2d 1082, 1085 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), trans. denied ("We see no practical difference [between a paternity action and a discovery request seeking blood or genetic testing of a child] as the end result ... is the same. The goal ... is to disestablish paternity.").
Although we understand and agree with the public policy considerations behind the decisions in Lamey and Johnson Controls, those cases are not controlling in this case of an after-born child. In Lamey, the court noted that for ten years after V.L. was born, father had not disputed his paternity of her, and thereafter explicitly agreed in a legal document that she was a child born of the marriage. 689 N.E.2d at 1269. In Johnson Controls, the court noted that the decedent had not challenged paternity during his lifetime. 704 N.E.2d at 1085. In this case, however, Michael never had the opportunity to rebut his presumptive paternity during his lifetime because he died before Q.L. was born. Roger, as Michael's personal representative,[4] stands in Michael's shoes and can bring an action if Michael could have done so. Bender v. Peay, 433 N.E.2d 788, 794 (Ind.Ct.App.1982). For the statute allowing a petition to determine heirship to have any meaning in this circumstance, Roger has to be able to challengeQ.L.'s paternity in Michael's stead. Moreover, we note that unlike the uncle in Lamey, Roger has no personal stake in the outcome of the challenge; whether Q.L. is or is not a legitimate heir of Michael's will not affect Roger at all, as Michael has both a wife and other children who are unquestionably his heirs. In his role as personal representative, Roger just needs to know *1182 how much of Michael's estate to distribute to each of them.
The trial court did not allow the Petitioners to introduce any evidence to rebut the statutory presumption of paternity in Michael, relying instead solely on the stipulations of the parties that Tammy and Michael were married when Q.L. was conceived and that he was born within 300 days of Michael's death. We hold that the trial court misinterpreted the law in so doing. The trial court should allow the opportunity to rebut Michael's presumptive paternity of Q.L.
Conclusion
The trial court misinterpreted the law in denying the Petitioners the opportunity to rebut Michael's presumptive paternity of Q.L., an after-born child. We therefore reverse the trial court's order and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
SULLIVAN, J., and RATLIFF, Sr.J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Tammy Long appears to be the other co-personal representative.
[2]  This appears to be an error. We can find nothing in the record which indicates Shelly is a personal representative of Michael's estate. The transcript of the hearing indicates Roger and Tammy are co-personal representatives and Shelly is an "interested party." Appellant's Appendix at 7.
[3]  We direct the Petitioners' attention to Appellate Rule 51(D), which requires "[a]ll Appendices to be bound separately from the brief."
[4]  Because neither party has provided the actual petition to determine heirship and for DNA testing, we cannot be sure of Shelly's relation to these proceedings. Although Shelly is an "interested person" as the mother of Michael's other heirs, if she is not also Michael's personal representative, she has no standing to pursue this action.

=== CASE 2208865 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:34.133828+00 ===

156 N.W.2d 166 (1968)
182 Neb. 605
Bill W. ABEL, Appellee,
v.
SOUTHWEST CASUALTY INSURANCE COMPANY, a Corporation, Appellant.
Duane C. MILLER and Phyllis E. Miller, Appellees,
v.
SOUTHWEST CASUALTY INSURANCE COMPANY, a Corporation, Appellant.
Nos. 36714, 36715.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
February 9, 1968.
*168 Sidner, Gunderson, Svoboda & Schilke, Fremont, for appellant.
Kerrigan, Line & Martin, Fremont, for appellee.
Heard before WHITE, C. J., and CARTER, SPENCER, BOSLAUGH, SMITH, McCOWN, and NEWTON, JJ.
WHITE, Chief Justice.
Two houseowners, plaintiffs, sue the defendant on the guaranty or surety bond contract of two basement waterproofing contracts allegedly breached by the contractor. This is a law action, tried by the court without a jury, in which the damages were stipulated. The district court entered judgment for the plaintiffs. We affirm the judgment.
Vulcan (Vulcan Waterproofing of K. C., Inc., a Missouri corporation) in an instrument captioned in large deep black print, "SURETY, BONDED WATERPROOFING GUARANTY," issued to and contracted with plaintiffs as follows: "YOUR GUARANTEE: In consideration of sums received by us for applying our waterproofing treatment to the above premises for the elimination of water seepage, we guarantee, subject to the Bond reproduced on the reverse side hereof, to apply our waterproofing treatment using the exclusive Vulcan Patented Pressure Pumping Process, as described in our Contract bearing the above stated number. In addition to our patented pressure pumping process, the contractor, if every necessary, will supply all waterproofing material he deems necessary in the event further waterproofing is required. This agreement does not include dampness, or condensation of walls and/or floors treated by this Company, if such conditions are caused by humidity either from within or outside the walls and/or floors. It shall not be construed that this guarantee covers any walls and/or floors other than those treated by this Company, or water leaks due to electrical or plumbing failure. The liability of this Company under any one Guaranty for such waterproofing treatment shall in no event exceed $5,000.00." (Emphasis supplied.)
The guaranty was for a 5-year period. On the reverse side of this instrument the defendant guarantees as follows: "* * * Guaranties when duly authorized and properly issued by Vulcan Waterproofing of K. C., Inc., (a Missouri Corporation) * * * Surety Bonded Waterproof(i)ng Guaranty (Series WP-1), that said Principal will discharge its obligations in accordance with the terms and conditions of said Guaranty during the period that such issued Guaranty is in full force and effect, * * *."
Defendant, an Arkansas insurance company, executed one general guaranty bond to Vulcan, and under its authorization, Vulcan included it in the individual contracts, as here. Vulcan, incorporated in Missouri, entered into 33 Nebraska contracts, 2 of which were with plaintiffs. Defendant was unauthorized to do business in Nebraska and, except to the extent indicated, did no business in Nebraska.
We go to the question raised as to jurisdiction over the defendant. Plaintiffs secured service on defendant under the Unauthorized Insurers Process Act (44-137.01 to 44-137.10, R.R.S.1943). Defendant filed a special appearance objecting to jurisdiction because it did no business in the state *169 and on the ground that the obligations were not insurance contracts under the act. There are two answers which dispose of this contention.
(1) After filing the special appearance which was overruled, defendant filed a motion to make the petition more definite and certain and attempted to preserve the special appearance, answered attempting to preserve special appearance, requested relief on the pretrial order, moved for dismissal of plaintiffs' cases, and moved for a new trial without attempting to preserve the special appearance. This constituted a general appearance and the jurisdictional objection is without merit. The rule has long since been settled: "An appearance is special when its sole purpose is to question the jurisdiction of the court. It is general if the party appearing invokes the power of the court on any question other than that of jurisdiction." Ivaldy v. Ivaldy, 157 Neb. 204, 59 N.W.2d 373. See, also, O'Hara v. Frederickson Building Corp., 166 Neb. 206, 88 N.W.2d 643; Graff v. Graff, 179 Neb. 345, 138 N.W.2d 644; South Omaha Nat. Bank v. Farmers & Merchants Nat. Bank, 45 Neb. 29, 63 N.W. 128; Behr v. Duling, 128 Neb. 860, 260 N.W. 281; Bankers Life Ins. Co. v. Robbins, 59 Neb. 170, 80 N.W. 484; McKillip v. Harvey, 80 Neb. 264, 114 N.W. 155; Maxwell v. Maxwell, 106 Neb. 689, 184 N.W. 227; Troyer Furniture Co. v. Orchard & Wilhelm Co., 121 Neb. 301, 237 N.W. 144.
Defendant's only answer in its reply brief is the case of Behr v. Duling, supra. But this case, in haec verba, specifically reaffirms the above rule and holds that an answer, by way of general denial, preserving the objection to jurisdiction is not a request for affirmative relief and therefore not a general appearance. But that is not the case here, especially the motion for new trial without any preservation of the objection to jurisdiction. An interesting discussion reconciling the proper relationship of these rules is found in Ivaldy v. Ivaldy, supra, but further discussion is unnecessary here.
(2) Jurisdiction was secured under the Unauthorized Insurers Process Act. The defendant, an Arkansas insurance company, collected premiums on 33 guaranties authorized to be issued and actually issued by Vulcan to Nebraska residents. Section 44-137.02, R.R.S.1943, says that such acts "effected by mail or otherwise," authorize process under the act. And considering the terms of this guaranty, the inducing purpose of this insurance, and under the provisions of section 44-359, R.R.S.1943, the guaranty was an insurance contract in any meaningful sense of the term. See Sun Ins. Co. v. Aetna Ins. Co., 169 Neb. 94, 98 N.W.2d 692. Under section 44-137.01, R.R. S.1943, the statutorily declared public policy of this state is: "* * * that it is a subject of concern that many residents of this state hold policies of insurance issued or delivered in this state by insurers while such insurers are not authorized to do business in this state, thus, presenting to such residents the often insuperable obstacle of resorting to distant forums for the purpose of asserting legal rights under such policies." The enforcement of such a purpose by an Unauthorized Insurers Process Act is constitutionally proper. Pennsylvania Lumbermen's Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. Meyer, 197 U.S. 407, 25 S.Ct. 483, 49 L.Ed. 810. We also observe, from the self-designated name of the defendant, that apparently its contention herein is that it was acting ultra vires. There is no merit to these jurisdictional objections.
The assignments of error as to the inadmissibility of certain evidence and its sufficiency will be considered together. This was a trial to the court and the undisputed evidence is that Vulcan performed the work; that subsequently the basements and the floors leaked; and that Vulcan did not and could not comply with the guaranty apparently because it went out of business. Consequently any error in the admission of evidence as to representation by Vulcan that *170 if the plaintiffs' houses were sitting in the middle of a lake, it would make them dry, is not prejudicial because the case was tried to the court alone. Assuming it was inadmissible, the presumption on appeal is that the trial court did not consider incompetent evidence. Miller v. Banner County, 127 Neb. 690, 256 N.W. 639; Terry Carpenter, Inc. v. Nebraska Liquor Control Com., 175 Neb. 26, 120 N.W.2d 374; Duffy v. State ex rel. Edson, 60 Neb. 812, 84 N.W. 264. Moreover, we fail to understand how the defendant can contend the term "waterproofing" is ambiguous and yet at the same time argue the inadmissibility of parol testimony to resolve such ambiguity. Giving maximum range to its argument it contends that the words "waterproof" and "waterproofing" as used in the Vulcan's guaranty were not "intended to mean to guarantee elimination of all water" but that when "waterproof" is used it is in a "qualified phrase to avoid a concept of fully guaranteeing elimination of all water." We will not repeat the guaranty, set out in full hereinbefore. The only exclusion is dampness or condensation on the walls and floors and nothing else. The instrument in bold type says, "Surety Bonded Waterproofing Guaranty" and after stating that the purpose is to eliminate water seepage, states that in addition to applying their special process, "the contractor, if ever necessary, will supply all waterproofing materials he deems necessary in the event further waterproofing is required." Webster's International Dictionary, (2d Ed.), Unabridged, p. 2886, defines "waterproof" as follows: "Impervious to water; specif.; a. Covered or coated with a material, as a solution of rubber, to prevent permeation by water. b. Pert. to or characterizing a * * * structure so constructed that a stream of water may be directed on it under specified conditions without the water entering. * * * To make waterproof, esp. by application of some material, as rubber solution, impervious to water.v. i. To be, or to be made, waterproof." "Waterproofing" is defined in the same work: "a. Act or process of applying a coating which will render something, as a roof or a fabric, waterproof; also, the state of being waterproof. b. Material applied to something else to make it waterproof."
It seems unnecessary to belabor the matter further. By circuitous and ingenious reasoning the defendant would have us come to the conclusion that waterproofing means "water resistant" or "water repellant" as commonly designated, for example, in a watch or coat. Humidity excepted, the guaranty was to "waterproof" and that conclusively includes protection against water seepage, the undisputed condition continuing after Vulcan performed its work. The guaranty is clear and unambiguous and requires no construction. It may be that the burden assumed is onerous, but we know of no rule protecting an insurance company from assuming such obligation, especially in light of the payment of a premium and the clear inclusion of the guaranty as an inducement to the plaintiffs. The contract of a surety, acting for compensation, is construed most strongly against the surety and in favor of the indemnity which the obligee has reasonable grounds to expect. Sun Ins. Co. v. Aetna Ins. Co., supra.
Defendant argues that Vulcan performed the work that it agreed to and therefore the obligation is discharged. But the obligation was to perform the work necessary to "waterproof" (humidity excepted) the basements and this is conclusively demonstrated by the 5-year guaranty. The guaranty was not that the work could be performed in 5 years but that the basements would be waterproof 5 years after the work was performed (structural changes excepted). Defendant would have us believe that if Vulcan performed the work in 5 years the obligation would be discharged, a contention patently absurd.
The evidence is undisputed as to the breach and the damages were stipulated. The representative of Vulcan saw the *171 cracks in the floors and the water seepage before the contract was entered into. After Vulcan's treatment, water seeped up through the crack radiating from the center seam in Abel's floor. The Vulcan process made no difference. The same situation was present as to Miller.
The court had jurisdiction, the guaranty and its breach were clear, and the judgment of the district court is correct and is affirmed. Plaintiffs are allowed $500 attorneys' fees for services in this court.
Affirmed.