=== CASE 9737378 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:35.204578+00 ===

Abrams, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part, with whom Hennessey, C.J., and Nolan, J., join). I join in the court’s decision to announce the new rule of construction which defines “issue” to include all biological descendants regardless of the marital status of the parents, overruling the rule of construction of Fiduciary Trust Co. v. Mishou, 321 Mass. 615 (1947). I cannot agree, however, with the court’s determination that the new rule not apply in this case.1 There are two compelling reasons to apply the rule announced in a decision to the litigants involved.
First, by merely announcing the new rule without applying it, the court’s action amounts to no more than dictum. Myers v. Drozda, 180 Neb. 183 (1966). Kojis v. Doctors Hosp., 12 Wis. 2d 367, 373-374 (1961). Molitor v. Kaneland Community Unit Dist. No. 302, 18 Ill. 2d 11, 28 (1959), cert. denied, 362 *664U.S. 968 (1960). Note, The Retroactivity of Minnesota Supreme Court Personal Injury Decisions, 6 Wm. Mitchell L. Rev. 179, 184 (1980); Schaefer, The Control of “Sunbursts”: Techniques of Prospective Overruling, 42 N.Y.U.L. Rev. 631, 638 (1967). The court is commenting on an issue which is irrelevant to the disposition of the case. Currie, Suitcase Divorce in the Conflict of Laws: Simons, Rosenstiel, and Borax, 34 U. Chi. L. Rev. 26, 61 (1966).
Second, and more importantly, prospective overruling results in excluding the particular plaintiff and has the potential to remove any incentive to bring challenges to existing precedent because the appellant is deprived of the benefit for the work and expense involved in challenging the old rule, which is admittedly erroneous. See Molitor, supra at 28; Myers, supra at 187; Kojis, supra at 373. To encourage parties in future cases to raise issues which reform and rid the law of antiquated legal doctrines, they should be given the benefit of the new rule. Schaefer, supra.
Courts in other States have applied a new rule or a change in the law to the plaintiff challenging the rule. See, e.g., Nga Li v. Yellow Cab Co., 13 Cal. 3d 804 (1975); Dawson v. Olson, 94 Idaho 636, 639-640 (1972); Barker v. St. Louis County, 340 Mo. 986 (1937); Myers v. Drozda, 180 Neb. 183 (1966).2 Moreover, where the issue has arisen either explicitly or implicitly in the various contexts, from negligence and charitable immunity3 to estate and family law to the property *665rules dealing with the problem of surface water, courts have applied the new rule to the appellant. See In re Marriage of Brown, 15 Cal. 3d 838 (1976) (community property); Nga Li, supra (negligence); Matter of Hoffman, 53 A.D.2d 55 (N.Y. 1976) (wills’ construction); State v. Deetz, 66 Wis. 2d 1 (1974) (common enemy rule of property); Kojis, supra (charitable immunity). Courts apply the new rule to the case at issue, in part because of the public policy consideration of encouraging litigants to initiate challenges which bring about needed changes in the law.4 See Nga Li, supra at 829-380; Molitor, supra; Barker, supra at 1003.
The court’s primary concern in declining to apply the rule announced today to the parties here appears to be the reliance interest of the Bar.51 agree with the court that in the areas of contract and property law “retroactive invalidation of an established principle is to be undertaken with great caution.” Sullivan v. Burkin, 390 Mass. 864, 871 (1984). But, by applying the decision retroactively to the parties before the court, the court does not sacrifice the caution so important in the development of new rules in this area of the law.
The court relies on Sullivan, supra, to conclude that the new rule of construction is not determinative of this case. In Sullivan, *666a widow sought a determination that the assets held in an inter vivos trust were part of her husband’s estate for purposes of establishing her statutory share. The old rule did not permit the surviving spouse to reach assets in an inter vivos trust. It is clear that the husband in Sullivan, through the organization of his affairs and the contents of his will, seemed to be fully aware of this old rule and explicitly sought its protection to prevent his wife from obtaining any of his assets. Therefore, due to the reliance on this old rule, the court denied the widow relief, although the rule was altered prospectively to permit a surviving spouse to reach assets in an inter vivos trust. Id.
Unlike the situation in Sullivan, the intent of this donor in 1959 when she established this trust is far from clear. In fact, it is likely that the donor did not have any “intention at all with respect to the question facing us in this case.”6 Boston Safe Deposit & Trust Co. v. Fleming, 361 Mass. 172, 186 (Braucher, J., dissenting), appeal dismissed, 409 U.S. 813 (1972). Similarly, the New York Appellate Division, in facing an analogous question, noted that it cannot “be said with any degree of assurance that at the time [the testatrix] executed her will she was provided with an explanation of the word ‘issue’ which appeared on the typewritten pages of that document.” Matter of Hoffman, 53 A.D.2d 55, 63 (N.Y. 1976). See Matter of the Estate of Best, 66 N.Y.2d 151, 153 (1985) (accepting Hoffman definition of issue to include legitimate and illegitimate children), cert. denied sub nom. McCollum v. Reid, 475 U.S. 1083 (1986).
Similarly, the Wisconsin court, in carving out an exception to the traditional rule of construction if the illegitimate child is a member of the family circle, noted that once statutes and legal presumption are put aside, there is nothing in the record to indicate that the donor would not have intended to include this particular child.7 In re Trust of Parsons, 56 Wis. 2d 613, *667617 (1973). Because the donor’s intent cannot be discerned from the trust instrument and the court today seeks to “unburden[ ] children from the stigma and the disadvantages heretofore attendant upon the status of illegitimacy,” ante at 661, I would not perpetuate the harshness of the traditional rule of construction to deny this nonmarital child8 participation in the donor’s trust.
By giving relief in this case, the court does not harm the reliance interest of the Bar.9
It is hard to understand why the Bar’s reliance should come before the interests of the child, and the reason articulated by the court does not compel such an unjust result. In fact, the court, by not granting relief in this case removes the incentive of the Bar to change rules which are no longer useful or relevant. The potential negative ramifications which flow from the court’s decision today on the incentive of attorneys to challenge outmoded legal doctrine may be avoided by granting relief in this case. Although the court criticizes the injustice of the law’s treatment of nonmarital children in the past, claiming that “[o]urs is an era in which logic and compassion” dictate that nonmarital children should no longer be stigmatized, ante, it imposes punitive treatment on this particular nonmarital child. The cruel irony of the court’s decision is that not only does this child not receive the benefit of the change she brought about in the law, but, prior to this decision, she was receiving payment from the trust and now, as a result of the decision, she can no longer receive these payments. I respectfully dissent on the failure of the court to apply the new rule to this case.
There is no constitutional problem in applying the new rule to the child in this case. Great N. Ry. v. Sunburst Oil & Ref. Co., 287 U.S. 358, 364 (1932). See, e.g., Molitor v. Kaneland Community Unit Dist. No. 302, 18 Ill. 2d 11, 28 (1959). cert. denied, 362 U.S. 968 (1960); Parker v. Port Huron Hasp., 361 Mich. 1, 26-27 (1960); Case Comment, Prospective — Retroactive Overruling: Remanding Cases Pending Legislative Determinations of Law, 58 B.U.L. Rev. 818 (1978).
Many courts apply the new rule to the parties without extended discussions. See, e.g., In re Estate of Mertes, 34 Ill. App. 3d 557 (1975) (trust construction); Farmers Bank & Capital Trust Co. v. Hulette, 293 S.W.2d 458 (Ky. 1956) (wills’ construction); Cooper v. Government Employees Ins. Co., 51 N.J. 86 (1968) (contracts); Pendergrast v. Aiken, 293 N.C. 201 (1977) (property); Pickering v. American Employers Ins. Co., 109 R.I. 143 (1971) (contracts).
In Payton v. Abbott Labs, 386 Mass. 540, 565 (1982), we noted that the reliance interest plays a much smaller part in tort law than in property or contract law. But, at least as to tort decisions involving the abolition of immunities, courts have noted that the reliance interest is fairly great. See, e.g., Myers, supra; Terracciona v. Magee, 53 N.J. Super. 557 (1959). Due to this reliance, courts have adopted innovative solutions to the question of retroactivity, see Myers, supra (decision partially retroactive as to all insured charities), while still applying the new rule to the instant case.
Uneven treatment arguably results if only the litigant is benefited by the new mle and similarly situated individuals are not benefited, having to proceed instead under the old rule. But, as the Supreme Court stated, “the fact that the parties involved are chance beneficiaries [is] an insignificant cost for adherence to sound principles of decision-making.” Stovall v. Denno, 388 U.S. 293, 301 (1967). One commentator has explained this inequity in treatment by suggesting that the individual “who successfully challenges existing legal doctrine can be, and has been, regarded as having thereby set himself apart.” Schaefer, supra at 638.
There is some indication that this reliance interest has been overemphasized by courts. One commentator quotes Justice Cardozo as saying that “[m]y impression is that the instances of honest reliance and genuine disappointment are rarer than they are commonly supposed to be by those who exalt the virtues of stability and certainty.” Note, Prospective Overruling and Retroactive Application in the Federal Courts, 71 Yale L.J. 907, 946 n.194 (1962), quoting Cardozo, Address Before tire New York State Bar Association, 55 Rep. N.Y. State Bar Ass’n 263, 295 (Jan. 22, 1932). See Levy, Realist Jurisprudence and Prospective Overruling, 109 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1, 28-29 (1960).
While the attorney perhaps understood the legal significance of the terms he selected, it is not clear on" this record that the donor had any such understanding.
Moreover, all of the living beneficiaries of this trust have been notified of this action, and the record before us indicates that those beneficiaries have not objected to. the inclusion of this child as a beneficiary.
It is of no consequence that this suit was initiated by the trustee instead of the child. As has happened in the past, the trustee may bring an action to resolve a question concerning the distribution of a trust. See Boston Safe Deposit & Trust Co. v. Fleming, 361 Mass. 172 (1972).
In fact, the court itself questions whether the attitudes expressed in Cooley v. Dewey, 4 Pick. 93, 94 (1827), were representative of that era. If that case were not a reflection of the attitude at the time it was written and it surely is not representative of current views, it is difficult to understand why this reliance interest should control the outcome in this case. The stated reason for this result, the reliance of the Bar, is more than adequately protected by allowing the Bar to adhere to the old rule for trusts executed prior to the date of this decision, while applying the new rule to the person making a successful challenge.

=== CASE 9737379 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:35.550108+00 ===

JUSTICE SIMON delivered the opinion of the court: The Administrator of the Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission (ARDC) charged the respondent with (1) conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, and misrepresentation, (2) illegal conduct involving moral turpitude, (3) conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice, and (4) making false statements to the ARDC with the intent to obstruct an inquiry. The charges stem from one central event — a settlement of a dispute over legal fees the respondent claimed were owing to him in which the respondent received a sum of money in exchange for a release and respondent’s recantation of his prior sworn testimony. The Hearing Board determined that there was “no doubt that the alleged intent on the part of the respondent to recant his sworn statement delivered to the Illinois Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission did in fact occur.” That board, however, reached no conclusion as to whether the respondent’s conduct constituted fraud, dishonesty, deceit or involved moral turpitude. It concluded only that, at “the very minimum, this [the misconduct] represents an unprofessional disregard for the disciplinary proceedings of the respondent’s profession.” Extraordinary mitigating circumstances surrounding the respondent’s misconduct led the Board to recommend a reprimand instead of a more severe sanction. The Review Board affirmed the Hearing Board’s findings of fact and conclusions of law but determined that suspension for six months was appropriate. The respondent filed exceptions in this court to the Review Board’s recommendations. There is essentially no dispute over the facts. The disagreement between the ARDC and the respondent, Robert E. McAuliffe, a former judge of the circuit court of Cook County and for the past 7 years a Chicago attorney, is over the sanction to be imposed. The respondent’s position is that, in view of the mitigating circumstances relied upon by the Hearing Board, discipline in excess of a reprimand would be inappropriate. The ARDC, however, urges us to suspend the respondent for three years. The record is replete, as the Hearing Board recognized, with tragic occurrences in the life of the respondent. Judge McAuliffe was admitted to the Illinois bar in 1953. From 1959 to the end of 1963 he served as a judge of the village court of Maywood, and for the next 15 years as a judge of the circuit court of Cook County. In 1964 while the respondent was vacationing with his family in the west, his two young daughters were raped and murdered by a marauder who invaded their hotel room. For years this incident haunted the respondent and it eventually contributed to the severe depression from which he suffered. The respondent’s voluntary resignation from the bench in April 1979 was prompted by personal and financial hardship. He was heavily in debt due to imprudent business investments. In addition, he was .supporting two households — one consisting of his first wife and daughter; the other of a son who was born in 1974 and his son’s mother, Charlotte, whom the respondent married after divorcing his first wife. Upon leaving the bench, the respondent entered into a professional relationship with an attorney, Jason Mi-tan, who specialized in personal injury work. The respondent handled cases referred to Mr. Mitán and was paid $2,000 per week for the first eight or nine weeks of this arrangement so that he could meet his financial obligations. After this initial period, the respondent received a percentage of fees collected on the cases referred and was reimbursed for all overhead expenses. This relationship lasted only eight months; in December 1979 the respondent moved out of Mitan’s office when he received notice that Mitán was being disbarred. Shortly thereafter, he entered into a similar arrangement with another attorney (attorney), who had represented Mr. Mitán in his disciplinary proceeding. Around this time, the respondent’s son and Charlotte moved to California. During the period the respondent was associated with the attorney, he commuted to California, on a regular basis to see them. In February of 1981, while in California, the respondent received a letter from the attorney stating that he was terminating their business relationship and would not pay the respondent fees which the respondent was claiming were owed to him. In April 1981, in an apparent effort to persuade the attorney to pay the amount he was claiming, the respondent filed a complaint with the ARDC accusing the attorney of using, without consent, waiver-of-attorney-lien forms that the respondent had signed in blank before leaving on a trip to California. He also provided the ARDC with a sworn statement supporting these charges. The respondent repeated these charges and added others during a citation deposition, in a civil case in which a party was seeking to locate Mr. Mitan’s assets. Throughout this period, the respondent was distraught over his financial situation and the attorney's alleged failure to live up to their agreement. On the advice of his physician, he contacted a psychologist whose diagnosis was that the respondent was suffering from a neurotic depression. While visiting California in May 1981, the respondent’s mental condition deteriorated. He began fearing that his son would be violently murdered as his daughters had been 17 years before. Obsessed by this fantasy, the respondent visited his son’s school daily to assure himself that the child was still alive. His psychological problems became so severe that he stopped bathing and dressing properly.'By late May 1981, Charlotte could no longer tolerate his bizarre behavior, and she asked the respondent to leave. He returned to Chicago to seek help from his psychologist. On August 5, 1981, while in Chicago, the respondent had a heart attack and was hospitalized. Two days later, he sustained a second massive heart attack. The respondent had lost about 75 pounds and believed he had little time left to live. Following his discharge from the hospital, his psychologist diagnosed his illness as a major psychotic depression — a more debilitating condition than the neurotic depression the psychologist had diagnosed at the end of May. In September 1981, on the advice of his psychologist, the respondent admitted himself to the Illinois State Psychiatric Institute in order to receive antidepressant medication. Because of his heart condition, the physicians were unable to administer the drugs, and the respondent left the psychiatric hospital without being treated and against medical advice. That same day he experienced chest pains and was rehospitalized in the intensive-care unit of Northwest Community Hospital with a third heart attack. While at Northwest Community Hospital, the respondent contacted the counsel representing the attorney in the negotiations to settle their fee dispute. The respondent agreed to a settlement of approximately $24,000, to be paid in return for recanting the charges and statements he made to the ARDC, and for a complete release. On September 16, 1981, after being discharged from Northwest Community Hospital, the respondent went directly to the attorney’s counsel’s office where he signed an affidavit, without reading it, despite the warning from the counsel that the documents he was being asked to sign were “horrible.” The affidavit recanted sworn testimony before the ARDC, rescinded the charges the respondent made against the attorney before the ARDC, and recanted a large portion of the testimony given in the citation deposition regarding the assets of Mr. Mitán. The respondent testified that he was convinced that his death was imminent and was willing to do anything to obtain the $24,000 so that he could return to California and be with his son before he died. Immediately after signing the documents, the respondent left Chicago with the money and attempted to drive to California. On the way, he lost consciousness somewhere in Wyoming and was hospitalized for a period of time. Upon his discharge, he continued on to California. In September 1982, he was admitted to a Veteran’s Administration hospital in California for treatment of his coronary condition and his psychiatric problems. During this hospitalization the respondent was assigned to the “Brain Damaged Ward,” where he received antidepressant drugs. After this treatment, the respondent’s physical and emotional health greatly improved. The respondent is presently employed as a part-time law clerk in a public office and also works part time for a law firm in Chicago. The Administrator argues that the integrity of the legal profession and the protection of the administration of justice required that the respondent be subjected to substantial discipline. The Administrator stresses that the respondent’s recantation of sworn testimony involved fraud, deceit, dishonesty, and misrepresentation which typically justifies disbarment. While the Administrator concedes that mitigating factors may affect the severity of punishment, he argues that the respondent’s reliance on his disabling emotional and physical condition to mitigate his misconduct is misplaced. Because the Hearing Board found that the respondent intended to recant his testimony in exchange for payment, the Administrator concludes that the respondent’s judgment was not impaired at the time of his misconduct. The Administrator, therefore, distinguishes the instant case from In re Crisel (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 332, where this court imposed a lesser sanction in light of Mr. Crisel’s neurotic depression and suicidal tendencies. The Administrator’s contention that the respondent’s conduct constituted fraud is not substantiated. After listening to the live testimony and performing its fact-finding function, the Hearing Board did not state that the respondent acted fraudulently. It concluded only, as noted above, that “at the very minimum [the respondent’s behavior constituted] an unprofessional disregard for the disciplinary proceedings of the respondent’s profession.” Cases on which the Administrator relies, such as In re Mitan (1979), 75 Ill. 2d 118, and In re Carr (1941), 377 Ill. 140, where there was fraud and stringent sanctions were imposed, are therefore not relevant here. The Administrator’s attempt to distinguish In re Crisel (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 332, on the ground that respondent’s judgment was not impaired when he recanted his testimony also misses the mark. Crisel involved a State’s Attorney who drove to a remote area intending to commit suicide. Unwilling to carry out his suicide plan, Mr. Crisel instead fired shots into his own automobile and then filed a police report claiming that he had been shot at by two unknown persons. After an investigation, the police determined that Crisel had fabricated the report. Crisel, like the respondent in the instant case, had been diagnosed as suffering from a depressive neurosis which the Hearing Board concluded had contributed to his misconduct. In light of these findings, we stayed a two-year suspension and placed Mr. Crisel on probation explaining that “where there is evidence linking the impairment to the misconduct, the impairment will be considered in mitigation, but will not act as a bar to discipline.” 101 Ill. 2d 332, 344. The Administrator’s assertion that Crisel is not applicable to the instant case, because the respondent’s intent to recant his testimony demonstrates that his judgment was not impaired, distorts the evidence and misconstrues the Hearing Board’s findings. The Administrator, as the Hearing Board explicitly noted, minimizes the severity of the respondent’s mental and physical condition at the time of his misconduct. Within the period of less than two months, the respondent experienced three major coronary incidents and was confined in a locked ward in a State psychiatric facility. He left this hospital without receiving any treatment and against medical advice only to be re-hospitalized the very same day with a third heart attack. It was during this hospitalization, convinced that his death was near, that the respondent agreed to sign an affidavit, which he never read, recanting his testimony. The evidence clearly demonstrates that the respondent was psychologically and physically disabled at the time of his misconduct. We therefore conclude that the Hearing Board’s finding that the respondent was mentally and physically impaired when he recanted his testimony is supported by clear and convincing evidence, and the Administrator’s attempt to distinguish In re Crisel (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 332, on this ground ignores the Hearing Board’s findings. As we read Crisel it lends substantial support to the respondent’s position that neither suspension nor probation are necessary in this case. In Crisel, we stayed a suspension and ordered probation because the respondent still required psychiatric treatment. Here, however, since the respondent has recovered from his psychological illness, probation is unnecessary. The Administrator’s request that we suspend the respondent for three years is overly harsh both in the light of the extraordinary mitigating circumstances of this case and in view of the discipline imposed in cases such as In re Crisel, where the attorney’s misconduct was linked to his disability. See also In re Hopper (1981), 85 Ill. 2d 318 (respondent censured because his failure to file income tax returns was tied to his psychiatric ailment). In considering the appropriate discipline to be imposed in this case, we do not minimize the seriousness of respondent’s misconduct. Recantation by an attorney of his sworn testimony in order to receive financial gain, even if the attorney is entitled to receive the gain, cannot be justified. We note, however, that the respondent’s misconduct caused no real harm. There was no evidence that the ARDC had been investigating the attorney prior to respondent’s initiation of charges. Further, the ARDC gave no indication that it attempted in any way to continue the investigation after the statements were recanted, nor that it would have pursued the charges had the respondent not recanted them. Similarly, with regard to the respondent’s recantation of portions of his citation deposition, the evidence reveals that the recanted statements had more to do with the personal controversy between the respondent, the attorney, and Mr. Mitán, than with the discovery of assets. There was neither an allegation nor proof that the cause of action of the plaintiff in the citation proceeding was prejudiced. In sum, the respondent used the ARDC as a collection agency. While this constitutes improper conduct, it does not appear that anyone was substantially harmed as a result. After reviewing the cases, “we find that none involved a pattern of conduct or surrounding circumstances sufficiently analogous to this respondent’s to be determinative of the sanction to be imposed in this case.” (In re Nadler (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 326, 333.) The respondent signed the affidavit as the Hearing Board observed, because of “a series of unusual personal tragedies, none of which are likely to repeat themselves.” The respondent’s successful rehabilitation is relevant in determining an appropriate sanction, as is his production of several witnesses who attested to his integrity. (See In re Nadler (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 326, 333.) In addition, we note the Hearing Board’s finding that the respondent, despite his physical and psychological problems, never neglected the matters of his clients, and that there has been no other blemish on his career since his admission to the bar 33 years ago. We do not believe that suspension is necessary either to safeguard the public or maintain the integrity of the legal profession (In re Neff (1980), 83 Ill. 2d 20, 25), and we conclude, as the Hearing Board did, that this one aberration in the respondent’s long career at the bar does not indicate that he is an improper person to practice his profession. (83 Ill. 2d 20, 25.) We therefore find censure to be the appropriate sanction. Respondent censured. JUSTICE WARD took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 9737380 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:35.554521+00 ===

JUSTICE MORAN, dissenting: The Hearing Board found that respondent intentionally recanted a sworn statement to the Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission (ARDC). In other words, respondent intentionally lied to the ARDC. Normally such serious misconduct would warrant a substantial suspension or disbarment. (See, e.g., In re Nadler (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 326.) The substantial mitigating factors in this case are sufficient to convince me that neither disbarment nor a long suspension is appropriate. Nonetheless, I do not feel that censure alone is a sufficient sanction given the serious nature of the misconduct involved. In a similar case, In re Crisel (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 332, this court recognized the mitigating nature of the respondent’s psychological problems but still imposed a three-year suspension, stayed pending completion of a concurrent three-year period of probation. The requirement in Crisel that the respondent undergo psychiatric treatment as a condition of probation was, in my view, an additional measure to safeguard the public; it was not, as the majority here suggests, the reason for imposing probation instead of censure. I believe that a similar approach is necessary in this case to adequately protect the public. However, since there is no need for lengthy ongoing psychiatric treatment, I would not impose as long a period of probation as in Crisel. Therefore, I would suspend respondent for one year, stay the suspension, and impose a concurrent one-year period of probation.

=== CASE 9737381 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:36.655765+00 ===

JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH delivered the opinion of the court: An indictment returned in the circuit court of Cook County charged Robert Byron (hereafter defendant), Harold Bean, Ann Walters, and Wayne Walters, with the murder of Dorothy Polulach (three counts, Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 38, pars. 9 — 1(a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(3)), armed robbery (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 38, par. 18 — 2), home invasion (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 38, par. 12 — 11(a)(2)), and conspiracy (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 38, par. 8 — 2(a)). Bean was also charged with solicitation. For reasons not relevant here, the Walters were granted a severance. The circuit court denied defendant’s pretrial motion for severance, and thereafter in a jury trial Bean and defendant were found guilty of each of the offenses charged. In a hearing requested by the People, the jury found that there existed one or more factors set forth in section 9 — 1(b) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(b)) and that there were no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude a sentence of death. Bean and defendant were sentenced to death, and their sentences were stayed (87 Ill. 2d R. 609(a)) pending appeal to this court (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, sec. 4(b); 103 Ill. 2d R. 603). Because of the denial of his oral motion for severance, Bean’s conviction was reversed. People v. Bean (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 80. Defendant’s contention that his conviction must be reversed because the People failed to prove his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt requires that we briefly review the evidence. Many of the facts are stated in People v. Bean and will be supplemented here only to the extent necessary to discuss the issue. The People’s principal witnesses were Wayne Walters, Robert Daniel Egan, and Debra Youngbrandt. Walters testified that the charges against him were to be reduced in exchange for his cooperating with the People. During 1979, he and his wife, Ann Polulach Walters, resided in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. Ann’s mother, Gracie Polulach, who was divorced from Ann’s father George, lived with them. George lived in Chicago with his wife Dorothy, the deceased, whom Ann hated, often referring to her as the “black widow.” Ann blamed Dorothy for George’s suicide in December 1979. The night after George’s wake in Chicago, the Walters, Bean, and Geri Smith, who was Bean’s former wife and a friend of Ann’s, were gathered at Smith’s home in Chicago. Ann expressed her suspicions that Dorothy was in some way responsible for George's death. Bean suggested that, for money, he would kill Dorothy. In May 1980, Smith and Bean visited the Walters at their home in Florida, and the killing of Dorothy was discussed again. In June 1980, at the Walters’ request, Bean traveled to Florida to discuss his suggestion that he would kill Dorothy. The Walters gave Bean $2,500 in cash for expenses. Robert Daniel Egan, charged with the offense of armed violence for conduct at the Polulach home at the time of the homicide, admittedly cooperating with the People in exchange for a reduced sentence, testified that in February 1981 he discussed with Bean and defendant a possible killing for money. Defendant was Egan’s ex-brother-in-law. After this discussion, which took place in defendant’s home, Egan, Bean, and defendant left defendant’s home in Bean’s car to burglarize the Polulach home. As a disguise, Bean wore a priest’s cassock and was carrying a briefcase. At approximately 6:45 p.m., Egan dropped Bean and defendant off a few blocks from the Polulach home, and, pursuant to Bean’s direction, drove to a nearby roller-skating rink and waited. Later, defendant appeared and removed a gun hidden underneath the front seat of Bean’s car, explaining that they forgot the gun and might need it. Defendant told Egan that 15 minutes later he was to drive down the street. Defendant left, and after waiting 15 minutes Egan started down the street as instructed. He picked up Bean and defendant, who were walking. The three returned to defendant’s home, where they sorted out jewelry which defendant had removed from the briefcase which Bean had been carrying. The three then left defendant’s home and drove to a bridge over the Cal-Sag River where Bean left the car and threw the gun into the water. Despite repeated efforts, this gun was never found. The next day defendant, Egan, and Bean drove to an alley behind a restaurant and Bean disposed of the priest’s clothing. Wayne Walters testified that Bean returned to Florida on February 18, 1981. He told the Walters that he had killed Dorothy and described to them how the murder occurred. He said he needed $10,000 immediately in order to pay off his two “partners,” one of whom had helped him in the Polulach home while the other had waited in the car. In response to Bean’s request for payment, Wayne gave Bean $50. Egan testified further that, when Bean returned to Chicago, Egan and defendant picked Bean up at the airport. On the way to the airport, at defendant’s request, Egan threw a bag of costume jewelry into a river. On the return trip from the airport, Bean told Egan: “You can add another round to our bag of tricks. *** Murder.” In defendant’s presence, Bean then related how he entered the Polulach home, fought with Dorothy, and slapped her. After she fell down, he handcuffed her hands behind her back and handcuffed her legs together. He then shot her twice in the head. Walters testified further that Bean returned to Florida at the Walters’ expense in March 1981. Because she was “terrified” that Bean’s partners might injure her if she did not pay them, Ann borrowed $5,000 from two friends. Wayne gave this money to Bean, and Bean indicated that the money would “keep them [his partners] quiet” and that they “won’t hurt you *** because they know they have me to deal with and I would kill them.” After Dorothy’s body was discovered by a friend, upon being interrogated, the Walters confessed their participation in the crime. Defendant was taken into custody on April 6, 1981, at his home. Detective Duffin testified that, when questioned at the police station, defendant replied that he had just “shot up” with heroin, and upon investigation, needle marks were found on defendant’s body. No charges were filed and defendant was released. Debra Youngbrandt, Bean’s girlfriend, testified that after hearing of defendant’s April 6 arrest, she, Bean, and Egan fled Chicago in her automobile and drove west through Illinois, Iowa, and Nebraska. During the trip, Bean indicated that he was the “priest” who had killed Dorothy Polulach. When Egan was arrested in Holdridge, Nebraska, for a minor traffic violation, Bean and Youngbrandt left Egan at the police station and returned to Chicago. On the way back, they abandoned Youngbrandt’s car and stole a pickup truck to which Bean attached stolen license plates. Upon their return to Chicago, at Bean’s request Youngbrandt called defendant in order to set up a meeting between the two men. However, the next day while at a truck stop, Youngbrandt called the authorities and eventually gave a statement implicating Bean. Egan was arrested at defendant’s home on April 22. Defendant was arrested the next day, immediately after his appearance before a' grand jury investigating the murder. In response to eight of the 14 questions asked him before the grand jury, defendant refused to answer upon assertion of his fifth amendment rights. Bean was arrested two days after defendant’s arrest. At trial, defendant presented an alibi. William and Lorraine Maloney, friends of defendant’s mother, testified that defendant had been at the Maloney home from approximately 11:30 a.m. until 7 p.m. on the day of the murder. Defendant’s testimony was consistent with that of the Maloneys. It was defendant’s theory that Egan and Bean committed the crime, and Egan, when cornered, in order to receive a more lenient sentence for himself, falsely implicated defendant. Prior to trial, defendant, in a written motion for severance, stated that the evidence which was to be introduced at trial overwhelmingly implicated Bean, but not defendant. Defendant argued that introduction of this evidence would be highly prejudicial to his defense. Bean’s attorney orally joined this motion, which the circuit court denied. Defendant contends that only Egan’s testimony linked him to the crime. He argues that because Egan was an admitted participant in the crime, had been convicted of four felonies, and had testified against defendant pursuant to an agreement with the People that he would receive a reduced sentence, his testimony was insufficient to prove defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. We do not agree. Notwithstanding that the jury was informed of the infirmities in Egan’s testimony and instructed that his testimony was to be viewed with suspicion, it found defendant guilty. We find apposite the statement in People v. Collins (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 237, wherein the court, in rejecting contentions similar to those made here, said: “A criminal conviction will not be set aside unless the evidence is so improbable or unsatisfactory that it creates a reasonable doubt of the defendant’s guilt. (People v. Vriner (1978), 74 Ill. 2d 329, 342; People v. Manion (1977), 67 Ill. 2d 564, 578; People v. Bybee (1956), 9 Ill. 2d 214, 221.) Although the testimony of an accomplice is viewed with suspicion (People v. Baynes (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 225, 232; People v. Todaro (1958), 14 Ill. 2d 594, 602), we have repeatedly held that it is sufficient to sustain a conviction if it satisfies the jury of the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt (People v. Farnsley (1973), 53 Ill. 2d 537, 544-45; People v. Coleman (1971), 49 Ill. 2d 565, 573; People v. Wollenberg (1967), 37 Ill. 2d 480, 484-85; People v. Hansen (1963), 28 Ill. 2d 322, 332-33). When presented with a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, it is not the function of this court to retry the defendant. As the United States Supreme Court observed in Jackson v. Virginia (1979), 443 U.S. 307, 319, 61 L. Ed. 2d 560, 573, 99 S. Ct. 2781, 2789, ‘the relevant question is whether, after viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt.’ The court went on to note that, ‘[o]nce a defendant has been found guilty of the crime charged, the factfinder’s role as weigher of the evidence is preserved through a legal conclusion that upon judicial review all of the evidence is to be considered in the light most favorable to the prosecution.’ (Emphasis in original.) 443 U.S. 307, 319, 61 L. Ed. 2d 560, 573, 99 S. Ct. 2781, 2789. In view of these principles, we conclude that there is sufficient evidence to support the jury’s verdict. Stated simply, the resolution of the defendants’ guilt or innocence depended on the credibility of the witnesses and the weight given their testimony. It is well settled that these determinations are exclusively within the province of the jury. (People v. Ellis (1978), 74 Ill. 2d 489, 496; People v. Manion (1977), 67 Ill. 2d 564, 578; People v. Zuniga (1973), 53 Ill. 2d 550, 559; People v. Soukup (1968), 41 Ill. 2d 94, 97.) Similarly, it is for the jury to resolve any conflicts in the evidence. (People v. Kubat (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 437, 468; People v. Vriner (1978), 74 Ill. 2d 329, 342.) Here the jury was fully cognizant of the infirmities in [Egan’s] testimony and was instructed that his testimony was to be viewed with suspicion. Nevertheless, the jury chose to believe [Egan] over the defense witnesses, and after reviewing the record, we are not prepared to say that their conclusion was unreasonable.” 106 Ill. 2d 237, 261-62. Defendant contends next that in denying his motion for severance the circuit court committed reversible error. He argues that, where the defenses of codefendants are antagonistic and incompatible, a severance is required in order to ensure each defendant a fair trial. (People v. Johnson (1958), 13 Ill. 2d 619; People v. Meisenhelter (1942), 381 Ill. 378.) Where one defendant accuses his codefendant, an antagonism arises which requires separate trials; otherwise, the alternative is a “circus.” People v. Braune (1936), 363 Ill. 551. Defendant contends further that the circuit court erred in denying the motion because he was “overwhelmed” by the abundance of evidence that was presented as to Bean only. Citing United States v. Sampol (D.C. Cir. 1980), 636 F.2d 621, 647, he argues that such a severe disparity in proofs required the ordering of a severance. The People contend that it was not error to deny a severance because defendant received a fair trial. They argue that defendant failed to prove that his alibi defense was antagonistic to Bean’s defense, or that he was “overwhelmed” by the perceived overabundance of evidence introduced solely against Bean. They argue further that because defendant, in his pretrial motion for severance, failed to state specifically how defendant would be prejudiced by proceeding with the joint trial and alleged mere apprehensions of prejudice, his demand for a severance must fail. The People argue, too, that both defendants’ defenses were compatible because they did not reciprocally accuse each other of the murder; specifically, the People point out that whereas defendant accused Bean, Bean did not testify and charge that defendant was the perpetrator of the offense. Finally, the People contend that the conflict in defenses which defendant contends exists is not a “true conflict” rising to the level of prejudicial antagonism; that the assertion by one defendant of an alibi defense does not automatically create antagonism as a matter of law; that antagonism between defenses exists only where one or more codefendants testify and implicate others; and that this court has never held that an “overwhelming abundance” of evidence presented against one defendant may prejudice his codefendant. The long-established rule in this jurisdiction is that “defendants jointly indicted are to be jointly tried unless fairness to one of the defendants requires a separate trial to avoid prejudice.” (People v. Lee (1981), 87 Ill. 2d 182, 187.) There is no automatic right to be tried separately from one’s codefendants. (People v. Bean (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 80, 92.) A defendant’s pretrial motion for severance must demonstrate specifically the prejudice complained of; mere apprehensions of prejudice are insufficient. (People v. Bean (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 80, 92; People v. Lee (1981), 87 Ill. 2d 182, 186; People v. Yonder (1969), 44 Ill. 2d 376, 386.) The decision to grant a severance is within the sound discretion of the circuit court and will not be reversed absent an abuse of that discretion. (People v. Bean (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 80, 93; People v. Daugherty (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 533, 541.) Severance is required where the defenses of codefendants are so antagonistic that severance is imperative to insure a fair trial. People v. Bean (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 80, 93; People v. Daugherty (1984), 102 Ill. 2d 533, 541-42; People v. Lee (1981), 87 Ill. 2d 182, 188. We do not agree with the People that Bean’s defense was not antagonistic to defendant’s. In reversing Bean’s conviction, we stated: “*** Byron’s defense was clearly entirely antagonistic to Bean’s. In a word, Byron’s defense consisted of the contention that Bean was the murderer and Byron was not even there. Byron’s counsel elicited admissions from witnesses which implicated Bean and were totally irrelevant to Byron. Finally, Byron’s closing argument labeled Bean as the murderer.” People v. Bean (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 80, 96. Much of the testimony of Walters and Youngbrandt, while directly implicating Bean, had nothing to do with defendant. The trial became more of a contest between the two defendants than between the People and each defendant; the record is replete with instances in which defense counsel attacked each other’s clients, as well as-each other, and only a severance could have provided defendant a fair trial. People v. Bean (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 80, 94; People v. Braune (1936), 363 Ill. 551, 556-57. We have considered the People’s argument that, although defendant’s attacks on Bean were prejudicial to him, nothing Bean did here served to prejudice defendant. As we stated in Bean, “any set of circumstances which deprives a defendant of a fair trial is sufficient to require severance. There is no requirement that the prejudice must be symmetrical.” (Emphasis in original.) (People v. Bean (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 80, 95.) We agree with defendant that the overwhelming volume of evidence presented against Bean only may have misled the jurors. The Federal courts have recognized that disparity in “the quantity and type of evidence adduced against the co-defendants[ ] is a vital consideration in evaluating the necessity for severance.” United States v. Sampol (D.C. Cir. 1980), 636 F.2d 621, 646. “In such cases when there is a gross disparity in the quantity and venality of the testimony against the respective joint defendants it is fair to inquire ‘whether the jury can reasonably be expected to compartmentalize the evidence as it relates to separate defendants in the light of its volume and limited admissibility.’ [Citations.]” (636 F.2d 621, 647.) Here, an overwhelming volume of evidence was presented as to Bean only, and in view of the bitter antagonism we are unable to say that the jurors could fairly apply the evidence to the respective defendants. Under the circumstances shown, defendant did not receive a fair trial. The motion for severance, should have been allowed, and the judgment must be reversed and the cause remanded for a new trial. Defendant has briefed and argued a number of issues, but in Anew of our decision and the unlikelihood that the alleged errors avíII reoccur, we need not consider them. For the reasons stated, the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is reversed and the cause remanded for a new trial. Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 9737382 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:36.660172+00 ===

JUSTICE MORAN, dissenting: Although I agree Avith the majority that the evidence was sufficient to prove defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, I cannot agree Avith the majority’s treatment of the severance issue. Therefore I respectfully dissent. In People v. Bean (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 80, this court held that it was error to deny a severance of Bean’s trial from that of Byron, the defendant herein. Based upon this error we reversed Bean’s conAdction and ordered a new trial. The reversal of Bean’s conviction, however, does not by itself require a new trial for Byron. The question before this court is not whether severance was required. The question, instead, is whether the erroneous failure to sever was sufficiently prejudicial to Byron to deprive him of a fair trial. Bean Ayas prejudiced by the failure to sever because Byron took the position that Bean was the murderer. Bean was thus required to defend himself against both the State and his codefendant. However, Byron’s motion for severance did not even allege that he expected Bean to point the finger at him, and at trial it was never Bean’s position that Byron was the murderer. Byron’s severance motion instead relied upon two grounds which have heretofore never been recognized by this court as sufficient for severance: (1) the difficulty in accusing Bean as the murderer when Bean is a codefendant, and (2) the disparity in the weight of evidence against Bean as opposed to defendant. As to the first ground above, defendant’s severance motion did not state any specific way in which he would be hampered in his attempts to attack Bean. “Mere apprehensions of prejudice” are not enough to require severance (People v. Lee (1981), 87 Ill. 2d 182, 186), and thus the failure to spell out the prejudice anticipated would normally be fatal to defendant’s motion. Moreover, given the fact that Bean was convicted of murder, it is hard to see how defendant can claim that he was prejudiced by an inability to convince the jury that Bean was the murderer. As to the second ground, this court has never before ruled that the failure to sever may deprive a defendant of a fair trial solely because the weight of the evidence was stronger against a codefendant. The evidence is never identical as to all codefendants, and absent some specific prejudice, the court should be unwilling to require severance merely because there is evidence against one defendant which does not bear on the guilt of the other. The case relied upon by the majority, United States v. Sampol (D.C. Cir. 1980), 636 F.2d 621, is factually very different from the case at bar. In Sampol two codefendants were charged with conspiracy and murder arising out of the car bombing of a former ambassador. A third defendant, Ignacio Nova, was charged only with making false statements to a grand jury and concealing the felony but was not charged with any culpability in the murder itself. The court held that Nova was prejudiced by a joint trial where the overwhelming bulk of the evidence bore no relevance to the relatively minor charges against Nova but instead related almost exclusively to the more serious charges against the other two defendants. In such an extreme situation where the trial of one defendant on serious charges may confuse the jury as to the minor charges against another defendant there may be some rationale for requiring severance. However, in the case at bar the defendants were both charged with the identical crime, and witnesses implicated each of them in the murder. Defendant was not deprived of a fair trial merely because, as the majority seems to think, the witnesses against Bean were more credible than the one key witness against defendant. I would therefore affirm defendant’s conviction.

=== CASE 9737383 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:38.250204+00 ===

Wilkins, J.
This is the second of two cases we decide today dealing with the question whether excess liability insurance coverage drops down to replace primary coverage if a primary insurer becomes insolvent. See Massachusetts Insurers Insolvency Fund v. Continental Casualty Co., ante 598 (1987).
*607In March, 1980, a fire in a Haverhill apartment building owned by the plaintiff caused injury and death to occupants of the building. Actions were commenced against the plaintiff, who was insured for general liability as to the apartment house to the amount of $500,000 by the Ambassador Insurance Company (Ambassador) as primary insurer and by the defendant Lincoln Insurance Company (Lincoln) to an additional amount of $1,000,000 as an excess insurer under an umbrella liability policy. Ambassador undertook the defense of the actions against the plaintiff, but, in September, 1984, Ambassador was declared insolvent and went into receivership in Vermont.* 1 Lincoln declined to afford coverage within the limits of the underlying coverage or to provide a defense. In August and December, 1984, the plaintiff sent Lincoln letters purporting to be demands pursuant to G. L. c. 93A (1984 ed.). The plaintiff commenced this action in February, 1985, seeking (1) a declaration that Lincoln’s umbrella policy provides both defense coverage and indemnity coverage “over and above sums collectible by the plaintiff pursuant to underlying coverage,” and (2) relief pursuant to G. L. c. 93A.
Lincoln moved for summary judgment, and the plaintiff in turn sought a partial summary judgment declaring Lincoln’s obligation to provide the coverage prayed for in the plaintiff’s complaint. The motion judge allowed Lincoln’s motion. An amended summary judgment was entered declaring that Lincoln was not obliged to defend the plaintiff in the underlying lawsuits; that Lincoln was only obliged to indemnify the plaintiff over and above $500,000, subject to policy limits; and that Lincoln’s refusal to provide primary indemnity and defense coverage was not a violation of G. L. c. 93A. The plaintiff appealed. We granted Lincoln’s application for direct appellate review.
*608Although we agree with the motion judge’s reasoning in certain respects, we conclude that Lincoln’s policy should be read to drop down to provide indemnity coverage to the extent that Ambassador’s insolvent estate does not.
1. The line of contention between Lincoln and the plaintiff is clearly defined. Both parties agree that, if the Lincoln policy provides that it will drop down if the relevant primary insurance is uncollectible, Ambassador’s insolvency will cause the Lincoln coverage to drop down. See Massachusetts Insurers Insolvency Fund v. Continental Casualty Co., supra at 599 n.2, and cases cited. The issue then is whether Lincoln’s excess policy provides that the lower limit of its indemnity coverage will be reduced to offset the consequences of the insolvency of a primary insurer.
The Lincoln umbrella policy is not a model of precise draftsmanship. In the section defining its indemnity coverage, the policy states that it will cover “Ultimate Net Loss” (a term defined as damages for covered losses and certain related litigation expenses) in excess of “the retained limit.” The retained limit is a deductible of $10,000. No mention is made in the coverage section of the consequences of any underlying insurance. That subject comes up for the first time two sections later where the policy states that Lincoln is liable only for the “Ultimate Net Loss” in excess of the greater of (a) the retained limit if no underlying insurance is applicable to the occurrence or (b) “the total of the applicable limits of liability of the Underlying Insurance as stated in the Schedule of Underlying Insurance and the applicable limits of any other Underlying Insurance collectible by the Insured” (emphasis supplied).2
*609The plaintiff makes much of the words “applicable limits,” arguing that they must mean recoverable limits, and that, because the limits of the underlying Ambassador policy are not recoverable, the Lincoln coverage must drop down. If we consider solely the words quoted above, the word “applicable” refers to that underlying coverage, if any, listed in the schedule, that provides indemnity for damage claims arising out of an occurrence (i.e., accident). See Whitney v. American Fidelity Co., 350 Mass. 542, 543-544 (1966) (no insurance was “applicable” when policy did not provide coverage for particular loss). The policy refers to the limits of the primary insurance coverage which the insured agrees to maintain.3 This is the view expressed by the motion judge. It is supported by case authority. See Continental Marble & Granite v. Canal Ins. Co., 785 F.2d 1258, 1259 (5th Cir. 1986); Molina v. United States Fire Ins. Co., 574 F.2d 1176, 1178 (4th Cir. 1978). We agree with the conclusion that the words “applicable limits” are not ambiguous, viewing those words in isolation in the first sentence of section I of the policy. We shall return to the question whether, in the context of the entire policy, the words “applicable limits” have another meaning.
The plaintiff relies further on the provision in section III that makes the Lincoln policy excess of the limits of applicable coverage stated in the schedule of underlying insurance and “the applicable limits of any other Underlying Insurance collectible by the Insured” (emphasis supplied).4 Here the plain*610tiff’s claim is that, if “other” applicable insurance must be “collectible,” the scheduled primary insurance also must be “collectible.” The insurance company’s purpose in inserting this language concerning other insurance collectible by the insured was, no doubt, to make its coverage excess of any first dollar insurance not listed in the schedule which becomes available in the circumstances of any accident causing a covered loss. If the Lincoln policy had said “any other collectible insurance,” the argument that the underlying scheduled coverage must also be “collectible” would be stronger. Even as written, however, courts have read substantially similar language to mean that the underlying scheduled insurance as well as any other insurance must be collectible.5 Although the conclusion that in context the word “collectible” applies to the underlying scheduled insurance is debatable (see Poirrier v. Cajun Insulation, Inc., 501 So. 2d 800, 809 (La. Ct. App. 1986] [Byrnes, J., dissenting in part]), we need not decide the point. Other language in the policy creates an ambiguity as to whether the excess coverage drops down when the underlying insurance is not collectible. That ambiguity should be resolved in favor of the insured. See Cody v. Connecticut Gen. Life Ins. Co., 387 Mass. 142, 146 (1982); Slater v. United States Fidelity & Guar. Co., 379 Mass. 801, 804 (1980); MacArthur v. Massachusetts Hosp. Serv., Inc., 343 Mass. 670, 672 (1962); August A. Busch & Co. of Mass., Inc. v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 339 Mass. 239, 243 (1959).
Earlier in this opinion we indicated that the reference in a portion of the policy to the “applicable limits” of the underlying *611coverage referred to any underlying policy that was relevant in relation to the particular kind of damage claim asserted (automobile, general liability, etc.). The policy uses the word “applicable” in the same section in another sense, one that tends to equate “applicable” with “collectible.” The last sentence of section III, quoted in n.2 above, provides that, if the benefit of underlying insurance is unavailable because of the insured’s failure to comply with a postoccurrence policy condition (such as cooperation with its insurer), the underlying insurance policy “shall be deemed applicable” and the excess coverage will not drop down. If the word “applicable” had only the precise, restricted meaning we attributed to it earlier in this opinion, this sentence would be unnecessary. This sentence opens up the thought that applicability can be determined by postoccurrence events, including the uncollectibility of the primary insurance. The insured is told that, if the primary insurance is not collectible because of his fault, the excess insurance will not drop down. The insured is not told, however, that the policy will not drop down if the primary insurance is not collectible through no fault of the insured, such as the postoccurrence insolvency of the primary insurer.
The seeming uncertainty whether the policy drops down if the underlying insurance is uncollectible through no fault of the insured is augmented by paragraph nine of the Conditions. “The insurance afforded by this Policy shall be excess insurance over any other valid and collectible insurance available to the Insured whether or not described in the Schedule of Underlying Insurance . . . and applicable to any part of Ultimate Net Loss ...” (emphasis supplied). The implication is that Lincoln’s coverage is excess only of collectible insurance, including the primary insurance listed in the schedule of underlying insurance.
If to this point an eyebrow is not raised to the level which marks a discernible policy ambiguity, the language of paragraph seven of the conditions provides the necessary impetus. That section says that “[t]he company’s liability . . . shall not attach until the amount of the applicable Underlying Limit has been paid by or on behalf of the Insured ...” (emphasis *612supplied). If “applicable Underlying Limit” in this section does not mean “recoverable” or “collectible” limits, an insured would obtain no benefit from his excess coverage upon the insolvency of his primary insurer if he could not himself provide the funds necessary to pay claims equal to the primary insurer’s deficiency. If, however, “the applicable Underlying Limit” means the recoverable or collectible underlying limit, the suggested unconscionable policy interpretation is avoided.
It seems likely that Lincoln did not contemplate the insolvency of a scheduled underlying insurer in drafting its policy. The phenomenon of the insolvency of an insurer is not, however, so rare as to excuse that omission of attention to detail. The result is that Lincoln issued a policy in which it generated uncertainty as to what should happen on the insolvency of a primary insurer. On traditional analysis (see Cody v. Connecticut Gen. Life Ins. Co., 387 Mass. 142, 146 [1982]), the ambiguity must be construed against Lincoln.6 The Lincoln indemnity coverage drops down to cover the consequences of Ambassador’s involvency.7
2. The excess policy is clear that Lincoln is not required to assume the defense of the underlying tort actions. Section II provides, as the plaintiff concedes, that Lincoln need not defend suits if the occurrence is covered by an underlying policy listed in the schedule of underlying insurance. An underlying policy covered the occurrence in this case.
Paragraph 16 of the Conditions says that “if the Underlying Insurance is exhausted by any occurrence,” Lincoln must assume the defense. The Ambassador coverage was not exhausted by any occurrence, as defined in the policy (“an accident,” etc.). Cf. Massachusetts Insurance Insolvency Fund v. Continental Casualty Co., supra at 601 (insolvency can cause coverage to be reduced).
*613In light of what we have just held concerning Lincoln’s indemnity obligations, however, Lincoln may prefer to assume control of the defense of the underlying tort claims. Although Lincoln does not have to assume the defense of the underlying claims, the plaintiff’s litigation expenses as described in the policy are part of the “Ultimate Net Loss” and Lincoln will have to reimburse the plaintiff for them in the same way it must indemnify the plaintiff for indemnity losses.
3. The plaintiff did not seek summary judgment concerning its G. L. c. 93A claim. We do not have the factual background for the plaintiff’s G. L. c. 93A claim, and we cannot and should not decide it. An insurance company which in good faith denies a claim of coverage on the basis of a plausible interpretation of its insurance policy is unlikely to have committed a violation of G. L. c. 93A. See Van Dyke v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 388 Mass. 671, 675-678 (1983).
4. The judgment is vacated. A new partial summary judgment shall be entered declaring that (1) the Lincoln Insurance Company umbrella policy provides indemnity coverage with respect to all losses covered by that policy over and above sums collectible by the plaintiff pursuant to the underlying coverage, and (2) unless the parties now agree otherwise, Lincoln Insurance Company is not obliged to assume the defense of the underlying tort claims against the insured.
So ordered.
We understand that Ambassador was a nonadmitted insurance company in Massachusetts. Consequently, under G. L. c. 175D, § 1 (4) (1984 ed.), Ambassador was not an “insolvent insurer,” and the Massachusetts Insurers Insolvency Fund would not stand in for Ambassador (G. L. c. 175D, § 5  [a] [1984 ed.]), if the Lincoln coverage does not drop down.
Section III in its entirety reads as follows: “UNDERLYING LIMIT — RETAINED LIMIT: The Company shall be liable only for Ultimate Net Loss resulting from any one occurrence in excess of either (a) the total of the applicable limits of liability of the Underlying Insurance as stated in the Schedule of Underlying Insurance and applicable limits of any other Underlying Insurance collectible by the Insured, less the amount, if any, by which any aggregate limit of such insurance has been reduced by payment of loss during the period of this Policy, hereinafter called the Underlying Limit, or (b) if the insurance afforded by such Underlying Insurance is inapplicable to the occurrence, the amount stated in the Declarations as the *609Retained Limit, whichever is greater. The limits of liability of any Underlying Insurance Policy shall be deemed applicable irrespective of any defense which the underlying insurer may assert because of the insured’s failure to comply with any condition of the Policy subsequent to an occurrence.”
Paragraph 14 of the Conditions of the policy states in part: “14. Maintenance of Underlying Insurance: Each Policy described in the Schedule of Underlying Insurance shall be maintained in full effect during the currency of this Policy except for any reduction of the aggregate limits contained therein solely by payment of claims arising out of occurrences taking place during the period of this Policy. Failure of the Named Insured to comply with the foregoing shall not invalidate this Policy but in the event of such failure the Company shall be liable only to the extent that it would have been liable had the Named Insured complied therewith.”
Although words are capitalized, the policy does not define “Underlying Insurance.”
See Poirrier v. Cajun Insulation, Inc., 501 So. 2d 300 (La. Ct. App. 1986) (four-to-one decision) (under policy language stating the excess coverage to be above “an amount equal to the limits of liability indicated beside the underlying insurance listed in Schedule A hereof, plus the applicable limits of any other underlying insurance collectible by the Insured,” excess coverage drops down upon insolvency of primary insurer because all the primary insurance referred to in the clause must be collectible). Cf. Geerdes v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 128 Mich App. 730, 734 (1983) (construing similar language, where the issue was somewhat different, the court said that the only policies listed in the schedule “that are considered in the computation are those that are collectible by the insured”).
We need not apply the concept of an insured’s objectively reasonable expectations in reading this policy. See Massachusetts Insurers Insolvency Fund v. Contintental Casualty Co., supra at 600 n.4.
Lincoln’s obligation might not become first dollar coverage. If Ambassador’s involvent estate can pay something to its general creditors, any amount available from the insolvent estate will underlie the Lincoln coverage.

=== CASE 9737384 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:38.255122+00 ===

O’Connor, J.
(dissenting). To the extent relevant here, Lincoln’s obligation is set forth in Insuring Agreement III, which says: “UNDERLYING LIMIT — RETAINED LIMIT: The Company shall be liable only for Ultimate Net Loss [damages for covered losses and litigation expenses] resulting from any one occurrence in excess of either (a) the total of the applicable limits of liability of the Underlying Insurance as stated in the Schedule of Underlying Insurance and the applicable limits of any other Underlying Insurance collectible by the Insured, less the amount, if any, by which any aggregate *614limit of such insurance has been reduced by payment of loss during the period of this Policy, hereinafter called the Underlying Limit, or (b) if the insurance afforded by such Underlying Insurance is inapplicable to the occurrence, the amount stated in the Declarations as the Retained Limit, whichever is greater. The limits of liability of any Underlying Insurance Policy shall be deemed applicable irrespective of any defense which the underlying insurer may assert because of the insured’s failure to comply with any condition of the Policy subsequent to an occurrence.”
The word “applicable” in III (a), modifying the words “limits of liability of the Underlying Insurance as stated in the Schedule of Underlying Insurance,” clearly means the limits of liability stated in any underlying policy that (1) covers the occurrence in question, and (2) is listed on the schedule. The court agrees that that language, viewed “in isolation,” has the clear meaning I attribute to it. Ante at 609. Nevertheless, the court concludes that in the last sentence of HI the words “applicable limits of liability” tend to mean “collectible limits of liability,” and that, therefore, those words elsewhere in III are ambiguous and should be construed favorably to the insured as meaning “collectible limits of liability.” Ante at 609-612. In my view, however, the word “applicable” wherever it appears in Insuring Agreement HI, including the last sentence, cannot reasonably be construed to mean “collectible”.
Insurance proceeds, being money, are collectible. The word “insurance,” in a suitable context, may be construed to mean “insurance proceeds,” and therefore be collectible. But, limits of liability cannot be gathered or received as can money. Therefore, according to the usual usage of our language, limits of liability are not collectible. Courts should not conclude that policy language fairly susceptible of interpretation in the usual and ordinary sense has instead been used in an unusual and inappropriate way. Manning v. Fireman’s Fund Am. Ins. Co., 397 Mass. 38, 40 (1986). Barnstable County Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. Lally, 374 Mass. 602, 605 (1978).
Furthermore, interpreting the words applicable “limits of liability of any Underlying Insurance Policy” as referring to *615the stated limits of liability of relevant policies listed on the schedule furthers the obvious purpose of the sentence, and is consistent with the policy as a whole. That provision simply says that any listed underlying policy that would cover the insured’s loss in the absence of the insured’s material breach of his obligations shall be deemed to cover the loss regardless of defenses the underlying insurer may have on account of such breaches. The reason for such a provision is no mystery. The burden created by the insured’s failure to secure the primary carrier’s liability is not to be shifted from the insured to Lincoln.
The court says that the last sentence of Insuring Agreement III tells the insured that “if the primary insurance is not collectible because of his fault, the excess insurance will not drop down.” Ante at 611. The court then concludes that an insured could reasonably infer that if the primary insurance is not collectible through no fault of the insured, such as the primary insurer’s insolvency, the excess insurance will drop down. But, the last sentence of Insuring Agreement in only tells the insured that if the primary insurer is not liable because of the insured’s fault, the excess insurance will not drop down. That message in no way suggests that, if the primary insurance is uncollectible by reason of insolvency, the excess insurance will drop down.
Paragraph 7 of the Conditions, of which Paragraph 9 is but a logical extension, provides that “[t]he company’s liability under this Policy with respect to any occurrence shall not attach until the amount of the applicable Underlying Limit has been paid by. or on behalf of the Insured or the amount of the Retained Limit has been paid by the Insured on account of such occurrence.” The court observes, ante at 612, that, if the word “applicable” in that provision does not mean collectible, “an insured would obtain no benefit from his excess coverage upon the insolvency of his primary insurer if he could not himself provide the funds necessary to pay claims equal to the primary insurer’s deficiency.” Concluding that such a result would be “unconscionable,” the court finds comfort in avoiding it by considering the word “applicable” as ambiguous and then construing it to mean “collectible.”
*616If the policy were ambiguous, considerations of conscionability of competing possible interpretations might be relevant. But neither Condition 7 nor the policy as a whole are ambiguous. Therefore, there is no occasion for the court to consider the conscionability of Condition 7. Furthermore, a provision requiring that the amount of the underlying insurance actually be paid by or on behalf of the insured before the excess insurer’s liability will attach is not unconscionable. It simply promotes the purpose of excess coverage. If, instead of having an excess policy with a limit of $1,000,000, as here, the insured had had underlying coverage with Ambassador with a $1,000,000 limit, the insured’s collectible insurance would have been zero because of Ambassador’s insolvency. A commitment on behalf of Lincoln effectively to substitute itself for Ambassador as to the excess and to pay the excess only if Ambassador pays up to its limit, or until the insured pays that amount, is not unconscionable.
The court rightly concludes that Lincoln is not required to assume the defense of the underlying tort actions. The message from that is that Lincoln’s coverage is not first dollar coverage. If Lincoln has no obligation to defend, it also appears that it has no right to defend. The court observes that, in light of the position in which the court’s holding puts Lincoln, Lincoln “may prefer to assume control of the defense of the underlying tort claims.” Ante at 613. But what is the source of Lincoln’s right to do so? It appears that the party required to pay the tort judgments will have no right of control over the proceedings from which those judgments may result. The court’s resolution of the indemnity and defense issues presented by this case, therefore, is inconsistent. I would affirm the judgment below.

=== CASE 9737385 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:38.786067+00 ===

Markman, J.
Defendant appeals as of right his jury conviction of possession with intent to deliver less than fifty grams of cocaine, MCL 333.7401(2)(a)(iv); MSA 14.15(7401)(2)(a)(iv). The trial court sentenced defendant to six months’ imprisonment and lifetime probation. We affirm.
On January 19, 1995, defendant lived in the upstairs apartment located at 802 Staples Street in Kalamazoo with his girlfriend, Rachelle Dodson, and Nicole Potts. At approximately 9:00 P.M., members of the Kalamazoo Valley Enforcement Team, a countywide narcotics unit, executed a search warrant on this apartment. After a battering ram was used to break through the apartment door, Officer Timothy Kozal was the first police officer to enter the apartment. He testified that he saw a black male wearing a multicolored shirt with white on the shoulders run through the apartment into a back bedroom. When Officer Kozal reached the bedroom, he opened the door and saw defendant, in the multicolored shirt, diving from the window toward a mattress on which Rachelle Dodson was sitting. Officer Kozal observed that the window was open and the screen was tom, *49although it was January and cold outside. Sergeant Lawrence Belen and Officer Gary Kirtley testified that they saw crack cocaine on the window sill and two pagers on the floor in the bedroom, which defendant later stated was the bedroom that he occupied. Officer Richard Ives, who was stationed outside the apartment during the raid, heard a screen ripping, then looked up and saw a formerly intact window screen tom out and saw a piece of paper floating to the ground. When he moved to where the paper landed, he also saw several small plastic bags containing an off-white chunk substance on the ground and a small bag on the roof of a car under the window.
As the police officers took the occupants of the apartment into other rooms to question them, defendant was yelling, “don’t say nothing.” Officer Kozai did not find any dmgs in a search of defendant. His search revealed only a large roll of money in defendant’s pocket, consisting of $80 in one-dollar bills and $820 primarily in twenty-dollar bills. Defendant told Officer Kozai that the money was from gambling and his employment at a convenience store, although defendant no longer worked there at the time of the raid. There were several women and two children, in addition to the three residents, in the apartment at the time of the raid, but the only person found with drags was Nicole Potts, who had a small rock of crack cocaine in her pocket. She appeared to be intoxicated, and said that she bought her drugs on the street.
In the dining room, several officers saw a white smudge mark on the glass table that looked like it had cut marks through it. The police officers also *50found several small plastic bags full of an “off-white substance” that the officers believed to be crack cocaine on the floor beside the table. The bags appeared to have been pushed off the table. There were also some plastic bags with comers ripped off and a box of plastic sandwich bags on the ground next to the dining-room table. Numerous plastic bags, with their comers tom out and containing a white residue that Officer Todd Weston believed was cocaine, were found in the trash. Officer Kirtley testified that between thirty and fifty rocks of crack cocaine were recovered from the apartment.
Defendant was subsequently charged with two counts: (1) possession with intent to deliver less than fifty grams of cocaine, MCL 333.7401(2)(a)(iv); MSA 14.15(7401)(2)(a)(iv), and (2) maintaining a drug house, MCL 333.7405-333.7406; MSA 14.15(7405)-14.15(7406). The prosecutor also sought an enhanced drug sentence pursuant to MCL 333.7413(2); MSA 14.15(7413)(2). At trial, Officer Kozal testified, without being qualified as an expert and without objection, that buyers of crack cocaine use twenty-dollar bills to buy a rock of crack and that ten- and twenty-dollar rocks of crack cocaine are common. He described the process by which crack cocaine is prepared and the heat sealing of the comers of plastic bags used to package the crack cocaine. He stated that the smudge marks on the table were consistent with marks left from cutting crack cocaine in preparation for packaging it, and described the method by which crack cocaine is cut for distribution. Officer Weston was then tendered as an expert in “street level narcotics.” In answer to defendant’s objection to such an expert, the trial court told the prosecutor to *51proceed and that it would “deal with it on a particular question basis.” Officer Weston then testified about the significance of plastic “coin bags” and how crack cocaine is packaged in them and sold in ten- and twenty-dollar amounts. He stated that the white smear on the table was crack cocaine and that the plastic bags with comers tom out found in the trash contained cocaine residue and were used to package cocaine. Officer Weston testified without further objection.
Officer Kirtley was also qualified as an expert in “street level narcotics trafficking” and testified regarding the method by which drags are bought and sold in Kalamazoo. During this testimony, he stated that drug dealing was prevalent in the area of 802 Staples and that crack cocaine dealers were primarily males who would often develop a relationship with a woman who has an apartment or a house, then use the apartment or the house to sell drugs and threaten the woman to keep her silent. He also stated that drug dealers often have pagers, many twenty-dollar bills from selling twenty-dollar rocks of crack cocaine, use pieces of paper to tabulate their drug transactions and cut their rocks of crack cocaine into smaller amounts to sell, leaving smears on the cutting surface. After Officer Kirtley’s testimony, defendant moved for a mistrial, stating that drug profile evidence given by Officer Kirtley was being used as substantive evidence of guilt. Although the trial court denied defendant’s motion for a mistrial, it provided a cautionary instruction to the jury not to use the profile testimony as evidence of guilt or innocence. At the close of the prosecutor’s case, the trial court found that there was insufficient evidence that *52defendant was maintaining a drug house and dismissed this count. The jury found defendant guilty of possession with intent to deliver less than fifty grams of cocaine. Subsequently, defendant moved for a new trial on the issues of improperly admitted profile evidence and ineffective assistance of counsel. The trial court denied defendant’s motion.
Defendant’s first claim on appeal is that the trial court improperly allowed drug profile testimony from police officers. The admission of evidence is reviewed for abuse of discretion. People v Ullah, 216 Mich App 669, 673; 550 NW2d 568 (1996). Similarly, the determination regarding the qualification of an expert and the admissibility of expert testimony is within the trial court’s discretion. People v Beckley, 434 Mich 691, 711; 456 NW2d 391 (1990). An abuse of discretion exists when an unprejudiced person, considering the facts on which the trial court acted, would conclude that there was no justification for the ruling made. Id.
Drug profile evidence has been described as an “informal compilation of characteristics often displayed by those trafficking in drugs.” People v Hubbard, 209 Mich App 234, 239; 530 NW2d 130 (1995), quoting United States v McDonald, 933 F2d 1519, 1521 (CA 10, 1991), and United States v Campbell, 843 F2d 1089, 1091, n 3 (CA 8, 1988). “A profile is simply an investigative technique. It is nothing more than a listing of characteristics that in the opinion of law enforcement officers are typical of a person engaged in a specific illegal activity.” Hubbard, supra at 239. Drug profile evidence is essentially a compilation of otherwise innocuous characteristics that many drug dealers exhibit, such as the use of pagers, the carrying of large amounts of cash, and the possession of *53razor blades and lighters in order to package crack cocaine for sale. See id. at 238; United States v Lui, 941 F2d 844, 848 (CA 9, 1991). Such evidence “is inherently prejudicial to the defendant because the profile may suggest that innocuous events indicate criminal activity.” United States v Lim, 984 F2d 331, 334-335 (CA 9, 1993). In other words, these characteristics may not necessarily be connected to or inherently part of the drug trade, so that these characteristics could apply equally to innocent individuals as well as to drug dealers. It is for this reason that the majority of courts have held that drug profile evidence is inadmissible as substantive evidence of guilt, because “proof” of crime based wholly or mainly on these innocuous characteristics could potentially convict innocent people. Hubbard, supra at 239-240.
On the other hand, courts generally have allowed expert testimony to explain the significance of items seized and the circumstances obtaining during the investigation of criminal activity. Hubbard, supra at 239; MRE 702.1 Even more specifically, this Court has held that a prosecutor may use expert testimony from police officers to aid the jury in understanding evidence in controlled substance cases. People v Ray, 191 Mich App 706, 707; 479 NW2d 1 (1991). For such expert testimony to be admissible, “(1) the expert must be qualified; (2) the evidence must serve to give the trier of fact a better understanding of the evidence or assist in determining a fact in issue; and (3) the evidence must be from a recognized discipline.” People v Williams (After Remand), 198 Mich App *54537, 541; 499 NW2d 404 (1993). For example, in Ray, supra at 708, this Court determined that a police officer properly offered expert testimony that the quantity of crack cocaine, and the way the rocks of crack cocaine were evenly cut, clearly indicated that the defendant intended to sell the drugs. Even where a police officer expert witness’ testimony is “founded solely on observations of innocent conduct,” courts have upheld admission of the expert’s opinion that the “defendant’s activities indicated that he acted in accordance with usual criminal modus operandi.”2 United States v Espinosa, 827 F2d 604, 612 (CA 9, 1987). “For that very reason, the expert testimony may be valuable to the jury.” Id. However, when the testimony at issue is a drug profile, the expert may not move beyond an explanation of the typical characteristics of drug dealing—in an effort to provide context for the jury in assessing an alleged episode of drug dealing—and opine that the defendant is guilty merely because he fits the drug profile. Such testimony is inherently prejudicial and constitutes an inappropriate use of the profile as substantive evidence of guilt.3 See Lui, supra at 847.
Clearly, there is often a very fine line between the probative use of profile evidence as background or modus operandi evidence and its prejudicial use as substantive evidence; the admissibility of profile evi*55dence must effectively be determined case by case. In particular, a difficulty arises in cases in which profiles are admitted because the evidence of a drug profile must resemble, to some degree, the defendant’s own circumstances and characteristics in order to be relevant, MRE 401, but when the profile begins to resemble the defendant’s circumstances and characteristics too closely, the profile can appear increasingly as substantive evidence of guilt. See United States v Quigley, 890 F2d 1019, 1023 (CA 8, 1989). In other words, once the profile is found to be relevant to the case, the court will often be faced with a gray area in which it may be obvious that the criminal profile circumstances and characteristics closely resemble those of the defendant, yet also in which the use of the profile may be the only way to explain to the jury the circumstantial evidence in the case.
This gray area is made even more difficult to navigate by the fact that profile evidence is usually offered by police officers testifying as expert witnesses. In Hubbard, this Court noted the danger that such testimony may have an “ ‘aura of special reliability and trustworthiness.’ ” Hubbard, supra at 241, quoting note, The admissibility of ultimate issue expert testimony by law enforcement officers in criminal trials, 93 Colum L R 231, 246-247 (1993). Thus, “ ‘[a] danger of prejudice exists in that a jury may accept a law enforcement officer’s testimony that the defendant was engaging in criminal behavior as substantive evidence of the defendant’s guilt.’ ” Id. Ideally, perhaps, it would be best in determining the admissibility of the profile if the witness knew nothing at all about the defendant’s case; in such a situation, the jury could draw no inference of guilt from *56his testimony. However, such a witness practically would be unable to offer profile testimony because he would be unable to know which “innocuous” evidence needed to be addressed at trial. There are innumerable “innocuous” characteristics and circumstances that potentially could constitute elements of a drug profile; those addressed by an expert will obviously tend to be precisely those circumstances and characteristics that are, in fact, present in a given case. It is hard to fathom how the profile expert can truly be segregated from the actual facts of the case in which he is testifying. Nevertheless, it remains a matter of difficulty that, as the expert becomes increasingly familiar with the facts of the case, there is the growing risk that the jury will confuse the expert’s description of the profile for substantive evidence of a defendant’s guilt.
Therefore, difficult as it may sometimes be, courts must take into consideration the particular circumstances of a case and enable profile testimony that aids the jury in intelligently understanding the evidentiary backdrop of the case, and the modus operandi of drug dealers, but stop short of enabling profile testimony that purports to comment directly or substantively on a defendant’s guilt.
Some or all of the following factors may be helpful in distinguishing between the appropriate and inappropriate use of drug profile evidence and thus help to determine the admissibility of such evidence. First, the reason given and accepted for the admission of the profile testimony must only be for a proper use— to assist the jury as background or modus operandi explanation. See United States v Williams, 957 F2d 1238, 1241 (CA 5, 1992) (one factor showing the pro*57file’s admission as substantive evidence was the reasoning of the court, admitting the profile for its probative value); Hubbard, supra at 242. Attorneys and courts must clearly maintain the distinction between the profile and the substantive evidence, and the former should not argue that the profile has any value in itself; it is only an aid for the jury. Second, the profile, without more, should not normally enable a jury to infer the defendant’s guilt. The prosecutor must introduce and argue some additional evidence from the case that the jury can use to draw an inference of criminality; multiple pieces of a profile do not add up to guilt without something more. Lim, supra at 335. In other words, the pieces of the drug profile by themselves should not be used to establish the link between innocuous evidence and guilt. United States v Williams, supra at 1241. Third, because the focus is primarily on the jury’s use of the profile, courts must make clear what is and what is not an appropriate use of the profile evidence. Thus, it is usually necessary for the court to instruct the jury with regard to the proper and limited use of profile testimony. See id. (failure to instruct the jury to consider the profile testimony only as background information supports the conclusion that it was admitted as substantive evidence of guilt); United States v Gomez-Norena, 908 F2d 497, 501 (CA 9, 1990) (finding no plain error when the court twice cautioned the jury to consider the profile testimony only as background material). Fourth, the expert witness should not express his opinion, based on a profile, that the defendant is guilty, nor should he expressly compare the defendant’s characteristics to the profile in such a way that guilt is necessarily implied. Quigley, supra at 1023-*581024 (“point by point examination of profile characteristics with specific reference to [the defendant] constitutes use of the profile not as background . . . but as substantive evidence that [the defendant] fits the profile”). Although we acknowledge that the distinction between admissible and inadmissible drug profile evidence is often highly subtle, courts nevertheless must evaluate such evidence carefully in order to determine whether it is being used to explain the significance of otherwise innocuous circumstantial evidence, or rather to demonstrate that the defendant fits the profile and is therefore guilty.
This Court in Hubbard, supra at 241, followed the majority of courts and prohibited the use of drug profiles as substantive evidence of a defendant’s guilt. Specifically, this Court determined that the drug profile evidence in Hubbard was admitted as substantive evidence for three reasons. First, the prosecutor argued that the evidence was admissible to “explain some of the reasons certain activities are undertaken, to show a consistent pattern of behavior.” Id. at 242. Second, the prosecutor specifically argued to the jmy that the profile was circumstantial evidence of defendant’s guilt. Id. at 242-243. Third, the trial court failed to give the jury a cautionary instruction limiting the use of the profile evidence. Id. at 243.
In the instant case, defendant does not contest, under the three-part expert testimony admissibility test, either that the experts were qualified to testify regarding street level narcotics dealings or that narcotics-related law enforcement is a recognized area of expertise. See People v Williams, supra at 541-542. However, defendant argues that the drug profile testimony did not merely provide the jury with a better *59understanding of the evidence, but served as substantive evidence of his guilt.
Accordingly, we look to the facts of the present case to determine whether the drug profile evidence was admissible as background or modus operandi evidence or instead whether it embraced the ultimate issue of defendant’s guilt and was thus inadmissible. First, in the case before us, the prosecutor stated that the purpose of Officer Krrtley’s expert testimony was to educate the jury about buying and selling drugs in Kalamazoo County.4 And, in answer to defendant’s motion for a mistrial, the prosecutor stated that her questions regarding drug dealing were focused toward the general education of the jury. This purpose is in contrast to the prosecutor’s reasoning in Hubbard, supra at 242, in which the prosecutor stated that the profile evidence was admissible to “explain some of the reasons certain activities are undertaken to show a consistent pattern of behavior.” While the prosecutor in Hubbard wanted to use the profile testimony too directly in order to prove defendant’s guilt instead of relying on the facts of the case to prove guilt when understood in the context of the profile, the prosecutor here did not intend to prove defendant’s guilt by showing merely that he fit the profile, i.e., to use the profile as substantive evidence of defendant’s guilt. Instead, the prosecutor specifically stated that she intended to use such testi*60mony to educate the jury regarding drug transactions, which are “not within the layman’s common knowledge.” People v Williams, supra at 542. This is a permissible use of drug profile evidence.
Second, the prosecutor in this case also did not argue that the drug profile was evidence against defendant. In Hubbard, supra at 238, the prosecutor referred to the profile evidence as circumstantial evidence of the defendant’s guilt, explicitly allowing the jury to use the testimony as substantive evidence when this use was more prejudicial than probative. Here, in contrast to Hubbard, the prosecutor argued only the facts of this particular case during her closing arguments. The prosecutor did argue that the totality of the evidence found in the apartment showed that defendant possessed the crack cocaine and intended to package it and sell it, and the modus operandi testimony regarding drug dealing could have helped explain the use of some of the items found at the scene, such as a pager and large amounts of money. Such use of profile testimony is allowed, because it helps the jury to understand the implications of the evidence, but does not propose to answer the question of defendant’s guilt by itself. It appears, in our judgment, that the prosecutor here was consistent in her use of the profile testimony as general education for the jury to explain the drug trade.
Third, the trial court provided a clear limiting instruction to the jury in this case. This factor is again contrary to the court’s failure to give an instruction in Hubbard, supra at 243, which helped to persuade this Court that the drug profile there was admitted as substantive evidence. In this case, after defendant moved *61for a mistrial following Officer Kirtley’s testimony, the trial court stated:
By stipulation of counsel, I am going to give you this instruction concerning Officer Gary Kirtley’s testimony about his experience in other drug cases. You are cautioned that the testimony concerning what happened in his other drug cases is not be used to decide whether any crime was committed in this case. This testimony that he gave concerning other drug cases was received only for background informational purposes and nothing else.
This limiting instruction clearly cautions that drug testimony, including profile testimony, other than that about the facts of defendant’s case, is not to be used as substantive evidence of defendant’s guilt. Thus, the instruction supported the prosecutor’s proposed use of the profile testimony and explicitly limited the jury’s use of such evidence. Although the instruction referred to Officer Kirtley’s testimony only, we note that this was the language to which defendant stipulated. In addition, we refuse to operate on the premise that jurors cannot comprehend the difference between substantive evidence and background testimony intended to help them understand the evidence, especially where this difference is pointed out to them. Therefore, we believe that the instruction given adequately limited the use of the profile evidence as a whole.
Fourth, the experts, Officers Weston and Kirtley, did not generally attempt to directly tie the profile testimony to defendant’s actions or characteristics in a manner that implied defendant’s guilt merely because of the connection, nor did they directly opine on the basis of such characteristics that defendant was a drug dealer. See Lui, supra at 847. Officer Wes*62ton stated that drag dealers often try to flush drags down a toilet during a raid. This testimony was proper background testimony to explain his actions during the raid and the modus operandi of many drag dealers. See United States v Hernandez-Cuartas, 717 F2d 552, 555 (CA 11, 1983). Officer Kirtley testified about a general procedure for buying and selling drags and the effects of crack cocaine on the body, but he did not attempt to apply this profile directly to defendant’s case to prove his guilt. Rather, it was clearly meant to educate the jury generally. He also testified that in Kalamazoo the most prevalent means of selling drags was for a male dealer to develop a relationship with a woman, move into her house to sell drags, then threaten her if she tries to interfere. Although this scenario could apply to the facts of defendant’s case, Officer Kirtley did not directly apply the scenario to the facts of defendant’s case or state that by itself it provided evidence of guilt. Similarly, Officer Kirtley stated that drag dealers often use pagers and cellular phones and carry large sums of money, but he did not merely link this information to defendant in such a way that defendant’s guilt was implied merely from his resemblance to the profile. Instead, the profile testimony was an explanation of the evidence. Thus, it was left to the jury to decide whether certain innocuous items found at the alleged crime scene and personal characteristics of the defendant were a part of his drag dealing. In addition, the officers properly used their expert knowledge of the drag trade to set the background to explain the significance of evidence of a smear of cocaine with cut marks in it, small bags and comers of plastic bags containing crack cocaine, and plastic bags with the *63comers tom off and containing a white residue believed to be cocaine. The police officers properly explained that this is how crack cocaine is generally prepared and packaged for sale, rather than for personal use. Ray, supra. This testimony by the police was admissible as expert testimony to aid the jury and did not implicate innocuous profile evidence, because this drug evidence is by no means innocuous. See United States v Webb, 115 F3d 711, 715 (CA 9, 1997). Overall, the use of expert testimony, to offer the jurors information about the drag trade from which to analyze the information in the case, was proper and did not offer innocent characteristics themselves as evidence of guilt.
However, Officer Kirtley also testified that “there are .certain areas within the city that are more prevalent or open dealing of drugs occur. One of those happens to be the area where 802 Staples Street is.” We believe that this particular statement referring specifically to defendant’s address impermissibly linked an innocuous drug profile characteristic to defendant and stated that drug dealing did take place merely because of the location of this apartment. On the basis of his general knowledge of drag dealing, he also testified that a piece of paper with tabulations of numbers found on the dining-room table was used to keep track of drug sales. Officer Kirtley did not simply testify that the tabulations were consistent with drug dealing modus operandi, but further stated that they were used for keeping track of drug sales. This testimony also impermissibly linked a fairly innocent piece of paper to the drug trade in such a manner that defendant’s guilt was implied from the profile *64itself. In our judgment, the jury was effectively told that the profile was evidence of defendant’s guilt.
Thus, we must now determine whether the error in admitting this particular testimony was harmless. The appropriate standard for assessing a defendant’s non-constitutional allegation of error since the Supreme Court’s opinion in People v Gearns, 457 Mich 170; 577 NW2d 422 (1998), is whether the prosecutor “proved that it was highly probable that . . . the tainted evidence did not contribute to the verdictf].” Id., at 204 (Brickley, J., joined by Mallett, C.J.), 220 (Cavanagh, J., joined by Kelly, J.); People v Graves, 458 Mich 476, 482-483; 581 NW2d 229 (1998). We find that it is “highly probable” that the erroneous admission of certain portions of Officer Kirtley’s testimony did not affect the jury’s verdict. Although there is no direct evidence that defendant possessed the crack cocaine found in the apartment, which he shared with two women,5 strong circumstantial evidence in this case pointed to defendant’s guilt, such as his frantic running through the apartment, the tom screen in his bedroom from which bags of cocaine fell to the ground, the cocaine on the bedroom window sill, and the large amount of cash in his pocket. In addition, the trial court gave the jury a cautionary instruction to disregard as substantive evidence Officer Kirtley’s testimony. Therefore, we conclude that the error was harmless.
On the basis of these facts, we find that the overwhelming part of Officer Kirtley’s and Officer Weston’s expert testimony was used as admissible modus *65operandi evidence to assist in explaining the drug trade to the jury. This is a permissible use of drug profile evidence and did not prejudice defendant. To the extent that there was any erroneous admission of profile evidence in this case, it was harmless. Defendant was convicted on the facts of the case that showed that he was involved in dealing drugs, not as a result of innocuous evidence from a drug profile.6
Defendant’s other argument on appeal is that his trial attorney’s failure to object to the drug profile evidence amounted to ineffective assistance of counsel. To justify a reversal based on ineffective assistance of counsel, a defendant must show that counsel’s performance fell below an objective standard of reasonableness and so prejudiced the defendant that it deprived him of a fair trial. People v Pickens, 446 Mich 298, 303; 521 NW2d 797 (1994). Effective assistance of counsel is presumed, so a defendant “bears a heavy burden of proving otherwise.” People v Effinger, 212 Mich App 67, 69; 536 NW2d 809 (1995). A defendant must also show actual prejudice, meaning that there is a “reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s error, the result of the proceedings would have been different.” Id.
In this case, defendant must show that his attorney’s failure to object to the expert testimony regarding general information about drug dealing “deprived him of a substantial defense that would have affected the outcome of the proceeding.” People v Daniel, 207 Mich App 47, 58; 523 NW2d 830 (1994). However, *66defendant merely states, very briefly, that his attorney’s “failure to object to improper evidence which is prejudicial renders his assistance ineffective.” In our judgment, defendant’s argument is without merit. We have determined that the expert testimony in this case was largely admissible to help explain the drug industry to the jury and that any inadmissible testimony was harmless and does not require reversal. Therefore, a defense objection to such testimony, even if it would have been advisable at certain junctures, would not have affected the outcome of the trial. Consequently, defendant’s trial attorney rendered effective assistance of counsel.
Affirmed.
Young, Jr, J., concurred.
Various courts have also allowed the admission of profile evidence for other limited purposes that we need not address here. See, e.g., United States v Webb, 115 F3d 711, 715 (CA 9, 1997).
This use of the term “modus operandi” refers to “a particular common method of committing a crime.” See anno: Admissibility of eocpert testimony as to modus operandi of crime—modem cases, 31 ALR4th 798, 802-803.
Obviously, even where testimony regarding a profile is determined to be probative as background or modus operandi evidence, it must still be relevant to the case under MRE 401 and comply with the balancing test of MRE 403.
The court allowed Officer Weston’s expert testimony regarding narcotics dealing on a question-by-question basis without requiring the prosecutor to first argue the merits of such testimony, and defendant did not object to the subsequent questions. Thus, the prosecutor’s first opportunity to explain the purpose of expert testimony about street level drug trafficking was after she moved for the qualification of Officer Kirtley as an expert witness.
Nicole Potts was the only person in the apartment who actually had crack cocaine in her possession on the night in question.
Because defendant did not object to the testimony of Officer Kozal, and his testimony regarding the general drug trade in Kalamazoo was cumulative to that of Officers Kirtley and Weston, we decline to address this testimony directly. See Ray, supra at 709.

=== CASE 9737435 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:24:59.582092+00 ===

Shanahan, J.,
dissenting.
Under Nebraska’s common law, are those who participate in commercial profit from the sale of an alcoholic beverage to a minor immune from liability for injury proximately caused by the minor’s consumption of alcohol? In the majority’s opinion, absence of an articulated answer is deemed the appropriate response to the question.
According to the majority, repeal of Nebraska’s dramshop act in 1935 was an “expression of Nebraska public policy.” Conspicuous by its absence is the majority’s explanation of just how a positive expression of public policy emanates from the *612nothingness of a legislative void. Nevertheless, there are two consequences from repeal of Nebraska’s dramshop act. First, no Nebraska statute prohibits a cause of action for injury resulting from the sale of alcoholic beverage to a minor. Second, the Legislature, through repeal of the dramshop act, has withdrawn the statutory cause of action for sale of alcohol to a minor and has thereby returned the cause of action to the domain of Nebraska’s common law.
Before an examination of current common law in Nebraska, one cannot overlook Neb. Rev. Stat. § 53-180 (Reissue 1988): “No person shall sell, give away, dispose of, exchange, or deliver, or permit the sale, gift, or procuring of any alcoholic liquors, to or for any minor or to any person who is mentally incompetent.” Underlying the preceding statute is the Legislature’s recognition that minors usually are ill-equipped to handle the deleterious effects from consumption of alcohol. This is not to say that the years beyond minority necessarily supply the ability to cope with problems from alcohol. Life teaches otherwise. Nevertheless, § 53-180 expresses the Legislature’s awareness that there is potential harm and a social detriment inherent in a minor’s consumption of alcohol, although implicit in the majority’s opinion is the singular and isolated notion that there is nothing harmful in the sale of alcohol to a minor. Putting aside the public policy expressed in § 53-180, the question is whether the Pelzek-Hubbard petition states a cause of action under Nebraska’s common law, that is, judicially enunciated law distinguished from law embodied in a constitution or legislative enactment.
Since the question in this appeal arises from a sustained demurrer,
“[w]hen ruling on a demurrer, a court must assume that the pleaded facts, as distinguished from legal conclusions, are true as alleged and must give the pleading the benefit of any reasonable inference from the facts alleged, but cannot assume the existence of a fact not alleged, make factual findings to aid the pleading, or consider evidence which might be adduced at trial.”
Security Inv. Co. v. State, 231 Neb. 536, 538, 437 N.W.2d 439, 442 (1989). Accord Parrett v. Platte Valley State Bank, ante p. *613139, 459 N.W.2d 371 (1990). Consequently, this court must accept the facts alleged in the Pelzek-Hubbard petition.
In Burns v. Veterans of Foreign Wars, 231 Neb. 844, 851, 438 N.W.2d 485, 490 (1989), we stated: “For actionable negligence, there must be a defendant’s legal duty to protect or not injure the plaintiff, a failure to discharge that duty, and plaintiff’s damage proximately caused by such undischarged duty.” Accord Wilson v. F & H Constr. Co., 229 Neb. 815, 428 N.W.2d 914 (1988). “ ‘Foreseeability is a factor in establishing a defendant’s duty, or, as expressed by Justice Cardozo in MacPherson v. Buick Motor Co., 217 N.Y. 382, 394, 111 N.E. 1050, 1054 (1916): “[F]oresight of the consequences involves the creation of a duty____” ’ ” Union Pacific RR. Co. v. Kaiser Ag. Chem. Co., 229 Neb. 160, 173, 425 N.W.2d 872, 881 (1988). “To determine whether conduct constitutes negligence, the invariable standard is reasonable care, although reasonable care is directly proportional to the danger inherent in conduct and may vary depending on circumstances.” Lynn v. Metropolitan Utilities Dist., 225 Neb. 121, 126, 403 N.W.2d 335, 339 (1987). Accord Prime Inc. v. Younglove Constr. Co., 227 Neb. 423, 418 N.W.2d 539 (1988). “The proximate cause of an injury is that cause which, in a natural and continuous sequence, unaccompanied by any efficient intervening cause, produces the injury, and without which the result would not have occurred.” Jensen v. Archbishop Bergan Mercy Hosp., ante p. 1, 9, 459 N.W.2d 178, 183 (1990). Accord Zeller v. County of Howard, 227 Neb. 667, 419 N.W.2d 654 (1988). “Determination of causation is, ordinarily, a matter for the trier of fact.” Mendoza v. Omaha Meat Processors, 225 Neb. 771, 778, 408 N.W.2d 280, 285 (1987). Accord Heiliger v. Walters & Heiliger Electric, Inc., ante p. 459, 461 N.W.2d 565 (1990).
If one’s conduct, either an act or omission, constitutes an unreasonable risk of foreseeable harm to another and proximately causes injury to that other person, a negligence cause of action exists. Foreseeability, as a factor in causation, is usually a question for the fact finder and ordinarily is not a subject for judicial determination as a matter of law raised by a demurrer.
Long before the present appeals by Gwendolyn Pelzek and *614Victoria Hubbard, this court enunciated the common-law principle that an owner of a vehicle may be liable for damages resulting from the owner’s negligently lending or entrusting the vehicle to a driver known to be intoxicated. Deck v. Sherlock, 162 Neb. 86, 75 N.W.2d 99 (1956). In Deck, the court correctly concluded that the owner, by placing the vehicle’s keys in the hands of a drunk driver, may be legally responsible for the accident caused by the drunk driver’s operation of the vehicle. In the Pelzek-Hubbard case, we have a situation alleged wherein people placed alcohol in the hands of a minor who, having become intoxicated, later drove a vehicle which was involved in an accident. Thus, both Deck and the present appeal include conduct which placed an intoxicated person behind the wheel of a motor vehicle and the question whether that conduct constituted an unreasonable risk of foreseeable harm to another. In Deck, there was a cause of action; in the Pelzek-Hubbard case, according to the majority, there is no cause of action. The majority offers no legal basis and explanation for a different standard and disparate treatment between one who provides car keys to an intoxicated person who becomes a drunk driver and one who provides alcohol consumed by a minor who becomes a drunk driver.
The majority uses Gora v. 7-11 Food Stores, 109 Ill. App. 3d 109, 440 N.E.2d 279 (1982), to support the majority’s position in the Pelzek-Hubbard appeal. In Gora, the court considered the Illinois Dramshop Act, Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 43, para. 135 (1979), and whether one might maintain a cause of action based on common-law negligence notwithstanding the Dramshop Act. Although the Illinois court concluded that there was no common-law cause of action for injury caused by sale of alcohol to a minor, the basis for the Gora decision was the existence of the Illinois Dramshop Act, which preempted a common-law cause of action. Since Nebraska does not have a dramshop act, the Gora decision, being irrelevant to the question in the present appeal, is unpersuasive, to say the least. However, several courts throughout the United States have provided well-reasoned decisions, which are based on common-law principles concerning a cause of action for negligence and which support imposition of liability for *615supplying an alcoholic beverage to a minor whose consumption of the alcohol results in injury; for example, see, Haafke v. Mitchell, 347 N.W.2d 381 (Iowa 1984); Migliore v. Crown Liquors of Broward, Inc., 448 So. 2d 978 (Fla. 1984); Sorensen v. Jarvis, 119 Wis. 2d 627, 350 N.W.2d 108 (1984); McClellan v. Tottenhoff, 666 P.2d 408 (Wyo. 1983); Morris v. Farley Enterprises, Inc., 661 P.2d 167 (Alaska 1983); Walz v. City of Hudson, 327 N.W.2d 120 (S.D. 1982); Ono v. Applegate, 62 Haw. 131, 612 P.2d 533 (1980); Alegria v. Payonk, 101 Idaho 617, 619 P.2d 135 (1980); Miller v. City of Portland, 288 Or. 271, 604 P.2d 1261 (1980); Munford, Inc. v. Peterson, 368 So. 2d 213 (Miss. 1979); Trail v. Christian, 213 N.W.2d 618 (Minn. 1973); Adamian v. Three Sons, Inc., 353 Mass. 498, 233 N.E.2d 18 (1968); Elder v. Fisher, 247 Ind. 598, 217 N.E.2d 847 (1966); Smith v. Clark, 411 Pa. 142, 190 A.2d 441 (1963); Rappoport v. Nichols, 31 N.J. 188, 156 A.2d 1 (1959). Thus, in reaching today’s result, the majority is foundering in a doctrinal backwater out of the mainstream in current negligence law throughout the country. Cf. Fuller v. Standard Stations, Inc., 250 Cal. App. 2d 687, 58 Cal. Rptr. 792 (1967).
The majority still feels that “dramshop liability” is “best left to the Legislature.” As previously noted, the Legislature returned the “sale to a minor” cause of action to the common law of Nebraska, but this court deferentially leaves the cause of action to the Legislature. Consequently, the particular cause of action has become part of an Alphonse and Gaston act. Moreover, in Arant v. G.H., Inc., 229 Neb. 729, 428 N.W.2d 631 (1988), the majority displayed the same sentiment notwithstanding the serious constitutional implications involved in such deference. The specific constitutional considerations are detailed in Arant (Shanahan, J., dissenting) and, therefore, will not be reiterated at this time. Suffice it to say that, under the Nebraska Constitution, the judiciary is the constitutional custodian of the common law in Nebraska, not the Legislature. The scope of common-law tort liability is traditionally a judicial, not a legislative, function. Yet, today this court has reached a result without any clear-cut expression of common law and, hence, has reached a result without a reason outside the legislative possibility of a statutory cause of *616action. The issue is not whether the Legislature can, could, should, or even would statutorily provide a cause of action to supply a remedy for the harm caused by the conduct alleged in the Pelzek-Hubbard petition. Also, whether Gwendolyn Pelzek and Victoria Hubbard are entitled to recover is not an issue presented by their appeal. Rather, the appeal simply asks whether Nebraska’s common law authorizes a cause of action on account of the conduct alleged. Both common law and common sense demand an affirmative answer to that question. Unfortunately, failure to recognize a cause of action in the Pelzek-Hubbard case turns Nebraska’s living body of common law on negligence into a juridical corpse.
The district court’s decision should have been set aside and the Pelzek-Hubbard action allowed to continue consistent with common law.
White, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2210421 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:52.62086+00 ===

711 N.E.2d 395 (1999)
304 Ill. App.3d 970
238 Ill.Dec. 292
SWANN & WEISKOPF, LTD., Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
MEED ASSOCIATES, INC., an Illinois corporation, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 1-98-3496.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Fourth Division.
April 29, 1999.
*397 Steven G.M. Stein, Michael D. McCormick, Stein, Ray & Conway, Chicago, for Appellant.
Stephen R. Ayres, Mauck, Bellande and Cheely, Chicago, for Appellee.
Justice WOLFSON delivered the opinion of the court:
Confronted with the claim that its contribution counts were barred by the statute of limitations, Swann & Weiskopf, Ltd. (Swann) offers two reasons why its action against Meed Associates, Inc. (Meed) should survivethe discovery rule and the equitable estoppel doctrine. Neither works. We affirm the trial court's order granting summary judgment to Meed.
FACTS
In 1985, Swann agreed to provide design services for S.B. Holdings at the Libertyville Manor Extended Care Facility. Swann subcontracted Bernard Orzechowski (Orzechowski) and his company, Meed, to design a storm water removal system for the Libertyville project.
In 1998, Swann's project manager Jim Leyden (Leyden) testified at a deposition. Leyden said:
Swann had hired Meed on several occasions, and contacted Meed for civil engineering on the project because, "Meed Associates performed high-quality engineering work." Meed's work included designing the "mechanical, plumbing and storm water retention" systems.
Shortly after the project was completed in 1989, S.B. Holdings notified Swann of the project's flooding problems. Swann dispatched Leyden and Orzechowski to investigate, and Orzechowski concluded earth mounds around the project site contributed to the flooding problems. When asked if he agreed with Orzechowski's opinion, Leyden responded:
"Meed Associates knew the location of the earth mounds. It was brought to their attention as per our site plan and also on some * * * previous correspondence that we've talked about between the Village of Libertyville and Meed Associates.
[Orzechowski] was required to include the calculations for water retention from any contributory area off of those earth mounds. That much I do know."
"[O]n or about October 12 of '89," Swann learned S.B. Holdings had hired an engineering firm, Albert Halff Associates (Halff), who "* * * was questioning the design of the storm water removal system * * *." In an October 12, 1989, letter, from Halff to S.B. Holdings, which Swann representatives read that month, Halff was "critical" of Meed's design of the storm water removal system. Halff concluded the eight-inch storm water pipe shown in the plans was insufficient to handle storm water at the project site.
Orzechowski responded to Halff's October 12, 1989, letter with a December 14, 1989, letter to Swann:
"1. Storm water sewer sizes, slopes and materials meet all governing code requirements, at time of original plan and permit submittals.
*398 2. Storm water retention was in compliance with all governing codes at the time of original plan and permit submittals.
3. Flooding problem [at the project site] was as a result of the earth mound * * *. The earth mound resulted in the creation of rerouted storm water flow and possible blockage of water flow in the storm sewer system, due to soil erosion."
On April 18, 1990, S.B. Holdings filed a complaint against Swann in Lake County Circuit Court, alleging the storm water removal system was defectively designed. S.B. Holdings and Swann chose to arbitrate their case.
At a February 15, 1991, arbitration hearing, attorneys for S.B. Holdings and Swann discussed the design of the storm water removal system. According to S.B. Holdings' attorney, "The issues presented, however, in the claim are more directed towards the design of that [storm water removal] system than they are in the actual construction of that system." When asked by an arbitrator to summarize the issues in the case, S.B. Holdings' attorney repeated: "There is an issue related to the design of the storm water retention system * * *." Swann's attorney, of course, was present.
During the arbitration case, Orzechowski assisted Swann and its independent engineering expert Kathleen Rafter (Rafter). The record does not reveal when Swann retained Rafter. Orzechowski still defended the design of the storm water removal system and his earth mound theory explaining the flooding problems. But Orzechowski subsequently retreated from his earlier opinions.
In a 1998 deposition, Orzechowski testified:
Around March 12, 1994, Orzechowski spoke with Swann's attorney and mentioned he and Rafter had discovered a defect in his design of the storm water removal system.
"The inadequacy of the sewer size was something that [Rafter] and myself, I'd say, discovered at the same time.
Before that we had no reason to believe ormy assumption was that the initial flooding was as a result of this improper the state just wasn't the same. It was not as per the plans. This [earth] mound in my mind was the contributing factor until I heard differently * * *."
Before Rafter discovered his design defect, Orzechowski believed "* * * the system designed was installed as per plan and was adequate." After Rafter's conclusions, Orzechowski acknowledged "* * * certain portions of the storm water removal system were inadequately sized[.]"
In July 1994, the arbitration panel ordered Swann to pay $477,239 to S.B. Holdings to remedy the flooding problem. On February 21, 1995, Swann filed, a "Complaint for Contribution" against Meed. Meed responded with an affirmative defense based on the limitations period. Swann filed an amended complaint, adding a breach of contract count to its contribution count. Meed filed a summary judgment motion, again based on the limitations period. Swann responded, arguing the discovery rule and the estoppel doctrine saved its complaint from a limitations period defense. On August 17, 1998, the trial court granted summary judgment to Meed. This appeal followed.
DECISION
Summary judgment is appropriate if the record shows "* * * that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." 735 ILCS 5/2-1005(c) (West 1994). Summary judgment "* * * is a drastic means of disposing of litigation and should only be allowed when the right of the moving party is clear and free from doubt." Loyola Academy v. S & S Roof Maintenance, Inc., 146 Ill.2d 263, 271, 166 Ill.Dec. 882, 586 N.E.2d 1211 (1992) (citing Purtill v. Hess, 111 Ill.2d 229, 240, 95 Ill.Dec. 305, 489 N.E.2d 867 (1986)). The trial court must construe the pleadings, depositions, admissions, and affidavits strictly against the moving party and liberally in favor of the non-moving party. Loyola Academy, 146 Ill.2d at 271, 166 Ill.Dec. 882, 586 N.E.2d 1211.
We review de novo the trial court's decision to grant summary judgment. LaSalle National Bank v. Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, 262 Ill.App.3d 899, 902, 200 Ill.Dec. 225, 635 N.E.2d 564 (1994).
*399 Swann makes two contentions. First, Swann contends its complaint was filed within the limitations period because it did not discover its claim against Meed until Orzechowski acknowledged a design defect in March, 1994. Second, Swann contends even if it did not file its complaint within the limitations period, Meed is estopped from raising a limitations period defense.
1. Discovery Rule
Section 13-204(b) of the Civil Practice Law provides:
"In instances where an underlying action has been filed by claimant, no action for contribution or indemnity may be commenced more than 2 years after the party seeking contribution or indemnity has been served with process in the underlying action or more than 2 years from the time the party, or his or her privy, knew or should reasonably have known of an act or omission giving rise to the action for contribution or indemnity, whichever period expires later." 735 ILCS 5/13-204(b) (West 1994).
Section 13-214(a) of the Civil Practice Law provides:
"Actions based upon tort, contract or otherwise against any person for an act or omission of such person in the design, planning, supervision, observation or management of construction, or construction of an improvement to real property shall be commenced within 4 years from the time the person bringing an action * * * knew or should reasonably have known of such act or omission." 735 ILCS 5/13-214(a) (West 1994).
Swann's amended complaint contains two-counts: Count I"Contribution"and Count II"Breach of Contract." Section 13-204(b)'s two-year statute of limitations applies to Count I, and section 13-214(a)'s four-year statute of limitations applies to Count II. We will analyze the four-year limitations period in section 13-214(a) first, because if Swann's complaint was time-barred under the longer period, it also was time-barred under the shorter period.
Section 13-214(a) contains the "discovery rule," which tolls the statute of limitations until the plaintiff knows or reasonably should know it has been injured and that this injury was wrongfully caused. See Knox College v. Celotex Corp., 88 Ill.2d 407, 415, 58 Ill.Dec. 725, 430 N.E.2d 976 (1981); County of DuPage v. Graham, Anderson, Probst & White, Inc., 109 Ill.2d 143, 153-54, 92 Ill.Dec. 833, 485 N.E.2d 1076 (1985). At that point, the plaintiff has an obligation to conduct further inquiries to determine whether it has an actionable claim. Nolan v. Johns-Manville Asbestos, 85 Ill.2d 161, 171, 421 N.E.2d 864, 52 Ill.Dec. 1 (1981). Ordinarily, the date when the plaintiff has or should have the requisite knowledge to trigger the limitations period is a question of fact. Jackson Jordan, Inc. v. Leydig, Voit & Mayer, 158 Ill.2d 240, 250, 198 Ill.Dec. 786, 633 N.E.2d 627 (1994).
But determining when the plaintiff possesses enough knowledge may be a question of law. Henderson v. Jones Brothers Construction Corp., 234 Ill.App.3d 871, 873, 176 Ill.Dec. 709, 602 N.E.2d 16 (1992). "Summary judgment on statute of limitations grounds is appropriate in the face of a plaintiff's assertion that the discovery rule applies only where it is apparent from the undisputed facts that the plaintiff knew or reasonably should have known of the injury and its wrongful causation * * *" within the limitations period. Hochbaum v. Casiano, 292 Ill.App.3d 589, 593-94, 686 N.E.2d 626, 226 Ill.Dec. 843 (1997). In other words, summary judgment should be granted only "* * * if two conditions are met: the facts known by the plaintiff are not in dispute, and only one conclusion can be drawn from them." Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, 262 Ill.App.3d at 903, 200 Ill.Dec. 225, 635 N.E.2d 564. These two conditions are met in this case.
First, the facts known by Swann are not disputed. Swann learned of the project's flooding problems in October 1989 when S.B. Holdings contacted Swann representatives and when Swann representatives read Halff's October 12, 1989, letter to S.B. Holdings. S.B. Holdings filed a complaint against Swann on April 18, 1990, alleging the storm water removal system was defectively designed. *400 And at a February 15, 1991, arbitration hearing on S.B. Holdings' complaint, S.B. Holdings' attorney identified the issues, including the design of the storm water removal system.
These facts clearly show Swann discovered Meed's potentially actionable conduct more than once between October 1989 and February 15, 1991. S.B. Holdings' initial contact, Halff's letter, S.B. Holdings' complaint, or the arbitration hearing each constituted "* * * direct evidence or admissions of actionable conduct * * * which activated the discovery period." Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, 262 Ill.App.3d at 906, 200 Ill.Dec. 225, 635 N.E.2d 564. See Washington Courte Condominium Ass'n-Four v. Washington-Golf Corp., 267 Ill.App.3d 790, 830, 205 Ill.Dec. 248, 643 N.E.2d 199 (1994) (limitation period against subcontractor began to run when general contractors "were aware of water problems" and notified subcontractor); Board of Library Directors v. Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, 215 Ill.App.3d 69, 74-75, 158 Ill.Dec. 756, 574 N.E.2d 869 (1991) (limitations period against subcontractor began to run when general contractor learned of water problem from architect).
On the discovery rule issue, we find the case before us similar to AXIA, Inc. v. I.C. Harbour Construction Co., 150 Ill.App.3d 645, 103 Ill.Dec. 801, 501 N.E.2d 1339 (1986). In AXIA, an office building began to leak shortly after completion in 1978. Within a year of completion, the building owner notified both the architect and the general contractor of the leaks. In 1983, the building owner hired a consultant to determine the cause of the leaks, and the consultant indicated design and construction deficiencies contributed to the leaks. The building owner sent copies of the consultant's report to the architect and the general contractor. The building owner filed a complaint in 1984, and the trial court dismissed its complaint as time-barred.
On appeal, the court held the building owner "* * * possessed the requisite amount of information necessary to further inquire whether the problem was actionable * * *" when it notified the general contractor of the leaks in 1978. AXIA, 150 Ill.App.3d at 651, 103 Ill.Dec. 801, 501 N.E.2d 1339. Here, Swann possessed enough information "to inquire further" about Meed's allegedly defective design as early as October 1989, when Swann sent Leyden and Orzechowski to investigate the flooding problems.
Second, the facts show Swann failed to file its complaint within four years from the date it discovered Meed may have wrongfully caused its injury. Swann filed its first complaint against Meed on February 21, 1995, more than four years after the latest conceivable discovery date: the arbitration hearing summarizing the issues to include Meed's design of the storm water removal system.
We bear in mind this is a case where Swann sought from Meed only the amount of money it had been ordered to pay S.B. Holdings at the arbitration hearing. The claim of S.B. Holdings was based entirely on Orzechowski's defective design. If the design were not defective, Swann would not owe any money to S.B. Holdings. Under these circumstances, Swann had ample notice in 1989, 1990, and early 1991 of the desirability of filing its claim against Meed. Swann simply chose to ignore that notice.
Once Meed introduced sufficient evidence which, if uncontradicted, would entitle it to judgment as a matter of law, Swann then had to allege or present some facts that would create a fact issue concerning the date of discovery. See Freeport Memorial Hospital v. Lankton, Ziegele, Terry & Associates, Inc., 170 Ill.App.3d 531, 537-38, 121 Ill.Dec. 388, 525 N.E.2d 194 (1988). While there is no need for Swann to prove its case at the summary judgment stage, given Meed's allegations and evidence, Swann was "* * * required to present some factual basis that would arguably entitle [it] to a judgment in [its] favor." Flint v. Court Appointed Special Advocates of DuPage County, Inc., 285 Ill.App.3d 152, 162, 221 Ill.Dec. 38, 674 N.E.2d 831 (1996). Swann did not do that, and the discovery rule cannot save its complaint from the limitations period. Swann's complaint is time-barred.
2. Equitable Estoppel Doctrine
However, Swann contends the doctrine of equitable estoppel saves its complaint, even if the discovery rule cannot.
*401 Equitable estoppel, in this context, prevents the defendant from employing a limitations period defense when the plaintiff reasonably relied on the defendant's words or conduct in delaying its complaint and the plaintiff suffered injury as a result of its reliance on the defendant's words or conduct. Senior Housing, Inc. v. Nakawatase, Rutkowski, Wyns & Yi, Inc., 192 Ill.App.3d 766, 771, 139 Ill.Dec. 878, 549 N.E.2d 604 (1989). "Although there is ordinarily no duty to apprise an adversary of his rights, one cannot justly or equitably lull his adversary into a false sense of security, causing him to subject his claim to the bar of the statute, and then plead the very delay caused by his course of conduct." Beynon Building Corp. v. National Guardian Life Insurance Co., 118 Ill. App.3d 754, 763, 74 Ill.Dec. 216, 455 N.E.2d 246 (1983).
The defendant's words or conduct need not be intentionally fraudulent, misleading, or deceptive. York v. Village of Wilmette, 148 Ill.App.3d 108, 116-17, 101 Ill.Dec. 388, 498 N.E.2d 712 (1986). Instead, this court must rely on less legal, more equitable concepts of "conscience and duty of honest dealing" in determining if the defendant's words or conduct should deny it the right to assert a limitations period defense. York, 148 Ill.App.3d at 117, 101 Ill.Dec. 388, 498 N.E.2d 712.
"* * * [T]he essential question presented is whether [the] plaintiff demonstrated that the words or actions of the defendant[] induced [the] plaintiff to reasonably rely to its detriment by failing to timely file this lawsuit." AXIA, 150 Ill.App.3d at 653, 103 Ill.Dec. 801, 501 N.E.2d 1339. In other words, we must decide whether we can say as a matter of law that Swann's purported reliance on Orzechowski's earth mound theoryin the face of S.B. Holdings' initial contact, Halff's letter, S.B. Holdings' complaint, and the arbitrationwas unreasonable.
"The party asserting the estoppel must have relied on the act or representation and because of that reliance refrained from commencing an action within the limitations period." (Emphasis added.) York, 148 Ill.App.3d at 117, 101 Ill.Dec. 388, 498 N.E.2d 712.
Here the record contains no evidence Swann withheld its complaint purely out of reliance on Orzechowski's earth mound theory. Although Orzechowski denied responsibility, asserting his earth mound theory to explain the flooding problems, Leyden testified Swann held Meed responsible for flooding problems based on the earth mounds: "[Orzechowski] was required to include the calculations for water retention from any contributory area off of those earth mounds."
The record does not indicate the date Swann hired Rafter, but Swann's reliance on Orzechowski decreased when it consulted an independent engineering expert. And when Orzechowski finally conceded his design was defective in March 1994, Swann did not file its complaint for almost a year. See Schiller v. Kucaba, 55 Ill.App.2d 9, 20, 203 N.E.2d 710 (1964) (equity aids the diligent, not the indolent). That is not being lulled into a false sense of security, it is ignoring one's own rights beyond the point of somnolence. See Butler v. Mayer, Brown & Platt, 301 Ill.App.3d 919, 925-26, 704 N.E.2d 740, 235 Ill.Dec. 167 (1998).
Swann has failed to present any evidence of its reliance on Orzechowski's earth mound theory and protestations of innocence. Only one inference can be drawnthere is no equitable estoppel in this case. Swann's complaint against Meed was time-barred.
CONCLUSION
Neither the discovery rule nor the estoppel doctrine saves Swann's complaint from section 13-214(a)'s limitations period. Swann's complaint was time-barred, and summary judgement was appropriate.
Affirmed.
SOUTH, P.J., and HOFFMAN, J., concur.

=== CASE 9737436 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:02.352727+00 ===

OPINION
RANDALL, Judge.
Appellant Robert Alan Lehikoinen was charged by complaint in Carlton County with fifth degree assault in violation of Minn.Stat. § 609.224, subd. 1(2) (1988) (intentional infliction of bodily harm). After a trial to the court sitting without a jury, appellant, representing himself (pro se), was found guilty as charged. Appellant was sentenced to sixty days in jail, stayed for one year probation with conditions that he either pay a fine of $500 or perform 100 hours of community service and complete a domestic abuse program. Lehikoinen appeals, challenging the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain his conviction. We reverse.
FACTS
Appellant’s conviction arose out of an alleged incident of domestic violence. At the time of the incident, appellant was living with Mary Sue Whitebird, the victim. Whitebird was the only witness to testify at trial. Whitebird’s sworn testimony varied greatly from the written reports of the two investigating deputies from the Carlton County sheriff’s department. Their reports were not introduced as evidence but did form the basis for the initial arrest.
According to the reports of Officers E. Clemons and E. Jensen, on October 21, 1989, at approximately 4:20 a.m., the Carlton County sheriff’s department received a call from the Cloquet Memorial Hospital regarding a possible incident of domestic abuse. At the hospital, Whitebird told the officers that she and appellant had gone out for the evening. Upon arriving home later that evening, appellant went to bed. A short time later their four-month old infant started crying. Whitebird laid the *771infant on the bed and was going to change its diaper when appellant woke up. He was angry and began yelling at Whitebird. Appellant grabbed a glass baby bottle and began hitting Whitebird around the legs and then hit her on the head. Whitebird, while holding the baby, was knocked to the floor. Appellant continued to hit her in the face with the baby bottle.
Whitebird suffered a large bump in the center of her forehead, a cut above her right eye which required seven stitches, and a cut on her nose which required one stitch. Also, her left leg was cut and her right kneecap was bruised. While at the hospital, Whitebird was given a victim’s packet and informed that she could file for a protection order on the following Monday.
The most distinctive feature about this record is that neither deputy was called to testify at the trial, investigative reports were neither offered nor stipulated to, and no one from the hospital or any place else was called to shed light on the nature and source of Whitebird’s injuries. The only evidence submitted to the trial court was Whitebird’s testimony, and she adamantly denied at trial that appellant had assaulted her. Whitebird described the incident as an act of self-defense by appellant.
Whitebird’s testimony may be set out as follows. After an evening out, she and appellant arrived at their residence at approximately two o’clock a.m. Because of a discussion they had about the baby, White-bird was very angry with appellant. While the infant was crying, Whitebird and appellant began quarreling over who was going to feed the baby. Whitebird became angry and gestured as though she were going to hit appellant with the baby bottle. White-bird raised the bottle and appellant “smacked” her arm to get it out of the way. The bottle broke and that is when Whitebird was injured. Whitebird took the infant and her son and went to her sister’s, and her sister gave her a ride to the hospital.
Even after being reminded by the trial court that she was under oath, Whitebird denied appellant struck her with the bottle. She did admit she had told the officers, that night at the hospital, that appellant hit her with the bottle. However, Whitebird went on to say she “may have said some things that weren’t true because [she] was mad.”
When questioned by the prosecutor, Whi-tebird repeatedly denied that appellant hit her with the baby bottle:
Q. Okay, Did — did—as you were getting the baby ready, did [appellant] strike you?
A. No. He did not.
⅝ ⅝ * ⅜! # Sit
Q. Did [appellant] strike you at some point?
A. No. Not — not physically.
⅜ * * * *
Q. Did [appellant] strike you with a bottle?
A. No.
Near the close of testimony, the following exchange took place between the trial court and Whitebird:
Q. Ms. Whitebird, how many times did [appellant] hit you with the bottle?
A. He didn’t hit me with the bottle. I know that’s the way it looks on the report. It looks like he took the bottle and started beating me up with it, and that— and that's not the way it happened.
Q. My question was—
A. He didn’t hit me with the bottle.
Q. At all?
A. No. He didn’t have the bottle in his hands. I did.
Q. But you told the deputy he hit you with the bottle.
A. (Indicating.)
Q. Is that yes? Did you?
A. I believe I might have told him that.
When questioned about injury to her leg and knee, Whitebird said the driveway was icy and she fell down many times on the way down the road. Whitebird admitted she took steps to obtain a restraining order but said she was pushed by people in her family to do so because they were upset about her stitches.
*772On this record, the trial court held the state had met its burden of proof and found appellant guilty of fifth degree assault.
ISSUE
Does Whitebird’s testimony constitute sufficient evidence to sustain appellant’s conviction for fifth degree assault in violation of Minn.Stat. § 609.224, subd. 1(2) (in- • tentional infliction of bodily harm)?
ANALYSIS
When the sufficiency of the evidence is raised on appeal, this court’s standard of review is the same for bench trials as it is for jury trials. State v. Cox, 278 N.W.2d 62, 65 (Minn.1979). The court’s review is “limited to a painstaking analysis of the record to determine whether the evidence, when viewed in a light most favorable to the conviction, was sufficient to permit the [trier of fact] to reach the verdict which [it] did.” State v. Webb, 440 N.W.2d 426, 430 (Minn.1989). In making this determination, the reviewing court must “assume the [trier of fact] believed the state’s witnesses and disbelieved any contrary evidence.” State v. Bias, 419 N.W.2d 480, 484 (Minn.1988). A conviction based on circumstantial evidence merits even stricter scrutiny. Id. That is,
[t]he evidence is entitled to the same weight as any evidence so long as the circumstances proved are consistent with the hypothesis that the accused is guilty and inconsistent with any rational hypothesis except that of guilt. * * * The conviction may stand only where the circumstances form “a complete chain which, in light of the evidence as a whole, leads so directly to the guilt of the accused as to exclude, beyond a reasonable doubt, any reasonable inference other than that of guilt.”
Our review of the evidence is limited to a review of the testimony of Ms. White-bird. No other evidence was submitted to the trial court. The deputies’ reports were not used at trial and do not constitute evidence. Neither of the reporting deputies testified nor did anyone from the hospital.
There is no evidence, direct or circumstantial, that supports appellant’s conviction. The only evidence before the trial court was the testimony of Whitebird. She denied that appellant struck her with the baby bottle.
Whitebird did admit at trial that on the night of the alleged incident she told the officers appellant had hit her with the baby bottle. However, under oath she impeached the value of this out-of-court statement. Arguably, this might be “some evidence” of guilt. However, it cannot come close to meeting the high standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt which is needed to sustain a conviction, even when construing the facts and inferences in a light favorable to the verdict. Regardless of what might have happened that night between Whitebird and appellant, this case simply represents a failure of proof.
DECISION
The evidence is not sufficient, as a matter of law, to sustain appellant’s conviction, and appellant’s conviction is reversed.
Reversed.

=== CASE 9737449 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:25:28.985914+00 ===

LEVINE, Justice.
Byron’s Construction Co. (Byron’s) appeals from a district court judgment dismissing its claims against the North Dakota Department of Transportation (the De*661partment) in its October 6, 1988, demand for arbitration. We affirm.
Byron’s and the Department entered into a highway construction contract in 1985. On February 11, 1988, Byron’s submitted a five-claim demand for arbitration requesting additional compensation. Claims 1 through 4 dealt with delay, disruption, additional work, soil types, borrow quantities, and tolerance requirements for gravel spread on the roadbed. Claim 5 dealt with the Department’s imposition of sanctions for violation of a contract provision relating to participation by minority business enterprises.
After a hearing on April 25-26, 1988, the arbitrators dismissed all five claims. The arbitrators determined that for Claims 1 through 4, Byron’s failed to provide timely notice under § 24-02-26.1, N.D.C.C., of its intention to claim additional compensation. The arbitrators dismissed Claim 5 for lack of jurisdiction. The district court affirmed the arbitrators’ dismissal of all of Byron’s claims. On appeal, we concluded that the arbitrators erred in dismissing Claim 5 for lack of jurisdiction and affirmed the dismissal of Claims 1 through 4 except for a subissue under Claim 2 relating to “force account” work which was not subject to the notice requirement of § 24-02-26.1, N.D. C.C. Byron’s Constr. Co. v. North Dakota State Highway Dep’t, 448 N.W.2d 630 (N.D.1989).
On October 6, 1988, Byron’s again demanded arbitration, seeking compensation for claims relating to “Borrow Quantities” and “Gravel Laydown Due to Altered Specification.” An arbitration hearing was held on May 31, 1989. That hearing was limited to “deciding the issue of whether or not the claim presented in this matter is the same claim that previously was adjudicated in the earlier arbitration proceeding.” In its decision of June 14, 1989, the second arbitration panel determined:
“2.
“The final estimate for final quantities of materials involved in this construction project were received by the claimant’s attorney on or before April 4, 1988, ... and therefore these quantities were available to the claimant for submission in the first arbitration proceedings involving this project.
“3.
“The alleged claim of an altered specification by the claimant was based upon the testimony of Paul Regan at the first arbitration proceedings. Review of that testimony and the evidence presented at the hearing on May 31, 1989, shows conclusively that this issue was considered in the first arbitration proceedings.
“4.
“The claimant had the opportunity pri- or to the first arbitration proceedings to request a continuance for the purpose of further study and review of the final estimates of quantities involved in this project and the claimant chose not to ask for such continuance and instead chose to proceed with the scheduled arbitration hearing on April 26, 1988.
“5.
“The claimant at or prior to the previous arbitration proceedings could have amended their claim to include additional matters brought to their attention shortly before or at the first arbitration hearing and there was no evidence to show that any such amendment was requested by the claimant.”
The arbitrators concluded that “[a]ll of the issues presented by the claimant in the second demand for arbitration were previously litigated and determined in the first arbitration proceedings” and ordered that “the second arbitration demand and claim is in all things dismissed.”
The Department filed a motion in district court for entry of a judgment implementing the decision of the arbitrators. Byron’s filed a motion for an order vacating the arbitrators’ decision and ordering a rehearing. The district court denied Byron’s motion and granted the Department’s motion. A judgment dismissing Byron’s claims in its October 6, 1988, demand for arbitration *662was entered and Byron’s appealed, raising one issue:
“Was the arbitrator’s determination that the doctrine of ‘res judicata’ precluded appellant’s right to arbitrate completely irrational?”
An arbitration decision will be vacated only if it is completely irrational. Byron’s Constr. Co. v. North Dakota State Highway Dep't, supra; Scherbenske Excavating, Inc. v. North Dakota State Highway Dep’t., 365 N.W.2d 485 (N.D.1985). Although there is no precise definition of a clearly irrational decision, Scherbenske Excavating, Inc. v. North Dakota State Highway Dep’t, supra, generally, a decision is completely irrational if it is either mistaken on its face or so mistaken as to result in real injustice or constructive fraud. Nelson Paving Co., Inc. v. Hjelle, 207 N.W.2d 225 (N.D.1973). The doctrine of res judicata applies to arbitration proceedings as well as judicial proceedings. Wellons, Inc. v. T.E. Ibberson Co., 869 F.2d 1166, 1168 (8th Cir.1989); B.O.W. Cleaning Corp. v. Doe, 84 A.D.2d 527, 443 N.Y.S.2d 614 (App.Div.1981); Restatement (2d) of Judgments § 84 (1982); 6 C.J.S. Arbitration § 128 (1975). The doctrine of res judicata may be used “to protect successful parties from unnecessary, duplica-tive proceedings which cause drains on the resources of both the parties and the judiciary.” Berdahl v. North Dakota State Personnel Board, 447 N.W.2d 300, 307 (N.D.1989).
Byron’s argues that the doctrine of res judicata does not bar its claims because its claims in the first arbitration proceeding were not decided on the merits:
“Res judicata is ‘... a thing or matter that has been definitely or finally settled and determined on its merits by a court of competent jurisdiction.’ (emphasis added) Robertson Lumber Company v. Progressive Contractors, Inc., 160 NW2d 61, 76 (N.D.1968). Nothing in the first arbitration hearing was determined on its merits since the entire demand was dismissed summarily on ‘notice’ and ‘jurisdictional’ issues.”
The reach of res judicata is not necessarily limited to matters that have actually been decided “on the merits.” See, e.g., Comment a to Restatement (2d) of Judgments § 19:
“a. Rationale. It is frequently said that a valid and final personal judgment for the defendant will bar another action on the same claim only if the judgment is rendered ‘on the merits.’ The prototype case continues to be one in which the merits of the claim are in fact adjudicated against the plaintiff after trial of the substantive issues. Increasingly, however, by statute, rule, or court decision, judgments not passing directly on the substance of the claim have come to operate as a bar....
“The rule that a defendant’s judgment acts as a bar to a second action on the same claim is based largely on the ground that fairness to the defendant, and sound judicial administration, require that at some point litigation over the particular controversy come to an end. These considerations may impose such a requirement even though the substantive issues have not been tried, especially if the plaintiff has failed to avail himself of opportunities to pursue his remedies in the first proceeding, or has deliberately flouted orders of the court.”
Comment a to Restatement (2d) of Judgments § 24 states: “The law of res judica-ta now reflects the expectation that parties who are given the capacity to present their ‘entire controversies’ shall in fact do so.”
This court has applied res judicata to cases in which substantive issues have not been directly decided. In Peacock v. Sundre Township, 372 N.W.2d 877, 878 (N.D.1985), we defined res judicata as meaning:
“that a valid, existing final judgment from a court of competent jurisdiction is conclusive, with regard to the issues raised, or those that could have been raised, and determined therein, as to the parties and their privies in all other actions.” (Emphasis added.)
As we observed in Wolf v. Anderson, 422 N.W.2d 400, 401 (N.D.1988) [quoting Per-*663due v. Knudson, 179 N.W.2d 416, 421 (N.D.1970) ]:
“Courts will not permit a litigant to try a part of his case and then, if he is disappointed with the outcome of the action, to have another day in court simply by alleging new claims or making a new demand for relief, when he could have made such demand in the prior action.”
We conclude that disposition of Byron’s claims in the first arbitration proceeding on notice and jurisdictional grounds rather than through resolution of the substantive issues “on the merits” does not preclude application of the doctrine of res judicata to bar Byron’s claims in the second arbitration proceeding.
One of the claims involved in both arbitration proceedings related to a dispute over borrow quantities. The arbitrators in the second arbitration determined that the claim had been previously determined in the first arbitration proceeding. Byron’s argues that “the issue of the final quantities could not have been incorporated into the first arbitration hearing Submission To Arbitration, since they were not even issued at the time Submission was entered.” However, Byron’s received “final quantities” estimates from the Department in a letter dated April 4, 1988, prior to the first arbitration hearing, but chose not to dispute the quantities figures. Byron’s submitted its claim in the first arbitration proceeding on a “total cost theory.” 1 On redirect examination by Byron’s attorney, Louis Byron testified:
“Q. Was there an adequate amount of time to really evaluate that to see just exactly how far off the quantities were?
“A. No. We were unconcerned about it at that time for the simple reason we had submitted everything under a total cost basis.”
On recross-examination by the Department’s attorney, Louis Byron testified:
“Q. Because you were making your first arbitration on the total cost theory, it didn’t really matter what the quantity — what the difference in quantity was, did it?
“A. That’s right.”
Thus, it is clear that the issue of borrow quantities is one that could have been raised at the first arbitration hearing. Byron’s chose not to raise the issue because Byron’s was “unconcerned about it,” having “submitted everything - under a total ■cost basis.” Byron’s was, therefore, barred from raising the issue in the second arbitration proceeding by the doctrine of res judicata enunciated in Peacock v. Sundre Township, supra. The arbitrators’ decision in this case was not co.mpletely irrational.
The other claim involved in both arbitration proceedings related to a dispute about tolerance requirements for gravel spread on a section of roadbed. Byron’s had to re-blade the gravel it laid on a section of roadbed and sought compensation for the extra work. In the first arbitration proceeding, one of the items in Claim 4 was: “The State required a tolerance on gravel base that was unreasonable and not required.” At the first arbitration hearing, one of the witnesses testified that the Department had altered a specification. Because of that testimony, Byron’s demanded the second arbitration hearing and submitted a claim for: “Gravel Laydown Due to Altered Specification.” Joe Metz-ger, a civil engineer appearing on behalf of Byron’s, testified on cross-examination:
“Q. Was the problem that the State was enforcing a requirement that you thought wasn’t required by the specification?
“A. Yes; but we really didn’t known what they were enforcing, ...”
⅜ ⅜ * s£ * ⅜
“Q. The bottom line is that there was a dispute over blading the gravel and accepting the gravel; right?
“A. Yes.
“Q. And the bottom line is that in the first arbitration proceeding the contractor, Byron’s Construction, went to the *664arbitrators and said, we’re having a terrible time with this gravel laydown, we’ve incurred some extra costs and we want to be compensated for those costs?
“A. That gravel was in part of the total cost. It was not specifically spelled out as a cost, no.
“Q. But it was a part of the total cost?
“A. It was included, but it was not spelled out as such.”
Francis Ziegler, a Department construction engineer, testified:
“Q. The total cost that Byron’s Construction was asking in the first arbitration proceeding, would that have included all costs that were related to this so-called unreasonable tolerance?
“A. Yes, it would.”
Ziegler also testified that “[tjhere’s no difference” between the claim for “gravel lay-down due to altered specification” in the second arbitration and Byron’s claim for additional compensation because the Department “required a tolerance on the gravel base that was unreasonable and not required,” which was denied by the arbitrators in the first arbitration proceeding. Roger Kluck, a Department claims engineer, testified that “the gravel laydown issues presented to the first arbitration panel [were] the same as the gravel lay-down issues presented to this arbitration panel.”
In light of the foregoing testimony, the arbitrators’ conclusion that this issue was “previously litigated and determined in the first arbitration proceedings in connection herewith” and their consequent dismissal of the second arbitration demand and claim are not completely irrational.
The record does not show that at the first arbitration hearing Byron’s sought additional time or a further hearing to more fully address the matters of borrow quantities or the tolerance requirement for gravel laydown (altered specification). “If either party requests, the arbitrator may provide additional time or schedule an additional hearing to allow for additional testimony or evidence.” T. Oehmke, Construction Arbitration, § 8:7 (1988). Grounds for adjournment or continuance requests include unanticipated amendments of claims or answers and material changes in issues. T. Oehmke, supra, at § 8:11. “[A] party to arbitration should not be allowed to obtain a second hearing by silently collecting its objections for the contingency of a loss in the first one.” Scherbenske Excavating, Inc. v. North Dakota State Highway Dep’t, supra, 365 N.W.2d at 490.
Affirmed.
ERICKSTAD, C.J., and VANDE WALLE, GIERKE and MESCHKE, JJ., concur.
. Louis Byron testified: “It’s necessary to use a total cost theory when you can't obtain all your information and get all your quantities that you feel that you’re entitled to.”

=== CASE 2211809 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:12.054843+00 ===

614 N.W.2d 687 (2000)
241 Mich. App. 155
James M. CLINE, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
The AUTO Body SHOP, INC. and Phillip E. Tripp, Jr., Defendants-Appellees, and
Barbara Tripp, Defendant.
Docket No. 213165.
Court of Appeals of Michigan.
Submitted September 14, 1999, at Lansing.
Decided May 16, 2000, at 9:00 a.m.
Released for Publication August 9, 2000.
*688 Robison & Sims, P.C. (by John M. Sims), Albion, for the plaintiff.
Marcoux, Allen, Abbott, Schomer & Bower, P.C. (by Robert T. Kendall, III), Jackson, for the defendants.
Before TALBOT, P.J., and FITZGERALD and MARKEY, JJ.
FITZGERALD, J.
Plaintiff appeals as of right the order granting defendants' motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(8) in this religious discrimination case. We reverse and remand.[1]
Plaintiff alleged that he was employed by defendant, The Auto Shop, Inc., from August 1994 until his constructive discharge in April 1996. Defendant-Appellee Phillip E. Tripp, Jr. (Tripp), is the owner of the business. Defendant Barbara Tripp is Tripp's wife. Plaintiff, who was agnostic, alleged that Tripp's treatment of plaintiff and the terms of his employment, such as compensation, job assignments, and the ability for advancement, were dependent on plaintiff's attendance at Tripp's church. Tripp is a "born-again Christian" and attends Cherish Christian Church. Specifically, plaintiff testified in his deposition that he was told that his compensation would be increased if he attended church, and that he in fact received pay raises after attending church. He also testified that if he did not attend church he was given more difficult assignments and was given less time to complete assignments than those employees who attended Tripp's church. Plaintiff indicated that his supervisor told him that he would have a better chance for advancement if he attended church with Tripp. Barbara Tripp told plaintiff that he should go to church, to pray to the Lord, and to accept the Lord in plaintiff's soul. Plaintiff testified that he could not work with the pressures of having to go to church and terminated his employment. He subsequently filed suit against defendants, alleging religious discrimination under the Civil Rights Act (CRA), M.C.L. § 37.2101 et seq.; MSA 3.548(101) et seq., on the ground that he was discriminated against because he does not share Tripp's religious beliefs.
Defendants moved for summary disposition on the ground that "attempts to proselytize plaintiff" did not interfere with plaintiff's religious practices. The trial court granted summary disposition in favor of defendants on a different ground, finding that the CRA does not provide protection for an atheist or agnostic who does not have a bona fide religious belief.
Subsection 202(1) of the CRA, M.C.L. § 37.2202(1); MSA 3.548(202)(1) provides that an employer shall not:
(a) Fail or refuse to hire or recruit, discharge, or otherwise discriminate against an individual with respect to employment, compensation, or a term, condition, *689 or privilege of employment because of religion.....
(b) Limit, segregate, or classify an employee ... for employment in a way that deprives or tends to deprive the employee ... of an employment opportunity, or otherwise adversely affects the status of an employee ... because of religion....
The goal of statutory construction is to ascertain and give effect to the intent of the Legislature. Frankenmuth Mut. Ins. Co. v. Marlette Homes, Inc., 456 Mich. 511, 515, 573 N.W.2d 611 (1998). If the language of the statute is unambiguous, the Legislature must have intended the meaning clearly expressed, and the statute must be enforced as written. No further judicial construction is required or permitted. People v. Morris, 450 Mich. 316, 325, 537 N.W.2d 842 (1995).
Here, the plain text of the statute provides no basis to limit the protections of § 202 to those individuals who allege a bona fide religious belief. On the contrary, the statute refers to "religion" without limiting its reach to the religious beliefs of the employee. If an employer disfavors an employee because the employee is not in religious conformity with the employer, the employer has plainly disfavored that employee "because of religion."
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court erred in concluding that an employee who does not allege a religious belief has failed to state a prima facie case of religious discrimination as a matter of law. Because the trial court did not address the merits of defendants' motion for summary disposition, we remand to the trial court for consideration of defendants' motion.
Reversed and remanded. Jurisdiction is not retained.
NOTES
[1]  This case was held in abeyance pending the resolution of the conflicting opinion in Zanni v. Medaphis Physician Services Corp., 240 Mich.App. 472, 612 N.W.2d 845 (2000).

=== CASE 2211817 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:12.139582+00 ===

413 N.E.2d 672 (1980)
OFFICE OF the PUBLIC COUNSELOR, Appellant,
v.
INDIANAPOLIS POWER and Light Company, Appellee.
No. 2-779A200.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Fourth District.
December 22, 1980.
*673 John J. Metts, Deputy Public Counselor, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Christopher J. Weber, Jon D. Noland, Barnes, Hickam, Pantzer & Boyd, Indianapolis, for appellee.
MILLER, Judge.
Appellant, the Office of the Public Counselor (Public Counselor), appeals the order of the Public Service Commission (the Commission) approving the petitioner-appellee's, Indianapolis Power & Light Company (IPALCO), application for an increase in its fuel cost charge for electrical service. Specifically, the Public Counselor attacks the Commission's finding number 4 as supported by insufficient evidence and as being contrary to law. This finding stated that:
"The actual increases in Applicant's fuel costs since the Commission's Order of August 30, 1978, in Cause No. 35132 approving Applicant's present basic rates and charges through April 30, 1979, have not been offset by actual decreases in other operating expenses, and the foregoing fuel cost charge of $.002621 per kilowatt-hour will not result in Applicant earning a return in excess of the return authorized by the Commission in that Order."
We affirm in part and reverse in part for the reasons stated below.
FACTS AND ISSUES
On May 16, 1979, IPALCO filed with the Commission its application for an increase in its fuel cost charge for electrical service. The required notices were published by the Commission and IPALCO. Also, the required reports were filed with the Public Counselor, the Commission's engineering department and IPALCO. The Commission held a public hearing on IPALCO's application on June 13, 1979. The testimony and exhibits offered at this hearing, which are pertinent to this appeal can be summarized as follows:
IPALCO's last basic rate increase was approved by the Commission through its order dated August 30, 1978. The Commission approved a rate of return equal to 7.25% on a fair value rate base of $993,366,000. The resulting utility income equalled $72,019,000. In arriving at this rate base, the Commission included the Petersburg Unit 3 and the Hanna to Petersburg transmission line neither of which were in service at that time. Significantly, they were valued at their gross original cost.
Returning to the present application, IPALCO sought an increase in the fuel cost charge for electrical service from approximately July 18, 1979 to October 18, 1979. In seeking this increase IPALCO estimated its average fuel cost for July, August and September, 1979, as required by IND. CODE 8-1-2-42(b).[1] Pursuant to IND. CODE 8-1-2-42(d)(4) *674 these estimates were premised upon IPALCO's actual and estimated fuel costs for February, March and April, 1979.[2]
At the time IPALCO filed this application, April, 1979 was the most recent month for which it knew its actual fuel costs. As a result, IPALCO's pre-filed evidence showed its actual operating revenue, expenses and utility operating income for the twelve month period ending April 30, 1979. The operating revenue was calculated for the first four months at the previous, lower basic rate and the last eight months at the then-current higher basic rate. In calculating its fair value rate base, IPALCO utilized the same procedure as employed by the Commission in analyzing IPALCO's basic rate increase application the previous August. The Commission had valued the Petersburg Unit 3 and the Hanna to Petersburg transmission line at their gross original cost. This increased its fair value rate base to $1,000,243,000 and decreased its rate of return to 6.36%. The Commission's staff accounting report noted that both calculations were "true and accurate." Nevertheless, this report observed that instead of valuing the Petersburg Unit 3 and the Hanna to Petersburg transmission line at the gross original cost, they could have been valued at the net accumulated depreciation value since they had been in service for a few months. This valuation method would reduce the fair value rate base to $992,360,000 *675 while increasing the rate of return to 6.41%. Significantly, as noted by this report as well as the testimony of John D. Wilson (IPALCO's controller), utilization of either the gross original cost or the net accumulated depreciation value provided rates of return which were not in excess of the 7.25% rate of return approved by the Commission on August 30, 1978. The Commission's engineering department also filed a report on IPALCO's application. Neither report found any material discrepancies with IPALCO's pre-filed data nor any basis for denying IPALCO's application for an increase in the fuel cost charge.
After properly perfecting its appeal, the Public Counselor raises two issues for our consideration:
1) Is the Commission's finding number 4 supported by sufficient evidence?
2) Is the Commission's finding number 4 contrary to Indiana law?
DECISION AND DISCUSSION
A. Issue One
This Court is reluctant to disturb administrative findings. Motor Freight Corp. v. Jarvis, (1975) 163 Ind. App. 442, 324 N.E.2d 500. Generally, a party seeking to overturn an administrative finding has the burden of showing the existence of reversible error due to a lack of substantial facts supporting the finding. Kinzel v. Rettinger, (1972) 151 Ind. App. 119, 277 N.E.2d 913; Thomas Prods. Co. v. Review Bd. of the Ind. Employment Securities Div., (1969) 145 Ind. App. 425, 251 N.E.2d 473. In reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence to support a finding made by an administrative agency, this Court will reverse the agency's finding only if it appears from an examination of the evidence in the agency's record of proceedings that the evidentiary basis of the finding was devoid of any probative value or was so meager as to lead to the conclusion that there is no rational basis for the finding. Additionally, we will reverse if it appears that the result of the hearing must have been influenced by an improper consideration. City of Muncie v. Public Service Comm., (1978) Ind. App., 378 N.E.2d 896, appeal after remand 396 N.E.2d 927. In conducting this examination, the Court of Appeals may not weigh the evidence. International Steel Co. v. Review Bd. of Ind. Employment Securities Div., (1969) 146 Ind. App. 137, 252 N.E.2d 848.
Initially, the Public Counselor attacks the first portion of finding number 4 which stated that "[t]he actual increases in [IPALCO's] fuel costs since the Commission's Order of August 30, 1978, ... approving [IPALCO's] present basic rates and charges through April 30, 1979, have not been offset by actual decreases in other operating expenses, ... ." The Public Counselor does not claim that IPALCO's fuel costs had not increased. Further, the Public Counselor has failed to point out any evidence that IPALCO's "other operating expenses" had decreased. Our examination of the record as referenced by the litigant's briefs reveals substantial evidence that the "other operating expenses" had not decreased, but were at the level projected by IPALCO in support of its basic rate increase request the previous August.
The Public Counselor next challenges the second part of finding number 4 which stated that an increased "fuel cost charge of $.002621 per kilowatt-hour will not result in [IPALCO] earning a return in excess of the return authorized by the Commission in" August, 1978. Expert testimony relative to this portion of the finding established that either accounting formula for calculating IPALCO's fair value rate basis (i.e., the gross original cost or the net accumulated depreciated value of the Petersburg Unit 3 and the Hanna to Petersburg transmission line) would provide rates of return equalling 6.36% and 6.41% respectively. Either rate is less than the authorized rate of 7.25%. Therefore, our examination of the evidence leads us to conclude that it is sufficient to support finding number 4 and, consequently, the Public Counselor has failed to establish any reversible error in that regard.
*676 B. Issue Two
The Public Counselor also challenges finding number 4 as contrary to Indiana law. Initially, the Public Counselor argues that this finding violates IND. CODE 8-1-2-6 which provides that:
"(a) The commission shall value all property of every public utility actually used and useful for the convenience of the public at its fair value, giving such consideration as it deems appropriate in each case to all bases of valuation which may be presented or which the commission is authorized to consider by the following provisions of this section. As one [1] of the elements in such valuation the commission shall give weight to the reasonable cost of bringing the property to its then state of efficiency. In making such valuation, the commission may avail itself of any information in possession of the state board of tax commissioners or of any local authorities. The commission may accept any valuation of the physical property made by the interstate commerce commission of any public utility subject to the provisions of this act.
(b) The lands of such public utility shall not be valued at a greater amount than the assessed value of said lands exclusive of improvements as valued for taxation. In making such valuation no account shall be taken of presumptive value resting on natural resources independent of any structures in relation thereto, the natural resource itself shall be viewed as the public's property. No account shall be taken of good will for presumptive values growing out of the operation of any utility as a going concern, all such values to rest with the municipality by reason of the special and exclusive grants given such utility enterprises. No account shall be taken of construction costs unless such costs were actually incurred and paid as part of the cost entering into the construction of the utility. All public utility valuations shall be based upon tangible property, that is, such property as has value by reason of construction costs, either in materials purchased or in assembling of materials into structures by the labor or (of) workers and the services of superintendents, including engineers, legal and court costs, accounting systems and transportation costs, and also including insurance and interest charges on capital accounts during the construction period. As an element in determining value the commission may also take into account reproduction costs at current prices, less depreciation, based on the items set forth in the last sentence hereof and shall not include good will, going value, or natural resources.
(c) In determining the amount of allowable operating expenses of a utility, the commission may not take into consideration or approve any expense for institutional or image building advertising, charitable contributions, or political contributions."
The core of the Public Counselor's argument on this point is that IPALCO's assignment of values to the Petersburg Unit 3 and the Hanna to Petersburg transmission line on a gross original cost basis rather than a net accumulated depreciation basis resulted in an unfair value of IPALCO's property.
As a general rule the Public Counselor's argument has merit since a fair valuation of IPALCO's property should include the net accumulated depreciation basis. However, the Commission did not enter a finding as to which basis was utilized. Further, the evidence before the Commission established that either basis would provide a rate of return well below the authorized rate of 7.25%. As evidenced by IC 8-1-2-42(d)(3), the rate of return is a key consideration in examining a fuel cost charge increase application. For these reasons we can not hold that finding number 4 violates IC 8-1-2-6 in the manner suggested by the Public Counselor.
The final challenge to finding number 4 alleges that it violates the requirement enunciated in L.S. Ayres & Co. v. Indianapolis Power & Light Co., (1976) 169 Ind. App. 652, 351 N.E.2d 814 and thereby *677 fails to satisfy IC 8-1-2-42(d)(3).[3]L.S. Ayres & Co. involved an appeal from an order of the Commission granting an increase in the basic rates charged by IPALCO. The Commission employed a rate base formula which utilized a historical test-year factor as opposed to a future test-year factor. The former factor included IPALCO's Petersburg Plant Number Two which had produced non-jurisdictional energy under a contract with the Indiana & Michigan Electric Company approved by the Federal Power Commission. The value of electricity produced under this contract represented approximately 45% of the Plant's total capacity. Nevertheless, the Commission included the entire value of the Plant in the rate base. L.S. Ayres, the intervenor, claimed the Commission erred by using the historical test-year factor instead of the future test-year factor because only a portion of the relevant historical data was available. Consequently, it argued that utilization of such historical test-year factor would not produce the requisite just and reasonable rates.
In analyzing L.S. Ayres' claim the Second District initially observed that the Commission's decision must "contain specific findings on all the factual determinations material to its ultimate conclusions." Id., at 661, 351 N.E.2d at 822. There are two policies underlying the "basic findings" requirement as it applies to the Commission's rate order. First, the process of formulating basic findings on all material issues assures that the Commission will make a reasoned analysis of the rate increase request so as to avoid arbitrary or ill-considered action. Second, by supplying this Court with its basic findings of fact, we will have before us the Commission's expert reasoning and subtle policy judgments. This substantially diminishes the possibility "of judicial substitution of judgment or complex evidentiary issues and policy determinations." Id., at 662, 351 N.E.2d at 822. Applying this standard of review to the record before it, the Second District remanded to the Commission that portion of the proceedings dealing with the test-year factor and adjustment method for a clear policy and evidentiary statement. Id., at 677, 351 N.E.2d at 830.
In the present case IPALCO used a historical test-year factor which included actual revenues from May 1, 1978 to April 30, 1979. However, the basic rate had been effective only since August 30, 1978. As a result, this factor included four months at the previous, lower basic rate. Through an argument similar to L.S. Ayres, the Public Counselor attacks this factor as inaccurate claiming that since the basic rate was not effective for the entire historical test-year, IPALCO's stated revenues were too low. If the revenues were too low, the rate of return from an increased fuel cost charge could not have been accurately determined. Consequently, he claims utilization of the historical test-year factor did not produce a "just and reasonable" fuel cost charge. The Public Counselor submits that the proper historical test-year factor should have "annualized" the first four months of the factors at the higher basic rate effective August 30, 1978.
Our analysis of this issue begins with the observation that before the Commission can grant an increase in the fuel cost charge, it must find that the increase will not result in a rate of return above the approved rate. IC 8-1-2-42(d)(3). The Commission made this ultimate finding, but the decision fails to contain basic findings on all the factual determinations material to its ultimate finding. Specifically, the decision is silent as to whether it utilized IPALCO's non-annualized operating revenue and if it did use this data, the Commission's rationale for selecting it. Lacking such findings, we are unable to fulfill our standard of review as enunciated in L.S. Ayres & Co., supra, as follows:
"[T]he selection of a test year and the adoption of an adjustment method are complex issues of regulatory policy which must be resolved in light of the special facts of each case. The statutory scheme reflects the basic legislative policy that these questions of rate making methodology *678 are best consigned to the Commission's expert judgment. IC 1971, 8-1-2-47 (Burns Code Ed.). The appropriate standard of review therefore limits our inquiry to whether, on the facts of this case, the test-year and adjustment method selected by the Commission were reasonably related to the purpose they were intended to serve-the fixing of "reasonable and just" rates. Public Serv. Comm'n v. City of Indianapolis (1956), 235 Ind. 70, 131 N.E.2d 308; Public Serv. Comm'n v. Indiana Bell Tel. Co. (1956) 235 Ind. 1, 130 N.E.2d 467. This standard of review does not authorize the substitution of judicial judgment on matters committed to Commission discretion nor does it require that the reviewing tribunal concur in the wisdom or correctness of the Commission's decision. Our function of review is limited to a determination that the actual choice made by the Commission was based on a consideration of the relevant factors and was reasonably related to the discharge of its statutory duty. In other words, we must determine that there has been no clear error in judgment, and that the Commission's action is founded upon a reasonable basis of support in the whole record."
Id. at 675-76, 351 N.E.2d at 830.
Because the Commission failed to make basic findings of fact specifying whether it accepted IPALCO's non-annualized historical test-year figure over the annualized test-year figure advocated by the Public Counselor as well as explaining its rationale for the selected test-year and since this income data is a critical factor in making the ultimate finding (that the fuel cost charge increase will not result in a rate of return above the approved rate of 7.25%) demanded by IC 8-1-2-42(d)(3), we must remand this portion of the proceedings to the Commission for a clear policy and evidentiary statement underlying the Commission's test-year factor.
For the reasons stated above the Commission's order is affirmed in part and reversed in part with that portion remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
YOUNG, P.J., and CHIPMAN, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  IC 8-1-2-42(b) provides that:
"No schedule of rates, tolls and charges of a public municipally-owned or cooperatively-owned utility which includes or authorizes any changes in charges based upon costs is effective without the approval of the commission. Before the commission approves any changes in the schedule of rates, tolls and charges of an electric utility, which generates and sells electricity, based upon the cost of fuel to generate electricity or upon the cost of fuel included in the cost of purchased electricity, the public counselor shall examine the books and records of the public, municipally-owned or cooperatively-owned generating utility to determine the cost of fuel upon which the proposed charges are based. In addition, before such a fuel cost charge becomes effective, the commission shall hold a summary hearing on the sole issue of the fuel charge. The public counselor shall conduct his review and make a report to the commission within twenty (20) days after the utility's request for the fuel cost charge is filed. The commission shall hold the summary hearing and issue its order within twenty (20) days after it receives the public counselor's report. The provisions of sections 39, 42, 43, 54, 55, 56, 59, 60 and 61 of this chapter concerning the filing, printing and changing of rate schedules and the time required for giving notice of hearing and requiring publication of notice do not apply to such a fuel cost charge or such a summary hearing."
[2]  IC 8-1-2-42(d) states that:
"An electric generating utility may apply for a change in its fuel charge not more often than each three (3) months. When such application is filed the petitioning utility shall show to the commission its cost of fuel to generate electricity and the cost of fuel included in the cost of purchased electricity, for the period between its last order from the commission approving fuel costs in its basic rates and the latest month for which actual fuel costs are available. The petitioning utility shall also estimate its average fuel costs for the three (3) calendar months subsequent to the expiration of the twenty (20) day period allowed the commission in subsection (b). The commission shall conduct a formal hearing solely on the fuel cost charge requested in the petition subject to the notice requirements of IND. CODE 8-1-1-8 and shall grant the electric utility the requested fuel cost charge if it finds that:
(1) the electric utility has made every reasonable effort to acquire fuel and generate or purchase power or both so as to provide electricity to its retail customers at the lowest fuel cost reasonably possible;
(2) the actual increases in fuel cost through the latest month for which actual fuel costs are available since the last order of the commission approving basic rates and charges of the electric utility have not been offset by actual decreases in other operating expenses;
(3) the fuel adjustment charge applied for will not result in the electric utility earning a return in excess of the return authorized by the commission in the last proceeding in which the basic rates and charges of the electric utility were approved; provided, however, if the fuel charge applied for will result in the electric utility earning a return in excess of the return authorized by the commission in the last proceeding in which basic rates and charges of the electric utility were approved, the fuel charge applied for will be reduced to the point where no such excess of return will be earned; and
(4) the utility's estimate of its prospective average fuel costs for each such three (3) calendar months are reasonable after taking into consideration (i) the actual fuel costs experienced by the utility during the latest three (3) calendar months for which actual fuel costs are available and (ii) the estimated fuel costs for the same latest three (3) calendar months for which actual fuel costs are available."
[3]  See fn.2, supra, p. 674.

=== CASE 9737730 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:33:24.260613+00 ===

DAVID T. PROSSER, J.
¶ 1. Jeramey J. Byrge (Byrge) seeks review of a published decision of the court of appeals, State v. Byrge, 225 Wis. 2d 702, 594 N.W.2d 388 (Ct. App. 1999), affirming a decision of the Circuit Court for Calumet County, Darryl W. Deets, Judge. The circuit court determined that Byrge was competent to stand trial for charges stemming from five felony offenses, including first-degree intentional homicide and hiding a corpse. After denying Byrge's motion to withdraw his no contest pleas but permitting him to withdraw the pleas of not guilty by reason of mental defect (NGI), the court found Byrge guilty and sentenced him to life imprisonment with a parole eligibility date of July 2, 2095.
¶ 2. Byrge unsuccessfully motioned the circuit court for post-conviction relief and subsequently sought review by the court of appeals. The court of appeals held that, under the deferential standard of review articulated by this court in State v. Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d 214, 558 N.W.2d 626 (1997), an appellate court will not upset a circuit court's competency determination unless it is clearly erroneous. The court then affirmed the finding that Byrge was competent to proceed. The court also held that Byrge's pleas were not defective because a sentencing court is not required to inform defendants about parole eligibility. Finally, the court of appeals concluded that Byrge had not received ineffective assistance of counsel.
*205¶ 3. We frame three issues in this case. First, we revisit our holding in Garfoot and discuss the standard of review that applies to competency determinations. Second, we address the related issue, whether Byrge was competent to stand trial. Third, we examine Byrge's contention that the sentencing court was obligated to inform him about parole eligibility before it accepted his plea.
¶ 4. We hold that an appellate court reviewing a competency determination must use the methodology set forth in Garfoot. The findings of a circuit court in a competency to stand trial determination will not be upset unless they are clearly erroneous because a competency hearing presents a unique category of inquiry in which the circuit court is in the best position to apply the law to the facts. We find that the circuit court's decision that Byrge was competent to stand trial was not clearly erroneous because testimony at the competency hearing indicated Byrge was able to understand the proceedings and assist in his defense. We conclude that when a circuit court exercises its statutory option to fix a parole eligibility date, that date has a direct and automatic effect on the range of punishment. In this circumstance, parole eligibility information is a direct consequence of the plea. Although the circuit court had a duty to inform Byrge about the parole eligibility information before it accepted his plea, the State has met its burden to prove that Byrge nonetheless entered the plea knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently. Accordingly, we affirm the decision of the court of appeals.
FACTS
¶ 5. On Friday evening, August 19, 1994, Joan Wagner (Wagner) called her husband and told.him that *206she would see him after her shift ended at 11:00 p.m. at the Mirro Foley Company in Chilton, Wisconsin. Wagner expressed excitement about the new home on which the couple had closed that day. When she did not arrive home by 11:30 p.m., her husband retraced Wagner's route but was unable to locate her or her vehicle.
¶ 6. A Mirro Foley co-worker observed Wagner leaving the facility at 11:15 p.m. He noticed that a male who had been sitting near the parking lot approached Wagner and began talking with her. Wagner and the male walked towards Wagner's blue-over-gray 1989 Pontiac Grand Am, and she unlocked the passenger's side for the male. The two then drove off. The co-worker later identified Byrge as the person who accompanied Wagner.
¶ 7. At about 11:45 p.m., a Town of Rantoul resident, Chris Kopecky (Kopecky), heard what he presumed to be screams coming from the woods near his home. He also saw a blue Grand Am near the entrance to those woods and remembered the first letter and number of the license plates. Two days later, Kopecky's mother realized that his description of the Grand Am matched the vehicle discussed in a newspaper article detailing Wagner's disappearance. Kopecky then decided to check the woods. On August 23, 1994, he and two friends saw a puddle of blood just off a trail leading into the woods. The shoes and feet of a body rested 500 feet away. Law enforcement authorities arrived and discovered that the clothing on the body matched what Wagner had worn. An autopsy positively identified the body and revealed that Wagner had been stabbed four times.
¶ 8. Byrge, a 19-year old who lived next door to Wagner, was not seen in the Chilton area after August 19,1994. Earlier in the week, Byrge had indicated that *207he planned to take a bus trip to Colorado to visit a woman with whom he had a child. On August 23,1994, Detective Jerry Pagel of the Calumet County Sheriffs Department, contacted Colorado authorities. They arrested Byrge in Highlands Ranch, Colorado. At the time of his' arrest, Byrge was operating a blue and silver Pontiac Grand Am that bore Wisconsin plates. The vehicle was registered to Wagner and her husband. During a search of the Grand Am, Colorado authorities found a hunting knife with a curved, four-inch blade under the front driver's seat. The knife appeared to have blood and body tissue on it.
PROCEDURAL HISTORY
¶ 9. On August 25, 1994, the Calumet County District Attorney filed a complaint alleging that Byrge caused Wagner's death. The complaint stated that Byrge committed the first-degree intentional homicide of Wagner, contrary to Wis. Stat. § 940.01(1) (1991-92),1 a felony punishable by life imprisonment. The complaint also alleged that Byrge was responsible for four other crimes: (1) hiding a corpse contrary to Wis. Stat. § 940.11(2), (2) false imprisonment contrary to Wis. Stat. § 940.30, (3) bail jumping contrary to Wis. Stat. § 946.49(l)(b), and (4) operating a motor vehicle without the owner's consent contrary to Wis. Stat. § 943.23(2).
¶ 10. The Circuit Court for Calumet County conducted a preliminary hearing on September 16, 1994, and the court bound Byrge over for trial on all counts. The prosecution filed an Information that same day, *208alleging the same charges as those set forth in the criminal complaint.
¶ 11. Byrge pled not guilty to all charges on September 23,1994. One month later, on October 24,1994, Byrge amended his pleas to include NGI pleas to the charges. On November 15,1994, Byrge entered pleas of no contest to all the charges except the false imprisonment charge. These modifications were not the result of a plea agreement. The NGI pleas remained intact as to all five charges.
¶ 12. Three psychiatrists examined Byrge and filed reports with respect to the NGI pleas.2 A court-appointed expert, Dr. Ralph K. Baker, examined Byrge on December 16. Dr. A.A. Lorenz, the psychiatrist selected by Byrge, evaluated him on March 3, 1995. The state's expert, Dr. Frederick Fosdal, interviewed Byrge on March 13.
¶ 13. On March 20 Byrge's trial counsel, Joseph Norby (Norby), filed a motion requesting a competency evaluation. Nine days later the circuit court appointed Dr. Baker to examine Byrge for competency to stand trial.3 Board certified in both psychiatry and neurology, Baker had evaluated more than 1,000 individuals *209for competency by the time of Byrge's hearing. Both Byrge and the State had placed Baker on their lists of psychiatrists acceptable as experts.
¶ 14. Baker evaluated Byrge for competency to proceed on April 14. During this examination, Byrge at first remained silent. Baker concluded that this silence was not the product of mental illness because Byrge agreed, albeit reluctantly, to speak with Baker after consulting Norby. Baker later testified that his findings from both this examination and the evaluation he had conducted with respect to the NGI pleas helped Baker determine many factors about Byrge that bore on competency.
¶ 15. The circuit court commenced the competency hearing on Friday, April 21, but postponed the proceeding until the following Monday because Dr. Baker was unavailable. When the hearing reconvened on April 24, the district attorney informed the court that Byrge had cut himself with glass earlier in the morning and that Byrge still might have glass in his mouth. Norby indicated that he and Byrge had had differences that day, culminating in a physical and verbal confrontation. Norby informed the court that he "never had been faced with a situation like this before," and that he was "at a loss as to how to proceed." The court and the attorneys agreed to bring Byrge into the courtroom under restraints and shackled to a wheelchair to protect courtroom personnel and Norby. -
¶ 16. The court first addressed Byrge. Byrge did not respond when Judge Deets inquired whether he was competent or incompetent. Following the procedure set forth in Wis. Stat. § 971.14(4)(b), the court and the parties agreed that Byrge's decision to stand mute would require the court to find Byrge incompetent unless the State proved otherwise.
*210¶ 17. Dr. Baker was the only witness that testified at the competency hearing. Baker explained that a competency evaluation determines whether a defendant is capable of cooperating with an attorney and assisting with the defense. Baker found that Byrge was able to understand the proceedings and assist his attorney. Byrge, Baker observed, "was not mentally ill or malingering, he simply was distressed at the number of things that occurred in jail and the possibility of the trial." Baker found that Byrge was aware of both the charges against him and the many factors involved in the legal process.
¶ 18. Baker noted that Byrge had suicidal thoughts and that his actions indicated he might not care what happened to him. He observed that Byrge has a "great deal of anxiety and frustration and depression." But Baker also testified that this condition did not affect competency because Byrge was not "unable to cooperate with his attorney or in any way function at the trial."
¶ 19. Following Dr. Baker's testimony, the court asked Norby if he wished to present additional evidence. Norby stated:
I am in a situation where I — if other counsel were representing Mr. Byrge, he may have wanted to call me as a witness, and I can't call myself and I can't testify. . .without violating the privilege that Mr. Byrge has with me, I am hamstrung, I really can't say anything. So if the court is asking if there is additional evidence I would like to offer, yes. But can I offer it at this point? I don't think I can.
Norby did not ask the court to call Dr. Lorenz or Dr. Fosdal as witnesses, and he did not call the court's attention to the reports from those two psychiatrists. *211The reports of Drs. Lorenz and Fosdal were not entered as exhibits at the competency hearing, but were later received into evidence on the State's motion.
¶ 20. The court found that Byrge was competent to proceed. Thereafter, Byrge sought to withdraw his pleas of no contest to four of the offenses, and the court denied the motion. Byrge also sought to withdraw his NGI pleas. After conducting a colloquy with Byrge, the court allowed the withdrawal of the NGI pleas. Four charges thus remained to which Byrge had pled no contest, namely first-degree intentional homicide, hiding a corpse, bail jumping, and operating a motor vehicle without consent. The court found Byrge guilty on all four counts.
¶ 21. On June 21, 1995, the court sentenced Byrge to life imprisonment on the first-degree intentional homicide conviction, setting a parole eligibility date of July 2,2095.4 The court also imposed a consecutive five-year term on Byrge's conviction in the hiding a corpse offense and concurrent five-year terms on the bail jumping and operating without consent convictions.
¶ 22. Byrge filed a post-conviction motion, essentially presenting four bases of relief. First, Byrge challenged the trial court's finding that he was competent to proceed. Second, he claimed that he had received ineffective assistance of counsel with respect to both the competency proceeding and the withdrawal of the no contest pleas. Third, Byrge contended that the no contest pleas were not entered knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently. Fourth, Byrge claimed that the plea colloquy was defective because the court never advised Byrge on the record that the maximum sen*212tence was life in prison without possibility of parole. The circuit court rejected Byrge's claims.
. ¶ 23. Byrge appealed, arguing that an appellate court should utilize an independent standard when reviewing a competency determination and challenging the circuit court's determination that he was competent to stand trial. He also maintained that a sentencing court should be required to inform a defendant about parole eligibility before accepting a plea. Finally, Byrge asked the court of appeals to review his contention that his trial counsel was ineffective.
¶ 24. The court of appeals certified the case to this court, Byrge 225 Wis. 2d at 711 n.2, but we declined the certification. The court of appeals then affirmed the decision of the circuit court, holding that, under the precedent established by Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d 214, a court of appeals is bound to employ the clearly erroneous methodology in reviewing a circuit court's competency determination. Byrge, 225 Wis. 2d at 711-12. Under that deferential standard, the court of appeals confined its review to the record of the competency hearing and affirmed the finding of the circuit court that Byrge was competent to stand trial. Id. at 713-14. The court of appeals also held that a sentencing court is not obligated to notify a defendant about parole eligibility information because parole eligibility is a collateral, not a direct, consequence of the plea. Id. at 716-17. Finally, the court held that Byrge had failed to establish a claim for ineffective assistance of counsel. Id. at 727.
¶ 25. In accepting Byrge's petition for review, this court declined to address the ineffective assistance of counsel claim. Order dated June 15,1999, at 2.
*213COMPETENCY DETERMINATIONS IN GENERAL
¶ 26. We begin by addressing the purpose of competency determinations. Competence to stand trial is a cornerstone of our criminal justice system. Drope v. Missouri, 420 U.S. 162, 171-72 (1975). Anglo-American law long has recognized that incompetent defendants cannot be compelled to stand trial.5 "[0]nly where a defendant is mentally competent will he be able to exercise effectively the rights which this society extends to persons charged with committing a crime." State ex rel. Matalik v. Schubert, 57 Wis. 2d 315, 322, 204 N.W.2d 13 (1973) (internal quotations omitted). Criminal prosecutions of incompetent defendants impinge on at least two principles of fundamental fairness. First, a person should not be tried in absentia. Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d 214 at 221 (citation omitted). Although an incompetent defendant physically may be present in the courtroom, in reality he or she may not be able to participate in the defense.6 Drope, 420 U.S. at 171. Second, an incompetent person may lack the ability to be informed about the charges and to confront the accuser. Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d at 221; Cooper v. Oklahoma, 517 U.S. 348, 357 n.8 (1996).
¶ 27. Defendants who are tried and convicted while legally incompetent are deprived of a due process right to a fair trial. Drope 420 U.S. at 172; Pate v. *214Robinson, 383 U.S. 375, 378, 385 (1966). Consequently, both federal and state courts permit the suspension of a criminal proceeding against an incompetent accused person. Matalik, 57 Wis. 2d at-321-22. Under federal case law, the due process test for determining competency considers whether the defendant: (1) "has sufficient present ability to consult" with his or her lawyer "with a reasonable degree of rational understanding;" and (2) "has a rational as well as factual understanding of the proceedings." Dusky v. United States, 362 U.S. 402, 402 (1960) (per curiam). Thus, a defendant is incompetent if he or she lacks the capacity to understand the nature and object of the proceedings, to consult with counsel, and to assist in the preparation of his or her defense. Drope, 420 U.S. at 171.
¶ 28. In Wisconsin, the trial of an incompetent defendant also violates state law.7 Wisconsin Stat. § 971.13(1) codifies the due process test set forth in Dusky, providing that, "No person who lacks substantial mental capacity to understand the proceedings or assist in his or her defense may be tried, convicted, or sentenced for the commission of an offense so long as the incapacity endures." See Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d at 222. This two-part "understand-and-assist" test constitutes the core of the competency-to-stand-trial analysis.
¶ 29. Wisconsin Stat. § 971.14 amplifies the basic rule of the understand-and-assist test by setting forth *215the procedures for a competency determination. A court "shall proceed under [the provisions of § 971.14] whenever there is reason to doubt a defendant's competency to proceed." Wis. Stat. § 971.14(1). A reason to doubt competency can arise from the defendant's demeanor in the courtroom, colloquies with the court, or by a motion from either party. State v. Debra A.E., 188 Wis. 2d 111, 131, 523 N.W.2d 727 (1994); see also State v. Johnson, 133 Wis. 2d 207, 220, 395 N.W.2d 176 (1986) (defense counsel must raise issue of competency when reason to doubt competency arises).
¶ 30. Once such doubt exists, Wis. Stat. § 971.14(2) requires the circuit court to appoint one or more examiners to perform a competency examination. See State v. McKnight, 65 Wis. 2d 582, 594, 223 N.W.2d 550 (1974). An examiner reports to the court his or her findings "regarding the defendant's present mental capacity to understand the proceedings and assist in his or her defense." Wis. Stat. § 971.14(3). If the district attorney, the defendant, and defense counsel waive the opportunity to present evidence beyond the examiner's report, the court makes its competency determination. Wis. Stat. § 971.14(4)(b). Absent a waiver, the circuit court conducts a competency hearing. Id. The court must find the defendant incompetent unless the State can prove, by the greater weight of the credible evidence, that the defendant is competent. Wis. Stat. § 971.14(4)(b); Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d at 221-22.
¶ 31. Competency to stand trial constitutes a judicial inquiry, not a medical determination. Judicial Council Committee's Note, 1981, § 971.13(1), Stats. "Requiring that a criminal defendant be competent has a modest aim: It seeks to ensure that he has the capac*216ity to understand the proceedings and to assist counsel.'' Godinez v. Moran, 509 U.S. 389, 402 (1993). A court must determine whether the defendant can understand the proceedings and assist counsel "with a reasonable degree of rational understanding." Debra A.E., 188 Wis. 2d at 126. Although a defendant may have a history of psychiatric illness, a medical condition does not necessarily render the defendant incompetent to stand trial. State ex rel. Haskins v. County Court of Dodge County, 62 Wis. 2d 250, 264-65, 214 N.W.2d 575 (1974). To determine legal competency, the court considers a defendant's present mental capacity to understand and assist at the time of the proceedings. Wis. Stat. § 971.14(3)(c); McKnight, 65 Wis. 2d at 595.
STANDARD OF REVIEW FOR COMPETENCY HEARINGS
¶ 32. Having addressed the purpose of competency to stand trial, we now turn to the first issue in this case, namely which standard of review an appellate court must employ when reviewing the competency determination of a circuit court. Byrge asks this court to adopt the position of the concurrence in Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d at 229 (Abrahamson, C.J., concurring), arguing that the issue of competency is a question of constitutional fact, or a mixed question of fact and law, subject at least partially to independent review. The State maintains competency determinations should be reviewed as questions of fact under the clearly erroneous standard endorsed by the majority opinion in Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d at 223-24. As a threshold matter, we note that whether an issue presents a question of fact or a question of law is in itself a ques*217tion of law. Crowley v. Knapp, 94 Wis. 2d 421, 429-30, 288 N.W.2d 815 (1980).
¶ 3 3. In Garfoot, a maj ority of this court held that competency to stand trial must be reviewed under the deferential clearly erroneous standard. Garfoot approached competency determinations as functionally factual inquiries. Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d at 223, 225. Findings of fact are not set aside unless they are clearly erroneous, and appellate courts give due regard to a circuit court's opportunity to assess the credibility of witnesses. Wis. Stat. § 805.17(2). We reasoned that competency determinations merit this level of deference because the circuit court can balance witness credibility and demeanor:
The trial court is in the best position to decide whether the evidence of competence outweighs the evidence of incompetence. Although the court could make precise findings of fact about the skills and abilities the defendant does and does not possess, the court must ultimately determine whether evidence that the defendant is competent is more convincing than the evidence that he or she is not. The trial court is in the best position to make decisions that require conflicting evidence to be weighed. Although the court must ultimately apply a legal test, its determination is functionally a factual one: either the state has convinced the court that the defendant has the skills and abilities to be considered "competent," or it has not.
The trial court's superior ability to observe the defendant and the other evidence presented requires deference to the trial court's decision that a defendant is or is not competent to stand trial. Only the trial court can judge the credibility of witnesses who testify at the competency hearing. Thus, only *218the trail court can accurately determine whether the state presented evidence that was sufficiently convincing to meet its burden of proving that the defendant is competent to stand trial.
Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d at 222-23.
¶ 34. Chief Justice Shirley S. Abrahamson, joined by Justice Ann Walsh Bradley and Justice Janine P. Geske, concurred in Garfoot. Emphasizing the constitutional basis of a competency hearing, the concurrence maintained that a competency determination implicates a question of constitutional fact, a mixed question of fact and law, subject to a two-tier standard of review. Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d at 229, 231-32. (Abrahamson, C.J., concurring). Under this methodology, an appellate court first applies the deferential, clearly erroneous standard in its review of the historical, evidentiary facts. Id. at 234. The reviewing court then independently analyzes the application of constitutional principles to the facts. Id. at 234-35.
¶ 35. Justice William A. Bablitch concurred separately in Garfoot, finding the concurrence authored by Chief Justice Abrahamson "fairly persuasive" but concluding that the court should await a better briefed case in which the standard of review is actually at issue before rejecting the clearly erroneous standard. Id. at 238 (Bablitch, J., concurring).
¶ 36. The standard of review is at issue in this case, and both parties have briefed the issue thoroughly. We therefore revisit our holding in Garfoot. We begin by considering how the United States Supreme Court treats the standard of review in competency hearings. This court frequently has sought uniformity in the law by following the Supreme Court in constitu*219tional interpretation. See Isiah B. v. State, 176 Wis. 2d 639, 646, 500 N.W.2d 637 (1993).
¶ 37. The Garfoot concurrence pointed to our independent review of many issues characterized as constitutional facts, including the sufficiency of Miranda warnings, voluntariness of confessions, vol-untariness of consent to search, and whether the right to silence has been honored. Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d at 235 n.ll. In these areas of inquiry, our constitutional decision making has conformed with the interpretations set forth by the Supreme Court. The Court appraises similar questions independently, recognizing the "uniquely legal dimension" of those issues.8 Thompson v. Keohane, 516 U.S. 99, 111-12 (1995).
¶ 38. This court's goal of seeking uniformity leads us to consider the manner in which the Supreme Court classifies appellate review of competency determinations. Although the Court certainly categorizes some issues as constitutional facts, it does not treat all constitutional questions identically. The Court's approach reveals that competency falls within a unique sphere of inquiry, a sphere in which the issue turns on more than historical facts but nonetheless requires *220appellate courts to grant deference to the findings of a trial court.
¶ 39. The difference between constitutional facts, mixed questions of fact and law, and historical facts, or simply questions of fact, is "often fuzzy at best."9 Container Corp. v. Franchise Tax Bd., 463 U.S. 159, 176 (1983). The Supreme Court itself acknowledges that it "has not charted an entirely clear course" in the elusive arena of distinguishing between legal and factual questions. Miller v. Fenton, 474 U.S. 104, 106 (1985); see also Cooter & Fell v. Hartmarx Corp., 496 U.S. 384, 401 (1990). Whether to label an issue a "question of law," a "question of fact," or a "mixed question of law and fact" often is more a matter of allocation than analysis, an allocation in which the Court recognizes that one judicial actor is better positioned than another to decide a matter. Miller, 474 U.S. at 113-14.
¶ 40. Initially, the Supreme Court suggested that reviews of competency determinations comprise mixed questions of fact and law. Under that methodology the Court first examined the trial court's findings of historical facts deferentially but then reviewed independently the ultimate question of competency. Because the determination of competency implicates due process protections, the Court suggested that it was appropriate for it to undertake its own independent review of the application of constitutional principles. Drope, 420 U.S. at 175 n.10; Robinson, 383 U.S. at 385-86.
¶ 41. The Supreme Court has retooled its approach and now treats competency determinations more like questions of fact. In Maggio v. Fulford, 462 U.S. 111 (1983) (per curiam), a majority of the Court *221held that its review of a competency determination must be confined to the clearly erroneous standard.10 Fulford was the result of a habeas corpus proceeding. A Louisiana trial court refused to order examination by a competency commission after assessing the testimony of a psychiatrist who interviewed the defendant for about one hour the day before the hearing. Id. at 113. In its review, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit held that the decision of the trial court was not supported by the record. Id. The Supreme Court reversed, concluding that the appellate court "erroneously substituted its own judgment as to the credibility of witnesses for that of the Louisiana courts." Id. In finding that a trial court is better positioned to reach the ultimate competency determination, the Court reasoned:
Face to face with living witnesses the original trier of the facts holds a position of advantage from which appellate judges are excluded. In doubtful cases the exercise of his power of observation often proves the most accurate method of ascertaining the truth. . .how can we say the judge is wrong? We never saw the witnesses....
Id. at 118 (citations omitted).
¶ 42. Fulford was the product of a divided Court.11 Since Fulford, however, the Court has not *222departed from its decision to allocate the ultimate decision of competency to the trial court. Two years after Fulford, Justice O'Connor, writing for the majority in Miller, concluded that certain trial court findings, including competency to stand trial, should be afforded deference because their resolution hinges on witness credibility, and hence, evaluation of demeanor. 474 U.S. 112-13. Such areas of inquiry offer compelling justifications "for leaving the process of applying law to fact to the trial court." Id. at 114. Subsequently, Justice Ginsburg reiterated this view when she authored the majority opinion in Thompson. She noted that although certain issues, including competency determinations, embody more than basic, historical facts, they nonetheless fall within a genre of decisions that the court classifies as "factual issues." 516 U.S. at 111.12
¶ 43. Many federal courts follow Fulford, Miller, and Thompson in habeas corpus proceedings, treating competency determinations as factual issues left to the *223discretion of state trial courts.13 Deference to trial *224courts is not, however, limited to federal habeas corpus reviews of state court decisions. A number of state courts apply the Fulford line of cases to appellate *225review of competency proceedings.14 These courts implicitly acknowledge that the Fulford methodology is appropriate for competency determinations because of the qualitatively factual nature of the inquiry, not because of the particular posture of a federal habeas corpus proceeding.15 Like federal courts, these state courts recognize that trial judges are better positioned than appellate judges to observe a defendant's conduct and to gauge the credibility and demeanor of witnesses.16
*226¶ 44. Based on our analysis of the case law since Fulford, we conclude that the Supreme Court classifies competency to stand trial within a discrete category in which the resolution of the legal issue is better left to the trial court.17 Thompson, 516 U.S. at 111; Miller, 474 U.S. at 112-13. Although more than the "what happened" types of historical facts arise in a competency determination, the decision pivots on factors only a trial court can appraise. Thompson, 516 U.S. at 111. In a competency proceeding, the ultimate resolution of the legal issue rests on the court's observation of witness credibility and demeanor.18 "An issue does not *227lose its factual character merely because its resolution is dispositive of the ultimate constitutional challenge." Miller, 474 U.S. at 106. We therefore are persuaded that the circuit court is the judicial actor best positioned to apply a legal standard to the facts of a competency decision.
¶ 45. In the interest of uniformity and consistency in constitutional decision making, we follow the interpretation of the Supreme Court and allocate the application of law to fact to the circuit court in competency proceedings. Because a competency determination depends on the circuit court's ability to appraise witness credibility and demeanor, "there are compelling and familiar justifications for leaving the process of applying law to fact to the trial court." Id. at 114. We therefore do not disturb our holding in Garfoot and adhere to the clearly erroneous standard for reviewing circuit court determinations in competency proceedings.
*228CIRCUIT COURT'S DETERMINATION OF COMPETENCY
¶ 46. Having examined the threshold issue, standard of review, we now turn to the second issue by examining the circuit court's determination that Byrge was competent to stand trial. Under the standard that applies to competency determinations, we will not reverse the circuit court's decision unless it was clearly erroneous. Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d at 223-24.
¶ 47. The only witness to testify at Byrge's hearing was Dr. Baker, the court-appointed psychiatrist who conducted the competency evaluation of Byrge.19 Byrge, however, asks this court also to review the reports submitted by Drs. Lorenz and Fosdal. We decline to do so. Both Drs. Lorenz and Fosdal conducted their evaluations for the NGI pleas; they did not examine Byrge for the purposes of a competency determination.20 An examination for purposes of NGI considers the ability of the "defendant to appreciate the wrongfulness of the defendant's conduct or to conform the defendant's conduct with the requirements of law at the time of the commission of the criminal offense." Wis. Stat. § 971.16(3). An evaluation for competency to stand trial assesses "the defendant's present mental capacity to understand the proceedings and assist in his or her defense." Wis. Stat. § 971.14(3)(c).
*229¶ 48. The aims of a competency hearing are modest, seeking to verify that the defendant can satisfy the understand-and-assist test. See Moran, 509 U.S. at 402. The hearing need not establish a psychiatric classification of the defendant's condition. Id. Section 971.13(1) contemplates a judicial, not a clinical, inquiry,21 and our courts treat competency to stand trial as a legal standard, not a medical determination. See Haskins, 62 Wis. 2d at 265. Elaborate psychiatric evaluations sometimes introduce a clinical diagnosis that may not speak to competency to proceed. Id. at 264-65. A history of irrational behavior and prior medical opinions about a defendant's condition, like a defendant's demeanor, can serve as indicia in the competency determination. Drope, 420 U.S. at 180. But clinical reports occasionally state that a defendant is incompetent "when what really was meant was merely that the defendant had some mental illness which required treatment." Haskins, 62 Wis. 2d at 265.
¶ 49. Even if a defendant has suffered past psychiatric episodes, he or she nonetheless may evince sufficient present ability to proceed. See Haskins, 62 Wis. 2d at 263 (quoting Dusky, 362 U.S. at 402). Consequently, a court looks at the defendant's "present mental capacity" to understand the proceedings and to assist counsel at the time of the proceedings. Wis. Stat. *230§ 971.14(3)(c); McKnight, 65 Wis. 2d at 595; see also Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d at 222-23.
¶ 50. In this case Byrge essentially asks this court to inject a medical determination into the legal standard. He argues that the circuit court should have found him incompetent to proceed because he suffered from psychological, mental, and psychiatric problems. We decline to do so. Dr. Baker recognized the distinction between the medical classification and legal competency to proceed. He interviewed Byrge twice — once for the NGI evaluation and later for competency to stand trial. He differentiated between the two types of evaluations when he noted that his first examination measured "mental responsibility," whereas the competency evaluation determined if Byrge could cooperate with counsel and assist with his own defense.
¶ 51. Baker concluded that Byrge was able to understand the proceedings and assist in the defense. He found Byrge "was not mentally ill or malingering, he simply was distressed at the number of things that occurred in jail and the possibility of the trial." Baker testified that Byrge was aware of both the charges against him and the many factors involved in the legal process. Although Baker agreed Byrge might be suicidal or depressed, he testified that the condition did not affect legal competency because Byrge was not "unable to cooperate with his attorney or in any way function at the trial."
¶ 52. The circuit court concluded that the State had proven that Byrge was competent because he had "substantial capacity to understand the proceedings and assist in his own defense." The court addressed the credibility and demeanor of the witness and of the defendant. Emphasizing its confidence in Baker's abili*231ties, his testimony in numerous past cases, and his credentials, the circuit court stated that it could listen to Baker's telephone testimony and make a determination without "look[ing] in his eyes." Byrge was present at the hearing, shackled to a wheelchair. The court noted the constraints on Byrge's physical liberty and did not discount them in its competency determination. The record makes no indication that Byrge was agitated or disruptive during the proceeding.
¶ 53. The findings of the circuit court are supported by the testimony of Dr. Baker and the circuit .court's observation of Byrge's demeanor. Based on the record before us, we find that the trial court did not erroneously exercise its discretion when it found Byrge competent to stand trial. We therefore decline to second-guess the factual determination of the circuit court.
PAROLE ELIGIBILITY INFORMATION
¶ 54. Having affirmed the circuit court's determination that Byrge was competent to stand trial, we next address the third issue, namely whether a circuit court, before accepting a plea of guilty or no contest, must inform a defendant that it possesses the authority to fix the parole eligibility date. Byrge contends that his pleas were not knowingly and intelligently entered because the circuit court did not warn him that the maximum penalty was not merely a life sentence, but a life sentence without the possibility of parole.
¶ 55. We begin by noting that the standard of review for this issue differs from the standard that we have applied thus far in this case. Whether a plea was entered knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently presents a question of constitutional fact. State v. *232Bangert, 131 Wis. 2d 246, 283, 389 N.W.2d 12 (1986) (citing Miller, 474 U.S. 104). We will not disturb a circuit court's findings of historical, evidentiary facts unless they are clearly erroneous. State v. Bollig, 2000 WI 6, ¶ 13, 232 Wis. 2d 561, 605 N.W.2d 199. However, we review the application of the law to the historical facts independently. Id. Under this standard, an appellate court may look to the entire record in the course of its review. Bangert, 131 Wis. 2d at 283.
¶ 56. When a circuit court sentences a defendant to life imprisonment, it must make a parole eligibility determination. As it applied to Byrge, Wis. Stat. § 973.014 required the sentencing court to exercise one of two options by: 1) determining that the defendant is eligible for parole under Wis. Stat. § 304.06, or 2) setting a parole eligibility date. Wis. Stat. § 973.014(l)-(2).22 In this case the circuit court exercised the second alternative under Wis. Stat. § 973.014(2) and set Byrge's parole eligibility date at July 2, 2095. The court noted that on that date, Byrge would be 120 years old.23 Although the circuit court *233engaged in an extensive colloquy with Byrge at the plea hearing, it did not inform Byrge about its options regarding the setting of parole eligibility or its authority to fix a parole eligibility date.
¶ 57. It is well established that a criminal defendant must enter a plea of guilty or no contest knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently. Bollig, 2000 WI 6, ¶ 15. When a defendant is not aware of the potential punishment, the plea is not entered knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently, and the result is a manifest injustice. State ex rel. Warren v. Schwarz, 219 Wis. 2d 615, 635-36, 579 N.W.2d 698 (1998).
¶ 58. Wisconsin Stat. § 971.08 governs the plea colloquy procedure a circuit court must follow to ensure that a plea is knowing, voluntary, and intelligent. The circuit court must "[a]ddress the defendant personally and determine that the plea is made voluntarily with understanding of the nature of the charge and the potential punishment if convicted." Wis. Stat. § 971.08(1)(a).
¶ 59. The issue here effectively requires us to decide whether parole eligibility directly reflects a potential punishment under Wis. Stat. § 971.08(l)(a). If it does, then the circuit court should have addressed parole eligibility in its plea colloquy with Byrge. When a defendant makes a prima facie showing that the circuit court did not conform with the statutory procedures of § 971.08, and the defendant alleges that he or she did not know or understand the information that the court should have provided at the plea hearing, the burden shifts to the State to prove by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant nonetheless *234entered the plea knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently. See Bangert, 131 Wis. 2d at 274.
¶ 60. Defendants have a due process right to be notified about the "direct consequences" of their pleas. See Bollig, 2000 WI 6, ¶ 16. A direct consequence of a plea is one that has a definite, immediate, and largely automatic effect on the range of a defendant's punishment. Id. If a defendant is not aware of the direct consequences of a plea, he or she is not appraised of "the potential punishment" under Wis. Stat. § 971.08(1)(a).
¶ 61. Information about "collateral consequences" of a plea, by contrast, is not a prerequisite to entering a knowing and intelligent plea. Warren, 219 Wis. 2d at 636. Collateral consequences are indirect and do not flow from the conviction. For example, collateral consequences may be contingent on a future proceeding in which a defendant's subsequent behavior affects the determination. Warren, 219 Wis. 2d at 637-38 (citing State v. James, 176 Wis. 2d 230, 243-44, 500 N.W.2d 345 (Ct. App. 1993)). Sometimes a collateral consequence is one that rests not with the sentencing court, but instead with a different tribunal or government agency. State v. Kosina, 226 Wis. 2d 482, 486, 595 N.W.2d 464 (Ct. App. 1999) (citing Torrey v. Estelle, 842 F.2d 234, 236 (8th Cir. 1988)). The distinction between direct and collateral consequences essentially recognizes that it would be unreasonable and impractical to require a circuit court to be cognizant of every conceivable consequence before the court accepts a plea. Warren, 219 Wis. 2d at 638-39.
¶ 62. Byrge contends that his pleas were not knowing or intelligent because the information about *235the parole eligibility date affected the range of his punishment and therefore constituted a direct consequence of his pleas. The State maintains that the circuit court's power to set the parole eligibility date represents only a collateral consequence of the plea, and therefore Wis. Stat. § 971.08(l)(a) did not obligate the circuit court to notify Byrge.
¶ 63. In its review of this case, the court of appeals held that the circuit court's failure to inform Byrge about parole eligibility did not render the plea defective. Byrge, 225 Wis. 2d at 718. The court relied in part on Birts v. State, 68 Wis. 2d 389, 398-99, 228 N.W.2d 351 (1975), in which we held that a circuit court is not required to notify defendants about parole rights. Byrge, 225 Wis. 2d at 716. The court also turned to a decision by the Supreme Court, Hill v. Lockhart, 474 U.S. 52, 56 (1985), which concluded that a defendant is not constitutionally entitled to be forewarned about parole eligibility. Byrge, 225 Wis. 2d at 715-16. The court of appeals noted that both Birts and Hill were decided at a time when the parole decision was left to the parole board, before Wis. Stat. § 973.014(2) authorized the sentencing court to engage in the threshold parole decision.24 Id. at 716. Nonetheless, the court reasoned that the holdings of those cases were still efficacious because Wis. Stat. § 973.014 does not mandate the sentencing court to fix a parole eligibility date but rather allows the court to leave the decision to set the eligibility to the parole board. Id. at 716-17.
¶ 64. The court of appeals also dismissed Byrge’s reliance on State v. Bentley, 195 Wis. 2d 580, 536 N.W.2d 202 (Ct. App. 1995), rev'd on other grounds, 201 *236Wis. 2d 303, 548 N.W.2d 50 (1996). In that case, the court of appeals suggested that parole eligibility constitutes a direct, not a collateral, consequence of the sentence. Byrge, 225 Wis. 2d at 717 (citing Bentley, 195 Wis. 2d at 590). While noting that this court reversed Bentley only on other grounds, the court concluded that Bentley does not govern here because it was decided in the context of an ineffective assistance of counsel claim.
¶ 65. We agree with the court of appeals that its decision in Bentley is not germane to this case. The core of the parole eligibility discussion in Bentley centered on "misadvice" in the ineffective assistance context, namely, the defense counsel's failure to advise a client about parole eligibility. Bentley, 195 Wis. 2d at 589-90. Bentley did not address whether Wis. Stat. § 971.08(l)(a) obligates a sentencing court to inform defendants about parole eligibility as a direct consequence of the plea. Moreover, we reversed Bentley on other grounds, and, because we do not address an ineffective assistance of counsel claim in this case, we decline to reassess Bentley here.
¶ 66. Like the court of appeals, we also find it significant that Birts and Hill were decided before Wis. Stat. § 973.014 authorized the sentencing court to take part in the threshold parole decision. See Byrge, 225 Wis. 2d at 716. Although § 973.014 does not "mandate" the sentencing court to fix the parole eligibility date, § 973.014(2) grants the court that authority. If the circuit court declines to exercise the option and allows the parole board to set the date, the parole right becomes contingent on a future proceeding, subject to a determination by a different government agency. The decision of the parole board then may turn on the defendant's future behavior, a factor that would be impractical for *237the circuit court to divine. See Warren, 219 Wis. 2d at 638-39. When a parole board makes an eligibility determination at a date after the sentencing order, parole eligibility is not an immediate and largely automatic result of the conviction. Hence, if the circuit court leaves the decision to another agency, the parole eligibility information is a collateral consequence of the plea, and failure to notify the defendant about parole eligibility does not compromise the plea.
¶ 67. We find, however, that a different set of considerations arises in the limited circumstances in which a sentencing court itself sets the parole eligibility date. If a circuit court elects to exercise the statutory option set forth in Wis. Stat. § 973.014(2), as it did in this case, the parole eligibility date links automatically to the period of incarceration, which in turn has a direct and automatic effect on the range of punishment. At Byrge's plea hearing, the circuit court expressly acknowledged this reality when it selected a parole eligibility date that exceeded Byrge's anticipated life span.
¶ 68. We therefore hold that in the narrow circumstance in which a circuit court has statutory authority under Wis. Stat. § 973.014(2) to fix the parole eligibility date, the circuit court is obligated to provide the defendant with parole eligibility information before accepting a plea. Parole eligibility in this discrete situation implicates punishment and constitutes a direct consequence of the plea. Because the circuit court did not inform Byrge about a potential direct consequence of his conviction, we conclude that Byrge has made a prima facie showing that the plea was not knowing, voluntary, and intelligent according to the requirements outlined in Wis. Stat. § 971.08(l)(a).
*238¶ 69. Having found that Byrge has made a threshold showing that the plea colloquy was defective, we now examine whether the State nonetheless has proven by clear and convincing evidence that Byrge nonetheless entered the plea knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently. See Bangert, 131 Wis. 2d at 274. If we find that the State has met this burden by showing that Byrge was aware of the parole eligibility possibilities, we will not disturb the pleas Byrge entered. See id. at 274-75.
¶ 70. In making its showing, the State may rely on any evidence, including testimony from defense counsel, to prove that a defendant possessed the requisite information to make the plea knowing, voluntary, and intelligent. Id. In this case the State offers the testimony that Byrge's trial counsel, Norby, provided at a post-conviction motion hearing. Although we recognize that Norby made his observations in the context of defending himself in an ineffective assistance of counsel claim, we nonetheless find his testimony pertinent to the State's burden. When reviewing a plea, we do "not focus on 'ritualistic litany' of formal elements" but instead consider whether the defendant received real notice about the implications of the plea. Bangert, 131 Wis. 2d at 282-83 (internal quotations omitted).
¶ 71. Norby testified that Byrge appeared to understand what his options were before the plea was entered, and he explained to Byrge that a conviction for first-degree intentional homicide carried a mandatory life sentence. Norby said that Byrge understood that the court could set a parole eligibility date sufficiently far enough into the future that Byrge would have no realistic opportunity of being released during his lifetime. According to Norby, Byrge never expressed any *239confusion or lack of knowledge about the plea or the likely penalties.
¶ 72. Byrge told the court at his change of plea hearing that he understood that the charge of first-degree intentional homicide carries a punishment of life imprisonment. He also testified at the post-conviction motion hearing. When asked if Norby discussed a parole eligibility date with him, Byrge said, "He never talked to me about going to prison at all for that." Byrge, however, added that he knew what parole eligibility meant. He also recognized that by entering the plea, the court would find him guilty of first-degree intentional homicide. Moreover, Byrge stated that he understood that the penalty for the crime was a mandatory sentence of life in prison.
¶ 73. The circuit court issued a written decision denying Byrge's motion for post-conviction relief. The court made the following finding:
[T]he Defendant was advised that he faced life imprisonment as punishment for his crime and the Defendant testified that he understood. Trial counsel discussed with the Defendant that the court could set parole eligibility so far into the future that he would not be released during his lifetime and that the Defendant understood that possibility. Under these circumstances, this court finds that the Defendant was advised of the maximum penalty and that he faced life without the possibility of parole.
We do not disturb this finding of fact because we conclude that the circuit court's determination was not clearly erroneous. The testimony of Norby supported the court's decision that Byrge knew and understood the parole eligibility possibilities at the time he entered his plea. We therefore conclude that the State has met *240its burden to prove that Byrge had real notice about the implications of the plea.
¶ 74. We hold that although the circuit court had a duty to inform Byrge about the parole eligibility information before it accepted his plea, the State has met its burden to prove that, despite the deficiency of the plea colloquy, Byrge nonetheless entered the plea knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently.
CONCLUSION
¶ 75. We hold that an appellate court reviewing a competency determination must utilize the clearly erroneous standard. Like the Supreme Court, we recognize that a competency hearing presents a unique category of inquiry in which the circuit court is in the best position to appraise witness credibility and demeanor and therefore to apply the law to the facts. Under this deferential standard of review, we affirm the circuit court's determination that Byrge was competent to stand trial. The testimony at the competency hearing supported the finding that Byrge was able to understand the proceedings and assist in his defense. We also conclude that when a circuit court exercises its statutory option to fix a parole eligibility date, the date impacts the potential punishment. In this limited circumstance the parole eligibility information is a direct consequence of the plea. In this case, however, the State has met its burden to prove that, despite the deficiency of the plea colloquy, Byrge nonetheless entered the plea knowingly, voluntarily, and intelligently.
By the Court. — The decision of the court of appeals is affirmed.
All subsequent references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 1991 — 92 volumes unless indicated otherwise.
Under Wis. Stat. § 971.16(3), the examiner's report must address:
[T]he ability of the defendant to appreciate the wrongfulness of the defendant's conduct or to conform the defendant's conduct with the requirements of law at the time of the commission of the criminal offense charged and,.. .whether the defendant needs medication or treatment and whether the defendant is not competent to refuse medication or treatment for the defendant's mental condition.
A competency to proceed report sets forth "[t]he examiner's opinion regarding the defendant's present mental capacity to understand the proceedings and assist in his or her defense." Wis. Stat. § 971.14(3)(c).
Byrge was born on July 2,1975.
See generally State ex rel. Matalik v. Schubert, 57 Wis. 2d 315, 321, 204 N.W.2d 13 (1973) (quoting 4 Blackstone, Commentaries *24, *25 (1897)); Cooper v. Oklahoma, 517 U.S. 348, 356-57 (1996).
See also Luke Stephen Vadas, Casenote, Godinez v. Moran: An Insane Rule for Competency?, 39 Loy. L. Rev. 903, 906 (1994).
Because an incompetent defendant's right not to stand trial is rooted deeply in constitutional principles, individual states may not impose procedural burdens that are incompatible with the protections offered by the Due Process Clause of the United States Constitution. Cooper, 517 U.S. at 367-69.
The Supreme Court treats the following as constitutional facts, situations in which the Court reviews the application of constitutional principles to the historical facts independently: Voluntariness of a confession, Miller v. Fenton, 474 U.S. 104 (1985); probable cause and reasonable suspicion determinations, Ornelas v. United States, 517 U.S. 690, 699 (1996); determination whether suspect was "in custody" for Miranda purposes, Thompson v. Keohane, 516 U.S. 99, 112 (1995); effectiveness of counsel's assistance, Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668 (1984); application of Sixth Amendment right to counsel, Brewer v. Williams, 430 U.S. 387, 397 (1977).
See generally George C. Christie, An Essay on Discretion, 1986 Duke L.J. 747, 772 (1986).
In line with 28 U.S.C. § 2254(d)(8), the Supreme Court used the phrase "not 'fairly supported by the record.'" Maggio v. Fulford, 462 U.S. 111, 117 (1983) (per curiam).
Four justices suggested that the majority was overruling those cases in which the Court had held that the review of a competency determination presents a mixed question of fact and law: Justice White concurred in the judgment but disagreed with the majority's conclusion "that competency is a question of *222historical fact." Fulford, 462 U.S. at 119 (1983) (White, J., concurring). Justice Marshall dissented, finding that, "Our decisions clearly establish that whether a competence hearing should have been held is a mixed question of law and fact which is subject to full federal review." Id. at 120 (Marshall, J., dissenting). Justice Brennan, with whom Justice Stevens joined, also dissented. He agreed with Justice Marshall's views on the standard of review but disagreed with him about whether the Court should schedule the case for oral argument. Id. (Brennan, J., dissenting).
See also Demosthenes v. Baal, 495 U.S. 731, 735, 737 (1990) (per curiam) (under Fulford, state court's conclusion regarding a defendant's competency is binding on a federal habeas court and noting that court of appeals did not personally observe the defendant and therefore had no reason to overturn what is essentially a factual determination).
"After Miller, practical considerations govern. A court should determine whether, as a matter of the sound administration of justice, one judicial actor is in a better situation to apply historical facts to a 'pristine' legal standard." Martin v. Dugger, 686 F. Supp. 1523, 1556 (S.D. Fla. 1988). See also United States v. Villegas, 899 F.2d 1324, 1341 (2d Cir. 1990) (citing Fulford for proposition that "[a] defendant's competence to stand trial is a question of fact"); United States v. Gold, 790 F.2d 235, 239-40 (2d Cir. 1986); Smith v. Freeman, 892 F.2d 331, 341 (3d Cir. 1989) (competence to stand trial is a question of fact); Fields v. Murray, 49 F.3d 1024, 1030-31 (4th Cir. 1995) (discussing which questions, after Fulford and Miller, Supreme Court treats as questions of fact or mixed questions of fact and law, and noting that competency to stand trial is a question of fact); United States v. Williams, 819 F.2d 605, 607 (5th Cir. 1987) (after Fulford, "the question of the defendant's competency is a question of fact as opposed to a mixed question of law and fact or a question of law"); Ray v. Duckworth, 881 F.2d 512, 516 (7th Cir. 1989) ("we must be careful to give due regard to the trial court's superior ability to draw the appropriate inferences from its observation of the defendant and expert witnesses"); Estock v. Lane, 842 F.2d 184, 186 (7th Cir. 1988) (reviewing court owes deference to state trial court because of its ability to observe the demeanor of witnesses); United State ex rel. Mireles v. Greer, 736 F.2d 1160, 1167 (7th Cir. 1984) (acknowledging that Fulford Court reshaped what was "heretofore considered at least a mixed question of law and fact with respect to the issue of competency"); United States v. Johns, 728 F.2d 953, 956 (7th Cir. 1984) (overruling previous standard of mixed determination of law and fact and holding that "clearly erroneous" standard applies on appeal to trial court's findings in a competency determination); Tolbert v. Page, 182 F.3d 677, 682 n.8 (9th Cir. 1999) (distinguishing which determinations under Supreme Court precedent are reviewed independently and which are treated deferentially); Evans v. Raines, 800 F.2d 884, 886 (9th Cir. 1986) (finding that after Miller, trial court's corn-*224petency determination should be afforded deference even though it might be a mixed question of fact and law); Oats v. Singletary, 141 F.3d 1018, 1025 (11th Cir. 1998) (observing that under Fulford, a state court's determination of competency to stand trial is a finding of fact reviewed under the clearly erroneous standard); United States v. Hogan, 986 F.2d 1364, 1371-72 (11th Cir. 1993) (noting that "as interpreted in Baal, the Supreme Court's [.Fulford] decision stands for the proposition that a state court's conclusion that a defendant is competent to stand trial is a factfinding" and overruling Eleventh Circuit's prior treatment of competency as a mixed question of fact and law).
The Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit has not spoken with one voice on the issue. In 1997 the court cited Fulford and Miller for the proposition that competency is a question of fact. Carter v. Johnson, 131 F.3d 452, 460 n.13 (5th Cir. 1997). One year earlier, the court had treated competency as a mixed question of law and fact, in which it suggested that an appellate court should take a "hard look" at the ultimate competency finding. Washington v. Johnson, 90 F.3d 945, 951 (5th Cir. 1996). See also Coe v. Bell, 89 F. Supp. 2d 922, 926 (M.D. Term. 2000) (noting that standard of review in the Sixth Circuit remains a mixed question of fact and law, even though "[s]ince the ruling in [Fulford], the Supreme Court. . .confirmed that it has classified as a factual issue the question of competency to stand trial"); Reynolds v. Norris, 86 F.3d 796 (8th Cir. 1996) (implementing standard under which appellate court gives deference to state trial court's factual finding of competence, but presumption of correctness does not extend to question whether defendant was denied due process); Lafferty v. Cook, 949 F.2d 1546, 1558-59 (10th Cir. 1991) (court reviews application of due process protections independently).
Van Tran v. State, 6 S.W.3d 257, 271 (Tenn. 1999) (citing Fulford for proposition that, "Although likely based upon expert medical and mental health testimony, the ultimate question as to whether the prisoner is competent is a question of fact"); State v. Cowans, 717 N.E.2d 298, 313 (Ohio 1999) {Fulford illustrates principle that competency is a factual determination best left to the trial judge's observations of the defendant's conduct); State v. Edwards, 572 N.W.2d 113, 117 (S.D. 1997) (relying on Fulford and finding that "a trial court is better able than we are to judge the demeanor of the accused"). See also State v. Harris, 789 P.2d 60, 72 (Wash. 1990) (en banc); Brooks v. State, 882 S.W.2d 281, 283 (Mo. Ct. App. 1994); People v. Morino, 743 P.2d 49, 52 (Colo. Ct. App. 1987).
In a habeas corpus review, other factors, such as the interests of comity and federalism, also provide reasons for deferring to the factual findings of a state court. See Estock, 842 F.2d at 187 n.2. But federalism concerns, see State v. Garfoot, 207 Wis. 2d 214, 237 n.14 (1997) (Abrahamson, C.J., concurring), are not what led the Court to review competency determinations under a deferential, "question of fact" standard. In Fulford and its successors, the important factor was the ability of the trial court to have face-to-face contact with witnesses. Fulford, 462 U.S. at 118.
See Commonwealth v. Robbins, 2000 WL 565218 *2 — 3 (Mass. 2000) ("we must give weight to the judge's opportunity to observe the defendant's demeanor”); State v. Cowans, 717 N.E.2d 298, 313 (Ohio 1999) (trial judge's observations of defen*226dant's conduct provided support for conclusion that defendant's competence did not warrant further inquiry); State v. Edwards, 572 N.W.2d 113, 117-18 (S.D. 1997) (facts and circumstances before the trial court indicated that trial court's decision to deny competency hearing did not violate defendant's due process rights); State v. Janto, 986 P.2d 306, 315-16 (Haw. 1999) (overruling mixed question of law and fact standard and adopting "abuse of discretion" standard); State v. Heger, 326 N.W.2d 855, 858 (N.D. 1982) ("Whether or not a defendant is competent to stand trial is a question of fact for the trial judge"); People v. Castro, 93 Cal. Rptr. 2d 770, 781 (Cal. Ct. App. 2000) (recognizing "general rule on appeal [ ] that a finding of competence to stand trial cannot be disturbed"); Reed v. State, 14 S.W.3d 438, 441 (Tex. App. 2000) (issue whether incompetency exists is left to the discretion of trial judge). See also State v. Zorzy, 622 A.2d 1217, 1219-20 (N.H. 1993); People v. Danielson, 838 P.2d 729, 749 (Cal. 1992); People v. Morino, (Colo. Ct. App. 1987).
The Supreme Court has found that the following also constitute questions of fact only: Voluntariness of a guilty plea, Marshall v. Lonberger, 459 U.S. 422 (1983), and juror bias, Wainwright v. Witt, 469 U.S. 412, 429 (1985), and Patton v. Yount, 467 U.S. 1025, 1034-40 (1984).
The circuit judge has a unique vantage from which to make a competency determination because the judge has signif*227icant personal exposure to the defendant. The judge is better able to assess a defendant's orientation to time, place, and persons than an appellate court reviewing a paper record. Only the judge can evaluate whether the defendant answers a question quickly or haltingly, thereby showing whether the defendant grasps the inquiry. Only the judge can hear the inflection and volume of the defendant's voice and observe the defendant's posture, attention span, eye contact, and focus on a witness. Only the judge can watch the defendant's reaction, including body language, to events in the courtroom. The judge also can determine whether the defendant is performing for the appellate record.
The judge can note whether the defendant confers with counsel while seated at the defense table. Such communication is a direct reflection of the defendant's ability to understand the proceedings and assist his or her lawyer.
The court gave Byrge's attorney the opportunity to call other witnesses, but he did not call Drs. Lorenz and Fosdal. Drs. Lorenz, Fosdal, and Baker all were scheduled to testify at the trial. The State entered the two exhibits during the discussion of Byrge's withdrawal of his NGI pleas.
Moreover, the reports by Drs. Lorenz and Fosdal were not entered as exhibits until competency had been determined. Hence, the circuit court apparently did not utilize them in making its determination.
"Competency is a judicial rather than a medical determination. Not every mentally disordered defendant is incompetent; the court must consider the degree of impairment in the defendant's capacity to assist counsel and make decisions which counsel cannot make for him or her." Judicial Council Committee Note, 1981, § 971.13(1), Stats.
The current version of Wis. Stat. § 973.014 provides the court with a third option, namely to determine that the person is not eligible for parole. Although the statute has been amended, the change does not affect our analysis.
Judge Deets remarked:
I am aware that some people live to be 110, and maybe with the advances of medical science, that you might have the capability of living to 110.1 have my doubts. But to be on the safe side, and for the reasons that this court has stated, I believe that the parole eligibility date should be set for July 2, 2095, when you would be 120 years old.
A court may impose a parole eligibility date beyond the expected lifetime of a defendant. State v. Setagord, 211 Wis. 2d 397, 414, 565 N.W.2d 506 (1997).
Wisconsin Stat. § 973.014 became effective on July 1, 1988, and applies to crimes committed on or after that date.

=== CASE 9737386 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:38.791595+00 ===

White, P.J.
(conciWTmi/). Officer Gary Kirtley’s testimony that male crack cocaine dealers in Kalamazoo frequently establish relationships with women who have apartments, move in with the women to sell drugs, and threaten the women to prevent them from talking about or interfering with the drug dealing was improper profile testimony. This testimony did not explain the significance of the seized contraband or other items of personal property, People v Ray, 191 Mich App 706; 479 NW2d 1 (1991), did not explain evidence presented,1 and was not properly admitted to assist the trier of fact in determining a fact in *67issue. People v Williams (After Remand), 198 Mich App 537; 499 NW2d 404 (1993).
I agree, however, that there was strong circumstantial evidence of defendant’s guilt separate and apart from the improper profile testimony, and that the trial court’s admission of the improper profile testimony was harmless error.
Also, because defendant does not challenge on appeal the admission of Officer Kirtley’s testimony regarding papers with tabulations found in the living room, I would not address the admissibility of the evidence.
While there was evidence that defendant resided at the apartment with two women and paid part of the rent, there was no evidence regarding how long defendant had resided there and how he came to reside there, or his relationship with the women, other than that one of the women was his girlfriend.

=== CASE 2210204 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:49.523824+00 ===

194 Cal.App.2d 620 (1961)
AMELIA DANIELS et al., Appellants,
v.
DAVID J. WEIGUM, Respondent.
Civ. No. 9978.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
Aug. 9, 1961.
Chargin and Briscoe and Leon G. Syranian for Appellants.
Honey, Mayall, Hurley & Knutsen for Respondent. *621
PEEK, J.
Plaintiffs appeal from that portion of the judgment of the trial court in favor of the defendant David J. Weigum.
The record discloses that the action commenced in the lower court was for damages incurred by the wrongful death of Carrol E. Daniels. The plaintiffs are the surviving wife and minor children. Although in their answers both defendants individually denied negligence as alleged in the complaint, at the commencement of trial defendant John Kraai admitted his liability. The liability of the other defendant, David Weigum, was tried before a jury which returned a verdict in favor of the plaintiffs against John Kraai, but against plaintiffs in favor of defendant David Weigum.
The facts in evidence at the trial disclose that the automobile operated by John Kraai struck the rear of the Weigum vehicle and propelled it into the opposite lane of traffic, where it collided with the decedent's oncoming vehicle. As Kraai's liability was admitted, the sole issue at the trial was the negligence of Weigum. Although there was evidence introduced that Weigum was negligent, such evidence was not without conflict and hence, the jury was confronted with the historical problem of resolving the conflict and which problem was solely theirs to resolve.
[1] Plaintiffs seek a reversal of the judgment on the single ground that the trial court erred in failing to give the following instruction to the jury:
"The law forbids you to attempt to classify negligence into degrees or grades or kinds, or to compare one instance of negligence with another and judge which is more deserving of reproof or excuse. If you should find that there was negligent conduct on the part of more than one person, you are not to attempt to determine which was guilty of the greater negligence, with a view to delivering a verdict in favor of, or to favor in any way, the one whose conduct was the less reprehensible. (If you find that any party to this action was, or all were, negligent, you will follow the court's instructions in determining whether or not liability should attach, and do so without regard to how you might grade or compare the negligence involved, if permitted so to do.)"
The requested instruction correctly states the law. (Lund v. Pacific Electric Ry. Co., 25 Cal.2d 287, 295 [153 P.2d 705].) But it does not necessarily follow that the trial court's refusal to give the instruction was reversible error. [2] An applicable instruction which is correct may be properly refused *622 on the ground that the point is covered by other instructions which were given. (Novak v. Peira, 175 Cal.App.2d 29 [345 P.2d 349]; City of Los Angeles v. Frew, 139 Cal.App.2d 859 [294 P.2d 1073].)
[3] The record shows that the trial court instructed the jury as follows:
"This does not mean that the law seeks and recognizes only one proximate cause of an injury, consisting of only one factor, one act, one element of circumstance, or the conduct of only one person. To the contrary, the acts and omissions of two or more persons may work concurrently as the efficient cause of an injury, and in such a case, each of the participating acts or omissions is regarded in law as a proximate cause."
"When the negligent acts or omissions of two or more persons, whether committed independently or in the course of jointly directed conduct, contribute concurrently and as proximate causes to the injury of another, each of such persons is liable. This is true regardless of the relative degree of the contribution."
The instructions given by the trial court adequately stated the law, and although the instruction refused by the lower court was more forceful, such distinction is not a ground for reversal. It is clear that the jury was not misled by the instructions given (Sebrell v. Los Angeles Ry. Corp., 31 Cal.2d 813 [192 P.2d 898]; Trelut v. Kazarian, 110 Cal.App.2d 506 [243 P.2d 104]) and the instructions as a whole stated the law fully and fairly (Douglas v. Southern Pacific Co., 203 Cal. 390 [264 P. 237]).
The judgment is affirmed.
Van Dyke, P. J., and Warne, J. pro tem.,  [fn. *] concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9737387 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:43.138976+00 ===

Corrigan, C.J.
On remand from our Supreme Court for consideration as on rehearing granted, 458 Mich 860 (1998), we consider this case involving repressed memories of sexual abuse in light of Guerra v Garratt, 222 Mich App 285; 564 NW2d 121 (1997). In Guerra, this Court held that no admission-based exception existed to the general holding of Lemmerman v Fealk, 449 Mich 56, 76-77; 534 NW2d 695 (1995), that “neither the discovery rule nor the statutory grace period for persons suffering from insanity extends the limitation period for tort actions allegedly delayed because of repression of memory of the assaults underlying the claims.” Following Guerra, as we are required to do by MCR 7.215(H)(1), we affirm the grant of summary disposition for defendants Archdiocese1 under MCR 2.116(C)(7) because plain*412tiff’s claims were barred by the statute of limitations. But for our obligation under MCR 7.215(H)(1) to follow Guerra, however, we would reverse and remand for consideration of the contention of defendants Archdiocese that they are entitled to summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(10) because they did not have knowledge or notice of defendant Gerald Shirilla’s2 behavior.3
i
Plaintiff commenced this action in 1993, alleging that defendant Shirilla, a priest, sexually assaulted him on numerous occasions beginning in 1972, when he was nine years old, and ending in 1981. In addition to claims of assault and intentional infliction of emotional distress against Shirilla, plaintiff asserted a claim of negligence against defendants Archdiocese. Plaintiff further alleged that he repressed the memory *413of the abuse until October 1992, when he underwent counseling after his arrest for spousal abuse.
The Archdiocese referred Shirilla for a psychiatric examination after plaintiff first alleged the abuse in 1993. Under Archdiocesan policy, the Archdiocese removed Shirilla from his post and sent him for treatment because the examining psychiatrists determined that plaintiffs claims were well-founded. Shirilla’s treatment included counseling and medication; he took Prozac to calm him and Depo Provera to curb his sex drive.
Defendant Shirilla admitted dining his deposition that in 1978 he massaged plaintiff’s chest and stomach while alone in plaintiffs bedroom. Aside from one other occasion where he either hugged plaintiff or shook his hand in the early 1980s, Shirilla denied any contact, sexual or otherwise, with plaintiff. Shirilla, however, also admitted massaging several other boys. The massages took place either in Shirilla’s private quarters or the boys’ bedrooms. Shirilla and some of the boys were clothed only in their underwear during the massages. Shirilla further acknowledged that a seminarian had accused him of sexual misconduct in-1973. Although the Archdiocese determined that the allegation was unfounded on the basis of the results of a psychological examination of Shirilla, it nonetheless removed him from the seminary. The Archdiocese ultimately reassigned Shirilla to the parish where he met plaintiff.
In 1995, defendants moved for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(7) and (10) on the ground that plaintiff’s claims were barred by the statute of limitations. The trial court granted the motion, reasoning *414that plaintiffs claims were barred under Lemmerman, supra:
Lemmerman and Williford dealt with alleged abuse by family members. This case deals with alleged abuse by a priest. The ages of the children were different; these children were younger at the time. The Lemmerman and Williford children were younger at the time of the alleged acts than was plaintiff in this matter.
Also the Demeyer case has the added allegations of negligence by church authorities in failing to recognize defendant Shirilla’s danger to young boys and in concealing that danger from parishioners or failing to remove defendant Shirilla from his pastoral duties.
However, the Lemmerman decision deals not [w]ith those facts but with the knowledge of the wrongs that exist in the mind of the plaintiff even though repressed. The Supreme Court specifically and unequivocally ruled that neither the discovery rule nor the disability tolling statute are available to repressed memory claimants.
This Court has read and reread the Lemmerman decision. I think I read it four or five times now and must find that it results in the clear conclusion that the Demeyer case is time barred and therefore will grant summary disposition.
n
Plaintiff argues that Shirilla’s admission of improper contact with him removes this case from the holding in Lemmerman. We agree, but are required to hold otherwise by MCR 7.215(H)(1).
In Lemmerman, supra at 63-77, the Court considered the interests underlying the statute of limitations and generally concluded that neither the discovery rule nor the statutory grace period for insane persons applies in tort cases where the plaintiff claims that *415repressed memory caused the delay in filing the complaint. The Court recited its general holding at the conclusion of part n of its opinion:
We therefore hold that neither the discovery rule nor the statutory grace period for persons suffering from insanity extends the limitation period for tort actions allegedly delayed because of repression of memory of the assaults underlying the claims. While the Legislature may ultimately resolve the threshold reliability question in favor of plaintiffs claiming repressed memories, neither device is presently available to extend the limitation period for repressed memory tort actions, even upon presentation of allegedly “objective and verifiable evidence” of a plaintiff’s claim. [Id. at 76-77.]
The Court, however, id. at 77, inserted footnote 15 after the final sentence of the paragraph. The footnote provides:
We do not address the result of those repressed memory cases wherein long-delayed tort actions based on sexual assaults were allowed to survive summary disposition because of the defendants’ admissions of sexual contact with the plaintiffs when they were minors. [Meiers-Post v Schafer, 170 Mich App 174; 427 NW2d 606 (1988)]; Nicolette v Carey, 751 F Supp 695 (WD Mich, 1990). Such express and unequivocal admissions take these cases outside the arena of stale, unverifiable claims with which we are concerned in the present cases.
Two weeks after we issued our original unpublished opinion per curiam in this case on February 28, 1997 (Docket No. 189716), another panel of this Court decided Guerra, supra. Guerra, supra at 290-291, held that footnote 15 did not carve an exception to the general holding of Lemmerman. Guerra viewed the first sentence of the footnote as addressing the *416retroactivity of Lemmerman and the second sentence as possibly creating an exception. The Guerra Court then declined to interpret the footnote as creating an exception because the Lemmerman Court repeatedly stated in the body of the opinion “its general holding that neither the discovery rule nor the statutory grace period for persons suffering from insanity extends the limitation period for tort actions delayed by alleged ‘repressed memory’ without suggesting any exception thereto other than legislative action.” Guerra, supra at 291. The Guerra Court reasoned that the Supreme Court would have identified any exception in the body of the opinion, not a footnote.
We are required by MCR 7.215(H)(1) to follow Guerra. Accordingly, we affirm the grant of summary disposition for defendants Archdiocese under MCR 2.116(C)(7) because plaintiff’s claims were barred by the statute of limitations.
m
If we were not obligated under MCR 7.215(H)(1) to follow Guerra, we would reverse and remand for consideration of defendants Archdiocese’s contention that they are entitled to summary disposition because they did not have knowledge or notice of Shirilla’s behavior.
Guerra correctly notes that Lemmerman repeatedly stated its holding in broad terms that would appear to foreclose an exception for cases containing admissions. The Supreme Court, however, elected in footnote 15 to address and distinguish claims supported by admissions. Lemmerman identified two cases where the defendant admitted sexual conduct with the plaintiff — Meiers-Post and Nicolette. In *417Meiers-Post, supra at 182-183, the plaintiff alleged that she repressed memories of her four-year relationship with her then high school teacher. This Court held that the defendant’s admission of the sexual relationship during his deposition provided sufficient corroboration that a sexual assault occurred. It, however, remanded the case for further factual development regarding whether the plaintiff actually repressed the memories. In Nicolette, supra at 698-700, the plaintiff alleged that she repressed memories of defendant sexually abusing her from the age of three to the age of thirteen. The United States District Court for the Western District of Michigan, following Meiers-Post, concluded that the plaintiff’s claims were not barred by the statute of limitations because she presented sufficient evidence that she repressed the memories and submitted a letter signed by the defendant in which he discussed three of the four incidents of sexual contact he had with the plaintiff when she was a child.
Lemmerman, supra at 66, emphasized that in cases where the Court has applied the discovery rule it has “weighed the benefit of application of the discovery rule to the plaintiff against the harm this exception would visit on the defendant and the important policies underpinning the applicable statute of limitations.” The Court further observed:
Balancing is facilitated where there is objective evidence of iiyrny and causal connection guarding against the danger of stale claims and a verifiable basis for the plaintiffs’ inability to bring their claims within the statutorily proscribed limitation period. [Id. at 66-67.]
*418In footnote 15, the Court remarked that the “express and unequivocal admissions” in Meiers-Post, supra, and Nicolette, supra, “take th[ose] cases outside the arena of stale, unverifiable claims” involved in Lemmerman. Id. at 77. Thus, the Court recognized that the concern for reliable fact finding is not implicated in cases involving admissions to the extent that it is in cases predicated on other evidence because the likelihood of a factual dispute whether the abuse occurred is lessened.
In cases supported by admissions, courts are essentially asked to recognize memory repression as a verifiable basis for a person’s inability to bring his claim within the limitation period. We conclude that the Supreme Court implicitly accepted this proposition in Lemmerman. See Lemmerman, supra at 80-82 (Weaver, J. concurring). Accordingly, were we to consider this issue as a matter of first impression, we would hold that repressed memoiy cases supported by admissions may fall outside Lemmerman. Under the reasoning of Lemmerman, supra at 74-76, the focus in determining whether to apply the discovery rule in those cases is on whether the court can be assured of reliable fact finding.
Lemmerman involved a case supported by an admission where the Court could not be assured of reliable fact finding. In Lemmerman, the plaintiff alleged that her father and aunt sexnally and physically abused her for ten years, beginning in 1939 when she was three years old. She further alleged that when she confronted her father a year before filing suit in 1990, he apologized and said that God would not forgive him. Her father, however, died shortly before she commenced the action. The Court *419concluded that the plaintiff could not invoke the discovery rule even though her claims were supported by an admission.
In this case, by contrast, we can be assured of reliable fact finding. Plaintiff alleged that Shirilla, among other instances of improper physical contact, “massage [d]” him. Shirilla admits massaging plaintiff’s chest and stomach on one occasion, but denies sexually abusing him. He also admits physical contact with several other boys during the same period. In light of Shirilla’s clear admission of conduct underlying plaintiff’s claims, we conclude that this case falls outside Lemmerman. Combined with allegations of similar misconduct with the seminarian in 1973 and Shirilla’s transfer from his post for treatment after plaintiff’s allegations became public, this case does not involve stale and unverifiable claims such as those involved in Lemmerman. Whether Shirilla’s conduct with plaintiff was sexual and whether the conduct harmed plaintiff are questions for the trier of fact. Accordingly, if we were not obligated to follow Guerra, we would hold that the trial court erred in granting summary disposition for defendants Archdiocese under MCR 2.116(C)(7).
Affirmed.
Young, Jr., J., concurred.
“Defendants Archdiocese” refers collectively to the Archdiocese of Detroit, Archbishop Adam Maida, Archbishop Thomas Gumbleton, Archbishop Edmund Szoka, Sacred Heart Parish, Sacred Heart School, Sacred Heart Seminary, Our Lady of Loretto School, Our Lady of Loretto Rectory, and Our Lady of Loretto Parish. Any reference to “Archdiocese” is a reference to the Archdiocese of Detroit alone.
In our prior opinion in this case, we reversed the grant of summary disposition for defendant Shirilla and remanded for continued proceedings. We affirmed the grant of summary disposition for defendants Archdiocese because they did not have knowledge or notice of Shirilla’s behavior. Defendant Shirilla did not seek leave to appeal the adverse decision to our Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court’s remand order provides in part:
If the Court of Appeals, after rehearing, sustains its earlier interpretation of Lemmerman v Fealk, 449 Mich 56 (1995), the Court is then to remand the case to the circuit court for consideration of the nonperpetrating defendants’ claim of entitlement to summary disposition because of absence of knowledge or notice of the individual defendant’s behavior. [Demeyer v Archdiocese of Detroit, 458 Mich 860, 861 (1998).]
Although we continue to adhere to our interpretation of Lemmerman, we cannot remand this case because we are obligated to follow Guerra under MCR 7.215(H)(1). This Court can remand this case only if it convenes a special panel and the panel agrees with our interpretation. MCR 7.215(H)(3)-(6).

=== CASE 9737388 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:43.143199+00 ===

Sawyer, J.
(concurring). I concur with the majority’s decision to affirm the grant of summary disposition. However, unlike the majority, I do not do so only because we are obligated to follow the decision in Guerra v Garratt, 222 Mich App 285; 564 NW2d 121 (1997).
*420First, I am not convinced that our decision in Guerra was incorrect. However, I do not believe we need reach that issue because, in my view, even if there is, as the majority holds, an admission-based exception to the holding in Lemmerman v Fealk, 449 Mich 56; 534 NW2d 695 (1995), such an exception would not apply to the facts in the case at bar.
Even if I were to accept the position that repressed memory cases supported by an admission represents a situation in which a case may be brought despite the fact that the applicable limitation period has expired, the “admission” in the case at bar is not of a sufficient quality to trigger such an admission-based exception.
Defendant Shirilla’s “admission” in this case hardly amounts to an admission to plaintiff’s allegations. Plaintiff alleges that Shirilla sexually assaulted him on numerous occasions over the course of nine years, beginning when plaintiff was nine years old. Shirilla admitted that he massaged plaintiff’s chest and stomach on one occasion when plaintiff was approximately fifteen years old. Other than having hugged plaintiff or shook his hand on one other occasion in the early 1980s, Shirilla denied any other physical contact with plaintiff.
I do not equate that as admitting either a sexual assault or ongoing sexual abuse over a period of nine years. Simply put, while Shirilla may have admitted engaging in questionable conduct on one occasion, he did not admit engaging in ongoing sexual abuse of plaintiff. By contrast, in Meiers-Post v Schafer, 170 Mich App 174; 427 NW2d 606 (1988), one of the cases identified in Lemmerman as falling under the potential admission-based exception, there was a strong *421and direct admission by the defendant. In MeiersPost, the plaintiff alleged an ongoing sexual relationship with the defendant while the plaintiff was a high school student and the defendant was a teacher. The defendant admitted engaging in sexual intercourse with the plaintiff on various occasions over an extended period.
Those facts stand in stark contrast to those in the case at bar where Shirilla admitted physical contact on two occasions, one having no sexual connotation and a second that may or may not have had a sexual purpose.
Simply put, I do not believe that the “admission” in the case at bar is of the quality necessary to trigger an admission-based exception even if such an exception is recognized under Michigan law.
Accordingly, I would decline to address the issues whether Lemmerman recognized an admission-based exception and whether Guerra was correctly decided. Rather, I would hold that the facts of the case at bar do not establish a sufficient admission to trigger such an exception even if one exists. Therefore, I would also affirm the trial court’s grant of summary disposition, but not merely because I am obligated to do so under Guerra.

=== CASE 9737389 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:43.766538+00 ===

JUSTICE WARD delivered the opinion of the court: The defendant, Reginald Wade, pleaded guilty to a charge of robbery (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 18— 1(a)) as part of a negotiated plea agreement in which the parties stipulated that the defendant had no prior convictions. Pursuant to that agreement, the defendant was sentenced to 90 days in the Cook County House of Corrections, with time considered served, and to 36 months’ probation. Nine months later, the trial court was informed by a probation officer that the defendant had previously been convicted of armed robbery and rape, which had made him ineligible for probation under the Unified Code of Corrections (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 1005 — 5—3(c)(2)(F)). When the defendant was returned to court, the judge rejected his argument that the court had lost jurisdiction 30 days after entering the sentencing order. The trial court held the order granting probation void on the ground that Wade was not eligible for probation at the time of sentencing, because of his past convictions. After the court vacated the probation order, the defendant was allowed to withdraw his guilty plea and enter a plea of not guilty. Following a jury trial presided over by the judge who had imposed the sentence of probation, the defendant was found guilty of robbery and sentenced to a term of nine years. The appellate court affirmed Wade’s conviction (137 Ill. App. 3d 878), and this court granted his petition for leave to appeal (103 Ill. 2d R. 315). The defendant was convicted of armed robbery and rape in 1979 and sentenced to six years’ imprisonment. His negotiated plea of guilty to the robbery charge concerned here was entered in 1982. He contends that the trial court did not have jurisdiction to vacate the judgment of probation, as Wade says it was a valid judgment because it was based on the evidence presented at the time of sentencing. Accordingly, he argues that the trial court had the power to modify or vacate the judgment only within 30 days of its entry (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 1005 — 8—1(c)). Wade says the court lost jurisdiction 30 days after imposing the original sentence, leaving the court without authority to vacate the sentence some 11 months later. The State argues that the defendant was not eligible for probation on his guilty plea to the robbery charge, as section 5 — 5—3(c)(2)(F) of the Unified Code of Corrections provides that an offender shall not receive probation if he has been convicted of a Class 2 or a greater felony in the 10 years preceding the Class 2 or greater felony for which he is being sentenced (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 1005 — 5—3(c)(2)(F)). Rape is a Class X felony (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 11 — 1(c)), greater than Class 2. Wade's conviction of that crime had occurred, less than four years before his plea of guilty to the robbery, a. Class 2 offense (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 18 — 1(b)). The State argues that, because the statute prohibits probation in this situation, the court could not sentence Wade to probation. Because the court lacked authority to impose probation, the State says the court’s first sentencing order was void and could be set aside at any time. The trial court, the State concludes, retained jurisdiction over the defendant and subject matter to set aside the void sentence. A void judgment is one entered by a court without jurisdiction of the parties or the subject matter or that lacks “the inherent power to make or enter the particular order involved.” (R. W. Sawant & Co. v. Allied Programs Corp. (1986), 111 Ill. 2d 304, 309; City of Chicago v. Fair Employment Practices Com. (1975), 65 Ill. 2d 108, 112.) A void judgment may be attacked at any time, either directly or collaterally. City of Chicago v. Fair Employment Practices Com. (1976), 65 Ill. 2d 108; Illinois Coach Co. v. Commerce Com. (1951), 408 Ill. 104; see also In re C.T. (1985), 137 Ill. App. 3d 42, 46. The defendant, citing Orrway Motor Service, Inc. v. Illinois Commerce Com. (1976), 40 Ill. App. 3d 869, 873, contends that a sentence is void only if the record before the court furnished facts showing that the court acted without jurisdiction. He says that the record before the trial court at the initial sentencing hearing supported imposition of probation as there was no evidence presented of Wade’s prior convictions. Based on. the information available to the court at the first sentencing hearing, the defendant contends the granting of probation was proper. The argument is not valid. This court decided in People ex rel. Carey v. Bentivenga (1981), 83 Ill. 2d 537, 544, and People ex rel. Ward v. Salter (1963), 28 Ill. 2d 612, 615, that a trial court has an obligation to order the criminal penalties mandated by the legislature. (See also People ex rel. Hanrahan v. Wilson (1971), 48 Ill. 2d 30.) The legislature has authority to define crimes and establish the nature and extent of criminal penalties, and a court exceeds its authority if it orders a lesser sentence than is mandated by statute, unless “the [mandated] penalty shocks the conscience of reasonable men.” (People ex rel. Ward v. Salter (1963), 28 Ill. 2d 612, 615; see also People ex rel. Carey v. Bentivenga (1981), 83 Ill. 2d 537, 542.) A trial court, upon determination of guilt, has no authority to assess a fine or impose a sentence other than that provided by statute. People ex rel. Daley v. Suria (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 26, 38; People ex rel. Carey v. Bentivenga (1981), 83 Ill. 2d 537, 542; People ex rel. Ward v. Moran (1973), 54 Ill. 2d 552, 556; People ex rel. Ward v. Salter (1963), 28 Ill. 2d 612, 615; see also In re C.T. (1985), 137 Ill. App. 3d 42, 46. Wade says, however, that Bentivenga and Salter support his argument that a sentence is void only if the evidence before the court does not support the court’s sentence. The defendant says that neither the sentence in Bentivenga nor the fine in Salter was authorized by statute, as appeared from the facts known to each court at the time of sentencing. The defendant seems to conclude that a judgment is not void unless the court knew that it was exceeding its authority when it entered the judgment. The defendant seriously misconstrues Bentivenga and Salter. Those decisions did not hold that knowledge of the trial court that it was exceeding its authority is prerequisite to a reviewing court’s determination that the trial court’s judgment was void. Wade also contends that the trial court’s vacature of the probation term improperly allowed the State a second opportunity to produce evidence against the defendant at the jury trial. The defendant says the State should have been precluded from reopening the case as it failed to investigate the defendant’s background for the first sentencing hearing. This contention is not convincing. Both parties stipulated at the first sentencing that the defendant had no prior convictions, and there was no necessity of a formal sentencing hearing on a negotiated plea. People v. Barto (1976), 63 Ill. 2d 17, 22. The defendant contends also that, under Supreme Court Rule 402(d)(2), the sentencing judge should have recused himself at the defendant’s trial. The rule in part provides: “(d) Plea Discussions and Agreements. *** (1)*** (2) *** If he [the trial judge] has indicated his concurrence or conditional concurrence [to a tentative plea agreement], he shall so state in open court at the time the agreement is stated ***. If the defendant thereupon pleads guilty, but the trial judge later withdraws his concurrence or conditional concurrence, he shall so advise the parties and then call upon the defendant either to affirm or to withdraw his plea of guilty. If the defendant thereupon withdraws his plea, the trial judge shall recuse himself.” 87 Ill. 2d R. 402(d)(2). Wade says that the trial judge violated the rule when he failed to recuse himself after vacating the original sentence of probation. He says the trial judge, by vacating the sentence imposed 11 months earlier, had effectively withdrawn his concurrence in the plea agreement. Wade says that, after he withdrew his guilty plea and pleaded not guilty, the judge had a mandatory duty under Rule 402(d)(2) to recuse himself. The appellate court, relying on People v. Cox (1985), 130 Ill. App. 3d 1073, rejected Wade’s argument, holding that the rule was inapplicable as the judge withdrew his concurrence after sentence was imposed. People v. Wade (1985), 137 Ill. App. 3d 878, 881. We consider that the appellate court properly held that Rule 402(d)(2) is inapplicable in light of the language of the rule and the committee comments. The comments state: “[A judge’s] concurrence or conditional concurrence is to be stated for the record when the plea is received, but if the judge later determines before sentencing that a more severe disposition is called for he must so advise the defendant and give him an opportunity to withdraw the plea.” (Emphasis added.) 87 Ill. 2d R. 402, Committee Comments. The comments make clear that Rule 402(d)(2) governs the procedures on accepting pleas of guilty, made pursuant to plea agreements, before sentencing. Too, Rule 402(d)(2) applies when a judge has concurred or conditionally concurred in the terms of a plea agreement and subsequently withdraws that concurrence. (People v. Lambrechts (1977), 69 Ill. 2d 544, 556.) The plea agreement to which the judge had previously agreed and under which he granted probation was based on a mistake of fact, and the agreement was no longer effective after the probation term was vacated. (People ex rel. Daley v. Suria (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 26, 33; People v. McCutcheon (1977), 68 Ill. 2d 101, 106-07; City of Chicago v. Fair Employment Practices Com. (1976), 65 Ill. 2d 108, 113-15; In re C.T. (1985), 137 Ill. App. 3d 42, 46.) The judge permitted Wade to plead not guilty after the probation term was vacated because it was clear there was no longer an agreement between the parties on the plea. With no plea agreement before the court, Rule 402(d)(2) did not apply, and the trial court properly presided over Wade’s subsequent jury trial. Even if this analysis is not deemed to be controlling, the defendant’s contention should not be given effect. The defendant made no motion for a substitution of judges. After the trial court vacated the probation judgment, the defendant could have sought a substitution of judges under section 114 — 5(c) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 114 — 5(c)). That section provides that a defendant may move at any time for a substitution of judges for cause. (See People v. Rynberk (1980), 92 Ill. App. 3d 112, 117; People v. Massarella (1979), 80 Ill. App. 3d 552, 563). The State correctly states that Wade has waived this issue on appeal because he did not request a substitution of judges before trial and did not raise it in his post-trial motion as trial error. (People v. Friesland (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 369, 374; People v. Walker (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 484, 504; People v. Adams (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 102, 118; People v. Reimolds (1982), 92 Ill. 2d 101, 108.) The defendant was represented by counsel. It would be unreasonable to hold that the defendant, having willingly gone to trial without objection before the original judge and without complaint at the post-trial motion stage, can successfully argue- on review that a different judge should have presided at his jury trial. For the reasons stated, the judgment of the appellate court is affirmed. Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9737390 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:43.770529+00 ===

JUSTICE SIMON, specially concurring: I can accept the majority’s determination that because the defendant failed to request a different judge before trial the issue is waived. Having made this determination, the court’s discussion of whether the defendant could have invoked Supreme Court Rule 402(d)(2) (87 Ill. 2d R. 402(d)(2)), which would require the judge to recuse himself, is unnecessary; since the issue has been waived, any conclusion the court might reach regarding the applicability of the rule would not affect the outcome of the case. (Palmer House Co. v. Industrial Com. (1944), 388 Ill. 542, 547). In any event, I do not agree with the conclusion the court did reach that the rule is inapplicable when the trial judge withdraws his consent from the plea agreement after rather than before sentencing. This interpretation of the rule is overly restrictive and it violates the due process clause of the Federal Constitution. When a defendant agrees to a plea bargain, he trades his constitutional right to a trial for a bargained-for sentence. This decision requires a rational calculation of risks and benefits — the expected period of incarceration following a trial against the expected period of incarceration following a negotiated guilty plea. To make this calculation, the defendant must understand not only the elements of his offense, but also the rules of the gáme, including what he can expect if the court withdraws its consent to the plea agreement. See Comment, Where Promises End: Prosecutorial Adherence to Sentence Recommendation Commitments in Plea Bargains, 52 U. Chi. L. Rev. 751 (1985). The Illinois Supreme Court drafted Rule 402 “to remove the aura of secrecy from plea agreements so that their details would be recorded and clearly understood.” (People v. Lambrechts (1977), 69 Ill. 2d 544, 558.) This rule serves to outline what a defendant can expect once he agrees to a plea bargain. Section 402(d)(2) sets forth what is to occur when a trial judge withdraws his consent to a plea agreement. The rule provides that if “the trial judge later withdraws his concurrence *** he shall so advise the parties and then call upon the defendant either to affirm or to withdraw his plea of guilty. If the defendant thereupon withdraws his plea, the trial judge shall recuse himself.” (Emphasis added.) (87 Ill. 2d R. 402(d)(2).) The use of the word “shall”, here gives the defendant a protected interest that the right afforded by the rule — that the judge will recuse himself should he withdraw his consent to the plea bargain — will be respected. See, e.g., Hewitt v. Helms (1983), 459 U.S. 460, 74 L. Ed. 2d 675, 103 S. Ct. 864. In the instant case, the judge agreed to the plea bargain and sentenced the defendant accordingly. He later voided the sentence and allowed the defendant to withdraw his guilty plea. Since the judge initially concurred in the plea and subsequently withdrew it when he voided the sentence, the rule should apply here. The majority’s conclusion that the committee comments limit the scope of the rule to situations where the judge withdraws his consent before sentencing is too narrow an interpretation of the rule to satisfy due process standards. The intent of a rule or statute is best determined from the plain meaning of its language. (People v. Pettit (1984), 101 Ill. 2d. 309.) Nowhere in the text of Rule 402(d)(2) is there even a hint that it would not apply to the facts presented here. Had we intended to limit the rule to situations where consent is withdrawn prior to sentencing, we could have easily said so. While committee comments provide some indication of a rule’s intent, they are hardly meant to serve as an exhaustive list of all the possible situations where the rule is properly applied. In addition, the purpose behind the rule is an important consideration in ascertaining its intent. (People v. Dednam (1973), 55 Ill. 2d 565.) The reason the rule provides for recusal is clear — to insure that an impartial judge hears the defendant’s case. The danger that a defendant may be prejudiced when the judge who withdrew his consent from the plea agreement hears the case exists whether consent is withdrawn before or after sentence is imposed: in- both instances the same judge has heard evidence by way of the guilty plea and factors in aggravation or mitigation. If anything, the possibility of prejudice would be even greater in the situation presented here where the judge withdrew consent after he imposed the sentence. Having presided over the plea through the sentencing hearing, the probability that the judge has formed a more rigid impression and thus is less inclined to be impartial is greater. Further, the judge might be more likely to be prejudiced against the defendant since the defendant, by requesting a trial, has demonstrated his dissatisfaction with both the sentence the judge has already imposed and the judgment the judge has issued. In sum, Rule 402(d)(2) protects the defendant when he enters a plea. Disregarding a defendant’s rights and expectations once he agrees to a plea, or interpreting them narrowly, encroaches upon -the defendant’s protected interest and violates due process. (See Santobello v. New York (1971), 404 U.S. 257, 30 L. Ed. 2d 427, 93 S. Ct. 495.) For these'reasons, I disagree with the majority’s decision on this issue.

=== CASE 9737391 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:46.044419+00 ===

Fitzgerald, J.
Defendant was convicted by a jury of abuse of a vulnerable adult, second-degree, MCL 750.145n(2); MSA 28.342A(n)(2), and was sentenced to five years’ probation, with the condition that defendant serve one year in jail, consisting of four months’ imprisonment followed by sixty days on a *566tether, with the remaining six months suspended.1 Defendant appeals as of right. We reverse.
The victim in this case is a 340-pound schizophrenic woman who was a patient at Newport Center, a specialized adult foster care facility for chronically mentally ill adults. The victim was placed at the facility as a result of being found not guilty of an offense by reason of insanity in 1994. On July 12, 1995, at approximately 9:00 P.M., the victim jumped or fell off the roof of the facility2 and onto the cement parking lot. The victim thereafter complained of pain and paralysis, and a house coordinator at the facility contacted defendant, the victim’s primary case manager, to inform him of what had happened. Defendant, who was informed that the victim had indicated that she would get up off the ground if the staff would provide her with a cigarette, instructed the house coordinator to prompt the victim to get up if she was able and to advise him of any changes in the victim’s medical condition. After assisting the victim into the facility and evaluating her condition, the house coordinator informed defendant that the victim continued to complain of pain. Defendant, noting that an emergency room visit would cost approximately $1,500 and that a physician’s visit would cost approximately $50, advised the house coordinator to have the residential administrator arrange a physician’s appointment for the victim for the following day.
Approximately sixteen hours following the fall, the victim was transported to a hospital by ambulance. *567She was diagnosed with a fractured pelvis and left elbow and a dislocated hip and left elbow.
Defendant argues that the prosecution presented insufficient evidence to support defendant’s conviction of second-degree vulnerable adult abuse. This Court reviews sufficiency of the evidence claims by considering the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution and determining whether a rational trier of fact could have found that the essential elements of the charged crime were proved beyond a reasonable doubt. People v Head, 211 Mich App 205, 210; 535 NW2d 563 (1995).
MCL 750.145n(2); MSA 28.342A(n)(2), the second-degree vulnerable adult abuse statute, provides:
A caregiver or other person with authority over the vulnerable adult is guilty of vulnerable adult abuse in the second degree if the reckless act or reckless failure to act of the caregiver or other person with authority over the vulnerable adult causes serious physical harm or serious mental harm to a vulnerable adult, [emphasis added.]
To establish the crime of second-degree vulnerable adult abuse, the prosecutor must prove (1) that the defendant is a caregiver or other person with authority over the vulnerable adult, (2) that the victim is a vulnerable adult, (3) that the defendant engaged in a reckless act or reckless failure to act, and (4) that the reckless act or reckless failure to act caused serious physical harm or serious mental harm to a vulnerable adult.
The parties do not dispute that defendant, as the victim’s primary case manager, was a caregiver and that the victim was a vulnerable adult as defined under the vulnerable adult abuse statute. See MCL *568750.145m(c) and (u); MSA 28.342A(m)(c) and (u). Thus, the first and second elements of the offense are not at issue.
The third element of the offense requires proof that the defendant engaged in a reckless act or reckless failure to act. The statute defines a “reckless act or reckless failure to act” as “conduct that demonstrates a deliberate disregard for the likelihood that the natural tendency of the act or failure to act is to cause physical harm, serious physical harm, or serious mental harm.” MCL 750.145m(p); MSA 28.342A(m)(p). The statute defines serious physical harm as “physical injury that threatens the life of a vulnerable adult, that causes substantial bodily disfigurement, or that seriously impairs the functioning or well-being of the vulnerable adult.” MCL 750.145m(r); MSA 28.342A(m)(r).3
Here, there is no dispute that defendant was advised that the victim had fallen or jumped off the roof to the concrete below and that the victim was complaining of pain and paralysis following the fall. Douglas Segan, an emergency medicine physician, opined that when one is dealing with an injured person who is complaining of pain following a fall, the injured must be immobilized and medical help must be obtained. Moreover, Segan opined that a fall from a height of twelve to sixteen feet could possibly lead to a multitude of fractures and physical injuries. Segan further opined that a person complaining of *569pain and being semiconscious following such a fall could possibly have suffered life-threatening injuries.
Given this evidence, defendant’s failure to summon immediate medical attention demonstrated a deliberate disregard for the likelihood that the victim would suffer additional serious physical harm. Therefore, we conclude that the prosecution presented sufficient evidence to establish the “reckless act or reckless failure to act” element of second-degree vulnerable adult abuse.
The fourth element of the offense requires proof that defendant’s reckless act or reckless failure to act caused serious physical harm. As previously noted, “serious physical harm” is defined as “physical injury that threatens the life of a vulnerable adult, that causes substantial bodily disfigurement, or that seriously impairs the functioning or well-being of the vulnerable adult.” The prosecution’s theory was that the “threat of death” and “pain” constitute physical injuries.
Because the Legislature did not define the phrase “physical injury,” this Court must give those words their common, ordinary meanings. People v Fields, 448 Mich 58, 67; 528 NW2d 176 (1995). In ascertaining the meaning of words, this Court may refer to dictionaries for guidance. People v Wilson, 230 Mich App 590, 592; 585 NW2d 24 (1998). Random House Webster’s College Dictionary (1997), pp 672 & 983, defines the term “physical” as “of or pertaining to the body” and the term “injury” as “harm or damage done or sustained.” Clearly, the mere threat of death does not constitute a physical injury.
“Pain” is defined as “physical suffering typically from an injury or illness.” Random House Webster’s *570College Dictionary (1997), p 972. No published Michigan decision has addressed, in the context of the vulnerable adult abuse statute, whether evidence of pain is sufficient to satisfy the “physical injury” element. However, in the context of a claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress, which requires a plaintiff to establish that the emotional distress manifested itself in definite and objective physical injury, it has been held that a general claim of pain and suffering will not suffice. Parnell v Booth Newspapers, Inc, 572 F Supp 909, 917 (WD Mich, 1983). See also Stites v Sundstrand Heat Transfer, Inc, 660 F Supp 1516, 1526-1527 (WD Mich, 1987). In light oí Parnell, and given that pain is merely a “symptom” of an injury or illness, we conclude that pain alone does not constitute a “physical injury.”4
Although hypothetical testimony was presented regarding medical complications that could result from a fall similar to the one in the present case, absolutely no evidence was presented that the victim suffered a physical injury as the result of the delay in medical treatment. Orthopedic surgeon John Morgan, who saw the victim on July 13, 1995, was unable to say with any reasonable degree of medical certainty that the victim sustained any physical injury apart from the initial fall. Dr. Segan, who had never examined the victim, testified that he could not say with certainty that the movement of the victim had aggravated her physical injury. The prosecution did not present any evidence to contradict this medical testimony. In the absence of any evidence that *571defendant’s failure to summon immediate medical attention caused a physical injury to the victim, we conclude that the evidence is insufficient to support defendant’s conviction.
In light of our disposition of this issue, we need not address defendant’s claim of instructional error.
Reversed.
Doctoroff, J., concurred.
Defendant was released on bond pending appeal.
The victim fell from a height of approximately twelve to fourteen feet.
The prosecution does not contend on appeal that defendant’s allegedly reckless act or reckless failure to act caused serious mental harm.
Indeed, a medical expert testified that pain is generally a symptom of a physical injury rather than a physical injury itself.

=== CASE 9737392 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:46.048673+00 ===

Corrigan, C.J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent. Unlike the majority, I would hold that the prosecution presented sufficient evidence to support defendant’s conviction of second-degree vulnerable adult abuse, MCL 750.145n(2); MSA 28.342A(n)(2). Defendant, a social worker, acted as the gatekeeper regarding emergency medical services for the Newport Center’s adult foster care clients, requiring that all employees obtain his approval before arranging for medical services or risk personal liability for their cost. The jury properly concluded that defendant’s decision to deny emergency services for this victim was a criminal act.
A
To support a conviction of second-degree vulnerable adult abuse, the prosecution must prove that (1) the defendant was a caregiver or other person with authority over the victim, (2) the victim was a vulnerable adult, (3) the defendant recklessly acted or failed to act, and (4) the defendant’s recklessness “causefd] serious physical harm or serious mental harm to the vulnerable adult.” MCL 750.145n(2); MSA 28.342A(n)(2). In this case, the prosecutor proceeded *572under a theory that defendant’s recklessness caused “serious physical harm,” not “serious mental harm.”1
The Legislature defined the phrase “serious physical harm” as “a physical injury that threatens the life of a vulnerable adult, that causes substantial bodily disfigurement, or that seriously impairs the functioning or well-being of the vulnerable adult.” MCL 750.145m(r); MSA 28.342A(m)(r). This Court must apply the phrase as expressly defined. People v Chupp, 200 Mich App 45, 49; 503 NW2d 698 (1993). Therefore, under the clear language of the statute, the defendant’s recklessness must cause a “physical injury” that either (1) threatens the life of a vulnerable adult, (2) causes substantial bodily disfigurement, or (3) seriously impairs the functioning or well-being of the vulnerable adult.
I agree with the majority that evidence that defendant’s recklessness threatened the life of the victim was not, by itself, sufficient to support a conviction. I cannot, however, join in the majority’s conclusion that bodily pain does not constitute a “physical injury” for purposes of the statute. The construction of the statute is a question of law for this Court. People v Webb, 458 Mich 265, 274; 580 NW2d 884 (1998). In construing the statute, this Court’s purpose is to ascertain the reasonable meaning of the specific language employed by the Legislature. People v Vronko, 228 Mich App 649, 655; 579 NW2d 138 (1998); People v Armstrong, 212 Mich App 121, 127; 536 NW2d 789 (1995).
*573Because the Legislature did not define the phrase “physical injury,” this Court must give those words their common, ordinary meanings. Webb, supra at 274; People v Fields, 448 Mich 58, 67; 528 NW2d 176 (1995). In ascertaining the common meaning of words, this Court may refer to dictionaries for guidance. People v Wilson, 230 Mich App 590, 592; 585 NW2d 24 (1998). Random House Webster’s College Dictionary (1997), pp 672 & 983, defines the term “physical” as “of or pertaining to the body” and the term “injury” as “harm or damage done or sustained.” Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary (1974), pp 594 & 866, similarly defines the term “physical” as “of or relating to the body” and the term “injury” as “hurt, damage, or loss sustained.” Those dictionaries define the term “pain” as “[usually] localized physical suffering associated with a bodily disorder (as a disease or an injury),” Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary (1974), p 824, and “physical suffering typically from injury or illness,” or “an instance of such suffering; a distressing sensation in part of the body.” Random House Webster’s College Dictionary (1997), p 972. Accordingly, giving the statutory language its common meaning, I would hold that the phrase “physical injury” encompasses bodily pain because pain both relates to the body and is harmful or hurtful.
B
In this case, the question is whether the prosecution proved that defendant’s recklessness caused the victim bodily pain that affected her in one of the three ways set forth in the statute.2 Unlike the major*574ity, I would hold that a reasonable jury could find that defendant caused the victim bodily pain. That defendant’s act was not the sole cause of harm to the victim does not relieve him of culpability. His recklessness need only be a proximate cause. See People v Bailey, 451 Mich 657, 676; 549 NW2d 325 (1996), amended 453 Mich 1204 (1996); People v Tims, 449 Mich 83, 95; 534 NW2d 675 (1995). As such, to establish causation, the prosecution had only to prove that defendant’s recklessness exacerbated the victim’s pain. The prosecution unquestionably met this burden by presenting overwhelming evidence establishing that the victim spent sixteen or seventeen hours in excruciating pain as the result of defendant’s reckless failure to act, i.e., to authorize emergency medical services. The prosecution also met its burden of proof regarding the severity of the harm by establishing that the victim’s pain seriously impaired her functioning or well-being.
According to Newport Center employees, defendant established the center’s policy regarding emergency medical services (ems). Under the policy, the employees were required to contact a case manager for authorization to obtain medical treatment for a resident. Thomas Horrocks, the center’s residential administrator, described the manner in which defendant responded to attempts to change the policy before the victim’s injury:
On a number of occasions I had input into the need to revise the policy in order to be able to better respond to cli*575ent and patient needs; however, all attempts to change the policy were vetoed by Mr. DeKorte and through threats and intimidation he refused to allow myself or any other staff member to change that policy.
One [occasion] in particular that comes to my mind is a situation in July of 1995 previous to [the victim’s] incident in which I made a statement in a meeting that I would be calling 911 to get appropriate care for the patients if they needed it, and Mr. DeKorte told me that I needed to start filling out my resume and looking for another job, and that I would be paying for costs of these hospital services and that it costs $50 to send a person to a doctor and $1,500 to send them to the emergency room, and that it was his call as case manager to determine when services were appropriate.
Two weeks after the criminal episode under review, defendant instructed a center employee to alter the policy to reflect that employees should contact the residential administrator, not the case manager, before taking action. Defendant'further requested that the employee backdate the policy change, but the employee could not recall at trial whether the date fell before or after the date of the victim’s injury.3
In compliance with the standing ems policy, Wayne Devette, the house coordinator, phoned defendant shortly after discovering the victim to report the victim’s complaints of pain and paralysis. Defendant instructed Devette to check the victim’s vital signs *576and encourage her to stand and move inside even though she had suffered a shattered pelvis, dislocated hip, and dislocated elbow. One of the employees at the scene refused to participate in moving someone who was so seriously injured. Other employees, however, assisted the victim in walking to the building.
Devette phoned defendant again as the victim sat in a chair near his office. Defendant ordered Devette to continue monitoring the victim’s condition, reiterating that “it would cost $1,000 to go to the hospital, and it would be $50 to make a doctor’s appointment for her.” Following defendant’s instructions, Devette left a note on Horrocks’ desk requesting that he schedule a doctor’s appointment for the victim. The victim was eventually moved to the living room floor, where she spent the night.
After arriving at work at 8:00 A.M., Horrocks scheduled a doctor’s appointment for the victim later that day. Horrocks then spoke to defendant about obtaining immediate treatment for the victim. Defendant refused, stating that the victim was manipulative and engaging in histrionics. He instructed Horrocks to get the victim ready for her appointment. Defendant also refused Horrocks’ request that he immediately personally assess the victim’s condition. Horrocks attempted to implement defendant’s orders, but the victim could not raise herself from the floor. She urinated on her clothing because she could not walk to the restroom. Throughout the morning, Horrocks repeatedly requested that defendant examine the victim to assess her injuries, but he declined.
Defendant first saw the victim approximately three or four hours after arriving at work. Even after speaking with her and observing her inability to move, *577defendant declined to arrange for immediate medical treatment. Instead, he encouraged the victim to get up and dress herself for her doctor’s appointment. The victim missed her appointment because she could not move from the living room floor. At 2:00 p.m., Horrocks, acting without defendant’s authorization while defendant was at lunch, called ems to transport the victim to the hospital.
This evidence clearly demonstrates that defendant’s actions seriously impaired the victim’s functioning or well-being. As a result of defendant’s reckless decisions, the victim spent sixteen or seventeen hours in excruciating pain from a shattered pelvis, and a dislocated hip and elbow. During this period, the victim lay on the floor in agony, unable to move or care for herself, risking additional complications from her injuries. Indeed, the treating orthopedic surgeon described the pelvic fracture as unstable. The act of moving the victim increased the risks of hemorrhage and blood clots and posed a threat to her life. A jury could reasonably find on the basis of this evidence that the defendant’s recklessness caused the victim severe pain that seriously impaired her functioning or well-being. Therefore, I would hold that the prosecution presented sufficient evidence to support defendant’s conviction.
For purposes of the statute, “serious mental harm” means “a mental injury that results in a substantial alteration of the mental functioning that is manifested in a visibly demonstrable manner.” MCL 750.145m(s); MSA 28.342A(m)(s).
I agree with the majority that a reasonable jury could conclude that defendant’s refusal to arrange for proper medical care for the victim was *574conduct that demonstrated a deliberate disregard for the likelihood that the natural tendency of his failure to act was to cause the victim serious physical harm.
Defendant’s practice of backdating documents did not end with the ems policy. In response to an investigation into the incident, defendant prepared several reports regarding the care provided for the victim during periods ending in 1994, February 1995, and May 1995. Although he prepared the reports in August 1995, defendant dated his signature to correspond with the end of the period covered, not the date the reports were actually prepared and signed.

=== CASE 2210217 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:49.679216+00 ===

194 Cal.App.2d 538 (1961)
THE PEOPLE, Respondent,
v.
PERRY HOLLEY et al., Defendants; HENRY LEE BURRELL, Appellant.
Crim. No. 7408.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. One.
Aug. 7, 1961.
Morris L. Davidson, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, William E. James, Assistant Attorney General, Norman H. Sokolow and Matthew M. Kearney, Deputy Attorneys General, for Respondent.
FOURT, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment of conviction of burglary.
In an information filed in Los Angeles County, appellant was charged with a violation of section 459, Penal Code. It was stated in the information that the appellant had entered a locked automobile with the intent to commit a theft. A plea of not guilty was entered. The public defender was appointed as counsel for appellant. Trial by jury was waived. The cause was consolidated with case numbered 228394, which pertained to Perry Holley, a codefendant. Appellant was found guilty as charged, and the offense fixed as burglary in the second degree.
A resume of the facts is as follows:
On April 27, 1960, about noontime, Ann Wright parked and locked her 1955 Oldsmobile car in a market parking lot in the 1400 block of East Florence Avenue in Los Angeles. She returned to her car in about 15 minutes and found the lefthand side wind wing broken and all of the property which had been left in the car missing. The property consisted of certain cosmetic materials in cases, and her purse containing a diamond ring. No one had been given permission to enter the car or to take the items in question.
At about 1:20 p. m. of the same day Officer Prause of the Los Angeles Police Department saw a 1951 Chevrolet parked on 23d Street about 4 feet south of the north curb. The right door of the Chevrolet was open and appellant was between such door and the curb, bending over some trash boxes. The appellant looked in the direction of the officer and at once got into the Chevrolet and it pulled away from the curb. The officer pursued the Chevrolet westbound on 23d Street and finally stopped it near San Pedro Street by sounding the horn in his car and showing a red light. When the officer first sounded the horn the appellant leaned forward as if he were fumbling with something on the front floorboards of the Chevrolet car.
The defendant, Holley, when the Chevrolet car stopped got *540 out and walked to the rear where the police car was parked. The officer walked to the driver's side of the Chevrolet car and saw a leather brief case opened on the front seat. This case was later identified as being the property of Ann Wright. There were similar brief cases and many loose items of cosmetics in the back seat of the Chevrolet. Holley told the officer he was a salesman and when then asked to exhibit his salesman's license, stated that he was not a salesman. Holley then said that he had found the cosmetics in a trash box in the 1200 block of East 23d Street. The appellant, during the period of time just mentioned, remained seated in the front seat of the Chevrolet.
The officer called for assistance and Officer Longuevaen answered the call and took the two suspects to a police station. Upon arrival at the station appellant was taken into the homicide room and Holley was placed in a separate room which was about 40 feet from where the appellant was placed. After appellant had been taken from the homicide room where he had been questioned, a diamond ring was observed in the doorway to such room about 6 feet from where appellant had been seated.
About 4 p. m. of the same day, Ann Wright came to the police station and identified the brief cases, cosmetics and diamond ring as her property, all of which had been taken from her locked car during her absence as heretofore set forth.
Appellant was searched and several T-shaped pieces of metal commonly known as pick locks were found in his possession.
The appellant in the first instance in this appeal represented himself. His argument at that time was that he had just been released from the state prison in Texas in January and he stated, "the odds were not in my favor"; further that the judge had found him guilty on general principles and that now he had "learned my lesson." Furthermore he asserted that he did not have in mind trying to get any money from the State of California (for being convicted and sent to prison), but would be satisfied to "leive the state compleaty." We interpreted the statement to mean that it was his contention that there was not sufficient evidence to sustain the judgment.
[1] The burglarious intent required by the statute in question may be inferred from the unlawful entry alone. (People v. Stewart, 113 Cal.App.2d 687, 691 [248 P.2d 768].)
[2] When property which was stolen in a burglary is *541 found in the possession of a person soon after the theft and such person is unable or unwilling to truthfully account for the manner in which he acquired the possession of such property the possession and guilty conduct are presumptive evidence that such person obtained the property burglariously. (People v. Citrino, 46 Cal.2d 284, 288- 289 [294 P.2d 32]; People v. McClure, 133 Cal.App.2d 631, 633 [284 P.2d 887].) The corroboration need be slight. (People v. Citrino, supra; People v. Williamson, 168 Cal.App.2d 735, 742 [336 P.2d 214].)
The amount of time which elapsed between the burglary and the finding of the stolen items in this particular case was only a matter of an hour or so and such fact was undoubtedly considered by the judge. (People v. Arbaugh, 82 Cal.App.2d 971, 987-988 [187 P.2d 866].)
[3] The defendant, when testifying in his own behalf, gave no explanation and denied any knowledge as to how the diamond ring got to the place where it was found, namely very close to where he had been seated in the police station. The evidence is sufficient in our opinion under the circumstances to sustain the judgment of the trial court.
Appellant did not in the first instance request this court for appointment of counsel. He did, however, write a letter addressed to the clerk of the superior court wherein he indicated that he wanted to appeal from the judgment. He further indicated that he was without funds and, "would the honorable judge be in his right to assign me a new concil, if so it is my request that the honorable judge assign me a council to give me legal aid with filing a notice of appeal." This court considered the letter to be a sufficient notice of appeal although it requires a most liberal interpretation. Furthermore, this court wrote to the appellant and stated among other things as follows:
"You have filed a brief in this court as of October 11th, 1960, and the matter has been set for hearing on January 24, 1961. You have made no request to this court for the assistance of an attorney to represent you in this court To the end that there may be no misunderstanding in the matter, do you wish to continue to represent yourself in your case or do you wish to apply to this court for the appointment of an attorney to assist you? In the event you should want an attorney, and in the event this court should deem it appropriate to appoint an attorney for you, the matter would undoubtedly not be heard on the January calendar. In the event you want to *542 continue to represent yourself the cause will undoubtedly be heard on the January calendar."
"Please advise this court forthwith of your desires in this matter. In the event no response is received from you on or before January 23, 1961, it will be understood by the court that you do not want an attorney, that you desire to represent yourself, and that the matter will be heard on January 24, 1961."
"An addressed, stamped envelope is enclosed for your convenience."
J. E. Brown, Clerk
By
__________
Deputy Clerk.""
An answer to the letter was ultimately received from appellant wherein he expressed a desire to have counsel appointed and this court thereupon referred the matter to the Criminal Bar Association of Los Angeles. It was subsequently recommended that an attorney be appointed for appellant and this court followed the recommendation.
A brief was filed by the appointed counsel for appellant in June 1961 wherein it is urged that at most there is a mere suspicion of guilt and that the judgment is not supported by any evidence and further that appellant did not have the exclusive possession of the stolen articles.
[4] The rule has long been settled that " 'before the verdict of the jury, which has been approved by the trial court, can be set aside on appeal upon the ground' of insufficiency of the evidence, 'it must be made clearly to appear that upon no hypothesis whatever is there sufficient substantial evidence to support the conclusion reached in the court below. ...' " (People v. Newland, 15 Cal.2d 678, 681 [104 P.2d 778].)
[5] Possession may be inferred from circumstantial evidence. (See People v. Torres, 98 Cal.App.2d 189 [219 P.2d 480].) The diamond ring in this particular case was found at a point where the appellant had recently been seated or close thereto and where the codefendant had not been.
A complete reading of the record indicates to this court that the evidence was sufficient to sustain the judgment, that there was no reversible error committed and that there is no merit to appellant's contentions.
The judgment is affirmed.
Wood, P. J., and Lillie, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2210223 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:49.749509+00 ===

154 Ill. App.3d 102 (1987)
506 N.E.2d 756
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
GAYLE EUGENE SILER, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 5-84-0643.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fifth District.
Opinion filed April 8, 1987.
*103 Randy E. Blue and Kim G. Noffke, both of State Appellate Defender's Office, of Mt. Vernon, for appellant.
*104 Michael Kiley, State's Attorney, of Shelbyville (Kenneth R. Boyle, Robert J. Biderman, and Denis M. Ambrose, all of State's Attorneys Appellate Service Commission, of counsel), for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
JUSTICE KASSERMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant, Gayle Eugene Siler, was found guilty of one count of child pornography and two counts of indecent liberties with a child after a jury trial held between July 25 and August 3, 1984, in the circuit court of Shelby County. Defendant was sentenced to 15-year terms of imprisonment on each count, with the sentences for the indecent-liberties counts to be served concurrently with each other but consecutively to the child-pornography sentence. Defendant has perfected the instant appeal from his convictions and sentences. We affirm.
Defendant's appointed appellate counsel raises two issues on appeal in defendant's behalf: (1) whether the trial court erred in allowing defendant to represent himself at trial; and (2) whether the trial court should have sua sponte declared a mistrial when defendant was unable to conduct proper examination of defense witnesses. Defendant has filed a pro se brief raising one additional issue: whether the trial court in sentencing defendant failed to consider that imprisonment might endanger defendant's medical condition. Defendant does not contest the sufficiency of the evidence against him and therefore we need not repeat the details of these offenses.
At his first appearance on December 2, 1983, defendant was advised of the charges against him and of his right to counsel. When defendant expressed his desire to represent himself, the following colloquy occurred:
"THE COURT: Now, is it your intent as of this minute to continue to represent yourself in these proceedings?
DEFENDANT: I hate to repeat myself. I said I would represent myself and that's an affirmative on that.
THE COURT: Now, have you been represented by counsel in other proceedings prior to this one?
DEFENDANT: (Shakes head from side to side.)
THE COURT: You have never been represented by an attorney, is that correct?
DEFENDANT: You got it.
THE COURT: You understand that it is possible that an attorney representing you might be able to do a better job with the case than you yourself might be able to do?
DEFENDANT: You know what B.S. is?
*105 THE COURT: I will take that, Mr. Siler, as an affirmative statement that you wish to represent yourself.
DEFENDANT: I think I would be better off to represent myself and I think we have that clarified, don't we?"
On December 16, 1983, defendant stated to the court: "I will let [the public defender] serve as my mouthpiece on this, ask all the questions that I feel should be brought out in this case. If he ever fails to do so, I would like him to withdraw immediately or I will ask that he be removed. I mean I have had this happen before and I find it much easier to represent myself a lot of times and have in the past." The court then suggested that if the defendant and the public defender did not have a meeting of the minds, that defendant should let the court know.
On January 18, 1984, defendant appeared with the public defender. The court advised defendant of the nature of the charges and the possible sentences. Defendant indicated he understood. The defendant also indicated that he was 39 years of age and that he intended to waive his right to a preliminary hearing. The court explained defendant's right to a preliminary hearing and again advised defendant of the charges and the possible sentences. The court also advised defendant of his rights to a jury trial and to cross-examine witnesses and also his rights against self-incrimination and to a speedy trial. The defendant stated that he understood the court's admonishments. The defendant also stated: "At this time, I definitely want [the public defender] next to me on this."
On May 9, 1984, the public defender filed a motion to withdraw as attorney of record for defendant, alleging that defendant failed to cooperate or correspond with him and that defendant failed to assist in his defense. At a hearing on May 18, 1984, the court denied the motion. Both the public defender and defendant informed the court that defendant wished to represent himself but with the assistance of the public defender "to run errands for him" and to "[f]ile the legal work and stuff like this." When the public defender advised the court that defendant desired to conduct the examination of witnesses, the court inquired of defendant's legal training. The defendant responded that he had handled all his court cases before but that he wasn't a qualified lawyer. Despite the court's warnings of the dangers of representing himself, defendant persisted in his stated desire to represent himself with the public defender as standby counsel to assist him.
At a hearing on motions on July 23, 1984, the public defender presented the defendant's opposition to the State's motion to amend the information, but he made it clear that he was doing so at the *106 defendant's request. The court warned defendant again of the pitfalls of proceeding pro se. The court also warned defendant that he was required to follow proper courtroom decorum.
Defendant filed, pro se, a discovery motion, a motion to change the place of trial, a motion to suppress, and a motion to sever some of the charges, which was granted. He also complied with discovery pro se.
Jury selection was conducted on July 27, 1984. Both the defendant and the public defender participated in the questioning of the prospective jurors. Defendant elicited information which permitted intelligent exercise of his peremptory challenges, probing areas of potential bias or prejudice. Defendant made two successful pro se challenges for cause. However, defendant also attempted to indoctrinate the jury to his side of the case and injected improper comments into his questioning, despite the trial court's admonishments.
During trial defendant cross-examined the three State's witnesses, delivered an opening statement, examined in whole or part eight of the defense witnesses, and gave one-half of his closing argument. The defendant established through the testimony that the camera used to take the pornographic pictures which supported the charges belonged to his sister, who disliked him; the victim sometimes dressed provocatively; the victim never reported the sexual episodes to anyone; the victim was not threatened when she posed for the pictures; and that other persons would have been in the house when the pictures were taken. Some of the witnesses failed to identify the defendant or the victim in some of the pictures. Defendant also examined his therapist, who testified that defendant had been a paraplegic since October 1980 and had only limited use of his arms and hands. The therapist also stated that he did not know whether defendant could hold his arms in a position in order to hold a camera to take a picture of himself. Defense witnesses also testified that defendant's reputation for morality and as a law-abiding citizen was fair.
However, during the trial the court repeatedly warned defendant that his conduct was disruptive, improper, and dilatory. Defendant complained to the jury that he did not have sufficient time or opportunity to prepare for trial. He also injected his own unsworn testimony into his questions and commented upon, repeated, argued with, and criticized witnesses' responses. He repeatedly ignored the court's rulings as to evidentiary objections and courtroom decorum and procedure.
During the third day of trial, when the court was forced to require offers of proof with respect to all defense witnesses, the court *107 limited the subject areas of examination to those relevant to the trial. The next day the court also required the public defender to ask those questions pertaining to defendant's character because defendant was not able to phrase proper questions to the witnesses. The court also warned defendant that, if defendant continued to inject unsworn testimony into the questions or repeat the witnesses' answers or examine beyond the scope of the offers of proof, the court would either prohibit defendant from calling the witnesses or require the public defender to conduct all the questioning.
Nevertheless, defendant's misconduct continued and the court, over defendant's objection, ordered that the public defender complete the examination of all the remaining witnesses. The public defender had taken an active role in the trial up to this point, with defendant's consent, objecting to questions and testimony, conducting some direct examination, making offers of proof, and arguing motions and proceedings concerning the admission or exclusion of exhibits. After this point, however, the public defender examined the last eight defense witnesses, argued defendant's motion for directed verdicts, and conducted the instruction conference. The defendant was allowed to give a closing argument, which the public defender supplemented.
The jury returned verdicts of guilty on one count of child pornography and two counts of indecent liberties with a child. It returned verdicts of not guilty on one count of child pornography and one count of indecent liberties.
As his first issue on appeal, defendant contends that the trial court "erred in allowing defendant to waive counsel and represent himself at trial."
Initially, we note that this issue was not raised in defendant's written post-trial motion and therefore may be considered as having been waived. (People v. Friesland (1985), 109 Ill.2d 369, 374, 488 N.E.2d 261, 262.) Nevertheless, we will address this contention.
We note that defendant is not contending that he did not effectively waive his sixth amendment right to counsel. (Cf. People v. Nieves (1982), 92 Ill.2d 452, 466, 442 N.E.2d 228, 235 (in which the court stated that where defendant proceeds to trial with standby counsel, admonishments of supreme court rule for waiver of counsel are not necessary).) Instead, defendant claims that "[b]ecause of his physical disability and his limited mental capacity to think rationally and articulate ideas, defendant lacked the ability to assist in his own defense, much less conduct it."
 1-4 The sixth amendment to the United States Constitution grants to a criminal defendant the right to make a defense pro se. *108 (Faretta v. California (1975), 422 U.S. 806, 819, 45 L.Ed.2d 562, 572, 95 S.Ct. 2525, 2533.) A careful inquiry must be made to determine defendant's ability to conduct his own defense, focusing on his age, level of education, mental capacity, and prior experience with legal proceedings. (People v. Graves (1984), 134 Ill. App.3d 473, 476, 480 N.E.2d 1142, 1144.) To exercise the right to proceed pro se, a defendant must knowingly and intelligently waive the benefits of his right to representation by counsel. (134 Ill. App.3d 473, 476, 480 N.E.2d 1142, 1144.) As noted earlier, defendant does not claim that he did not knowingly and intelligently waive the right to counsel; and the record indicates that defendant's waiver of counsel was in compliance with Supreme Court Rule 401(a) (103 Ill.2d R. 401(a)). Furthermore, the court was aware of the defendant's age and his ability to speak and conduct his defense rationally and intelligently. The court was also aware that defendant had represented himself previously. We note that one prior instance of defendant's pro se representation is the subject of a published opinion. (People v. Siler (1980), 85 Ill. App.3d 304, 406 N.E.2d 891.) We also note that defendant had been admonished repeatedly concerning the nature of the charges, the possible penalties, his right to counsel, and the dangers of pro se representation. A defendant need not have the skill and experience of a lawyer in order to competently and intelligently choose self-representation. Faretta v. California (1975), 422 U.S. 806, 835, 45 L.Ed.2d 562, 581-82, 95 S.Ct. 2525, 2541.
The facts and circumstances in the case at bar indicate that defendant was fully informed of the nature of the charges, the possible penalties and his rights, and that he understood them and was aware of the dangers of self-representation. We conclude that the trial court did not err in determining that defendant was competent to waive counsel and proceed pro se. We further disagree with defendant's assertion that his "ability to think rationally and mount a semblance of a defense is highly questionable."
Defendant also suggests, as part of the first issue raised by him on appeal, that "even his fitness to stand trial was highly questionable." However, our determination that defendant was competent to proceed pro se necessarily includes a determination that defendant was also fit to stand trial. (See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 104-10.) On the record before us there is no bona fide doubt of defendant's fitness to stand trial. See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 104-11(a).
 5 As his second issue on appeal, defendant urges that the trial court should have, sua sponte, declared a mistrial when defendant *109 was unable to conduct proper examination of defense witnesses.
The record indicates that the trial court was faced with a defendant who was both unruly and disrespectful and who refused to follow elementary standards of courtroom decorum and procedure. Defendant injected unsworn testimony into his questions to witnesses, asked questions that were irrelevant and beyond the scope of his offers of proof, and in general delayed the trial. The court warned the defendant that if his conduct continued the court would either prohibit defendant from calling further witnesses or require the public defender to conduct all examinations. Despite the court's warning, defendant's conduct continued and the court ordered the public defender to question the remaining defense witnesses. However, defendant was allowed to give a closing argument and told the jury: "I almost deliberately got [the public defender] to take over at that point."
"When a defendant chooses to represent himself, he assumes responsibility for conducting his own defense [citation], and he is not entitled to favored treatment or special consideration because he has made this choice [Citations.]" (People v. Beardsley (1985), 139 Ill. App.3d 819, 826, 487 N.E.2d 731, 736.) In this regard, our supreme court has stated:
"[A]s held in People v. Burson, 11 Ill.2d 360, 373, [143 N.E.2d 239,] the defendant's right to defend himself is subject to the constant duty of the court to protect the judicial process from deterioration occasioned by improper and inadequate conduct of the defense. In such situation the court possesses broad discretion in relation to the appointment of counsel for advisory or other limited purposes or to supersede the defendant in the conduct of the defense. Continuous supervision of the trial is required in order to maintain proper judicial decorum to the end that defendant may receive a fair trial." People v. Allen (1967), 37 Ill.2d 167, 172, 226 N.E.2d 1, 4.
Defendant relies on the case of McKaskle v. Wiggins (1984), 465 U.S. 168, 79 L.Ed.2d 122, 104 S.Ct. 944, for the proposition that participation by standby counsel over defendant's objection should not be allowed to destroy the jury's perception that the defendant is representing himself. (465 U.S. 168, 177-78, 79 L.Ed.2d 122, 133, 104 S.Ct. 944, 950-51.) However, McKaskle is distinguishable from the case at bar.
First, Wiggins' complaint in McKaskle was that "his Faretta right to present his defense pro se was impaired by the distracting, intrusive, and unsolicited participation of counsel throughout the trial." (465 U.S. 168, 176, 79 L.Ed.2d 122, 132, 104 S.Ct. 944, 950.) While *110 the public defender's examination of the final defense witnesses was over defendant's objection, the public defender in the instant case was not distracting or intrusive. Furthermore, defendant himself brought about this result by reason of his inability or unwillingness to follow proper courtroom procedure.
Second, the McKaskle court recognized that there is no absolute bar to standby counsel's unsolicited participation at trial and that "[t]he trial judge may be required to make numerous rulings reconciling the participation of standby counsel with a pro se defendant's objection to that participation; nothing in the nature of the Faretta right suggests that the usual deference to `judgment calls' on these issues by the trial judge should not obtain here as elsewhere." (465 U.S. 168, 176, 177 n. 8, 79 L.Ed.2d 122, 132, 133 n. 8, 104 S.Ct. 944, 950, 950-51 n. 8.) The McKaskle court also recognized that the right of self-representation is not a license to abuse courtroom dignity and that a defendant's sixth amendment rights are not violated when a trial court appoints standby counsel in order to enforce basic rules of courtroom protocol. 465 U.S. 168, 184, 79 L.Ed.2d 122, 137, 104 S.Ct. 944, 954.
We conclude, therefore, that in the case at bar the trial court did not err in requiring the public defender to conduct the examination of the final eight defense witnesses.
 6 Defendant also raises one issue in his pro se brief. Defendant claims that the trial court erred in failing to consider his physical condition when imposing a sentence of imprisonment.
Section 5-5-3.1(a)(12) of the Unified Code of Corrections provides that if the imprisonment of the defendant would endanger his medical condition, such factor shall be accorded weight in minimizing the sentence. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 1005-5-3.1(a)(12).
At the outset we would note that defendant was not eligible for probation, as he had been convicted of burglary within 10 years of the offenses in the case at bar. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 1005-5-3(c)(2)(F).) Furthermore, it is apparent from the record that the trial court was fully aware of defendant's medical condition even before trial. The defendant's spinal cord was injured in an automobile accident and as a result he was confined to a wheelchair and requires special medical treatment. Medical personnel were present with defendant in the courtroom and arrangements were made during trial to ensure that defendant received proper medical care.
The report of proceedings of the sentencing hearing revealed that the trial court considered defendant's medical condition and specifically considered section 5-5-3.1(a)(12) of the Unified Code of Corrections. *111 The court stated: "He's getting medical treatment. He does not like the medical treatment. He is displeased with the medical treatment he's receiving now. But I've seen no showing that being in prison is going to endanger, notwithstanding all the statements the defendant has made."
The defendant failed to make a showing that imprisonment would endanger his medical condition and we conclude that the trial court's sentence was not an abuse of discretion. See People v. Spinks (1980), 80 Ill. App.3d 1096, 1099-1100, 400 N.E.2d 634, 636; People v. Kelley (1975), 25 Ill. App.3d 753, 760-61, 324 N.E.2d 82, 87-88.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Shelby County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
KARNS, P.J., and WELCH, J., concur.

=== CASE 9737393 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:51.428309+00 ===

Doctoroff, J.
Defendant was charged with eavesdropping on a private conversation, MCL 750.539c; MSA 28.807(3), and divulging unlawfully obtained information, MCL 750.539e; MSA 28.807(5). After defendant was bound over for trial on the charges, he filed a motion to quash the information. The trial court granted the motion on the basis that the intercepted conversations did not constitute “private conversations” within the meaning of the eavesdropping statute because the conversations were conducted *119with the use of a cordless telephone.1 The prosecutor now appeals as of right from the trial court’s order quashing the information. We reverse.
Defendant and his wife, Joanne Stone, lived next door to Ronald Pavlik during their marriage. When defendant and Joanne commenced divorce proceedings, defendant moved out of the home, but Joanne remained. During the pendency of the divorce, Pavlik informed defendant that he owned a police scanner and that he could use the scanner to intercept calls made by Joanne on her cordless telephone.2 Defendant told Pavlik to “keep on top of things and to let him know if anything bad was going to happen.” Joanne became suspicious when, on numerous occasions, she found that other people had information about her that they should not have had. On one occasion, a friend of the court custody investigator told Joanne that defendant had told the investigator *120that defendant thought that Joanne was pregnant, that she planned to move out of the state, and that defendant had a tape recording to that effect. According to Joanne, the only place defendant could have obtained that information was from Pavlik’s recordings of her telephone conversations. Joanne contacted the police. After interviewing several people, the police obtained a search warrant and found approximately fifteen cassette tapes at the homes of defendant and Pavlik. The tapes contained recordings of telephone conversations between Joanne and her family members, friends, and attorney. Pavlik admitted that he had used his police scanner to intercept Joanne’s calls from her cordless telephone.
The prosecution argues that the trial court erred in determining that, because Joanne Stone was using a cordless telephone, her conversations were not “private conversations,” and, thus, their interception did not violate MCL 750.539c; MSA 28.807(3). We agree. Questions of statutory interpretation are questions of law, which we review de novo. People v Denio, 454 Mich 691, 698; 564 NW2d 13 (1997).
MCL 750.539c; MSA 28.807(3) provides:
Any person who is present or who is not present during a private conversation and who wilfully uses any device to eavesdrop upon the conversation without the consent of all parties thereto, or who knowingly aids, employs or procures another person to do the same in violation of this section, is guilty of a felony punishable by imprisonment in a state prison for not more than 2 years or by a fine of not more than $2,000.00, or both.
MCL 750.539a(2); MSA 28.807(1)(2) defines the term “eavesdrop” as “to overhear, record, amplify or transmit any part of the private discourse of others *121without the permission of all persons engaged in the discourse.”
Whether conversations conducted with the use of a cordless telephone are protected by the eavesdropping statute is a question of first impression in Michigan. The primary goal of judicial interpretation of statutes is to ascertain and give effect to the intent of the Legislature. People v Stanaway, 446 Mich 643, 658; 521 NW2d 557 (1994). The first criterion in determining intent is the specific language of the statute. People v Pitts, 216 Mich App 229, 232; 548 NW2d 688 (1996). The Legislature is presumed to have intended the meaning it plainly expressed. People v Roseburgh, 215 Mich App 237, 239; 545 NW2d 14 (1996).
First, we disagree with the trial court’s finding that Joanne Stone’s conversations were not protected by the eavesdropping statute because “a conversation does not include the reconstruction of a conversation from the interception of radio waves from a cordless telephone.”
The trial court’s finding that the interception of the radio waves produced by a cordless telephone is not the interception of a “conversation” was based on the decision of the United States Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals in McKamey v Roach, 55 F3d 1236 (CA 6, 1995), construing title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, as amended by the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986, 18 USC 2510-2521 (1988). The federal statute at issue prohibited the nonconsensual interception of wire, oral, and electronic communication and the intentional disclosure or use of the contents of such communication with knowledge that the information was *122obtained through illegal interception. 18 USC 2511(l)(a), (c), and (d); McKamey, supra at 1238. At the time the conversations in McKamey were intercepted, the federal statute expressly exempted the radio portion of a cordless telephone conversation from the definitions of wire and electronic communications. Id. at 1238.3 Therefore, if a cordless telephone conversation were to fall within the protection of the federal statute, it would have to be included within the definition of an oral communication. The statute defined an oral communication as “any oral communication uttered by a person exhibiting an expectation that such communication is not subject to interception under circumstances justifying such expectation.” 18 USC 2510(2); McKamey, supra at 1239. The court reasoned that, because the defendants did not intercept the plaintiffs’ actual utterances, but intercepted a radio signal produced by a cordless telephone used by one of the plaintiffs, it was actually a reproduction of the conversation produced by the scanner that was recorded. Id. at 1239. Accordingly, the court concluded that the plain language of the statute did not include cordless telephone communications within the definition of “oral communication.” Id.
In contrast to the federal statute, the Michigan eavesdropping statute does not differentiate between wire, electronic, and oral communications. Rather, the statute protects “private conversations.” Because the term “conversation” is not defined in the statute, *123we refer to a dictionary for its definition. People v Lee, 447 Mich 552, 558; 526 NW2d 882 (1994). Random House Webster’s College Dictionary (1997) defines a “conversation” as an “informal spoken interchange of thoughts, information, etc.; oral communication between people.” According to the Michigan eavesdropping statute’s own definition of eavesdropping, the interception of “any part of the private discourse of others without the permission of all persons engaged in the discourse”4 is prohibited. MCL 750.539a(2); MSA 28.807(1)(2), MCL 750.539c; MSA 28.807(3) (emphasis added). Keeping in mind that the intent of the Legislature in enacting the eavesdropping statute was to protect an individual’s right to privacy, Navarra v Bache Halsey Stuart Shields Inc, 510 F Supp 831, 835 (ED Mich, 1981), we read that language broadly to include the interception of radio waves generated by a cordless telephone conversation. In this respect, MCL 750.539c; MSA 28.807(3) and MCL 750.539a(2); MSA 28.807(1)(2) offer more protection for an individual’s right to privacy than does the federal statute. Accordingly, we reject the trial court’s finding that a cordless telephone conversation is not a “conversation” for the purposes of the eavesdropping statute.
We further believe that the trial court erred in determining that, because Joanne Stone’s conversations were conducted with the use of a cordless telephone, the conversations were not private. The statutes at issue do not define the term “private.” However, in the context of the eavesdropping statute, this *124Court has held that a conversation is “private” if it is “ ‘intended for or restricted to the use of a particular person or group or class of persons . . . [and is] intended only for the persons involved.’ ” Dickerson v Raphael, 222 Mich App 185, 193; 564 NW2d 85 (1997), quoting Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, Unabridged Edition (1966). Here, the circumstances indicated that Joanne Stone intended her cordless telephone conversations to be private. The conversations were conducted in the privacy of her own home, and she testified at the preliminary examination that she intended that they be heard only by the persons with whom she was conversing. Therefore, the conversations were private for the purposes of the eavesdropping statutes.
The trial court reasoned that Joanne Stone could not have had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the cordless telephone conversations because of the ease of interception of such conversations. However, the trial court erred in relying on the concept of a “reasonable expectation of privacy.” The concept of a “reasonable expectation of privacy,” which arose in the context of the Fourth Amendment, is not applicable here, where the statutes at issue focus on conduct between private individuals and expressly exclude law enforcement officers acting within the scope of their authority. MCL 750.539g(a); MSA 28.807(7)(a); Dickerson, supra at 192-193. Rather, whether a conversation was private should depend on whether the conversation was “ ‘intended for or restricted to the use of a particular person or group or class of persons . . . [and is] intended only for the persons involved.’ ” Id. at 193 (citation omitted).
*125Furthermore, we disagree with the trial court’s reasoning that the cordless telephone conversations were not private because of the ease of their interception. Such reasoning would erode the right to privacy as technology advanced to create simpler ways to intercept private communications of all types. We agree with the statement of the Ohio Supreme Court that “[fundamental rights should not be sacrificed on the altar of advancing technology.” Ohio v Bidinost, 71 Ohio St 3d 449, 462; 644 NE2d 318 (1994). It is true that the right to privacy may be waived by clear and unequivocal conduct estopping the assertion of the right. Dickerson, supra at 193; Doe v Mills, 212 Mich App 73, 86-87; 536 NW2d 824 (1995). However, we do not believe that Joanne Stone’s use of a cordless telephone clearly and unequivocally waived her privacy rights. The preliminary examination testimony indicated that Joanne believed her cordless telephone conversations to be just as private as if she had used a corded land-line telephone.5 Joanne Stone was conducting a conversation on a telephone in the privacy of her own home. Pavlik did not unintentionally or accidentally pick up Joanne Stone’s conversations on the scanner, but targeted and intentionally monitored Joanne Stone’s conversations with the scanner. The fact that it was easy for him to do so is irrelevant. *126The type of conduct that occurred in the instant case is exactly the type of conduct the eavesdropping statute was intended to discourage, and which we will not condone. Accordingly, on the basis of the plain language of the statute, we hold that the cordless telephone conversations intercepted by Pavlik were “private conversations” for the purposes of MCL 750.539c; MSA 28.807(3).6 We, therefore, reverse the trial court’s order granting defendant’s motion to quash the information.
Reversed.
Hoekstra, P.J., concurred.
An understanding of the operation of a cordless telephone is required for the resolution of the issue presented in this case. In People v Fata, 159 AD2d 180, 183; 559 NYS2d 348 (1990), the New York Supreme Court, Appellate Division, explained:
Undoubtedly those who eryoy the convenience of a cordless telephone suffer a certain loss of privacy in their communications. A cordless telephone consists of a base unit, which is connected to an ordinary telephone wire, and a handheld unit. For an outgoing call, the handheld unit transmits the speaker’s voice over radio waves to the base unit. Incoming calls over the telephone wire are transmitted from the base unit to the handheld unit by radio waves. Such radio signals can pass through almost any material and ordinarily have a range of about 50 feet. Because the telephones operate on common radio frequencies, the conversations can be monitored with a standard radio or even a walkie-talkie. If two cordless telephones are physically close enough, a call to one of them could cause the other telephone to ring.
Joanne Stone is virtually blind. She testified that it was necessary for her to use the cordless telephone so that she could use an enlarger when she conducted business on the telephone.
The provisions in 18 USC 2510 expressly excluding the radio portion of a cordless telephone communication from the protection of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act were deleted in 1994 by PL 103-414, § 202(a)(1).
The dictionary defines the term “discourse” to include “conversation.” Random House Webster’s College Dictionary (1997).
The legislative histoiy of the 1994 amendment of 18 USC 2510, which deleted the express exclusion of the radio portion of a cordless telephone communication from the protection of the federal Electronic Communications Privacy Act, noted that “ ‘[t]he cordless phone, far from being a novelty item used only at “poolside,” has become ubiquitous . . [.] More and more communications are being carried out by people [using cordless phones] in private, in their homes and offices, with an expectation that such calls are just like any other phone call.’ ” HR Rep No 103-827, 103d Cong, 2d Sess (1994) reprinted in 1994 US Code Cong & Ad News 3489, 3497 (citation omitted).
Numerous other jurisdictions have construed their state eavesdropping statutes to prohibit the intentional interception of cordless telephone conversations. See State v Faford, 128 Wash 2d 476, 484-486; 910 P2d 447 (1996); State v Mozo, 655 So 2d 1115, 1116 (Fla, 1995); Bidinost, supra at 461-463; Fata, n 1 supra.

=== CASE 9737394 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:51.432422+00 ===

O’Connell, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I generally concur with the majority’s analysis of this case, but I would limit the scope of today’s decision to the recording of cordless telephone conversations. Although I agree that the use of a scanner to record private cordless telephone conversations violates the statute in question, I feel that the question whether merely listening to these conversations as they are monitored by a scanner is also a violation of the statute is better left for another day. 1
*127At issue is whether using a device to record private cordless telephone conversations is a violation of Michigan’s eavesdropping statute. MCL 750.539a(2); MSA 28.807(1)(2) defines “eavesdropping” as “to overhear, record, amplify or transmit any part of the private discourse of others without the permission of all persons engaged in the discourse.” As the majority opinion notes, Pavlik, allegedly acting with the encouragement of defendant and for his benefit, used his police scanner to intercept and record calls from Joanne Stone’s cordless telephone. Defendant’s argument that these conversations were not intended to be private is without merit.2 That they were broadcast over a cordless telephone does not change the nature of the communications.3
I concur with the majority’s conclusion that the conversations in question were private discourse as defined by the statute.4 To the extent that the trial court concluded that the recording of cordless tele*128phone conversations through use of a scanner was not a violation of the statute, I disagree, and in this regard concur with the reasoning and analysis of the majority opinion. I would vacate the order of the trial court and remand this case for a trial. I would direct the trial court to limit the inquiry on remand to illegal recording of the cordless telephone conversations.5
My reluctance to join in the majority opinion stems in part from my uncertainty concerning precisely when in the course of Pavlik’s conduct he began “eavesdropping” for purposes of the statute. Was it at the moment that he turned his scanner on, the moment a voice came over the system and the system began to record, or at the moment when Pavlik actually listened to the recording? MCL 750.539c; MSA 28.807(3) concerns “wilfully” using a device to eavesdrop, indicating that the inadvertent interception of private conversations may be beyond the scope of the statute.
The police found approximately fifteen cassette tapes at the homes of defendant and Pavlik that included private conversations between Joanne Stone and her friends, family, and attorney. This abundance of recorded material demonstrates the persistent and intentional nature of the eavesdropping and the egregious nature of the intrusions.
The central issue addressed in the briefs concerns the term “private discourse.” It is beyond question that Joanne Stone’s conversations with her doctor or her attorney constitute private discourse within the meaning of the eavesdropping statute. The parties have neither briefed nor argued the constitutionality of the eavesdropping statute as it applies to individuals who use a scanner to listen to cordless telephone conversations. Thus, the question of the constitutionality of this statute as applied to listeners and recorders is not before this Court and therefore not appropriately addressed here.
Today there exist numerous affordable devices of sufficient sophistication as to allow almost any conversation (private discourse) to be intercepted and recorded. The ease, method, or process by which a conversation can be intercepted should not affect this Court’s determination whether a conversation is private discourse.
I express no opinion concerning whether merely listening to these conversations violates the statute.

=== CASE 9737395 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:57.101835+00 ===

Wright, J.
NATURE OF CASE
Action Electric Company, Inc. (Action), and Connie W. Emry, personal representative of the estate of Thomas D. Emry *693(Emry’s estate), appeal from a summary judgment granted in favor of Allied Mutual Insurance Company (Allied) on the grounds that Emry was not “using” the vehicle for purposes of insurance coverage at the time he was struck and killed by another vehicle. The issue presented is whether a person who has stopped and exited a vehicle in order to assist victims of a traffic accident is “using” the vehicle for purposes of a policy of automobile insurance.
SCOPE OF REVIEW
The interpretation of an insurance policy is a question of law, in connection with which an appellate court has an obligation to reach its own conclusions independent of the determination made by the lower court. American Family Ins. Group v. Hemenway, 254 Neb. 134, 575 N.W.2d 143 (1998).
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Thomas Emry (Emry) died September 17, 1993, while attempting to help persons involved in an automobile accident which Emry witnessed. Emry and his family had been to a high school football game and were returning home, traveling southbound on Highway 31. While stopped at a stop sign at the crossroads of Highways 31 and 36, Emry witnessed a car and a pickup truck collide in the intersection.
Emry exited his vehicle, telling his family he was going to see if anyone was hurt. As Emry approached the intersection, he raised his hands to warn other drivers, and he was struck by an underinsured automobile which traveled through the intersection at approximately 55 m.p.h. Emry was approximately 25 feet from his vehicle at the time he was struck.
The vehicle Emry was driving was covered by a “business auto policy” issued by Allied to Action. Emry was not listed as an insured on the policy, but he was using the insured vehicle with permission. The policy included the following provisions:
SECTION n - LIABILITY COVERAGE
A. COVERAGE
We will pay all sums an “insured” legally must pay as damages because of “bodily injury” or “property damage” to which this insurance applies, caused by an “accident” *694and resulting from the ownership, maintenance or use of a covered “auto.”
1.WHO IS AN INSURED
The following are “insureds”:
a. You for any covered “auto.”
b. Anyone else while using with your permission a covered “auto” you own, hire or borrow ....
NEBRASKA UNDERINSURED MOTORISTS COVERAGE
A.COVERAGE
1. We will pay all sums the “insured” is legally entitled to recover as damages from the owner or driver of an “underinsured motor vehicle”. . . .
B. WHO IS AN INSURED
1. You.
2. If you are an individual, any “family member”.
3. Anyone else “occupying” a covered “auto” or a temporary substitute for a covered “auto”.. . .
F. ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS
The following are added to the DEFINITIONS Section:
2. “Occupying” means in, upon, getting in, on, out or off.
PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
Emry’s estate and Action filed a claim with Allied for under-insured motorist benefits, and Allied filed this action for declaratory judgment, seeking a determination of the scope of coverage under the policy. The issue before the trial court was whether the commercial automobile insurance policy issued by Allied provided underinsured motorist coverage for the damages resulting from the death of Emry. Allied contended that the policy was unambiguous and provided underinsured motorist *695coverage for Emry as a permissive driver only if he was “occupying” the covered vehicle, since he was not a named insured under the policy. Emry’s estate and Action conceded that he was not a named insured under the policy. However, they asserted that under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-577 (Reissue 1993) (now codified at Neb. Rev. Stat. § 44-6408 (Reissue 1998)), Allied could not limit underinsured motorist coverage to persons “occupying” the vehicle, when the liability portion of the policy covered persons “using” the vehicle. Emry’s estate and Action contended that Emry was using the vehicle at the time he was struck and that, thus, he should be covered by the underinsured motorist portion of the policy.
The trial court found that even assuming that the coverages must be identical for insureds under the policy, Emry was not “using” the vehicle when he was struck and killed by the under-insured driver. The court distinguished between named insureds and their family members who are protected when they are operating or are passengers in a motor vehicle, as well as when they are engaged in other activities, and a permissive driver’s coverage under a policy extending underinsured motorist coverage which depends on and is connected to use of the vehicle to which the policy applies. Relying upon Farmers Union Co-op Ins. Co. v. Allied Prop. & Cas., 253 Neb. 177, 569 N.W.2d 436 (1997), and National Union Fire Ins. Co. v. Bruecks, 179 Neb. 642, 139 N.W.2d 821 (1966), the court concluded that the injuries to and the death of Emry did not arise out of the “use” of the insured vehicle.
The trial court found that Emry was struck at least 25 feet from the vehicle and was not engaged in activities connected to use of the vehicle such as changing a flat tire, loading or unloading materials or other articles carried by the vehicle, or other actions that were causally related to its use. Rather, the court determined that the vehicle was merely the means by which Emry arrived at the location of the accident. The court concluded that under the policy issued, the underinsured motorist coverage was not applicable to the accident that resulted in Emry’s death and entered judgment accordingly in favor of Allied. Emry’s estate and Action appeal.
*696ASSIGNMENT OF ERROR
Emry’s estate and Action claim the trial court erred in finding that the commercial automobile insurance policy issued by Allied did not provide coverage for the damages resulting from the death of Emry.
ANALYSIS
Underinsured Motorist Statute
It is conceded that Emry was not a named insured under the policy issued by Allied. The policy states that underinsured motorist coverage is provided only for persons “occupying” the insured vehicle, which is defined in terms which imply actual contact or close physical proximity to the insured vehicle.
Emry’s estate and Action argue that under the plain language of § 60-577(1) and public policy, the underinsured motorist coverage provided must apply to the same persons who are insured under the liability provisions of the policy. Allied contends that such limitation does not violate the language of § 60-577(1) or public policy.
Parties to an insurance contract may contract for any lawful coverage, and the insurer may limit its liability and impose restrictions and conditions upon its obligation under the contract not inconsistent with public policy or statute. American Family Ins. Group v. Hemenway, 254 Neb. 134, 575 N.W.2d 143 (1998). Statutory interpretation is a matter of law, in connection with which an appellate court has an obligation to reach an independent, correct conclusion irrespective of the determination made by the court below. Nicholson v. General Cas. Co. of Wis., 255 Neb. 937, 587 N.W.2d 867 (1999). In construing a statute, a court must determine and give effect to the purpose and intent of the Legislature as ascertained from the entire language of the statute considered in its plain, ordinary, and popular sense. SID No. 1 v. Nebraska Pub. Power Dist., 253 Neb. 917, 573 N.W.2d 460 (1998). The interpretation of an insurance policy is a question of law, in connection with which an appellate court has an obligation to reach its own conclusions independent of the determination made by the lower court. American Family Ins. Group v. Hemenway, supra.
*697A provision drawn by the insurer to comply with the statutory requirements of uninsured or underinsured motorist coverage must be construed in light of the purpose and policy of the statute. Such a provision, drawn in pursuance of a statutorily declared public policy, is enacted for the benefit of injured persons traveling on the public highways. The purpose of the Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist Insurance Coverage Act is to give the same protection to a person injured by an uninsured or underinsured motorist as the person would have if he or she had been injured in an accident caused by an automobile covered by a standard liability policy. Such provisions are to be liberally construed to accomplish such purpose. See Stephens v. Allied Mut. Ins. Co., 182 Neb. 562, 156 N.W.2d 133 (1968).
Where a statutory omnibus provision is in conflict with the provisions of the insurance policy, the statute and not the policy provision is controlling. Protective Fire & Cas. Co. v. Cornelius, 176 Neb. 75, 125 N.W.2d 179 (1963).
At the time Emry was struck and killed, the relevant portion of the Underinsured Motorist Insurance Coverage Act provided: “[N]o policy insuring against liability ... shall be delivered ... unless coverage is provided for the protection of persons insured who are legally entitled to recover compensatory damages from the owner or operator of an underinsured motor vehicle .. . .” § 60-577(1).
The question is whether § 60-577 required Allied to provide underinsured motorist coverage to all persons insured under the liability provisions of its policy. In particular, Emry’s estate and Action argue that under § 60-577, the phrase “persons insured” refers to the class of persons insured under the liability provisions of a given policy.
The court in Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co. v. McMichael, 906 P.2d 92 (Colo. 1995), addressed a similar question. In that case, the liability provision of a business automobile policy covered permissive “users” of insured automobiles, while the uninsured and underinsured provision covered only permissive “occupiers.” The relevant uninsured and underinsured statute required that policies provide uninsured and underinsured coverage “ ‘for the protection of persons insured thereunder.’ ” (Emphasis *698omitted.) Id. at 96. The Supreme Court of Colorado held that the statute required that insurers offer uninsured and underinsured coverage to a class of persons as extensive as the class covered under the liability provision of an automobile insurance policy.
The court explained that read in the context of the rest of the statute, the plain meaning of the phrase “for the protection of persons insured thereunder” meant that insurers must provide uninsured and underinsured coverage for the protection of persons insured under the liability policy that the insurer was issuing. The court noted that this interpretation of the statute comported with the policies behind the uninsured and underinsured statute, which were to protect individuals from loss caused by financially irresponsible motorists and to make such coverage widely available. The court stated that absent such a reading of the statute, “[cjonsumers unaware of or unschooled in the vagaries of insurance contracts could be misled into believing they have purchased coverage when in reality they have not.” Id. at 98.
Likewise, in First Sec. Bank v. Doe, 297 Ark. 254, 760 S.W.2d 863 (1988), the uninsured motorist endorsement provided coverage for persons “occupying” the vehicle, while the basic liability policy covered persons “using” the vehicle. The relevant uninsured motorist statute stated that insurers were required to provide uninsured motorist coverage in their policies for the protection of “ ‘persons insured thereunder.’ ” Id. at 257, 760 S.W.2d at 865. The Supreme Court of Arkansas concluded that the uninsured motorist statute required coverage if the policy covered liability arising from the use of the vehicle, because the statute expressed the intent to include in uninsured motorist coverage the persons included in liability coverage.
In Kaysen v. Federal Ins. Co., 268 N.W.2d 920 (Minn. 1978), the comprehensive liability insurance coverage of a company vehicle provided in part that an “insured” included executive officers while the vehicle was being used in the business of the company. In contrast, the uninsured motorist portion of the policy did not include executive officers in the definition of an “insured.” The statute in question provided that insurers were required to provide uninsured motorist coverage in their poli*699cies “ ‘for the protection of persons insured thereunder ....”’ (Emphasis omitted.) Id. at 924.
The Supreme Court of Minnesota concluded that under the relevant statute, uninsured motorist coverage was required to be coextensive with the coverage afforded under the comprehensive liability portion of any given policy. The court concluded that this was the most sensible reading of the phrase “persons insured thereunder” as provided in the uninsured motorist statute. The court explained: “If insurers are allowed to designate a separate and smaller category of persons insured under uninsured motorist coverage, then the broad-based protection which the legislature intended to require could be contractually restricted at the whim of insurers.” Id. at 924-25. See, also, First Sec. Bank v. Doe, supra; Hornick v. Owners Ins. Co., 511 N.W.2d 370 (Iowa 1993); Kats v. American Family Mut. Ins. Co., 490 N.W.2d 60 (Iowa 1992); McMichael v. Aetna Ins. Co., 878 P.2d 61 (Colo. App. 1994); Bertini v. State Farm Mutual Auto. Ins., 48 Ill. App. 3d 851, 362 N.E.2d 1355, 6 Ill. Dec. 435 (1977); Roach v Central Nat’l Ins Co, 60 Mich. App. 40, 230 N.W.2d 297 (1975); Rau v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 21 Wash. App. 326, 585 P.2d 157 (1978).
We conclude that under the plain language of § 60-577, “persons insured” are those persons insured under the liability provisions of a motor vehicle policy. As such, Allied was required to provide underinsured motorist protection for persons “using” the vehicle and could not limit coverage to the smaller class of persons “occupying” the vehicle.
Whether Emry Was “Using” Vehicle
The next issue is whether Emry was “using” the vehicle under the terms of the liability portion of the policy. Again, this is a question of law, in connection with which we have an obligation to reach conclusions independent of the determination made by the court below. See American Family Ins. Group v. Hemenway, 254 Neb. 134, 575 N.W.2d 143 (1998). Also, whether an insurance contract is ambiguous and, therefore, in need of construction is a question of law. Moller v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 252 Neb. 722, 566 N.W.2d 382 (1997).
*700In previous cases, we have generally held that a causal relationship or connection must exist between an accident or injury and the ownership, maintenance, or use of a vehicle in order for an incident to fall within the meaning of the phrase “arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of a vehicle.” See Farmers Union Co-op Ins. Co. v. Allied Prop. & Cas., 253 Neb. 177, 569 N.W.2d 436 (1997). In Farmers Union Co-op Ins. Co. v. Allied Prop. & Cas., we held that a passenger’s injury from a dogbite while in the insured’s vehicle did not fall under the insurance policy’s limitation that the injury arise out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of the automobile. We stated that we have defined the words “arising out of the use” as very broad, general, and comprehensive terms that are ordinarily understood to mean originating from, growing out of, or flowing from and that “but for” causation was required. We concluded that there was no causal connection between the vehicle itself or its permanent attachments and the dogbite, requiring that something peculiar to the vehicle itself causally contribute to the accident. Heretofore, we have not addressed whether a person who has witnessed a traffic accident and has stopped and exited a vehicle in order to assist victims of the accident is using the vehicle for purposes of a policy of automobile insurance.
In Rau v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., supra, a truckdriver was struck by an uninsured motorist after he briefly left his truck to inquire about directions. The driver parked the truck at the curb of the southbound lanes, crossed four lanes of traffic on foot to ask for directions from another truckdriver, and in returning was struck by an uninsured motorist. The court concluded that the truckdriver was using the vehicle at the time he was struck, explaining it was common sense that the parties contemplated the driver of a delivery truck on his route might have occasion to leave the truck to ask for directions.
The court in Rau discussed what it means to “use” a vehicle within the contemplation of an uninsured motorist endorsement. Citing Hartford Accident & Indem. Co. v. Booker, 140 Ga. App. 3, 230 S.E.2d 70 (1976), the court pointed out that the “use” of a vehicle depends upon the factual context of each case. The term does not imply remoteness but does extend beyond physical contact at least to the point where control over *701the vehicle is easily or reasonably at hand and, particularly, when it is still being utilized. The court described that among other factors to be considered in determining whether a person is “using” a vehicle is whether the person is “‘vehicle oriented’ ” at the time of the injury. Rau v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 21 Wash. App. 326, 334, 585 P.2d 157, 162 (1978).
In Monroe Guar. Ins. Co. v. Campos, 582 N.E.2d 865 (Ind. App. 1991), an employee of a tow-truck company had driven his tow truck to a parking lot to confer with a police officer about towing a vehicle. The employee waited in the police cruiser for the results of a Breathalyzer test to determine whether the vehicle would need to be towed. After being informed that he was to tow the vehicle, the employee exited the police cruiser with the intention of proceeding to the vehicle to be towed to determine how it could safely be removed from the roadway. As he was exiting the police cruiser, the employee was struck and injured by an uninsured motorist.
The court determined that the tow-truck employee was using the tow truck at the time he was struck. The court explained that reasonable persons would expect that a tow-truck company employee must engage in activities during the towing process which require that the employee exit the tow truck. The court concluded that the employee was “using” the tow truck in a manner contemplated by the parties to the insurance contract.
In Harris v. Magee, 573 So. 2d 646 (Miss. 1990), the crew of a construction company was dispatched to a jobsite. A slow-moving crane departed first, followed by the job foreman in a company truck and two other employees in company vehicles. The vehicles encountered the crane on the side of the road after it had mechanical difficulties. The foreman parked his vehicle approximately 75 feet from the crane, exited the vehicle, and attempted to repair the crane. While crawling from beneath the crane, he was struck and killed by an uninsured motorist. The court held that the foreman was “using” the company truck when he was struck and concluded that stopping to repair the crane was a necessary aspect of the truck’s operation.
Similarly, in Federated Mutual Implement & Hardware Ins. Co. v. Gupton, 241 F. Supp. 509 (E.D. S.C. 1965), the court held that an employee of a gas station was using the company vehi*702ele while pouring gasoline into another vehicle stranded on the shoulder of a roadway. The court explained that the exact definition of the term “use” was elusive and not capable of a definition which would leave everyone comfortable. Whether or not an injury arises from the use of a motor vehicle within a liability policy or statute depends upon the factual context of each case. The court considered whether the injury to the gas station employee was a reasonable consequence of the use of the company vehicle and concluded it was obvious that it was within the contemplation of the parties that the vehicle would be used as a service station truck and that the operation of delivering gasoline on the highways was a necessary and incidental adjunct.
The court in Hartford Accident & Indem. Co. v. Booker, 140 Ga. App. 3, 230 S.E.2d 70 (1976), held that a sanitation service employee was using a garbage truck when he was struck approximately 30 feet from the truck. The court explained that in defining the word “use,” one must look to the contemplation of the parties entering into the insurance contract. The court concluded that common sense dictated that the parties contemplated the truck would be loaded and unloaded and that it would be necessary for the driver to walk down the side of the road near his truck in order to collect garbage.
In Stevens v. United States Fid. & Guar. Co., 345 So. 2d 1041 (Miss. 1977), the court held that a wrecker operator’s injuries arose out of the use of the wrecker when he was struck after having exited the wrecker and begun to sweep away debris from the vehicle he was going to tow. The court noted it was obvious that the wrecker would be used for removing disabled vehicles from the highway and that removing debris from the highway was a necessary part of that operation. The court explained that the operator’s “temporary absence” from the wrecker did not amount to abandonment of the use of the wrecker. Id. at 1044.
In Great American Ins. Co. v. Cassell, 239 Va. 421, 389 S.E.2d 476 (1990), a firefighter was struck by an uninsured motorist while standing in an intersection completing a required fire report after a fire had been extinguished. The firefighter was 20 to 25 feet away from the firetruck, but the court held that the firefighter’s death arose out of the use of the truck. The court noted that the report was part of the firefighter’s mission and *703that the mission had not been completed when the accident occurred.
In Falls v. N.C. Farm Bureau Mut. Ins. Co., 114 N.C. App. 203, 441 S.E.2d 583 (1994), the court held that the driver was “using” the insured vehicle when he was hit by an underinsured motorist while walking along the road in search of mechanical assistance after the vehicle had broken down. Although the driver was approximately one-half mile from the vehicle at the time he was injured, the court concluded that there was a causal connection between the driver’s injury and his use of the vehicle. The court stated: “But for the vehicle becoming disabled, the journey would not have been abandoned.” Id. at 208, 441 S.E.2d at 585. See, also, Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co. v. McMichael, 906 P.2d 92 (Colo. 1995); Randall v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 255 Va. 62, 496 S.E.2d 54 (1998); Oberkramer v. Reliance Ins. Co., 650 S.W.2d 300 (Mo. App. 1983); Maring v. Hartford Casualty Ins. Co., 126 N.C. App. 201, 484 S.E.2d 417 (1997); Nationwide Mutual Ins. Co. v. Davis, 118 N.C. App. 494, 455 S.E.2d 892 (1995).
From the above cases, we conclude that whether a person is “using” a vehicle depends upon the factual context of each case and upon the contemplation of the parties to the contract. One factor in determining “use” is whether the activity can reasonably be expected to occur in relation to the operation of the vehicle. Another factor is whether the person is still “vehicle oriented” at the time of the occurrence. See Rau v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 21 Wash. App. 326, 585 P.2d 157 (1978).
Under the facts presented, we conclude that Emry was “using” the company vehicle at the time he was struck and killed by the underinsured motorist. Emry’s journey home was suddenly and unexpectedly interrupted by an accident in the intersection he was about to cross. Emry exited the vehicle temporarily to see whether anyone was hurt. He had not completed his intended journey and would have soon continued to drive home had he not been struck.
Such an activity could reasonably be expected to occur in relation to Emry’s use of the vehicle. As part of the operation of the insured vehicle, a driver could reasonably be expected to temporarily exit the vehicle in order to assist victims of a traf*704fie accident which the driver had just witnessed and which occurred in the driver’s intended path. Thus, Emry’s actions were part of the reasonably expected use of the vehicle as contemplated by the parties.
CONCLUSION
We reverse the judgment of the trial court, and remand the cause thereto with directions that the court enter judgment consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded with directions.

=== CASE 9737396 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:23:57.106887+00 ===

Connolly, L,
concurring in part, and in part dissenting.
I agree with the majority opinion that Allied was required to provide underinsured motorist protection for persons “using” the vehicle and could not limit coverage to the smaller class of persons “occupying” the vehicle. However, I respectfully dissent from the majority’s conclusion that Emry was “using” the vehicle at the time he was struck. The majority opinion recognizes that a causal relationship or connection must exist between an accident or injury and the ownership, maintenance, or use of a vehicle in order for an incident to fall within the meaning of the phrase “arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of a vehicle.” The majority opinion correctly cites Farmers Union Co-op Ins. Co. v. Allied Prop. & Cas., 253 Neb. 177, 569 N.W.2d 436 (1997), for the proposition that “but for” causation is required. However, the majority ignores the test as set out in Farmers Union Co-op Ins. Co.
In Farmers Union Co-op Ins. Co., we noted that we “require that something peculiar to the vehicle itself causally contribute to the accident.” Id. at 183, 569 N.W.2d at 440. The cases cited by the majority in the instant case all support this general proposition. It is a peculiar characteristic of delivery trucks that their drivers will need to ask for directions, of tow trucks that their drivers will need to tow cars, of construction vehicles that a foreman will need to stop and repair construction equipment, of gas station trucks that a gas station attendant will need to pour gasoline into a stranded car, of garbage trucks that a garbage collector will need to pick up garbage, of a firetruck that a firefighter will complete a fire report, and of any vehicle that the driver will need to go for help if the vehicle breaks *705down. However, it is not a peculiar characteristic of an ordinary vehicle that such a vehicle will be used to help the victims of an accident involving another vehicle. Such a use would be peculiar to an ambulance, but that is not the type of vehicle at issue here.
Nonetheless, the majority concludes that the vehicle was “used” in the instant case. The majority accomplishes this feat by deleting the peculiarity requirement, stating that in determining “use,” we need only consider whether the activity can reasonably be expected to occur in relation to the operation of the vehicle and whether the person was “vehicle oriented.” The majority’s failure to include a peculiarity requirement in its new test renders the test meaningless. Indeed, one could contemplate that stopping for ice cream will occur in relation to the operation of a vehicle and that such a stop would be “vehicle oriented.” Likewise, one could conclude that a dogbite will occur in relation to the operation of a vehicle when a dog is in the vehicle and that the dogbite would be “vehicle oriented.” Thus, by adopting the “vehicle oriented” test, the majority has implicitly overruled this court’s holding in Farmers Union Co-op Ins. Co. and started a descent down the proverbial slippery slope.
Stephan, J., joins in this concurrence and dissent.

=== CASE 2210244 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:50.05474+00 ===

399 Mass. 771 (1987)
506 N.E.2d 1152
PHEASANT RIDGE ASSOCIATES LIMITED PARTNERSHIP & others[1]
vs.
TOWN OF BURLINGTON & others.[2]
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
January 9, 1987.
April 30, 1987.
Present: HENNESSEY, C.J., WILKINS, NOLAN, & O'CONNOR, JJ.
Elizabeth A. Lane (Leonard Kopelman, Town Counsel, & Barbara Saint Andre with her) for the defendants.
Michael S. Gardener (Paul D. Wilson with him) for the plaintiffs.
WILKINS, J.
The defendant town, acting through its selectmen, purported to take a 14.5 acre parcel on Center Street pursuant to a unanimous vote of a September 23, 1985, town meeting. The town voted to take the property "for the purpose of parks, recreation, and the construction of moderate income housing which will be subject to the review and approval of Town Meeting." The vote further appropriated $1,130,000 from available funds to pay for the land taking. On October 21, 1985, the selectmen adopted an order of taking which was recorded in the appropriate registry of deeds on November 15.
*773 At the time of the town's purported taking, the Center Street parcel was the subject of an application, filed on June 27, 1985, on behalf of the plaintiffs, for a comprehensive permit under what is sometimes called the Anti-Snob Zoning Act. G.L.c. 40B, §§ 20-23, inserted by St. 1969, c. 774, § 1. The parcel was zoned for light commercial, municipal, and single family residence uses. As subsequently modified, the plaintiffs' proposed development would have 202 apartment units of which at least twenty percent would be available for low and moderate income housing, as defined by the Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency.[3]
Under G.L.c. 40B, § 21 (1984 ed.), a limited dividend organization may submit an application for a comprehensive permit authorizing the construction of low or moderate income housing, as defined in G.L.c. 40A, § 20, in lieu of making application to various municipal boards. The details of the handling of such an application, including any appeal from its denial, are spelled out in Board of Appeals of Hanover v. Housing Appeals Comm., 363 Mass. 339, 345 (1973). Burlington had low or moderate income housing in such limited amounts as to qualify land in the town for treatment under G.L.c. 40B, § 21. See G.L.c. 40B, § 20.
The board of appeals held its first public hearing on the application on July 23, 1985. Its next session was held on August 20. The board received reports from various town boards and indicated that it wanted supplemental information from the selectmen and the board of health, which was received by the close of the board's October 15 session. The plaintiffs insisted to the board that the hearing portion of the proceeding was concluded at the close of the August 20 session. The board received some further information by the time of its November 5 *774 meeting and very little information thereafter. By then, of course, the town meeting had authorized the taking and the selectmen had adopted an order of taking. By the time of the board's November 19 meeting the order of taking had been recorded. The board of appeals denied the application on December 27, relying on the taking as one of the reasons for denial of the application.
The issues in this appeal concern (1) the lawfulness of the town's taking in light of the plaintiffs' assertion that the taking was made in bad faith, (2) whether the defendant town and members of the board of selectmen are liable under G.L.c. 12, § 11I (1984 ed.), and (3) whether the comprehensive permit was constructively granted because the board of appeals did not act seasonably on the application. These issues arise from the partial allowance by a Superior Court judge of the plaintiffs' motion for summary judgment and the immediate entry of a judgment on certain counts of the complaint.
The motion judge filed an extensive memorandum in which he concluded, as the judgment later reflected, that (1) the taking was void because the town acted in bad faith, (2) the town and the selectmen were liable for violating G.L.c. 12, § 11I (the amount of any damages to be determined later), and (3) the comprehensive permit had been constructively granted because the board of appeals did not render its decision within the time required under G.L.c. 40B, § 21.[4] We allowed the town's application for direct appellate review of its appeal.
We agree with the motion judge that the taking was unlawful and void and that the comprehensive permit was constructively granted. We disagree, however, with his conclusion that partial summary judgment should be entered on the claim made under G.L.c. 12, § 11I, that the town and the members of the board of selectmen interfered or attempted to interfere with the plaintiffs' rights by threats, intimidation, or coercion.
1. We consider first the plaintiffs' challenge to the validity of the taking and conclude that the motion judge was correct *775 in declaring that the purported taking of the plaintiffs' property was unlawful and void. In reaching this conclusion we hold that a municipal land taking, proper on its face, may be invalid because it was undertaken in bad faith and that, on this record, because there is no dispute as to any material fact on the issue of bad faith, the judge properly entered summary judgment for the plaintiffs on this issue. The absence of any record support for the town's claim that it did not act in bad faith makes this case most unusual and not likely soon to be replicated.
Previous challenges to the motives behind municipal land takings that have appeared facially valid have been unsuccessful on their facts in this court. See Chelmsford v. DiBiase, 370 Mass. 90, 95 (1976) (where town acted in good faith and for a public purpose, taking of land which was subject of pending application for comprehensive permit under G.L.c. 40B, § 21, is valid); Poremba v. Springfield, 354 Mass. 432, 434 (1968) (highway taking not adequately alleged to have been made in bad faith, or for the private benefit of private person and not for the public benefit); Despatchers' Cafe Inc. v. Somerville Hous. Auth., 332 Mass. 259, 263-264 (1955) (allegations insufficient to state challenge to motives of taking authority where malicious or dishonest motive is disclaimed); Sellors v. Concord, 329 Mass. 259, 262 (1952) (where town's good faith not challenged, court assumes proposed uses are not pretenses); Lynch v. Forbes, 161 Mass. 302, 309 (1894) (no question of good faith raised; expediency or necessity for taking is for taking authority). Although challenges to such takings failed in these cases, sometimes on pleading principles no longer applied, each opinion recognized in one way or another that there may be cases in which the exercise of the power of eminent domain may be successfully challenged. Certainly, the use of the power solely to benefit some private person or persons would be action taken in bad faith and grounds for declaring a taking invalid. See Despatchers' Cafe Inc. v. Somerville Hous. Auth., supra at 263; Lynch v. Forbes, supra at 309. See also Moskow v. Boston Redevelopment Auth., 349 Mass. 553, 573-575 (1965) (Kirk, J., dissenting), *776 cert. denied, 382 U.S. 983 (1966). Although the occasions in which a taking on behalf of the United States has been set aside are rare, the Federal courts have recognized the possibility that a condemnation may be arbitrary, capricious, or in bad faith. See Southern Pac. Land Co. v. United States, 367 F.2d 161, 162 (9th Cir.1966), cert. denied, 386 U.S. 1030 (1967), citing United States v. Carmack, 329 U.S. 230 (1946).
Bad faith in the use of the power of eminent domain is not limited to action taken solely to benefit private interests. It includes the use of the power of eminent domain solely for a reason that is not proper, although the stated public purpose or purposes for the taking are plainly valid ones. For example, when a county took land for a training area for its police and fire employees, on which a city planned to construct a sewage treatment plant and, on the facts, the reason for the county's action was to prevent construction of the sewage treatment plant, the power of eminent domain was used in bad faith and the taking was invalid. Carroll County v. Bremen, 256 Ga. 281, 282 (1986). See Earth Management, Inc. v. Heard County, 248 Ga. 442 (1981) (taking invalid when county commissioner took land for park in order to prevent construction of hazardous waste disposal facility).
It is not easy to prove that particular municipal action was taken in bad faith. This is particularly true where the significant event is an affirmative vote (here at least a two-thirds vote) of the persons voting at a town meeting on a motion to take a particular parcel of land. Challenges to town meeting action based on a claim that unlawful, improper, or erroneous reasons were advanced at town meeting or elsewhere in support of the challenged action have been unsuccessful. See Simon v. Needham, 311 Mass. 560, 566 (1942); Southern New England Conference Ass'n of Seventh-Day Adventists v. Burlington, 21 Mass. App. Ct. 701, 708 (1986). Cf. Moskow v. Boston Redevelopment Auth., supra at 565-566 (statements of candidates for city council); Knowles v. Codex Corp., 12 Mass. App. Ct. 493, 498 (1981) (dicta, not citing this court, that act of Legislature [i.e., General Court] would not be set aside even if all *777 favorable votes had been induced by bribery). We should not easily attribute improper motives to a town, and to its citizens voting at town meeting, if there were valid reasons that would have supported the town's action. See Sturges v. Chilmark, 380 Mass. 246, 257 (1980), and cases cited; Morgan v. Banas, 331 Mass. 694, 698 (1954).
In the case of a corporation we attribute to the corporation the actions, words, and knowledge of its employees acting within their authority. See Galvin v. New York, N.H. & H.R.R., 341 Mass. 293, 296 (1960); Pihl v. Morris, 319 Mass. 577, 581 (1946); International Underwater Contractors, Inc. v. New England Tel. & Tel. Co., 8 Mass. App. Ct. 340, 345-346 (1979). In determining the state of mind of a person or group of persons, we consider not only what they have said but we also draw inferences concerning their intentions from what they have done and what they have not done. Although the problem of proof of a municipal corporation's bad faith is more difficult than the problem of such proof with respect to a business corporation, the relevant principles are the same. Recognition in our cases that a bad faith land taking would be unlawful inevitably assumes that it would be possible to prove the bad faith of a town.
There are certain motives or reasons that would be unlawful if they were the dominant reasons for the town's taking.[5] Clearly, taking land solely to block G.L.c. 40B, § 21, low or moderate income housing would be improper. To have taken the site involved in this case to prevent the impact of the proposed development on the water, sewer, traffic, and other problems of the town would not have been action in good faith. The town was not barring other residential development on these grounds. There was another larger development for which a comprehensive permit was sought under G.L.c. 40B at about the same time, and the town did not try to take that property. Problems with what is now called the "infrastructure" *778 of the town might have warranted the denial of the comprehensive permit as reasonable and consistent with local needs (G.L.c. 40B, §§ 21, 23), but the taking (an indirect and unfairly selective attack on the problem) could not be justified on those grounds.
The only valid justification, in the circumstances, for the taking would be that the town truly intended that the land should be used for the purposes for which it was taken. The record is clear that in recent years the town had studied its needs for parks and recreation and that neither the Center Street site nor any parcel in the general vicinity of that site had been considered for acquisition for park or recreational uses. There is no indication in the record that before the plaintiffs' proposal was announced any town board was seeking to provide low and moderate income housing on or near the site.
The matter of taking the subject site came forward only when the plaintiffs' proposal became known. Although not controlling, the absence of any prior town interest in the site or its neighborhood is instructive on the matter of good faith. See Chelmsford v. DiBiase, 370 Mass. 90, 93 (1976) (interest in acquisition of site taken by eminent domain had been expressed for years prior to possibility of project proposed under G.L.c. 40B).
The manner in which the town dealt with the attempted acquisition of the subject parcel was not in accord with its usual practices. The town agencies, such as the housing authority, recreation commission, conservation commission and planning board, that were responsible for town activities in the areas for which the land was to be taken were not consulted, as they normally would have been, either as to the merits or feasibility of the proposed use or the cost of any such use. The purposes for which the site was to be taken were not known to the town's finance committee, in Burlington called the ways and means committee, or to the town's capital budget committee, prior to the September 23 town meeting. Those purposes for which the taking was to be proposed were developed by the selectmen and town counsel within minutes before the commencement of the town meeting.
*779 The record requires the inference that the town, acting through its town meeting, was concerned only with blocking the plaintiffs' development. We see no dispute as to any material fact barring an award of summary judgment on this point.[6] The public purposes for which the site purportedly was to be taken were not purposes for which the town intended in good faith to take and use the property. They were selected as a device in the erroneous belief that, as generally lawful public purposes, they would make the taking proper.[7]
The presentation by the chairman of the board of selectmen of the motion under the September 23 warrant article shows beyond question that the town meeting was being asked to consider the motion, not on the merits of the acquisition of the site for uses stated in the motion, but to bar the plaintiffs' development.[8] The town is not bound by the statements of the *780 chairman of the board of selectmen, nor are those statements admissions that may be used against the town.[9] The town is bound, however, when, after hearing the chairman's uncontested remarks and without any consideration by any town agency or the town meeting itself of the merits or the relative merits of the acquisition of the site for the purposes stated, the town meeting voted to take the property.
We conclude, as noted earlier, that the portion of the judgment declaring the purported taking unlawful and void should be affirmed.
2. The town and the board of selectmen also challenge that portion of the judgment that states that "the defendant Town and defendant Board of Selectmen by their actions violated G.L.c. 12, § 11I."[10] Section 11I incorporates § 11H and in doing so provides, among other things, that any person whose exercise or enjoyment of rights secured by the Constitution or laws of the Commonwealth has been interfered with, or attempted to be interfered with, by threats, intimidation, or coercion may maintain an action against the wrongdoer. There is no *781 doubt that the plaintiffs, taken collectively, had the right to seek a comprehensive permit with respect to the Center Street site. There is also no doubt that the purported but invalid taking interfered with the plaintiffs' rights, at least by casting doubt on their ownership of the land and causing them to incur the expenses of this litigation.
The judge concluded that the wrongful taking of property was "a coercive act; especially as done in this case." He based the § 11I liability of the board of selectmen and the town solely on the ground that the taking was coercion within the meaning of G.L.c. 12, §§ 11H and 11I. We do not agree.
Although the purported taking of the plaintiffs' property was unlawful because done in bad faith, the taking did not itself interfere or attempt to interfere with the plaintiffs' rights by coercion. The taking was an attempted direct, preemptive act and did not seek to coerce any plaintiff to do or not to do anything. Legislation, even unlawful legislation, lacks any quality of coercion when that legislation seeks to eliminate the rights of a person and does not seek to force that person unwillingly to do or not to do something otherwise lawful.[11]
The plaintiffs argue further that at least two selectmen made statements to the effect that they would take any action necessary to stop the development, that all the selectmen acquiesced in those statements and efforts to block the development, and that these statements were threats and intimidation within the meaning of those words incorporated into § 11I. These words do not threaten a person with arrest or physical eviction (see Batchelder v. Allied Stores Corp., 393 Mass. 819, 823 [1985]), nor are they unquestionably words threatening physical harm (see Bell v. Mazza, 394 Mass. 176, 179-180 [1985]). We think *782 the question whether the selectmen, or any of them, engaged in conduct prohibited by § 11I cannot be resolved on a motion for summary judgment because there is a dispute as to material facts shown on the summary judgment record. If the trier of fact concludes that the selectmen's words could reasonably be understood only to express an intention to use lawful means to block the development, those words would not be a threat, intimidation, or coercion actionable under § 11I. See Bell v. Mazza, supra at 183.
We decline to reach, on review of the partial summary judgment, certain issues not decided below which may not have to be decided at any time in the course of the litigation. We have not decided that we will follow decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States construing similar but not identical language in 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (1982), and other civil rights laws, particularly conclusions expressed in opinions released after G.L.c. 12, §§ 11H and 11I, were enacted. We decline now to decide whether under § 11I we will adopt a rule of qualified good faith immunity for public officials.[12] See Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 818 (1982). The town does not argue that it is entitled to the same immunity as to acts of its agents, and it may well be right in not making that claim. See Owen v. Independence, 445 U.S. 622, 650 (1980).[13]
3. The judge correctly ruled that the comprehensive permit was constructively granted pursuant to G.L.c. 40B, § 21. He so concluded because the board of appeals failed to render its decision within forty days of October 15, 1985, the last date on which a "`public hearing' on the permit application can be said to have terminated."
*783 A board of appeals must hold a public hearing within thirty days of the receipt of an application for a comprehensive permit and must render a decision within forty days after termination of the public hearing or else the application will be deemed to have been allowed. G.L.c. 40B, § 21. Unlike G.L.c. 40A, § 15 (1984 ed.), concerned with appeals to boards of appeals on zoning matters, the relevant statute does not explicitly state a time from its filing within which the board of appeals must act on an application for a comprehensive permit. Here the board held its first hearing on July 23, 1985, and held continued sessions on August 20, September 26, October 15, November 5, and November 19, 1985. On December 27, within forty days of November 19, the board voted to deny the application.
The only argument of substance the town advances here on this issue is the assertion that G.L.c. 40B, § 21, does not authorize a determination that there has been a constructive grant of a comprehensive permit when the board's decision is made within forty days of the date of the last scheduled hearing. The forty-day period runs from the date of the last session at which interested persons presented information and argument. Milton Commons Assocs. v. Board of Appeals of Milton, 14 Mass. App. Ct. 111, 115 (1982). The date may be even earlier if a board of appeals has not conducted the public hearing expeditiously, scheduling adjourned sessions at reasonable intervals in the circumstances.
There was no meaningful hearing on November 19. We need not decide at what earlier date the hearing should be treated as concluded. The town's suggestion that there is a disputed fact whether the board was reasonable in holding the hearing open until November 19 is not supported by references to the record material. Our view of the record indicates that there is no dispute of material fact on the question of the reasonableness of the delay.
4. We affirm the judgment in so far as it declares (paragraph A) the purported taking to have been made in bad faith and to be void and declares (paragraph C) that the comprehensive permit was constructively granted. We vacate the portion of the *784 judgment (paragraph B) that entered judgment for the plaintiffs on their G.L.c. 12, § 11I, claim against the town and board of selectmen.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  Arthur D. Ullian, Robert M. Kargman, Hubert J. Ruping, trustee of Grandview Farm Realty Trust, Maplewood Construction Company, Inc. (Maplewood), and BIDC Construction Corp. (BIDC). Ullian and Kargman are alleged to be general partners in Pheasant Ridge Associates Limited Partnership, a limited dividend organization which constructs low and moderate income housing subsidized by State and Federal programs. Ruping, as trustee, and Maplewood own the 14.5 acres subject to the alleged taking and are alleged to have agreed to sell the parcel to BIDC whose rights have been assigned to the limited partnership.
For the purposes of this appeal, the plaintiffs may properly be treated collectively as the owners of the parcel which the town purported to take by eminent domain.
[2]  The members of the board of selectmen of Burlington, individually and in their official capacities and the members of the town's zoning board of appeals only in their official capacities. Except when distinctions are necessary among the defendants, we shall collectively refer to them as the town.
[3]  The plaintiffs' announcement of the proposed development in February, 1985, had produced immediate, substantial, town-wide opposition. An article was placed in the warrant for the May, 1985, town meeting authorizing the taking of the Center Street parcel. On advice of town counsel, however, no motion to take the property was offered, but the town did vote to appropriate funds for an appraisal of the property.
[4]  The motion judge deferred consideration of a claim based on a violation of 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (1982), and the determination of any damage until after the disposition of any appeal from the judgment.
[5]  We need not define dominant reason with precision in order to decide this case. A showing here that this taking occurred only for the unlawful reason that the town wanted to block the plaintiffs' development is surely enough.
[6]  The town argues that the judge should have allowed its motion to strike substantial parts of the plaintiffs' affidavit material in support of summary judgment. The judge correctly noted that there was no dispute as to a material fact on the bad faith issue. Some affidavit material was admissible to show what information had been given to the town, its selectmen, and its town meeting members concerning various matters and was not hearsay for that purpose.
[7]  In fact, moderate income housing by itself is not clearly a proper purpose for the taking of land (Massachusetts Home Mortgage Fin. Agency v. New England Merchants Nat'l Bank, 376 Mass. 669, 694 [1978]), and, in any event, land taken for park purposes may not generally be used for an inconsistent purpose without legislative approval, and thus, if the taking were valid, the right to build moderate income housing on the site would at best be in doubt. See G.L.c. 45, § 7 (1984 ed.); Foster v. Worcester, 164 Mass. 419 (1895).
[8]  The chairman of the board referred to a letter he had recently received from the Secretary of the Executive Office of Communities and Development expressing disapproval of the taking as "effectively removing the property from consideration for this rental housing, and nullifying the developers' application for a comprehensive permit" under G.L.c. 40B. The chairman identified as a threat the letter's suggestion that the town might cease to be eligible for State discretionary funds if it did not address its housing needs. The chairman added, "So, the important piece of information here is that the state has acknowledged that if we take this land, that we would in fact nullify the application of a comprehensive permit for the apartments. A lot of people wanted to know if it would or not, and the state says that it does. That's assuming, however, that the town is taking the land for public purpose. So we, the board of selectmen, felt that to appropriately act as you directed us to in May, that we should bring forth an article that would legitimately take the land for a public purpose. Parks and recreation is a legitimate public purpose to take land." He then continued: "[B]asically the state has gotten wind of what we're doing here, and if any of us want to try and con the state that we're taking it for a different reason, we're really kidding ourselves. So the state knows what we're trying to do. We have, in essence, found a legitimate reason to take the land and have set that forth in the article that has now moved on the floor." He added the following: "Therefore, if the wish of this body is to follow through with what it started back in May, then in fact you have an article before you for the amount of money that's legally been set forth by appraiser and an article that the Board of Selectmen and Town Counsel feels is legal and defendable and has precedence in terms of having been done before and succeeded and been taken before."
[9]  A municipality is not bound by statements of elected officials made in election campaigns (Moskow v. Boston Redevelopment Auth., 349 Mass. 553, 565-566 [1965]) or not made as part of the official action of a municipal board (id. at 564).
[10]  The judge made no decision concerning the liability of the board of appeals on the count based on G.L.c. 12, § 11I. The judge does not explicitly state whether the selectmen violated § 11I in their official or individual capacities or both.
[11]  In the dissent in Redgrave v. Boston Symphony Orchestra, Inc., ante 93, 104 (1987) (O'Connor, J., dissenting, joined by Lynch, J.), two Justices of this court concluded that coercion involved "restraint or domination of another's will" and appeared "to refer to restraint accomplished by physical force." Certainly there is no such coercion shown in this case. To dispose of the § 11I issue as it relates to a taking being coercion, and without further defining coercion, we need only conclude that an invalid land taking does not interfere or attempt to interfere with the landowner's rights in the land by coercion.
[12]  Although we conclude as a matter of law that the taking was not made in good faith, there is contested record evidence whether the selectmen thought that what they were proposing was unlawful. They consulted town counsel and may have acted in an objectively reasonable way in concluding that they were pursuing an available legal method of stopping the development.
[13]  There is no discussion in the briefs, and none we have found in the record, as to the applicability, if any, of G.L.c. 258 (1984 ed.), the Massachusetts Tort Claims Act, to an action against a municipality or municipal officials under G.L.c. 12, § 11I.

=== CASE 2210254 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:50.201478+00 ===

194 Cal.App.2d 32 (1961)
AMCO PLASTIC PIPE COMPANY, Respondent,
v.
JET SPECIALTIES COMPANY et al., Defendants; FLEK CORPORATION (a Corporation), Appellant.
Civ. No. 19654.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
July 20, 1961.
Tanner, Odell & Taft and Everett Shilling for Appellant.
Breed, Robinson & Stewart for Respondent. *34
SHOEMAKER, J.
This is an appeal by the defendant from a judgment for plaintiff in an action to recover damages for breach of contract. Although Jet Specialties Company was originally named as defendant in this action, Flek Corporation was substituted as defendant pursuant to a pretrial order.
Plaintiff was a manufacturer of plastic tubing, and defendant was engaged in producing and marketing hula hoops made from this tubing. Through a series of oral negotiations and letters exchanged between the parties, plaintiff and defendant entered into a contract whereby plaintiff was obligated to sell and defendant to purchase a certain quantity of plastic tubing to be manufactured by plaintiff. It is apparent from the pretrial statement that both parties admitted the existence of a contract and differed only as to what terms had been included therein.
After certain preliminary oral negotiations between the parties, plaintiff wrote defendant on September 5, 1958, listing certain terms which it desired to include in any contract to be made between the parties. These terms included the specifications for the tubing to be produced, the price to be paid for the tubes, and the desired duration of the contract. The following provision was also set forth: "Payment for tubes to be net 10 days from date of pick-up or shipment. If payments are late, we have the right to sell tubes on the open market." The letter concluded with the request that defendant draw up a contract and send it to plaintiff if these terms were agreeable to defendant.
On September 12, 1958, defendant wrote plaintiff, requesting that plaintiff "consider this letter a contract as follows:"
"You will make tubes for us measuring eight feet seven inches (8'7") long and weighing 8 1/2 to nine ounces from Linear Polyethylene for $.39 each, f.o.b. your plant.
"Payment for the tubes to be made every ten (10) days and should you have more than the production available from the 2 1/2 inch extruder, we shall be given the privilege of buying this, also. ..."
"We, also, cannot give you more than a thirty (30) day guarantee as you can imagine that this market could soften very rapidly, however, we will buy all of the tubing used for the San Francisco operation from you, that will be necessary as long as this item is saleable."
On September 15, 1958, plaintiff wrote defendant, stating:
"Your letter received this morning covers the arrangement *35 very well, and we will consider it a contract within the terms it outlines, for 30 days production beginning today."
On September 17, 1958, defendant wrote plaintiff, stating that he was delighted to hear that the 3 1/2-inch extruder was back in production. He also wrote, "Please consider this letter your order to give us all of the tubing now available from both extruders. ..."
On October 2, 1958, the market for hula hoops collapsed, and defendant telegraphed plaintiff to stop production.
After considering both the written and oral evidence presented by the parties, the trial court found that the following contract had been formed between the parties: Plaintiff was obligated to sell and defendant to purchase for a period of 30 days commencing September 15, 1958, certain production of a 2 1/2-inch extruder, which both parties understood to be 4,000 tubes per day. If plaintiff should put the 3 1/2-inch extruder into production defendant would be obligated to purchase an additional 6,000 tubes per day (which was the production to be expected from this extruder). As to the additional 6,000 tubes per day, however, defendant's obligation to purchase was cancellable at any time as to future production. Defendant was obligated to pay plaintiff in full within 10 days after receipt of invoice, and if defendant were ever in default in said payments, plaintiff was entitled to sell the tubes in the open market without regard to deliveries to defendant.
The trial court further found that defendant failed to purchase 49,617 pieces of tubing which it had contracted to purchase, and that defendant at no time during the duration of the contract paid plaintiff within 10 days from receipt of invoice. Judgment was therefore entered in favor of plaintiff in the amount of $7,695.80. Defendant appeals therefrom.
Appellant's first contention is that the trial court erred in admitting parol evidence adding to the terms of the contract. It is appellant's position that the parties entered into a written contract which was contained in appellant's letter of September 12th and respondent's answering letter of September 15th.
Appellant points out that this contract, as interpreted by the trial court, required respondent to provide appellant with 4,000 tubes per day for the full 30-day period of the contract (since this was the expected output from the 2 1/2-inch extruder). When respondent put the 3 1/2-inch extruder into operation on September 17th, respondent was then obligated to supply appellant with an additional 6,000 tubes per day *36 from this machine until further notice from appellant, who was entitled to cancel his order, as to the 3 1/2-inch extruder, at any time. Since appellant did not cancel this order until October 2d, respondent should thus have supplied a total of 216,000 tubes during the entire duration of the contract. Respondent admittedly fell short of meeting this obligation by several thousands. It is, therefore, appellant's position that respondent clearly breached the contract and that the trial court erred in finding that respondent performed all things required of it under the contract.
Respondent admittedly did not provide appellant with the full production of tubes produced from both extruders, therefore the trial court's conclusion that respondent had fully performed is necessarily based on its finding that respondent was under no duty to deliver tubes to appellant when appellant was in default on its payments. It is appellant's contention that parol evidence of this additional agreement between the parties should not have been admitted by the trial court. Appellant points out that respondent originally suggested in its letter of September 5th that respondent should have the right to sell the tubes in the open market without regard to deliveries to appellant if appellant failed to pay on time, but that this term was not included in his answering letter of September 12th, and hence is conclusive evidence that it was not intended to be a part of the contract. Appellant argues that admission of parol evidence on this point improperly added to the parties' written contract.
Courts have in the past construed the parol evidence rule strictly; however, recent decisions have adopted a more liberal approach.
In American Industrial Sales Corp. v. Airscope, Inc. (1955), 44 Cal.2d 393 [282 P.2d 504, 49 A.L.R.2d 1344], the court allowed the introduction of parol evidence of a contemporaneous oral agreement as to the place of payment, even though such agreement conflicted with the presumption that a contract, silent as to place of payment, is payable where the creditor resides. [1] The court stated:
"It has long been the rule that when the parties have not incorporated into an instrument all of the terms of their contract, evidence is admissible to prove the existence of a separate oral agreement as to any matter on which the document is silent and which is not inconsistent with its terms. [Citations.]. ..." (P. 397.) *37
In Mangini v. Wolfschmidt, Ltd. (1958), 165 Cal.App.2d 192 [331 P.2d 728], the plaintiff sued for breach of a contract under which he was employed as a manufacturer's agent by the defendant. Although the written contract was silent as to the duration of plaintiff's employment, the trial court refused to admit parol evidence on this issue. [2] On appeal, the judgment was reversed, with the court stating:
"Respondent relies strongly upon declarations ... that '... parol evidence cannot be admitted to add another term to the agreement, although the writing contains nothing on the particular one to which the parol evidence is directed.' The last quoted rule must be limited in its application to writings which appear as a matter of law to be complete integrations. Unless so limited it would be out of harmony with prevailing authority ..." (P. 203.)
[3] The written contract in the case at bar clearly contains nothing in conflict with an agreement that respondent should have the right to sell tubes on the open market if appellant were to fall behind in his payments. The contract simply provides, "Payment for the tubes to be made every ten (10) days ..." No other term of the written contract makes any reference whatever to the amount to be paid every 10 days, the manner of payment, or any other related provision.
Clearly, parol evidence of an oral agreement that respondent could sell tubes to others if appellant fell behind in his payments does not conflict in any way with the written contract. It would seem equally clear that the written contract certainly cannot be said as a matter of law to be a complete integration. Without the aid of parol evidence, the contract would clearly be incomplete in several respects. Although the contract provided that payments were to be made every 10 days, the contract failed to state when the 10 days would begin to run or what amount would be due at the end of the 10 days. Only through the aid of parol evidence was the trial court able to determine that the payments were to cover all tubes received to date and that the 10 days would run from receipt of invoice. Even to determine the amount of tubes which respondent was obligated to sell and appellant to purchase, it was necessary to introduce parol evidence as to the number of tubes which both parties expected to be produced by the two extruders. It is therefore apparent that the contract cannot be said as a matter of law to be a complete integration and that the trial *38 court did not err in admitting evidence of the oral understanding that respondent could sell the tubes to others if appellant fell behind in payments. Since appellant does not dispute the trial court's finding that it was continually in default during the entire duration of the contract, it would seem that respondent's failure to deliver the full production of tubes was not inconsistent with full performance by respondent.
[4] Appellant next contends that even if parol evidence was properly admissible, there was no evidence to support the finding that the parties had ever agreed that respondent should be entitled to sell tubes on the open market when appellant defaulted in payments. Respondent's letter of September 5th, in which this term was specifically set forth, was certainly evidence of the fact that respondent wished this provision to be included in the contract between the parties. Respondent also testified to an oral agreement between the parties that respondent should be entitled to sell tubes to others if appellant defaulted in its payments. Upon this showing there was sufficient evidence to support the trial court's finding that the parties had agreed to include this additional provision in their contract.
[5] Appellant's final contention is that the finding of full performance on respondent's part cannot be allowed to stand because the evidence conclusively established that the tubing supplied by respondent was defective. Appellant points out that it continually cautioned respondent against making the tubing too soft; that it had received complaints from some of its customers; and that it was forced to scrap and replace 282 dozen tubes. Appellant further contends that the evidence established that respondent used substandard materials in making the hoops, and refers to testimony by respondent that it had altered the composition of the tubes in order to make them stiffer, it being appellant's position that respondent's action was, in effect, an admission that its tubes were defective.
Respondent, on the other hand, points out that the contract provided that it was to supply appellant with tubes of specific dimensions made from "Linear Polyethylene." Respondent's general manager defined linear polyethylene as polyethylene with a density of .94 or better, and that all the tubing sold to appellant was of such density or better. The trial court undoubtedly concluded that respondent was fulfilling its part of the contract as long as it supplied appellant with tubes made from "Linear Polyethylene," regardless of whether or *39 not tubes made from this particular material were always of a sufficient stiffness to make satisfactory hula hoops.
There was considerable conflict in the evidence pertaining to the quality of the tubing produced by respondent. The record discloses sufficient evidence upon which the trial court could have found that respondent's tubes met the contract requirements.
Judgment affirmed.
Kaufman, P. J., and Draper, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2210266 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:50.407965+00 ===

194 Cal. App. 2d 581 (1961)
AMERICAN OIL SERVICE (a Corporation), Appellant,
v.
HOPE OIL COMPANY (a Corporation) et al., Respondents.
Civ. No. 24935.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
Aug. 8, 1961.
Jesse M. Allen and Richard G. Wilson for Appellant.
Brown and Grisham for Respondents.
SHINN, P. J.
Prior to March 1952, Hope Oil Company and May and Richards, hereinafter referred to as Hope, or defendant, owned two units suitable for the reconditioning of oil wells which were then and for some time had been operated by American Oil Service, hereinafter called American, or plaintiff, in the reconditioning of oil wells upon a profit-sharing agreement with Hope. About the first of March, Hope agreed to purchase a third unit to be operated under similar conditions by American. This unit was constructed and turned over to American and used with the others. The agreement was reduced to writing under date March 1, 1952, although it was not executed by the parties until December 26, 1953. In the interim numerous drafts of an agreement had been prepared by Hope and rejected by American. By the terms of the agreement American was to operate the equipment and was to pay to Hope (1) "one-half of all gross money earned for all work done by units 1, 2 and 3 and any other rentals"; (2) "one-half of the repair expenses"; (3) $2,000 per year for insurance and $3,000 per year for services of Hope in overseeing their interests in the equipment; (4) $130,000; and it was also provided that when said sums had been paid Hope would transfer to American one-half interest in the equipment.
Hope agreed to pay (1) one-half repair expense on pickups used in the business; (2) 50 cents per operating hour toward the compensation of a contact man who would secure work for the equipment; other provisions of the agreement are not relevant to the present controversy.
The contract was performed until a dispute arose in August 1958 with respect to the amount that American had paid on the purchase price of a half interest in the equipment. American first claimed that it had paid all but about $2,625.13 of the purchase price but after review of the account claimed it was fully paid, whereas Hope claimed there was an unpaid balance of around $44,381.75. Plaintiff instituted the present action for declaratory relief, alleging it had paid in full for a half interest in the equipment and alleging also that there was a dispute as to the amount that defendant had paid for repairs in 1952. While the complaint alleged that plaintiff had fully performed under the agreement, it was not alleged that plaintiff had overpaid defendant. *583
Defendant answered, specifically admitting that "the agreement referred to has not been cancelled or rescinded and that plaintiff has at all times complied with all of the terms and conditions of said contract on its part to be performed and is not in any respect in default thereunder." It was alleged, however, that in February 1953 the parties entered into a parol agreement modifying the written agreement in that plaintiff agreed that defendants would be released from its promise to pay 50 cents per hour for the services of the contact man. It was further alleged "for further answer to said paragraph [V] defendants allege that in addition to the obligations of plaintiff enumerated in said paragraph, plaintiff was required to keep the equipment described in said agreement in good repair." It was not alleged that the written agreement was modified with respect to defendant's obligation as to the repairs. The answer prayed for an accounting.
The contentions of the parties were disclosed by a joint pretrial statement. Plaintiff contended that each party was required to pay one-half of the repair expense, whereas defendant claimed that notwithstanding the fact that it had each month reimbursed plaintiff for one-half of the repair expense paid by plaintiff it was entitled to the return of the total sums paid by it and that plaintiff was to stand all the repair expense. Defendant contended also that under the alleged oral modification of the agreement, which plaintiff denied, it was to be reimbursed for all sums it had paid for the services of the contact man. There was no dispute as to either of these amounts. The following figures were agreed upon: if defendants were entitled to reimbursement of the sums paid for repairs and the contact man, plaintiff would owe a balance on the purchase price of $44,381.75 up to August 31, 1958; if defendant is reimbursed for the repairs only, plaintiff would owe a balance of $30,037.88; if defendant is reimbursed for the amounts paid for the contact man alone the contract balance would be $23,201.30.
It was not and is not questioned that if defendant was chargeable with one-half the repair expense and with what it had paid toward the compensation of the contact man the purchase price of a half interest in the equipment would have been fully paid May 31, 1957, and the payments made by plaintiff to defendant up to August 31, 1958, would have exceeded plaintiff's total obligations under the contract by the amount of $31,588.13. *584
Thus, the primary issue was when, if at all, was plaintiff paid up in full, and this would require a determination whether the agreement had been orally modified with respect to the compensation of the contact man and whether defendant was properly chargeable with one-half of the repair expense. These facts being ascertained would determine that plaintiff either had or had not overpaid the purchase price, and the amount of any overpayment.
Neither in the pleadings nor the pretrial statement was it asserted by plaintiff that any overpayment it had made was due to a mistake of fact nor was it asserted by defendant that any overpayment was made voluntarily with full knowledge of the facts.
The court found the agreement had not been modified; the purchase price of the equipment had been paid in full May 27, 1957, and thereafter plaintiff had paid defendant $31,588.13. The finding that the purchase price was fully paid May 27, 1957, implied that defendant was not entitled to reimbursement for sums paid for repairs or for the contact man. Judgment was in favor of plaintiff for $31,518.13 and establishing its half ownership in the equipment.
Defendant made a motion for a new trial. Upon the hearing of the motion defendant advanced the contention that plaintiff's overpayments were made voluntarily and were not recoverable.
Plaintiff maintained on the hearing of the motion that the payments had been made under mistake of fact.
Defendant also insisted that even if the payments were made under mistake of fact, yet as the owner of a half interest in the equipment, it was entitled to a half of the rental received by plaintiff, and that it had been paid no more than was due it; but as nearly as we can determine this contention was not advanced during the trial. However, the evidence covered the entire field of the operations of the parties under the agreement and the circumstances in which plaintiff's payments had been made.
The court amended its findings and found that the overpayments had been made voluntarily and were not recoverable. Judgment was rendered establishing plaintiff's half interest in the equipment and denying a recovery of any sums paid. Plaintiff appeals.
On the appeal plaintiff's only contention for reversal is that the evidence without conflict established that its payments were made through a mistake of fact and are therefore *585 recoverable; and defendant defends the finding to the contrary.
Although defendant has not appealed it may advance any contentions which would defeat, in whole or in part, any judgment for money in favor of plaintiff. (Code Civ. Proc.,  956.) Defendant does not claim there was insufficient evidence to support the finding that the agreement was not modified with respect to the wages of the contact man. It concedes there was ample evidence to justify the construction of the agreement as requiring defendant to pay half the cost of repairs. However, it maintains that in any event, it was entitled to receive the amount it did receive by virtue of its ownership of a half interest in the equipment. Plaintiff replies to this contention.
We have first to consider plaintiff's contention that its payments were made under a mistake of fact. We conclude that this contention must be sustained. When the agreement was signed, Mr. Van Hooser, plaintiff's president, who was unable to read, put it away and paid no further attention to it. Plaintiff's accountant, Mr. Pihlstrom, was not familiar with the terms of the agreement. He knew how the money that came in should be divided with defendant and that $130,000, in addition to other amounts payable by plaintiff, must be paid on the purchase price of the equipment. However, he did not set up an account charging plaintiff with $130,000 and crediting it with payments made on the purchase price.
As money came in checks were issued to defendant, monthly, comprising one- half of the rentals plaintiff had received, plus a monthly payment toward the $5,000 plaintiff was to pay defendant annually for insurance and supervision, less 50 cents per hour as defendant's share of earned commissions of the contact man. At the same time he presented defendant with a statement for one-half of the current repairs which plaintiff had paid. Defendant paid these invoices monthly. Pihlstrom testified that Mr. Richards, acting for defendant, requested that for tax reasons it was desirable to credit on the books one-half of each check to rentals and one- half to purchase of the equipment. Although Mr. Richards denied having given such instructions the books were set up on that basis. Mr. Van Hooser agreed to this arrangement. While the books would show the amounts that were credited to the purchase this was only on the basis of the arbitrary and false assumption that a half of each payment should be credited to amounts *586 due to defendant and payable before anything was credited to the purchase price.
Matters progressed in this way until June 1958. Neither party furnished a statement to the other which purported to show the amount that remained unpaid on the contract price, nor was the matter discussed. About June 1958 at the request of Van Hooser, Pihlstrom prepared a statement in accordance with the books. This showed a balance then unpaid of $2,625.13. When the statement was shown Mr. Richards and an offer was made to pay the amount, Van Hooser was informed by Richards that defendant would claim an unpaid balance of some $40,000. For the first time Van Hooser was informed that defendant would claim that it was entitled to reimbursement of the amounts it had paid for repairs and for the contact man. Van Hooser then took the contract from his safe, and when Pihlstrom prepared an account in accordance with the agreement it was found that contract was fully paid up by May 31, 1957.
The court's findings, as modified, read in part: "Plaintiffs' payments to defendants in excess of the terms of the contract for the period from June 1, 1957 through August 31, 1958 totaled $31,588.13 but because said payments were voluntary payments and were made with full knowledge of all of the facts relative thereto plaintiff is not entitled to a judgment for said overpayments."
In the minute order ruling on the motion for new trial the court stated that the payments made were voluntary "under cases of Western Gulf Oil Co. v. Title Ins. & Trust Co., 92 Cal. App. 2d 257 [206 P.2d 643] and Texas Co. v. Todd, 19 Cal. App. 2d 174 [64 P.2d 1180]." These cases are relied upon by defendants in support of their contention that plaintiffs' payments were made voluntarily and for that reason are not recoverable. [1] They state the familiar rule that a payment voluntarily made with knowledge of the facts affords no ground for an action to recover it back. [2] But it is elementary that an excessive payment made in ignorance of the fact that it is excessive is recoverable. (Restatement, Restitution,  20, p. 92.) The only question is whether one rule or the other has application to the facts of the case.
[3] There was insufficient evidence to justify a finding that plaintiff through its president, its accountant, or otherwise had such knowledge of the facts as would have rendered the payments voluntary. It was clearly established that the accounting which charged one-half the rentals paid to defendant *587 to income and one-half to the purchase price did not reflect the true amounts to be credited on the purchase price under the terms of the agreement. This fact was unknown for six years, due to Van Hooser's unfamiliarity with the books and Pihlstrom's unfamiliarity with the agreement. Although they had the means of knowledge and could have discovered the facts at any earlier time, their neglect to do so was merely a mistake of fact upon their part. They did not wake up for another year to the fact that the contract had been paid in full May 29, 1957.
In the Texas Co. and Western Gulf Oil Co. above mentioned, the respective debtors had full knowledge of the facts, a dispute existed as to the proper interpretation of a contract, and as to the amount of the debt, and the sums in question were paid in settlement of the controversy. This was not the situation in the case at bar.
Whether the payments were made voluntarily or through mistake depended upon the intentions of plaintiff in making them. These were to be judged in light of the facts that were known to plaintiff. Means of knowledge were not the equivalent of knowledge. We would suppose that most mistakes of fact occur through failure to resort to means of knowledge.
There was no dispute as to the unpaid balance while the questioned payments were being made. It was not known to either Van Hooser or Pihlstrom that Hope would claim that the agreement had been modified or that it was not chargeable with any part of the repair expense. The payments were not made in settlement of a disputed claim. When the dispute arose plaintiff made no further payments. A debtor who pays a bill twice, forgetting that it has been once paid, and without the creditor's asserting a demand, is clearly entitled to recover the overpayment as having been made involuntarily. This is the present situation. Plaintiff is not in the position of a debtor who, knowing that his debt has been paid in full, accedes to the demand of his creditor and pays a second time in order to settle the controversy.
The question whether Hope was entitled to receive all the payments made after May 27, 1957, as the owner of one-half interest in the equipment, regardless of the circumstances in which the money was paid, has not been answered by the trial court nor, in fact, was the contention advanced except on motion for a new trial. There was evidence, however, that subsequent to May 29 defendant had paid $8,706.19 as one-half of the cost of repairs. It had also paid $6,458.23 for insurance *588 and supervision, for which it had received partial reimbursement according to the contract.
It is a general rule that a cotenant occupying and using property is not accountable to his cotenants for enjoyment of such use. It is also settled that one cotenant must account to the others for rentals received from the property held in cotenancy.
We express no opinion as to which rule is applicable to the facts of the present case.
There are various reasons for our inability to dispose of the case without ordering a retrial. There are factual questions which must be determined in the trial court. Were we to direct a judgment in favor of plaintiff for the return of the overpayments it would mean that plaintiff has had the use of the property and may keep substantially all the income, which the parties call rental, without any compensation to defendant, and leaving defendant without reimbursement for repairs it paid for in the interim and without reimbursement of sums paid for insurance and supervision and the contact man.
We cannot affirm the judgment. To do so would create a new contract for the parties. They have no agreement for division of the income after plaintiff became the owner of a half interest in the equipment. They may or may not be satisfied with their original arrangement. A claim to reimbursement for moneys paid under mistake of fact rests upon equitable principles. (38 Cal.Jur.2d pp. 302, 303.) Defendant asserts grounds of estoppel. These factual questions require a retrial.
The judgment is reversed.
Vallee, J., and Ford, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2210268 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:36:50.432737+00 ===

194 Cal. App. 2d 305 (1961)
SANDALIO CURBELO, Appellant,
v.
MATSON NAVIGATION COMPANY, Respondent.
Civ. No. 19602.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
July 26, 1961.
Goldstein, Brann & Stern and H. Leland Shain for Appellant.
Donald D. Connors, Jr., and Brobeck, Phleger & Harrison for Respondent.
SHOEMAKER, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment of dismissal entered upon the granting of defendant's motion to that end, and from an order denying plaintiff's motion for a new trial. Since an appeal does not lie from the order denying a new trial, this part of the appeal must be dismissed.
This action is one to recover for personal injuries sustained by plaintiff Sandalio Curbelo, a seaman, while he was employed by defendant Matson Navigation Company aboard a vessel in navigable waters. The complaint is in two counts, one for negligence under the Jones Act, the other for unseaworthiness under the general maritime law.
The accident happened June 28, 1955, and the complaint was filed and summons thereon issued on June 27, 1958. On September 15, 1959, defendant was served with process. On October 19, 1959, defendant moved to dismiss the action upon *307 the sole specified ground of laches, which motion the trial court granted. A judgment was entered. Plaintiff thereupon moved for a new trial, which was denied.
Appellant argues (1) that laches is no defense in an action at law; (2) that the defense of laches cannot properly be raised by a motion to dismiss but must be set up by demurrer or answer; and (3) even though it be assumed that this defense is applicable and can properly be raised by motion to dismiss, there was no evidence of laches since the action was commenced and service of summons and complaint accomplished within the statutory time.
Respondent, on the other hand, contends that the uniformity of the general maritime law must be preserved from interference by varying state enactments, and that the doctrine of laches is an integral part of the maritime law which a de-defendant in an admiralty action is entitled to raise, regardless of whether or not there has been compliance with a state statute governing diligence in prosecution.
While the statute of limitations ordinarily may not be raised by a motion to dismiss, our decisions have not held this rule to be applicable to the defense of laches. [1] To the contrary, the cases have recognized the power of the court on its own motion to deny relief where laches is disclosed by the complaint or appears from the evidence, despite failure to raise the defense by demurrer or answer. (Akley v. Bassett (1922), 189 Cal. 625, 648 [209 P. 576]; Suhr v. Lauterbach (1913), 164 Cal. 591, 593 [130 P. 2]; Stevinson v. San Joaquin etc. Co. (1912), 162 Cal. 141, 143-144 [121 P. 398]; Harris v. Hillegass (1884), 66 Cal. 79, 80 [4 P. 987]; Sullivan v. Portland, etc. R. R. Co. (1876), 94 U.S. 806, 811 [24 L. Ed. 324].) Since the trial court could thus have raised this issue on its own motion, it would seem to make little difference that respondent may not have chosen the most appropriate manner in which to bring this defense to the court's attention.
Granting the defense of laches was properly before the court, the problem is presented as to whether this defense is applicable to an action such as the present one, which, although arising out of admiralty, is instituted in a state court. The right to bring such an action in a state court was originally reserved to suitors in the Judiciary Act of 1789: "... the district courts ... shall also have exclusive original cognizance of all civil causes of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction ... saving to suitors, in all cases, the right of a common law *308 remedy, where the common law is competent to give it; ..." (1 Stat. 76-77.)
The rule is well established, however, that the "saving clause" was intended only to allow claimants to have their maritime rights enforced by a common-law remedy--not to have these rights and liabilities measured by common-law standards rather than those of the maritime law. (Southern Pacific Co. v. Jensen (1917), 244 U.S. 205 [37 S. Ct. 524, 61 L. Ed. 1086]; Chelentis v. Luckenbach S. S. Co. (1918), 247 U.S. 372 [38 S. Ct. 501, 62 L. Ed. 1171]; Knickerbocker Ice Co. v. Stewart (1920), 253 U.S. 149 [40 S. Ct. 438, 64 L. Ed. 834, 11 A.L.R. 1145].) The court in the Luckenbach case expressed the distinction as follows:
"The distinction between rights and remedies is fundamental. A right is a well founded or acknowledged claim; a remedy is the means employed to enforce a right or redress an injury. Bouvier's Law Dictionary. Plainly, we think, under the saving clause a right sanctioned by the maritime law may be enforced through any appropriate remedy recognized at common law; but we find nothing therein which reveals an intention to give the complaining party an election to determine whether the defendant's liability shall be measured by common-law standards rather than those of the maritime law. ..." (P. 384.)
[2] These authorities establish that the substantive principles of the admiralty law would be controlling regardless of the fact that a seaman chose to bring his action in a state forum.
[3] The admiralty doctrine of laches is applied, in practice, by looking to the applicable state statute of limitations by analogy. "... However, even though the statutory period has run, the action will not be dismissed if plaintiff can show that his delay was excusable and that defendant has not been prejudiced by the delay. (Gilmore & Black, The Law of Admiralty, ch. VI,  6-25, p. 296, f.n. 149.) [4] The running of the state statute of limitations creates a presumption of detriment to the defendant (Kane v. Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (3d Cir. 1951) 189 F.2d 303), and has the effect of shifting to the plaintiff the burden of showing that his delay was excusable and that defendant was not prejudiced thereby. (Cummings v. Redeeriaktieb Transatlantic (E.D. Pa. 1956) 144 F. Supp. 422; Le Gate v. The Panamolga (2d Cir. 1955) 221 F.2d 689.)"
[5] In the instant case, however, there is no need to look *309 to the California statute of limitations by analogy, since the Jones Act contains its own statute of limitations, incorporated by reference from the Federal Employers' Liability Act. (46 U.S.C.A.  688; 45 U.S.C.A.  56.) The applicable section provides that actions must be commenced within three years from the day the cause of action accrued, and appellant's complaint was filed within the three-year period.
[6] With respect to the count for unseaworthiness, the rule has been established that if negligence under the Jones Act is also alleged, the courts may not apply a shorter statute of limitations to the unseaworthiness count than that provided for the Jones Act count. In McAllister v. Magnolia Petroleum Co. (1958), 357 U.S. 221 [78 S. Ct. 1201, 2 L. Ed. 2d 1272], the question presented was whether a state court could apply its two-year statute of limitations to bar an unseaworthiness action which was joined with an action for negligence under the Jones Act. The court held that it could not, stating:
"... we simply hold that where an action for unseaworthiness is combined with an action under the Jones Act a court cannot apply to the former a shorter period of limitations than Congress has prescribed for the latter. We think this is so whether the action is at law or in admiralty, in the state or the federal courts. ..."
"... Congress has provided that a seaman shall have three years to bring his action under the Jones Act. A state court cannot reduce that time by applying its own statute of limitations to such an action. Engel v. Davenport, 271 U.S. 33 [46 S. Ct. 410, 70 L. Ed. 813]; cf. Cox v. Roth, 348 U.S. 207 [75 S. Ct. 247, 99 L. Ed. 260]. As an essential corollary of that proposition, it may not qualify the seaman's Jones Act right by affixing a shorter limitation to his concurrent right of action for unseaworthiness. ..." (Pp. 224, 225.)
We now turn to appellant's final contention that he was not guilty of laches. Respondent agrees this suit was commenced in time and the date of filing is not to be considered with respect to its contention on this appeal. Respondent's claim is as to the prejudice it purportedly suffered by the delay in service. There is some authority for the proposition that a plaintiff may be barred by laches due to lack of diligence in prosecuting an action, even though the complaint was timely filed, and that state laws governing diligence in prosecution may be looked to by analogy. (See Evans v. American Export Lines, Inc. (S.D. New York 1959) 175 F. Supp. 386, where a complaint was dismissed for laches after the plaintiff had *310 initiated a timely suit in a state court, but had failed to bring it to trial within a reasonable time.)
[7] The burden of proving laches, however, must be borne by the party seeking to assert this defense. While state law may be looked to by analogy in determining the existence of laches, the sole effect of the violation of a state statute is to shift the burden to the plaintiff to prove that his delay was excusable and that the defendant was not prejudiced thereby. [8] Even assuming, therefore, that California law would be applicable on the issue of laches, Code of Civil Procedure section 581a provides that "... all actions heretofore or hereafter commenced must be dismissed ... unless the summons shall be served and return thereon made within three years after the commencement of said action ..." Since service was made by appellant well within the statutory period, it is thus clear that no presumption of detriment to respondent can be deemed to have arisen (see Kane v. Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, supra), and respondent retained the burden of showing that the delay was inexcusable and that it resulted in prejudice to respondent. (See Cummings v. Redeeriaktieb Transatlantic, supra; Le Gate v. The Panamolga, supra.)
Respondent, in moving to dismiss the action, merely alleged that "... it was inexcusable for plaintiff to withhold service for 15 months, particularly when the complaint was filed one day ahead of the statute of limitations." Respondent further stated that it would now be forced to prepare a defense to an accident which had occurred more than four years ago and as to which the witnesses were "probably scattered over the seven seas."
Appellant, in opposing the motion, stated that, as a professional seaman, he had been "about the seven seas during this period, and away from contact with counsel."
[9] Under these circumstances, we conclude that respondent cannot be deemed to have shown inexcusable delay and resultant prejudice to it due to the delay in service. The bare statement that service was withheld for 15 months and that appellant came within one day of exceeding the Jones Act statute of limitations is not sufficient to show inexcusable delay. As to the requisite showing of prejudice, respondent asserts only that the witnesses are "probably" scattered. No attempt whatever is made to present evidence that respondent tried to contact any of these witnesses or that it encountered any difficulty in doing so. *311
Respondent argues, however, that appellant offered no excuse for his delay. Appellant was under no necessity to do so. As pointed out above, the burden of showing laches was upon respondent. No such requisite showing was made.
The appeal from the order denying new trial is dismissed.
The judgment is reversed. Appellant to recover costs on appeal.
Kaufman, P. J., and Draper, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737397 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:24:09.513128+00 ===

DICKSON, J.
The defendant, William Edward Riley, was convicted of two counts of dealing in cocaine, both as class A felonies;1 dealing in a substance represented to be a controlled substance, a class D felony;2 and possession of a narcotic drug, a class D felony;3 and he was found to be a habitual offender.4 The trial court sentenced the defendant to an enhanced sentence of sixty years. This Court has jurisdiction pursuant to Indiana Appellate Rule 4(A)(7).
The defendant claims six errors: (1) the trial court’s limitation on the cross-examination of a confidential informant; (2) the trial court’s improper answer to a question from the jury during deliberations; (3) insufficient evidence that the defendant possessed more than three grams of cocaine; (4) insufficient evidence to disprove the defendant’s entrapment defense; (5) insufficient evidence that the defendant dealt in a substance represented to be a controlled substance; and (6) manifestly unreasonable sentence.
Limitation of Cross-Examination
At trial, the State offered the testimony of Anthony Young, a confidential informant, who worked with the police in arranging the purchase of drugs from the defendant. In return, Young was to receive leniency in his own criminal case on drug charges. The defendant sought to cross-examine Young as to his living arrangements. The State objected on the grounds of relevancy, and the trial court held a conference out of the jury’s presence. The defendant contended that his purpose was to determine whether government funds were being used to provide housing and living expenses for Young. Although the cross-examination resumed, a final ruling by the trial court was delayed until all parties had read the relevant case law on the subject. Subsequently, the trial court conducted another hearing out of the jury’s presence, found that Young had a reasonable fear for his safety, and denied the defendant’s request to inquire as to the witness’s street address. The trial court allowed the defendant to inquire as to the type of accommodations in which Young resided, who paid for his residence, and the general location. The defendant did not pursue this information.
The defendant contends that he was presumptively entitled to question a government informant as to the witness’s address, citing Pigg v. State, 603 N.E.2d 154 (Ind.1992). The defendant also contends that the trial court failed to hold an in camera hearing to determine if Young had a reasonable basis for the claimed fear.
When a defendant seeks to cross-examine a confidential informant, he is presumptively entitled to inquire into such matters as the witness’s address. Id. at 157. This right is not absolute, however, and may be limited if the trial court finds that the witness has a reasonable fear of danger were he to disclose his address. Id. Thus, we have required the trial court to conduct an in *492camera hearing during which the defendant may demonstrate the potential resulting prejudice if he is not allowed to pursue the inquiry. Id. We review the trial court’s decision for an abuse of discretion, and the burden is on the party seeking the information to prove an abuse. Id.
Despite the defendant’s contention that the trial court did not conduct the required hearing, the record clearly discloses that a hearing occurred outside the jury’s presence5 during which evidence and argument were presented and a ruling was made. The defendant has failed to demonstrate how this hearing did not comply with our requirement that an in camera hearing be conducted.
During the hearing, the State identified evidence that would support a finding that Young had a reasonable fear of danger were he to disclose his address. Young testified at trial that he believed that the defendant would kill him if the defendant knew Young was working with the police. In addition, a receipt for Young’s moving expenses was submitted to the trial court, a move at least partially attributed to Young’s fear for his own safety. The trial court also acknowledged that both Young and the defendant had been witnesses to murder or close friends of murder victims. Considering these facts, the trial court concluded that a reasonable fear existed. The trial court did not abuse its discretion.
Jury Question
The defendant contends the trial court erred in answering a specific question from the jury during deliberations. Because the defendant presented an entrapment defense, the jury was instructed as to factors that it might consider in determining whether the defendant was predisposed to commit the charged crime. During deliberations, the jury sent a written question to the trial court asking, “Do all answers to A through I [in instruction 13], have to be predisposed to commit the crime, ... in determining if the defendant was predisposed to commit the alleged crime or not.” Record at 791. The trial court called the parties back into the courtroom, informed them as to the question asked, and, over the defendant’s objection, stated that it intended to answer the question “no.” Id.
When jurors request additional guidance from the court, the proper procedure is for the judge to notify the parties so that they may be present before the court communicates with the jury and be informed of the court’s proposed response. Moffatt v. State, 542 N.E.2d 971, 974 (Ind.1989). When the trial court gives a special instruction on one particular issue, it tends to emphasize that issue as being of primary importance and tends to tell the jury what it ought to do. Wallace v. State, 426 N.E.2d 34, 36 (Ind.1981). When the trial court undertakes to answer questions from the jury regarding the instructions without notice to or outside the presence of the parties, a rebuttable presumption of prejudice arises. Stanley v. State, 515 N.E.2d 1117, 1120 (Ind.1987).
The trial court in this case called the parties into the courtroom and informed them of the jury’s question and his intended response. Over a timely objection, the court responded to the question with a “no,” which was a correct expression of the law set forth in the instruction. On the facts in this case, we do not find it likely that this response would unduly emphasize the particular instruction or influence the jury’s action. We find no prejudice in the trial court’s response.
The defendant contends that answering the jury’s question constituted the giving of additional instruction during deliberations because it explained the meaning of the instruction.6 In support of this argument, the *493defendant relies upon two cases in which the trial court had given additional instructions to the jury. Wallace, 426 N.E.2d at 36-37; Faceson v. State, 642 N.E.2d 985, 986-87 (Ind.Ct.App.1994). In Wallace, the deliberating jury requested definitions of legal terms used in the instructions, and the trial court provided a written instruction addressing the terms at issue. We held this to be reversible error. Id. at 36-37. In Faceson, which relied upon Wallace, the Court of Appeals held it to be reversible error when the trial court failed to call the parties into open court before responding to the jury’s question, giving it written instructions defining the words “dealing,” “intent,” “delivery,” and “possession.” 642 N.E.2d at 986-87.
The defendant contends that Wallace and Faceson require the trial court to reread all of the instructions and that any other response constitutes error. We agree that the generally accepted procedure in answering a jury’s question on a matter of law is to reread all instructions in order to avoid emphasizing any particular point and not to qualify, modify, or explain its instructions in any way. Wallace, 426 N.E.2d at 36-37. However, we have also held that any error in refusing to answer the jury’s question would be harmless. Averhart v. State, 470 N.E.2d 666, 690 (Ind.1984), cert. denied 471 U.S. 1030, 105 S.Ct. 2051, 85 L.Ed.2d 323 (1985). Further, as the State notes, we have also permitted departure from this procedure when a trial court is faced with extreme circumstances, such as including an omitted and necessary instruction or correcting an erroneous instruction, as long as it is “fair to the parties in the sense that it should not reflect the judge’s view of factual matters.” Jenkins v. State, 424 N.E.2d 1002, 1003 (Ind.1981) (citations omitted). Thus, “when the jury question coincides with an error or legal lacuna [gap] in the final instructions ... a response other than rereading from the body of final instructions is permissible.” Id.
Here, the instruction stated, not incorrectly, that the jury had the permissive ability, but not the mandatory duty, to comsider the named factors. It is clear from the jury’s question that the jury believed it may have had insufficient guidance as to whether all factors had to be proven in order to establish predisposition. In such a case, the trial 'court’s reply of “no”, which correctly stated the law and addressed an apparent gap in the instruction, was not error.
Insufficient Evidence of Amount of Cocaine
The defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to prove that he dealt cocaine in an amount over three grams, a necessary element to convict him of dealing in cocaine as a class A felony. It is undisputed that the total weight of the packaged material purchased from the defendant on each of the two occasions exceeded three grams. The first set of packages, State’s Exhibit W, had a total weight of 10.15 grams. The second set of packages, State’s Exhibit X, had a total weight of 6.21 grams. The lab technician who tested the seized material combined the contents of several packages within each group and determined that each sample tested positive for cocaine, but the technician did not determine the relative purity of the cocaine in relation to its overall weight.
The defendant contends that the State failed to establish that the defendant dealt in more than three grams of cocaine because the technician did not establish the relative purity of the sample. Our case law establishes, however, that “[t]he total weight of the delivered drug and not its pure component is to be considered in prosecutions.” Tobias v. State, 479 N.E.2d 508, 511 (Ind.1985). We have found that the legislature intended to use the weight of the entire substance as delivered by the defendant, as this encompasses the common understanding of those in the drug trade. Woodson v. State, 501 N.E.2d 409, 410 (Ind.1986). The State was not required to prove purity of the product. The evidence of quantity was not.
*494Insufficient Evidence of Predisposition
The defendant claims that the evidence was insufficient to prove that he was predisposed to commit the crime. At trial, the defendant relied on an entrapment defense. The State may rebut this defense either by disproving police inducement or by proving the defendant’s predisposition to commit the crime. McGowan v. State, 674 N.E.2d 174, 175 (Ind.1996).
In reviewing a claim of insufficient evidence, we consider only the evidence that supports the verdict, and we draw all reasonable inferences from that evidence. Dockery v. State, 644 N.E.2d 573, 578 (Ind.1994). We neither reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of the witnesses. Marshall v. State, 621 N.E.2d 308, 320 (Ind.1993). The conviction will be affirmed if the probative evidence and reasonable inferences drawn from the evidence could have allowed a reasonable trier of fact to find the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. McEwen v. State, 695 N.E.2d 79, 90 (Ind.1998).
The evidence most favorable to the judgment is that the defendant was familiar with drug jargon and prices, that he engaged in multiple transactions, and that he undertook to arrange future transactions. These facts are sufficient to show a predisposition to deal in controlled substances. See, e.g., Martin v. State, 537 N.E.2d 491, 495 (Ind.1989) (familiarity with drug jargon and two sales to undercover officers sufficient to demonstrate predisposition to sell drugs); Wallace v. State, 498 N.E.2d 961, 964-65 (Ind.1986) (familiarity with drug prices and efforts to arrange future transactions among circumstances which support conviction).
Insufficient Evidence of Dealing in Purported Controlled Substance
The defendant contends that the evidence was insufficient to show that he dealt in a substance represented to be a controlled substance. The evidence favorable to the judgment reveals that an undercover police officer heard the defendant say that he was selling “bogeyman,” which the record indicates was the defendant’s term for a substance that resembles, but is not, cocaine. The defendant neither told the officer that he was selling him cocaine nor informed him that the “bogeyman” did not contain a controlled substance. Rather, the defendant informed the officer that the substance could be resold as cocaine and that the officer could make nine times the money he paid for it. After being paid two thousand dollars, the defendant provided the officer with a brown paper bag containing three smaller plastic bags filled with a white powdery substance. The defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient because the defendant did not represent it to be cocaine and that the officer who bought it knew that it was not cocaine.
The statute under which the defendant was convicted7 reads:
(a) A person who knowingly or intentionally delivers or finances the delivery of any substance, other than a controlled substance or a drug for which a prescription is required under federal or state law, that:
(1) is expressly or impliedly represented to be a controlled substance;
(2) is distributed under circumstances that would lead a reasonable person to believe that the substance is a controlled substance; or
(3) by overall dosage unit appearance, including shape, color, size, markings, or lack of markings, taste, consistency, or any other identifying physical characteristic of the substance, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the substance is a controlled substance;
commits dealing in a substance represented to be a controlled substance, a Class D felony.
(b) In determining whether representations have been made, subject to subsection (a)(1), or whether circumstances of distribution exist, subject to subsection (a)(2), the trier of fact may consider, in *495addition to other relevant factors, the following:
(1) Statements made by the owner or other person in control of the substance, concerning the substance’s nature, use, or effect.
(2) Statements made by any person, to the buyer or recipient of the substance, that the substance may be resold for profit.
(3) Whether the substance is packaged in a manner uniquely used for the illegal distribution of controlled substances.
(4) Whether:
(A) the distribution included an exchange of, or demand for, money or other property as consideration; and
(B) the amount of the consideration was substantially greater than the reasonable retail market value of the substance.
Ind.Code § 35-48-4-4.5 (1993). The State concedes that the defendant never told the officer that the substance was cocaine; however, it argues that the defendant impliedly represented that the substance was a controlled substance when he told the officer that it could be resold at a profit.
In construing a statute, we look to the plain, ordinary, and usual meaning of the language unless the statute itself clearly provides a contrary meaning. Marion County Sheriff’s Merit Bd. v. Peoples Broadcasting Corp., 547 N.E.2d 235, 237 (Ind.1989). We also examine the statute as a whole, Matter of Lawrance, 579 N.E.2d 32, 38 (Ind.1991), and we do not presume that the legislature intended language used in a statute to be applied illogieally or to bring about an unjust or absurd result, State ex rel. Hatcher v. Lake Superior Court, Room Three, 500 N.E.2d 737, 739 (Ind.1986).
The statute expressly authorizes the trier of fact to consider the circumstances of the sale in determining whether there has been an implied representation that the substance is a controlled substance. Ind.Code § 35-48-4-4.5(b). Here, the defendant delivered two ounces of non-eontrolled substances, caffeine and ephedrine, for the price of two thousand dollars. The defendant told the officer he could make nine times that amount on re-sale. In addition, the substance, totaling two ounces, was divided and packaged in three separate plastic bags that were placed in a brown paper bag. Finally, in delivering the substance, the defendant placed the bag on the floorboard of the car, rather than directly handing it to the officer.
The criminal activity proscribed by the statute is not limited to circumstances when an offender explicitly and personally represents that the substance delivered is a controlled substance. The actual knowledge of the purchaser is not an element of the charged offense. The determinative element is whether the non-controlled substance was “expressly or impliedly represented to be a controlled substance.” Ind.Code § 35^8-4-4.5(a)(1).
In this case, the defendant was engaged in selling a substance that he expressly represented could be sold as cocaine for a profit. Ind.Code § 35-48-M:.5(b)(2). Further, the defendant packaged the substance in a manner “uniquely used for the illegal distribution of controlled substances.” Ind.Code § 35-48-4-4.5(b)(3). Finally, the distribution of this substance included an exchange of money in an amount “substantially greater than the reasonable market value of the substance.” Ind.Code § 35-48-4-4.5(b)(4).
On these facts, we find that the evidence is sufficient to support this conviction.
Manifestly Unreasonable Sentence
The defendant’s final contention is that he received a manifestly unreasonable sentence. The trial court sentenced the defendant to the presumptive sentence of thirty years on one count of dealing in cocaine (enhanced to sixty years due to the habitual offender finding) and ordered this sentence to run concurrently with the remaining sentences (thirty years on the other count of dealing in cocaine and three years on each of the remaining counts). Acknowledging that the sentence is within the statutory maximum, but emphasizing that the offense involved elements of entrapment and that he had fallen prey to enticements of a friend, the defendant urges that the sixty year sentence is excessive.
*496Sentencing is normally left to the sound discretion of the trial court, Elmore v. State, 657 N.E.2d 1216, 1219 (Ind.1995), and, although this Court is empowered to review and revise criminal sentences, we will not do so unless the sentence is “ ‘manifestly unreasonable in light of the nature of the offense and the character of the offender.’ ” Prowell v. State, 687 N.E.2d 563, 568 (Ind.1997) (quoting Ind.Appellate Rule 17(B)), cert. denied — U.S. -, 119 S.Ct. 104, 142 L.Ed.2d 83 (1998). Additionally, “ ‘the issue is not whether in our judgment the sentence is unreasonable, but whether it is clearly, plainly, and obviously so.’ ” Thacker v. State, 709 N.E.2d 3, 10 (Ind.1999) (quoting Brown v. State, 698 N.E.2d 779, 784 (Ind.1998)); Prowell, 687 N.E.2d at 568.
The defendant argues that the nature of the offense does not warrant the presumptive sentence because he was entrapped, relying upon his arguments on the sufficiency of the evidence. As noted swpra, the jury’s’ rejection of the entrapment defense is supported by the evidence. Entrapment thus cannot be considered in our determination of manifest unreasonableness. Citing Gregory v. State, 644 N.E.2d 543 (Ind.1994), the defendant implies that consecutive sentences resulting from a series of offenses by the same defendant stemming from a state-sponsored “sting” operation are manifestly unreasonable and, thus, we should find this sentence to be manifestly unreasonable. But here, the defendant was not sentenced to consecutive terms for a series of offenses. Instead, he received a thirty-year sentence, with a thirty-year habitual offender enhancement; his other sentences run concurrently. “[T]he habitual offender finding is not a separate punishment, but rather an enhancement of the underlying conviction which allows for a longer term of imprisonment because the previous contacts with the justice system have failed to provide any meaningful deterrence to the defendant.” Mayo v. State, 681 N.E.2d 689, 694 (Ind.1997).
We are not convinced that the sentence in this case is clearly, plainly, and obviously unreasonable and thus decline to revise the sentence.
Conclusion
The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
SELBY and BOEHM, JJ., concur.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs and dissents with separate opinion in which SHEPARD, C.J., concurs.
. Ind.Code § 35-48-4-1 (1993).
. Ind.Code § 35-48-4-4.5 (1993).
. Ind Code § 35-48-4-6 (1993).
. Ind.Code § 35-50-2-8 (1993).
. "In camera ” is defined as follows: "In chambers; in private. A judicial proceeding is said to be heard in camera either when the hearing is had before the judge in his private chambers or when all spectators are excluded from the courtroom.” Black's Law Dictionary 760 (6th ed.1990). Here, the proceeding occurred before the jury was brought into the courtroom, and no evidence has been presented to suggest that spectators were present.
. We note that in his reply brief, the defendant additionally argues that the record suggests that the trial court communicated with the jury outside the defendant’s presence. Reply Brief at 7. The defendant argues that the trial court’s com*493ments suggest that he responded to the jury before calling the parties into the courtroom and providing notice of his intended answer. While the record may be ambiguous as to the timing, it does not clearly support the defendant's conclusion.
. The charging instrument and the jury instructions were not based on sections (a)(2) or (a)(3) but rather described the criminal conduct proscribed by section (a)(1).

=== CASE 9737398 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:24:09.520331+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Justice,
concurring and dissenting.
I concur in the majority’s opinion except for its resolution of the claim discussed under the caption, “Insufficient Evidence of Dealing-in Purported Controlled Substance.”
The defendant stands convicted of Dealing in a Substance Represented to Be a Controlled Substance. Ind.Code § 35-48-4-4.5(a)(1) (1993). To secure a conviction on this charge, the State was required to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant knowingly or intentionally delivered or financed the delivery of a substance that, while not a controlled substance or prescription drug, was “expressly or impliedly represented to he a controlled substance.” Id. (emphasis supplied).
As the majority acknowledges, the defendant did not tell the undercover police officer that he was selling cocaine but “bogeyman,” a substance that resembles but is not cocaine. The defendant did not represent the substance to be a controlled substance. Rather, the defendant expressly represented that the substance was “bogeyman,” which is not a controlled substance. The evidence does not support conviction on this charge.
SHEPARD, C.J., concurs.

=== CASE 9737399 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:24:09.827742+00 ===

LILLIE, J.
Frank Seipp, Jr., worked for respondent Yellow Cab Company between September 26, 1956, and October 7, 1956; thereafter he obtained employment elsewhere and as a result of its termination was awarded unemployment insurance benefits effective May 12, 1957. Inasmuch as respondent was a base-period employer (Seipp’s base period was January through December 1956), the Department of Employment charged its account with a portion of the benefits granted Seipp; however, under section 1032 of the Unemployment Insurance Code, respondent can relieve its reserve account of such charges if it can prove either that Seipp “left the employer’s [respondent] employ voluntarily and without good cause or was discharged by reason of misconduct in connection with his work.” Thus on June 6, 1957, it requested the department to make a ruling on the termination of Seipp from its employment; the department ruled that he had left respondent’s employ with good cause and that the charges to its reserve account must stand. Respondent appealed to the referee, who reversed the ruling. On its own motion the *345Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board set aside the decision of the referee; held that Seipp was not discharged but voluntarily left respondent’s employ and that there was no prima facie showing he left without good cause; and affirmed the decision of the department. Thereafter respondent filed a petition for writ of mandamus to review the decision of the board. The lower court found that Seipp “was discharged by petitioner and did not voluntarily quit” (Findings of Fact, par. 5), and concluded that respondent “made a prima facie case that Frank Seipp was discharged” (Conclusions of Law, par. 4) and that his “action in failing to return to work without leave of absence having been given him was misconduct” (par. 5); granted the writ; and ordered the board to set aside its decision. From this judgment the board appeals.
The record reveals the following undisputed facts. Seipp began working for respondent as a cab driver on September 26, 1956; he was given a set of “Operating Regulations” which in pertinent part provided: 11 Should you be sick or for any valid reason unable to report for work, notify your garage superintendent not less than two hours before the time you are due out. . . . Any driver who is absent without leave for seven days will be terminated. Any day off not okayed by the garage superintendent will be counted as AWOL time.” Seipp worked for 11 days; on the 12th day, October 7, 1956, without notifying respondent or giving any reason therefor, he failed to report for work; he did not communicate with respondent then or at any time thereafter and never advised it of his reason for failing to report. His pay for the 11 days’ work from September 26, 1956, to October 7, 1956, amounted to $56.70; after October 6 Seipp obtained employment elsewhere; he at no time ever sought reinstatement with respondent. Seipp having failed to report for work on October 7, respondent held his time card for seven working days at the end of which, pursuant to its regulations, it marked the same as a “discharge” for an unauthorized absence from work; respondent never notified Seipp of this action.
Seipp was not present at the hearing; respondent neither subpoenaed him to appear nor took his deposition; it did not request the department to obtain information from its records concerning Seipp’s employment after leaving respondent; and it presented no evidence of its working conditions or salary scale or how many hours Seipp worked during the 11 days.
*346The parties agree, under California Portland Cement Co. v. California Unemp. Ins. Appeals Board, 178 Cal.App.2d 263 [3 Cal.Rptr. 37], that the burden is on respondent to produce evidence which would establish a prima facie case that Seipp was “discharged by reason of misconduct in connection with his work.' ’ However, respondent denies that it has any additional burden of proving the negative fact that Seipp did “not quit” (R.O.B., p. 4), under the first alternative of section 1032, arguing that it is neither in accord with the disjunctive wording of the statute nor compatible with the intent and policy of unemployment benefit legislation to require it to prove both propositions under section 1032— that Seipp left its employ “voluntarily and without good cause” and that he was “discharged by reason of misconduct in connection with his work. ’ ’ The record shows that respondent has not sought relief under the first alternative, but has elected to proceed only under the second; thus, it contended before the board that Seipp “was discharged for reasons constituting misconduct in connection with his work” (Ruling Decision No. 121, p. 2), and the board defined the issues accordingly. However, implicit in the board’s holding that Seipp “voluntarily left the employer’s employ” (p. 4) is the finding that respondent did not sustain its burden of proving that he was discharged. Thus, since it is conceded by respondent “that there is no sufficient evidence in the record to show that Seipp did not have good cause for quitting, if it is found that he quit” (R.O.B., p. 13), we are in accord with respondent’s view that the only matter before us is whether it has sustained its burden of proving that Seipp was discharged by reason of misconduct connected with his work, under the second alternative set forth in section 1032.
We know of no California case wherein the second proposition has been discussed; thus we draw on the court’s opinion in California Portland Cement Co. v. California Unemp. Ins. Appeals Board, 178 Cal.App.2d 263 [3 Cal.Rptr. 37], construing the first alternative under section 1032. Therein the petitioner (employer) offered proof that Carter quit his job stating he was leaving to obtain other work, and that Carter left for a cause not attributable to the company. The court held this insufficient to establish a prima facie ease under section 1032, in that the employer did not prove that Carter did not have a compelling personal reason to quit.  In discussing the scope of appellate review and what constitutes a prima facie *347showing, the court said at page 269 : “In reviewing a decision of the trial court, the reviewing court, on facts such as these, determines only whether the decision is supported by the record. (Ashdown v. State of Calif. Dept. of Emp., 135 Cal.App.2d 291, 299 [287 P.2d 176].)  The inquiry is one of law: whether, on the undisputed facts, petitioner made a prima facie showing that Carter left his employment with petitioner voluntarily and without good cause. (4 Cal.Jur.2d 488, § 606; Haynes v. Unemployment Comp. Com., 353 Mo. 540 [183 S.W.2d 77, 80].)”; and again at page 274: “Petitioner argues that it made a prima facie case that Carter left his employment without good cause by circumstantial evidence ; that the fact is necessarily inferable from the evidence it produced. . . . We cannot say, as a matter of law, that the only inference dedueible from the evidence is that Carter quit without good cause.”  As to what constitutes a prima facie case the court pointed out at page 274: “A prima facie showing requires proof of facts from which a legal conclusion can be drawn. The determination whether an employee left his employment ‘without good cause’ is, in effect, the drawing of a legal conclusion from a set of facts. ‘Good cause’ cannot be determined in the abstract any more than can any other legal conclusion. It can be determined only in relation to a set of facts.”
Bearing in mind the burden of proof under section 1032, and that ‘ ‘ [t] he employer assumes the risk of nonpersuasion” (California Portland Cement Co. v. California Unemp. Ins. Appeals Board, 178 Cal.App.2d 263, 268 [3 Cal.Rptr. 37]), to prevail, respondent must not only establish that Seipp was discharged but that his discharge was by reason of misconduct in connection with his work. Thus mere proof that it marked his time card as a “discharge” is not sufficient; it must also prove that this act, in substance and in fact, constituted a termination of the employment relationship between it and Seipp, and that the latter was terminated by reason of misconduct in connection with his work—for an infraction of company regulations relative to unauthorized absence. To prove an effective discharge respondent must show that at the time, an employment relationship between it and Seipp existed. And, “in the absence of any other evidence” (R.O.B., p. 8) respondent has attempted to establish the continued existence of this relationship after October 6 by resorting to the presumption “ [t]hat a thing once proved *348to exist continues as long as is usual with things of that nature” (Code Civ. Proc., § 1963, subd. 32), contending that thus having proved the continued employment relationship it was entitled to, and did, discharge Seipp for having been absent for seven days without leave in violation of company regulations.
However, respondent’s reliance on the presumption and on the fact the time card shows a “discharge,” no more precludes inquiry into whether the “discharge” was only a matter of form, than the fact that Carter left for a cause not attributable to his employer precluded inquiry into “good cause” to determine whether he had a compelling personal reason to quit, in California Portland Cement Co. v. California Unemp. Ins. Appeals Board, 178 Cal.App.2d 263 [3 Cal.Rptr. 37]. In both cases the burden is on the employer, and in both, a determination of the vital issue can be made only in relation to the facts, which here permits the court to look past form to find the substance of the “discharge.” This is not new; such inquiry is made in “trade dispute” cases under section 1262, Unemployment Insurance Code. In construing the volitional test established in Bodinson Mfg. Co. v. California Employment Com., 17 Cal.2d 321 [109 P.2d 935], the courts look beyond form to find the subjective intent, the substance of the termination, holding that the final act is not necessarily the controlling factor in determining whether an employee voluntarily left his employment or was discharged. (McKinley v. California Emp. Stab. Com., 34 Cal.2d 239 [209 P.2d 602] ; and Gardner v. State, 53 Cal.2d 23 [346 P.2d 193].) And it is apparent from the administrative decisions in this state, “entitled to great weight” although not necessarily controlling (Coca-Cola Co. v. State Board of Equalization, 25 Cal.2d 918, 921 [156 P.2d 1]), that an employer cannot create a “discharge” simply by so marking his records; that under section 1032 the real fact of termination shall be determined. (California Unemp. Ins. Appeals Board Benefit Decision No. 6372.) In that case the board, holding .that an employee had voluntarily quit without good cause and the employer’s account should not be charged, said “. . . although as a matter of form the employer discharged this claimant, the claimant herein, as a matter of actual fact voluntarily left his work when he refused to work on Sundays in accordance with the instructions of his employer.”
While respondent has only to sustain its burden under the *349second alternative of section 1032, the issue of discharge and whether it was for misconduct herein necessarily involves the determination of whether, in fact, Seipp voluntarily quit. With this respondent agrees—“ [T]he single issue is whether Seipp was discharged or whether he quit.” (R.O.B., p. 13); but we have no concern here with whether Seipp left respondent’s employ with or without good cause except insofar as his reason for failing to report bears upon whether he then actually intended to quit. Appellant has directed our attention to a compilation in the C.C.H. Unemployment Insurance Reports of a number of out-of-state administrative decisions involving factual situations somewhat analogous to the one at bar, in which the cause of termination was determined in connection with eligibility for employment insurance benefits. Not all of these cases make express distinction between “voluntary leaving” and “discharge”; but in all, inquiry was made into the true cause of the employee’s failure to report for work where he never returned and was subsequently discharged, and it was concluded that he voluntarily quit. An employee, to be transferred to another shift, who left without explanation and 30 days later was terminated for his continuous absence, was held to have voluntarily left without good cause, not as having been discharged for absenteeism (Delaware, §1975.23, p. 11,162). One, who left suitable work at a prevailing wage without choosing an available alternative to keep his job open, was held to have voluntarily left (Alaska, § 1975.16, p. 5758); so too an employee who later advised that his two-day absence was due to a drunken spree (Maryland, § 1975.163, p. 23,097), one who left for illness and did not seek reinstatement upon recovery (Michigan, § 1975.163, p. 25,225-25,226), and an employee who took a day off to attend a wedding and never returned (Missouri, § 1975.163, p. 28,-127). In Indiana and New York cases, the employee’s failure to report was held to constitute a voluntary leaving without good cause and not a discharge for misconduct—in the former the employee left when he was told he could not take a leave (§ 1975.021, p. 17,151), and in the latter he refused to accept additional duties (§ 1975.035, p. 712). In a Nevada decision the board considered the employee as voluntarily separated from her work without good cause where she was found to be absent without notice to her employer (§ 1975.163, p. 31,143); the same was held by the court to be a “voluntary quit” in *350Maltese v. Unemployment Comp. Board of Review, 190 Pa. Super. 123 [152 A.2d 773].
Thus inherent in the inquiry is the question—did Seipp’s act of failing to appear for work on October 7 constitute a voluntary leaving of his employment—if it did, it was the final act of terminating the employment relationship, regardless of why he quit or whether he had good cause to do so (respondent concedes that there is no sufficient evidence in the record to show that Seipp did not have good cause for quitting), and respondent’s subsequent act of “discharge” was wholly ineffective; if it did not, the employment relationship continued and respondent could, and did seven days later, properly discharge him for an infraction of a company rule regarding unauthorized absence from work. Respondent concedes that Seipp cannot in fact be discharged by it unless the employment relationship existed between them at the time (R.O.B., pp. 7, 10), submitting that the evidence supports his discharge for misconduct “assuming Seipp had not earlier terminated the employment relationship.” (R.O.B., p. 7). Thus, if the evidence shows that the employment relationship ended on October 7, Seipp thereafter was no longer an employee of the respondent subject to its control, was under no obligation to report or duty to return to work and could be neither guilty of misconduct in connection with his work nor discharged from its employ; and that respondent after seven days marked his time card as a “discharge” could constitute at most a clerical act or record entry made for its own convenience in keeping its books.
To establish that Seipp was “employed at the time respondent acted to terminate the employment relationship by marking his time card a ‘discharge’ ” (R.O.B., p. 7), respondent relies on the presumption in section 1963, subd. 32, Code of Civil Procedure, “in the absence of any other evidence.” (R.O.B., p. 8.) This it urges in the face of undisputed proof that on October 7 Seipp failed to report for work and never thereafter returned or sought reinstatement ; and in the face of substantial evidence, which respondent ignores, plainly pointing to the fact that on October 7 Seipp simply quit his job for other employment at better pay. In his reason for failing to report lies Seipp’s intent to then quit —and little is more indicative of this intention than the low wage he earned with respondent. Intent was a factor in determining whether the employee voluntarily left in Maltese *351v. Unemployment Comp. Board of Review, 190 Pa.Super. 123 [152 A.2d 773]. The court there held that one who left work “without notice or any apparent intention of returning for work” voluntarily quit without good cause. So, too, in a Michigan administrative decision (App. Bd. Dee., Dkt. B714937-8156) the board said: “We find that the record and testimony clearly establishes that the claimant was absent on the days in question and that she failed to notify the employer within three days as required by the shop rule. There was apparently no reason why the claimant could not have complied with the shop rule regarding reporting had she so desired and we find her failure so to do indicates an intention on her part to abandon her job. It is accordingly our finding that in view of claimant’s failure to report for work for three consecutive days or to notify the employer as required by shop rule, she voluntarily left her work ...” (emphasis added).
Seipp began driving a cab for respondent on September 26; he continued working for 11 days through October 6. There being no evidence to the contrary, we assume that during this time his work was satisfactory, he complied with all company regulations and worked steadily. For the 11 days he earned $56.70, on the basis of a five-day week, the sum of $23.95 a week. Having been issued a copy of the company regulations at the time he was hired, we also assume he was familiar with them. On October 7 Seipp did not report for work nor did he then or later communicate with respondent; after October 6 he took a job with another employer. Seipp at no time sought to have respondent keep his job open nor did he ever seek reinstatement. Bearing in mind the presumption “ [t]hat a person is innocent of [a] ... wrong” (Code Civ. Proc., § 1963, subd. 1), that he was paid $23.95 for what we assume to be a 40-hour week, that after October 6 he obtained another job, and that he never sought reinstatement with respondent, it is obvious from his act of failing to appear on October 7, that on that day Seipp intended to, and did, quit to seek or take better-paid employment. There was apparently no reason why Seipp could not have complied with the regulation requiring him to report, with which he was familiar, had he so desired and, inasmuch as his previous eleven days work was satisfactory, we find his failure to report on the twelfth day indicates an intention on his part to then abandon his job. The act of Seipp under the circumstances was as much a *352voluntary leaving for other work, as was the act of Carter in California Portland Cement Co. v. California Unemp. Ins. Appeals Board, 178 Cal.App.2d 263 [3 Cal.Rptr. 37], even though the latter stated that was his reason for quitting. Therein the court said at page 271: ‘ ‘ There is no question but that Carter left his employment with petitioner voluntarily; he was not laid off or discharged; he left on his own; he willed and intended at the time to leave his job." Seipp having quit on that day had no obligation at any time thereafter to return to work for respondent.
Respondent’s act of marking Seipp’s time card as a "discharge" seven working days after he quit does not alter the effectiveness of Seipp’s termination. Having severed his employment relationship on October 7, Seipp neither was bound by company regulations nor continued under respondent’s control, thus, he could not have been guilty of misconduct or subject to discharge by respondent. Although leaving without notice may not be the best way to sever an employment relationship, it does not here affect the validity or effectiveness of his act of quitting. Further, we entertain a doubt that respondent then actually intended its act of discharge to terminate any employment relationship, for it never attempted to notify Seipp of its action. Marking Seipp’s time card as a "discharge" was no more, and then intended to be no more, than a clerical function merely acknowledging in respondent’s books and records, for its own convenience, that the employment relationship between it and Seipp had been terminated.
For the foregoing reasons we find that respondent has failed to establish a prima facie showing that Seipp was discharged by reason of misconduct in connection with his work, reverse the judgment of the court below and affirm the decision of the Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board.
Wood, P. J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737400 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:24:09.833949+00 ===

FOURT, J.
I dissent.
This ease is a classic example of the drift in matters governmental in recent years. It is my view that in the first instance the plan of the Unemployment Insurance Act was to compensate the unemployed who were so unemployed without fault or violation on their part—it was supposedly designed to insure the diligent worker against the hazards of economic insecurity by providing him with benefit payments when un*353employed through no fault of his own—or as has been said “the purpose of the act was to minimize the burdens of involuntary unemployment, not to furnish a welcome sedative to those who prefer to drift more comfortably on the tides of indolence. ’ ’
Hereinafter the respondent will at times be referred to as the company; appellants will at times be referred to as the department; and Seipp will on occasion be referred to as the employee or the applicant.
The majority opinion in this case holds in effect that the employee quit sometime before he was discharged for his misconduct (absenteeism) and that therefore the Yellow Cab Company never could have discharged him on the date the company asserts that it did so discharge him. In short, the opinion holds in effect that the employee quit before he was discharged.
Reference in the opinion is made to out-of-state administrative opinions involving factual situations “somewhat analogous” to the case before us. I have read the cited cases and in my opinion the facts in those eases are not analogous to the facts in this case.
The majority opinion employs the following phrase: “in the face of substantial evidence, which respondent ignores, plainly pointing to the fact that on October 7 Seipp simply quit his job for other employment at better pay.” (Emphasis added.)
The majority opinion does not point out nor make any reference to what that “substantial evidence” is or of what it consists, for the very good reason that there is not one whit of any evidence, substantial or otherwise, in the record to sustain such an assertion. The opinion further sets forth as follows: “In his reason for failing to report lies Seipp’s intent to then quit-” It is a strange and unusual procedure for this court to attempt to spell out the reasons or the intent of the employee in this matter, when the employee himself, so far as the record discloses, never said a single word about the matter, never wrote anything with reference thereto, and in fact (as I will later point out), in effect refused to answer any questions about why his employment at Yellow Cab was terminated.
The majority opinion further indicates that the employee quit because of the low wage he received from the Yellow Cab Company and that he secured other employment at better *354pay. There is nothing whatsoever in the record with reference to the rate of pay received by Seipp. True it is that the record does show (on the face of the first letter of the company to the department) “Amount of wages involved in quarter of separation $56.71,” however, there is nothing whatsoever to show how many hours or how many days Seipp worked during the 11-day work period to collect such sum. I am not so naive as to believe that the union cab drivers’ contract with the Yellow Cab Company provides for approximately $.64 per hour for a cab driver, which would be about the rate, had Seipp earned $56.70 and had he worked 8 hours a day for 11 days. Nor is there anything in the record with reference to Seipp’s securing other employment or as to what he would have received by way of wages or earnings had he secured such other employment.
The majority opinion further states “it is obvious from his act of failing to appear on October 7, that on that day Seipp intended to, and did, quit to seek or take better paid employment.” (Emphasis added.) Even the Department of Employment in its brief on appeal (within the department itself) from the referee’s decision stated “Neither the Department nor the employer had any information as to whether or not claimant decided to leave his job on the first day he failed to show up for work or at any time——(Emphasis added.) In the proceeding before this court the department declined to indicate just when it was that Seipp quit, but were content to maintain that it must have been sometime during the seven days of his absence. The majority of this court see fit however to assert positively that Seipp quit on the very first day he failed to show up for work—this in the face of absolutely no word or expression whatsoever from Seipp as to what he (Seipp) had in mind about the matter, if anything. The guess of the one is as good as the guess of the other for as pointed out, there is nothing to support either guess.
It may be well to extend the statement of the facts in this case to set forth correctly at least a part of the record which the majority of the court have omitted. When the company received the notice from the Department of Employment with reference to the claim of Seipp to draw from the reserve account of the company, the company on June 6, 1957, notified the department in writing as follows: ‘1 The claimant was discharged by us for misconduct. The claimant was discharged for having been absent without leave. Company rules *355state that any employee absent without leave for seven days will be discharged. Claimant’s last day of work was 10-6-56 and, although he did not return, his time card was held until 10-14-56 and then marked AWOL and sent to the Payroll Department for clearance. (Emphasis added.)
11 These facts are supported by company business records. } }
On June 12, 1957, the Department of Employment wrote to Seipp at his San Francisco address with reference to his claim for benefits and stated to him that the company “states that you left his employment on October 6, 1956 because: you voluntarily quit on October 6, 1956 with no reason given.” (Emphasis added.)
It is to be noted that the letter of the Department of Employment to Seipp in no wise correctly set forth the contention of the Yellow Cab Company. Whether the error was deliberate or not, I do not know. It is interestingly true, however, that the statement therein made, namely, that Seipp voluntarily quit on October 6, 1956, with no reason given, is what the Department of Employment ultimately held to be the fact without any evidence to sustain it, and the majority of this court have supported that position. In any event the Department of Employment in the same letter of June 12th advised Seipp that it would be necessary for him to furnish certain information within ten days to the end that the Department of Employment could “comply with the law in answering the above statement”-—namely the assertion of the Yellow Cab Company. The following was then set forth in the letter:
“1. If you were laid off or discharged, explain details on reverse.
“2. If you left because of personal circumstances, explain details on reverse.
“3. Were you dissatisfied with your job? [ ] Yes [ ] No.
If ‘Yes,’ answer following:
a. Length of employment_years __months.
b. Hours of work - to__Number of days per week.
e. Bate of pay $--per_ (day, week, month).
d. Why were you dissatisfied with the job?_
*356“4. Did you leave to take another job? [ ] Yes [ ] No.
If ‘Yes,’ answer following questions about the new job:
a. Date you obtained the new job--Date you went to work ____
b. Name and address of new employer--
c. Hours of work__ to__Number of days per week.__
d. Starting rate of pay $__ per - (day, week, month).
e. Was the new job temporary ?_ Permanent ?-
f. What was the main reason why you changed to the new job?--”
A self-addressed envelope was enclosed for the convenience of Seipp in mailing his replies to the questions to the Department of Employment.
Section 1963, Code of Civil Procedure, subdivision 24 provides: “That a letter duly directed and mailed was received in the regular course of the mail.” It is therefore assumed, in the absence of anything to the contrary, that Seipp received the letter from the department.
Seipp did not answer any of the questions and the records of the Department of Employment indicate in handwriting on the face of its own copy of the letter that there was “No response” by Seipp.
The Department of Employment thereupon ruled and gave notice thereof to the Yellow Cab Company on July 5, 1957, and set forth the reason for the unfavorable ruling as follows:
“You allege that the Claimant was discharged for misconduct—failure to call in when absent from assigned work. However, since Claimant discontinued reporting for work without notifying the Employer and continued to absent himself from work, it must be concluded that he voluntarily quit the employment instead of being discharged.
“The information submitted by you does not reasonably show and the Department has no facts in its possession which justifies the conclusion that Claimant quit without ‘good cause.’ ”
The cause was appealed by the Yellow Cab Company to a referee and after the testimony of an employee of the company was taken, the referee reversed the Department of Employment ruling and held in effect that the employee, Seipp, was discharged by the company for misconduct. No *357evidence was introduced at the hearing before the referee in behalf of the applicant.
The department on its own motion then set aside the decision of the referee and took over the matter. At what was supposed to be a hearing on the matter (which hearing was never held) an order was made by the department to the effect that the cause would be submitted upon briefs. No further testimony was taken nor was any other evidence received.
The department thereafter ordered in effect that because in other eases it had ruled in favor of the employee, therefore in this case the order would be “that the claimant voluntarily left the employer’s employ”; it then held that the employee’s having left voluntarily, the employer’s account in effect was chargeable for benefits for the employee and further that therefore it was not necessary “to discuss whether the employer established a prima facie case that the claimant was discharged for misconduct connected with his work”; and thereupon affirmed the department’s previous ruling.
It must be remembered in this case that Seipp said nothing and submitted nothing and the department submitted nothing with reference to how or why Seipp was terminated and any statement in any brief, opinion or decision with reference to why or how the termination occurred, so far as Seipp was concerned, is purely conjecture, speculation, supposition and guess-work. The only evidence whatever in the record is that he was discharged by the company for misconduct. For all we know Seipp may have had some personal reason for terminating the employment which was perfectly justifiable had he come forward with the facts; he may have taken an asthmatic friend to Arizona, he may have been in jail, he may have laid off to go into business for himself to the end that he could perhaps make a great deal of money for himself, he may have just wanted a compensated rest or it may be that he was allergic to hard work with what the majority of this court term poor pay and was out looking for light work with high wages.
Fortunately or unfortunately there is no evidence to support any of the mentioned possibilities, including the possibility as contended for by the majority of this court. I am of the belief that no judgment should be grounded on impulse, whim or fancy. To so hold is to set up dangerous and poorly located guide posts which ultimately will result in opinions being tailored to fit the view that unemployment insurance *358reserves should always be tapped. Much mischief will be created by such a course. In other words, it is my belief that the opinion of the majority of this court sponsors the view that practically all unemployed workers ought to receive unemployment insurance benefits willy-nilly and without regard to the disqualification limitations of the statutes.
Disqualification provisions were written into the law in the first instance to prevent those who were not entitled to benefits from depleting the funds which are set up and made available to those who are entitled thereto.
There is nothing in the record before this court showing any illness of Seipp or that his health would have been endangered from continuing with the job, that the duties were too arduous or that he needed a change of scenery. It appears to me that an employee owes some responsibility and consideration to and for an employer and he ought to conduct himself accordingly; and that if the employee quits, the reason for such ought to be a compelling one, not an imaginary, trifling or whimsical one or one negligently or willfully unexpressed to the company in violation of the company rules. There is not an iota of evidence in the record in this case to the effect that the working conditions were abhorrent or unbearable and no longer suitable to Seipp.
No matter from what direction this case is approached, the conclusion is inescapably reached that the necessary element for an absolute accurate determination of why Seipp absented himself from his job is subjective in nature “in that it abides in the mental attitude of the claimant.”
We must further keep in mind that the applicant Seipp was in effect asked if he left the work because of personal circumstances and if so, to explain the details thereof—he was asked if he was dissatisfied with the job and if so to relate why and to tell how long he had been on the job, what the rate of pay was, and the hours of work—he was asked if he left the Yellow Cab Company to take another job and if so, what was the main reason for changing to the new job. He gave no answers in spite of the fact that the Department of Employment told him in writing that it was necessary to have the answers to such questions in that the company had asserted that he had “voluntarily quit on October 6, 1956.” In fact, as heretofore set forth, the company had told the Department of Employment that Seipp was discharged for misconduct. In any event, what inferences are to be drawn from the facts?
*359Code of Civil Procedure, section 1958, provides as follows: “An inference is a deduction which the reason of the jury makes from the facts proved, without an express direction of law to that effect.” An inference can be founded on a fact legally proved.
Code of Civil Procedure, section 1832 provides as follows: “Indirect evidence is that which tends to establish the fact in dispute by proving another, and which, though true, does not of itself conclusively establish that fact, but which affords an inference or presumption of its existence. For example: a witness proves an admission of the party to the fact in dispute. This proves a fact, from which the fact in dispute is inferred. ’ ’
Code of Civil Procedure, section 1833 provides: “Prima facie evidence is that which suffices for the proof of a particular fact, until contradicted and overcome by other evidence. For example: the certificate of a recording officer is prima facie evidence of a record, but it may afterwards be rejected upon proof that there is no such record.”
The inquiry by the department was a proper one. It appears to me that it is reasonable to infer that Seipp refused, or at least failed or neglected, to answer the questions because true answers might have disqualified him from collecting from the company’s reserve account. There was nothing cruel or inhuman in asking him why he quit, if he did so quit. To have the proper answers in effect was a prerequisite to collecting the benefits. He was the moving party to collect the benefits and yet, when confronted with simple questions as to just what did take place in the termination of his employment, he saw fit to make no response and to remain mute. It is a fair inference, under the circumstances, that for him to answer the questions correctly and truthfully meant that he would expose himself to a rejection of his claim—otherwise why would he refuse to tell the truth about the entire matter? Had he quit as the Department of Employment holds that he did so quit, would he not have been incensed and resentful of the company’s saying that he had “voluntarily quit—with no reason given” and that he should not participate in benefits from their reserve account? It appears to me that had he not recognized that he had been justifiably discharged, he would indeed have been resentful of the imputation by the company that he was attempting to collect on a false claim and that he would forthwith have provided the answers to the questions by the Department of Employment,
*360The only apparent purpose of the questions put to Seipp in the letter, as pointed out to him by the department, was to assist in the determination of his eligibility to draw on the company’s reserve. In fact, I doubt that more pertinent questions could have been asked of Seipp. The strength of an inference depends upon the questions asked. There is a legitimate inference to be drawn from his refusal to provide the answers to the questions in the face of what was tantamount to an accusation by the company that his claim was a fake, and that inference is not that he quit voluntarily.
Silence and reluctance to answer such simple and yet important questions and to face up to the situation at hand compel me to draw an inference which is adverse to Seipp. He was in a position to admit or deny or explain the charge of the company and he did nothing and said nothing. Why did he seemingly dread to tell the truth in answering the inquiries of the department?
In my opinion there is a decided difference between mere absence from work and the leaving or quitting work. Seipp in this case was obviously and admittedly absent from work for seven days, and according to the company rules such conduct without an excuse therefor constituted cause for discharge. In this case the Department of Employment from the very first instance sought to and did manufacture excuses and alibis for the applicant—he, the applicant, never spoke one word for himself and the majority of this court adopt the interpretation of the Department of Employment with no basis in fact to support it.
There should, of course, be a liberal interpretation of the Unemployment Insurance Act, but there ought also to be at least a semblance of a foundation of something in the way of evidence upon which to base the judgment. Supposition, conjecture, speculation and a desire to do good should not suffice. There ought to be some balancing of interests, taking into consideration the welfare of the employer and the general public.
The employee in this case knew of the regulations of the employer to the effect “Should you be sick, or for any valid reason unable to work, notify your garage superintendent not less than 2 hours before the time you are due out. ’ ’ Seipp never contacted the employer on any occasion whatsoever. In these days of modern communication Seipp (assuming he remained in a metropolitan area) could have telephoned from *361any of thousands of places; indeed it would be difficult to imagine that he could have been in excess of a block away from a telephone at any time. Yet he never called, never wrote a postal card and never sent a telegram or message to the employer about his absence. This constituted a failure to comply with the rules of the company and showed lack of responsibility upon his part and a disregard of ordinary standards of behavior which the company had a right to expect of him and yet the department and this court in effect place their stamp of approval upon such conduct.
At the oral argument it was asserted by the attorney for the company and not denied by the attorney general that during the time between Seipp’s last day of actual work and his discharge, the company made payments to the Teamsters’ Security fund in behalf of Seipp, paid on his company insurance and that his job was held open for him during such time.
There was testimony in behalf of the company to the effect that if any driver had any intention to quit, the driver would fill out a notice of voluntary termination with the garage superintendent and thereupon terminate the employment. The rebuttable presumption contained in section 1963, subdivision 32 of the Code of Civil Procedure that “a thing once proved to exist continues as long as is usual with things of that nature” is applicable to the present situation. The fact of employment was established. As set forth above, the testimony showed that if a driver had any intention to quit he would fill out a notice of that fact. The employee did not fill out such notice.
Section 1030 of the Unemployment Insurance Code at the time in question read as follows:
“Any employer who is entitled under Article 3 of Chapter 5 of this part to receive notice of the filing of a new or additional claim or notice of computation may, within 10 days after mailing of whichever is the earlier of such notices, submit to the department any facts within its possession disclosing whether the claimant left such employer’s employ voluntarily and without good cause or was discharged from such employment for misconduct connected with his work. The department shall consider such facts together with any information in its possession and promptly issue to the employer its ruling as to the cause of the termination of the claimant’s employment. Appeals may be taken from said rulings in the *362same manner as appeals from determinations on benefit claims.”
Section 1032 of the Code read as follows:
“If it is ruled under Section 1030 or 1328 that the claimant left the employer’s employ voluntarily and without good cause or was discharged by reason of misconduct connected with his work, benefits paid to the claimant subsequent to the termination of employment due to such voluntary leaving or discharge which are based upon wages earned from such employer prior to the date of such termination of employment, shall not be charged to the account of such employer unless he failed to furnish the information specified in Section 1030 within the time limit prescribed in that section. ’ ’
There is no presumption with which I am familiar, and the department and the majority of this court have pointed to none, which is to the effect that an employee by his mere absence from work has affirmatively acted to thereby terminate his employment. However, that is the basis and the effect of their holding. If that be the law then many an employee will ultimately wish it were otherwise. For example, if the employee in this particular case had started into the company’s garage on the seventh day of his absence with the thought of going to work and had he then been struck down and severely injured, by the cab of a coworker leaving the garage, does anyone think that he, Seipp, would not have made an application for (and probably recovered) industrial accident benefits as an employee of the Yellow Cab Company? Had such occurred and had he been awarded benefits he would be surprised indeed to have this court reverse the award on the theory that in fact he quit on the first day of his absence from work and therefore he was not entitled to any benefits for the injuries sustained.
It may be that it is presently fashionable to stretch and distort the statute in question to the end that practically any claimant can recover benefits without regard to the disqualification provisions of the statute. It is a weak and mistaken view, and experience will teach that it is fallacious. The majority of this court have built a hurdle over which an employer will find it next to impossible to negotiate because in effect the opinion does away with any restrictions which tend to maintain a substantial reserve fund in the employer’s account and in effect declares it to be open season on all such reserve funds.
*363I cannot concur in what seems to me to be the giving of a premium for a failure to comply with ordinary rules of common sense in the employer-employee relationship. Apparently, an employee can now walk off a job, leave the employer in a dilemma as to whether or not to hire someone else to fill the position, whether to continue to pay certain employee benefits by way of insurance premiums and other charges with the probability that the employee some months later will secure an award for unemployment insurance benefits paid in part from the employer’s reserve account because the employee is now unemployed.
I would affirm the judgment.
Respondent’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied October 4, 1961. Schauer, J., was of the opinion that the petition should be granted.