=== CASE 9739818 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:33.399929+00 ===

VANDE WALLE, Justice,
concurring specially.
I reluctantly concur in the result reached in the majority opinion. Were it not for the specific statutory admonition in Section 14-05-24, N.D.C.C., that the court distribute the real and personal property of the parties as may seem just and proper, I might well dissent. If the parties have presented no evidence of the value of the military pension to the trial court, the trial judge is not in a position to place a value on the pension. The case law of the various jurisdictions is littered with decisions discussing the various methods by which pensions or *492retirement benefits may be valued for purposes of distribution in divorce proceedings. As Justice Pederson has noted in the majority opinion, we have a few of our own in North Dakota. I believe it is safe to assume that in most of those cases evidence concerning the value of the pension or retirement benefit was at least offered to the court. Here, no evidence concerning the value of the pension was submitted to the court. If the trial judge had attempted to assign a value to the pension and divide it between the parties I have no doubt we would have reversed because there was no evidence in the record upon which the trial judge could have made such a determination.
In a negligence action tried to the court we have no trouble affirming a dismissal where the plaintiff fails to introduce evidence to prove his claim. Here, despite the fact there is no evidence in the record concerning the value of the pension and despite the fact Conchita did not raise as an issue on appeal the failure of the trial judge to value and divide the pension, I reluctantly concur in the result reached by the majority opinion. I do so partly because of the trial judge’s erroneous indication that an unvested military pension could not be considered in property distribution and partly because Section 14-05-24, N.D.C.C., appears to place an affirmative duty on the trial courts to distribute the property of the parties equitably.
GIERKE, J., concurs.

=== CASE 2221075 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:03.636289+00 ===

62 Ill. 2d 540 (1976)
343 N.E.2d 507
NORTH PIER TERMINAL COMPANY et al., Appellees,
v.
THOMAS M. TULLY, County Assessor, et al., Appellants.
No. 47849.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed January 20, 1976.
Rehearing denied March 25, 1976.
*541 *542 Bernard Carey, State's Attorney, of Chicago (Sheldon Gardner, Deputy State's Attorney, and Henry A. Hauser and Michael F. Baccash, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel), for appellants.
Flanagan and Bilton; Gould and Ratner; and Gordon H. Millner, Ltd., all of Chicago (Dean H. Bilton, James A. Rooney, and Gordon H. Miller, of counsel), for appellees North Pier Terminal Co. et al.
Keith F. Bode, Robert C. Keck, Jr., and Robert L. Byman (Jenner & Block, of counsel), for appellee Nabisco, Inc.
Reversed and remanded.
MR. JUSTICE RYAN delivered the opinion of the court:
This action was originally brought by plaintiffs as a class action challenging the legality of omitted property assessments and the back taxes levied thereon. The second amended complaint is in two counts. The trial court entered summary judgment in favor of the plaintiffs and against the defendants (the County of Cook and its tax assessment and collection officials) as to count II. No disposition was made of count I. The trial court declared the tax unauthorized in law and void, and permanently enjoined the defendants from assessing, levying or collecting the void taxes from members of the class. The court also continued in effect the preliminary injunction orders previously entered requiring the county collector to *543 impound any payments of the taxes in a fund and retained jurisdiction for purposes of administering and distributing the fund. The defendants appealed, and the case was transferred to this court pursuant to Rule 302(b) (58 Ill.2d R. 302(b)).
This case was originally filed on behalf of all taxpayers in the County of Cook who were lessees during the years 1969 through 1973 of real property from lessors whose properties were exempt from taxation. These lessees had previously been assessed on their leasehold interests pursuant to amended section 26 of the Revenue Act of 1939 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1969, ch. 120, par. 507). In Dee-El Garage, Inc. v. Korzen, 53 Ill. 2d 1, this court held amended section 26 unconstitutional and held that the provisions of section 26 as they existed prior to the 1969 amendment remained in effect. Following that decision the assessor made the assessments of omitted property involved in this case under section 220 of the Revenue Act of 1939 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 120, par. 701).
Several other complaints were filed by other lessees of real property from lessors whose properties are exempt from taxation. The original plaintiffs then filed the second amended complaint in two counts. Count I is brought on behalf of the members of the original class and count II is brought on behalf of all taxpayers whose back taxes have been entered in the collector's 1973 warrant books as omitted property. The several cases were consolidated in the trial court with the second amended complaint, and after answers were filed by the defendants, the plaintiffs filed motions for summary judgment which were allowed. As previously noted, no disposition was made of count I of the second amended complaint filed by the original plaintiffs. All of the complaints on which injunction orders were entered present essentially the same questions as does count II on the second amended complaint of the original plaintiffs, and we will consider this appeal as though only count II of the second amended complaint is involved.
*544 Plaintiffs contend and the trial court held that the procedures followed by the assessor in assessing plaintiffs' leasehold interests as omitted property were defective thus rendering the taxes levied void as being unauthorized in law.
Our opinion in Dee-El Garage was filed October 2, 1972, and rehearing denied November 29, 1972. Thereafter, the county assessor for Cook County undertook to assess plaintiffs' leasehold interests for the year 1973, and the property was back taxed pursuant to those assessments for the years 1970 through 1973. Prior to April 9, 1974, as required by section 97 of the Revenue Act of 1939 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 120, par. 578), the assessor certified the completion of the assessments. On or about June 8, 1974, the assessor and the board of appeals executed joint affidavits certifying the assessment books in accord with section 125 of the Revenue Act of 1939 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 120, par. 606). At the time of these certifications the assessor had not completed sending notices and holding hearings concerning the assessments of omitted property. The 1973 assessment books at the time they were certified by the assessor and the board of appeals contained no omitted property assessments for plaintiffs' properties. Sometime after June 18, 1974, the assessor had additional sheets containing the omitted property assessments inserted in the assessment books and by affidavits dated December 5, 1974, stated that the additional sheets were inserted in the assessment books at the direction of the county clerk subsequent to the date of the original certifications of the books by the assessor and by the board of appeals.
Section 97 of the Revenue Act of 1939 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 120, par. 578) provides in part as follows:
"When the county assessor has completed such revision and correction and entered the changes and revision in the assessment books, an affidavit shall be appended to each of such assessment books in the form required by law, *545 signed by the county assessor. After the signing of such affidavit the county assessor shall have power, when directed by the board of appeals pursuant to Section 113 of this Act, or on his own initiative, to assess properties which may have been omitted from assessments for the current year or during any year or number of years for which such property was liable to be taxed, and for which such tax has not been paid, but only on notice and an opportunity to be heard in the manner and form required by law, and shall enter such assessments upon the assessment books. The assessor shall have no power to change the assessment or alter the assessment books in any other manner or for any other purpose so as to change or affect the taxes in that year, except as ordered by the board of appeals. The county assessor shall make all changes and corrections ordered by the board of appeals. The county assessor may for the purpose of revision by the board of appeals certify the assessment books for any town or taxing district after or when such books are completed." (Emphasis added.)
Plaintiffs contend that the assessor had no authority under section 97 of the Revenue Act to add assessments of omitted property to the 1973 assessment books after they had been certified by the assessor and the board of appeals. To do so would deprive the taxpayer of his right to have the assessment of his omitted property reviewed by the board of appeals which plaintiffs contend is provided for all assessments in section 113 and 117 of the Revenue Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 120, pars. 594, 598). Thus, plaintiffs argue, the tax is void.
The defendants contend that the assessment procedure followed was not violative of statutory provisions and that the tax is valid. Also, defendants argue that this is not a proper case for equitable relief because the assessment is clearly authorized by section 97 of the Revenue Act and that the defects complained of are mere irregularities for which the proper remedy is at law. Because we find this not to be a proper case for equitable relief we need not consider the merits of plaintiffs' contentions.
We have recently held that where a taxpayer has an *546 adequate remedy at law equity will not assume jurisdiction unless the tax is unauthorized by law or is levied upon exempt property. (Clarendon Associates v. Korzen, 56 Ill. 2d 101; La Salle National Bank v. County of Cook, 57 Ill. 2d 318.) The remedy provided by law is the statutory remedy of paying the tax under protest and filing an objection to the application for judgment. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 120, pars. 675, 716.) The plaintiffs do not argue that the legal remedy is not adequate but contend that the back tax is a tax "unauthorized by law" because of the failure of the assessor to make the assessment before the assessment books were certified to the county clerk. Thus, plaintiffs argue, the tax constitutes one of the two exceptions stated in Clarendon for which equitable relief is allowed, regardless of the availability of an adequate remedy at law. We do not agree.
The leasehold interests of the plaintiffs are taxable under section 26 of the Revenue Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 120, par. 507), which remained in force by reason of our decision in Dee-El Garage. Although count II of the second amended complaint, which is involved in this appeal, is not limited to a tax upon the assessment of leasehold interests but attacks the assessment of all omitted property, it is not contended that the property assessed is not subject to taxation.
Section 97 of the Revenue Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 120, par. 578), which is partially set forth above, confers upon the county assessor in counties having a population of 1 million or more the authority to make assessments of omitted property at the direction of the board of appeals or on his own initiative. The statute provides that the assessor has the authority to assess omitted property after he has completed his revision of assessments, executed his affidavit and delivered the books to the board of appeals.
Relying on Barkley v. Dale, 213 Ill. 614; C.P. Kimball & Co. v. O'Connell, 263 Ill. 232, and People ex rel. *547 Brecheisen v. Board of Review, 363 Ill. 106, plaintiffs contend that the assessor's authority to assess omitted property terminated when the assessment books were closed and certified to the county clerk. The three cases relied upon by the plaintiffs involve assessments made by assessment officers who under the statute were required to complete their assessments by a specified date. Earlier cases had held that the failure to complete the assessments within the time specified was fatal to the validity of the assessments. (See Marsh v. Chesnut, 14 Ill. 223; Billings v. Detten, 15 Ill. 218; Eurigh v. People ex rel. Miller, 79 Ill. 214.) However, the three cases cited by the plaintiffs hold that because of other sections of the statute which provide that the failure to complete an assessment in the time required by law shall not vitiate the assessment, the date set forth in the statute is directory only. These three cases hold that the assessment officials may continue their work and complete the matters pending before them after the expiration of the statutory date. However, when the work has been completed, the affidavits attached to the assessment books, and the books returned to the county clerk, the authority of these officials to act ceases. In Barkley and in Kimball, the court held that equitable relief was proper because the assessments were made by a body that had no authority to act. Under the rationale of these cases plaintiffs insist that the assessor involved in the present assessments similarly lacked authority to act.
However, in People ex rel. Little v. Collins, 386 Ill. 83, this court, in holding that the State Department of Revenue was a continuing body with continuing duties, distinguished the three cases relied upon by the plaintiffs and stated:
"In reaching the foregoing conclusion we believe no violence is done to such cases as Barkley v. Dale, 213 Ill. 614, Kimball & Co. v. O'Connell, 263 Ill. 232, and People ex rel. Brecheisen v. Board of Review, 363 Ill. 106, cited *548 and strongly relied upon by petitioners. The sections of the Revenue Act there involved were different and did contain definite time limitations within which the boards of review could act." (Emphasis added.) 386 Ill. 83, 102.
There is also no provision in the statute with which we are concerned that requires the assessor to complete his assessments by a specified date. Although section 125 of the Revenue Act provides that the final date of adjournment of the board of appeals shall be 60 days after the date of the last delivery to it of the assessment books for any township or taxing district, the legislature has not seen fit to specify a period of time within which the assessor must perform his duties. We will therefore not extend the holding of Barkley, Kimball and Brecheisen to limit the power conferred upon the assessor by statute in counties of a population in excess of 1 million.
We emphasize, however, that we are discussing only the power of the assessor to function. We are not deciding the validity of the tax as levied on the assessments in question. The defects of which the plaintiffs complain are essentially procedural irregularities in the assessment process which, while they may have a bearing on the question of the validity of the taxes levied, do not establish the lack of authority of the assessor to act. Thus, as noted in the cases cited below, the taxes are not "unauthorized by law."
This court has long held that if "officers authorized to make the assessment make it, then mere irregularities in the proceedings under which it was made cannot give a court of chancery jurisdiction to restrain its collection." Gray v. Board of School Inspectors, 231 Ill. 63, 74. See also Chicago, Burlington & Quincy R.R. Co. v. Frary, 22 Ill. 34; Reynolds v. Milk Grove Special Drainage District, 134 Ill. 268; Owens-Illinois Glass Co. v. McKibbin, 385 Ill. 245; Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. v. Tierney, 411 Ill. 421.
We conclude that the taxes involved in this case are *549 not "unauthorized by law" and that a basis for equitable relief as defined in Clarendon is not present. Plaintiffs had an adequate remedy at law by way of paying the taxes under protest and filing objections to the application for judgment. The trial court therefore erred in granting equitable relief. In view of this holding it is unnecessary for us to pass on the other issues raised which bear only upon the validity of the taxes levied against the questioned assessments.
The judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is reversed, and the cause is remanded for the disposition of other counts in the complaints in these cases that were not involved in this appeal.
Reversed and remanded, with directions.
MR. JUSTICE SCHAEFER took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.

=== CASE 2221079 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:03.725171+00 ===

357 N.W.2d 613 (1984)
HOME FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION OF ALGONA, Iowa, Appellee,
v.
Jacqueline E. and Richard E. CAMPNEY, Appellants.
No. 83-1189.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
November 14, 1984.
Rehearing Denied December 17, 1984.
*615 Mark S. Soldat, Algona, for appellants.
Joseph J. Straub, Algona, for appellee.
Considered by UHLENHOPP, P.J., and McGIVERIN, LARSON, CARTER, and WOLLE, JJ.
McGIVERIN, Justice.
Defendants Jacqueline E. and Roger E. Campney appeal from a judgment for plaintiff Home Federal Savings and Loan Association of Algona, Iowa, in a mortgage foreclosure action that involves a due-on-sale clause in the mortgage. We affirm and remand the case to permit the trial court to rule on a still pending motion.
The following issues are presented for our review: 1) whether the proper interpretation of the word "shall" in the due-on-sale clause requires judgment for defendants; 2) whether the due-on-sale clause is unconscionable; 3) whether application of the doctrine of reasonable expectations requires judgment for defendants; 4) whether plaintiff actually exercised the option to accelerate payment of the mortgage balance that the due-on-sale clause purports to give; 5) whether the forfeiture of a sale contract for the mortgaged property by the defendants' vendees operated retroactively to cancel the operation of the due-on-sale clause; 6) whether plaintiff waived its right to bring the foreclosure action, or should be estopped from doing so; 7) whether the trial court acted permissibly in making its award of attorney fees to plaintiff; and 8) whether one of defendants' witnesses should be deemed an expert witness within the meaning of Iowa Code section 622.72 (1983) and compensated accordingly.
This being an equity case, our review is de novo. Iowa R.App.P. 4. Upon consideration of the record, we find the facts to be as follows.
Prior to November 17, 1977, defendants, who are husband and wife, contacted plaintiff about financing the purchase of a house in Algona which Richard Campney's relatives had recently inherited. The house was in poor condition, and defendants contemplated a loan not only to purchase it, but also to make extensive repairs. Once repairs were completed, they planned to rent it out or possibly to move into it themselves if they lost their lease on the farm they were renting at that time.
Clay Mowers, then executive vice-president of plaintiff, discussed with defendants such matters as the amount of the loan they were seeking, the interest rate, and the monthly payments. Although it seems to have been obvious to defendants from the first that the loan would be secured by a mortgage on the property to be purchased, apparently it was not mentioned to *616 them in the course of these discussions that the mortgage would contain a due-on-sale clause.
Defendants decided to purchase the property and applied for a loan in the amount of $21,650, of which $18,500 was for the purchase of the property and the remainder for remodeling and repairs. Plaintiff approved the application and requested defendants to designate an attorney to represent them in connection with the purchase of the property. Defendants retained Vern McClure, an Algona lawyer, as their attorney. He wrote a title opinion letter to defendants prior to the closing and issued an Attorney's Certificate of Title thereafter, but was not requested by defendants to be present at the closing.
The closing took place on November 17, 1977. Present were defendants, Sandra Wiener (a vice-president of plaintiff), and several of Mr. Campney's relatives. The closing took a little over an hour, and during that time defendants had the opportunity to read each instrument they signed, including the mortgage, prior to signing it. However, defendants admit that they did not read the mortgage before signing. Mrs. Weiner answered various questions that defendants asked her, but there was no mention or discussion of a due-on-sale clause in the mortgage.
The mortgage signed by defendants contained a due-on-sale clause as its paragraph 17, which reads: "This mortgage shall become due and payable forthwith at the option of the mortgagee if the mortgagor shall convey away said premises or if the title thereto shall become vested in any other person or persons in any manner whatsoever."
After taking possession of the house, defendants spent several months making renovations and repairs. When the work was completed, they tried without success to rent the property. In the fall of 1978, they listed it for sale. They received no satisfactory offers and reduced their price in the spring of 1979. Shortly thereafter, they entered into negotiations with Bruce and Laurie Moe, which culminated on June 27, 1979 with the signing of an agreement or contract to sell the house to them for $30,000 on a five-year balloon contract at 10 percent interest per year.
Roger Long, the realtor who handled the sale of the property to the Moes, told Richard Campney several weeks before the sale that, because of the due-on-sale clause in the mortgage, defendants should consult with the mortgagee (plaintiff) before selling the property. Long warned Campney that plaintiff might, after the sale, declare the entire mortgage balance due and payable, or might instead request a raising of the mortgage interest rate in exchange for not doing so. Campney expressed his view to Long that the due-on-sale clause was illegal and unenforceable, and that in the event of sale plaintiff could neither accelerate payment of the mortgage balance nor request an increase in the interest rate. Rod Ricklefs, a colleague of Long's who had recently attended a seminar on the legality of due-on-sale clauses, also discussed the enforceability of the clause with Campney.
Plaintiff learned of the sale to the Moes from Mrs. Jacqueline Campney the day after the sale contract was signed. Mrs. Weiner, who had presided at the closing in 1977, advised Mrs. Campney to talk to Mr. Mowers about the mortgage. Neither of defendants did so, and on July 9, 1979, Mowers wrote to them regarding the effect of the due-on-sale clause. In his letter he offered defendants the choice of either paying off the entire mortgage balance or consenting to raise the interest on it from the original 9 percent to 11 percent per year.
There followed a series of letters in which plaintiff reiterated its demand for either payment in full or an increase in the interest rate. Defendants refused to agree to either. On August 30, 1979, plaintiff filed its petition for foreclosure of the mortgage and its underlying note.
The petition alleged that defendants breached the terms of paragraph 17 of the *617 mortgage by conveying or agreeing to convey the realty to the Moes, and that plaintiff under the terms of paragraph 17 elected to declare the entire mortgage debt to be due and payable.
Defendants answered and resisted foreclosure on several grounds.
After trial, judgment for plaintiff was entered. Defendants appeal.
I. The word "shall" in the due-on-sale clause. As noted before, paragraph 17 of defendants' mortgage reads, "This mortgage shall become due and payable forthwith at the option of the mortgagee [Home Federal] if the mortgagor [Campneys] shall convey away said premises or if the title thereto shall become vested in any other person or persons in any manner whatsoever." (emphasis added). Defendants' first contention is that the proper interpretation of the emphasized "shall" requires judgment for them in this action.
Defendants maintain that the word "shall," although sometimes used to express simple futurity, ordinarily expresses obligation when, as here, it is used in the third person. Thus, defendants contend that, according to ordinary usage, the second "shall" of paragraph 17 indicates that the mortgage could not have become due upon sale unless the defendants were under an obligation to sell the mortgaged property. Because no such obligation existed, defendants contend that the due-on-sale clause was never triggered by their sale to the Moes.
Defendants used the testimony of a grammarian to make an alternative argument in this vein. Mrs. Marguerite Kalar testified for defendants that the second "shall" was ambiguous because of its location in a protasis (conditional clause). She said that it was unclear whether the word should be read as indicating an obligation or as indicating simple futurity. Defendants maintain that this ambiguity should be resolved against plaintiff as the drafter of the language.
We decline to adopt either of defendants' arguments on this issue. The purpose of contract interpretation is to ascertain the intent of the contracting parties at the time the contract was made. See Freese v. Town of Alburnett, 255 Iowa 1264, 1267, 125 N.W.2d 790, 792 (1964). The record shows that plaintiff intended the word "shall" to express simple futurity. Defendants, by their own admission, did not read the mortgage before signing it, and so cannot be said to have had any actual intent regarding the word "shall" in paragraph 17. The proper interpretation of this word cannot involve giving it a meaning that none of the parties in fact gave it. Hamilton v. Wosepka, 261 Iowa 299, 307, 154 N.W.2d 164, 168 (1967) (quoting 3 A. Corbin, Corbin on Contracts, preface (1963)).
When interpreting a contract, we seek to give effect to the language of the entire contract in accordance with its commonly accepted and ordinary meaning. Gendler Stone Products Co. v. Laub, 179 N.W.2d 628, 630 (1970). Words of the contract are interpreted in the context in which they are used. Greenberg v. Alter Co., 255 Iowa 899, 904, 124 N.W.2d 438, 441 (1963).
In this case, although it might be maintained that the word "shall" has two commonly accepted and ordinary meanings (that of obligation and that of simple futurity), the consideration of its context is decisive. Defendants' interpretation of the word as expressing obligation would result in the triggering of the due-on-sale clause only if they conveyed the property pursuant to some obligation to do so. Plaintiff's interpretation (simple futurity) results in the triggering of the clause upon any conveyance of the property by defendants, whether or not any obligation to convey existed. It is this latter interpretation that is in fact consistent with the ordinary and usual operation and effect of a due-on-sale clause. See Fidelity Federal Savings and Loan Association v. de la Cuesta, 458 U.S. *618 141, 145, 102 S. Ct. 3014, 3016, 73 L. Ed. 2d 664, 670 (1982).
We conclude that, in the context of paragraph 17, the word "shall" has the commonly accepted and ordinary meaning of expressing simple futurity. Because of this conclusion, and because defendants' signing of the sale contract with the Moes was a conveyance under Iowa law, see Fellmer v. Gruber, 261 N.W.2d 173, 174 (Iowa 1978), we hold that plaintiff was within its rights in invoking paragraph 17 notwithstanding the fact that defendants were under no obligation to convey the property.
II. Unconscionability. We next address defendants' contention that, even if paragraph 17 is interpreted in favor of plaintiff, it is unconscionable and should therefore be selectively eliminated from the mortgage. We do not agree.
A. We have said that a court considering a claim of unconscionability should examine the factors of assent, unfair surprise, notice, disparity of bargaining power, and substantive unfairness. C & J Fertilizer, Inc. v. Allied Mutual Insurance Co., 227 N.W.2d 169, 181 (Iowa 1975). Consideration of these factors leads us to conclude that paragraph 17 is not unconscionable in this case.
With regard to assent, defendants point out that because they did not read the mortgage before signing it, they cannot be said to have actually assented to paragraph 17. This is true, but does not end our inquiry. In C & J Fertilizer we quoted Professor Llewellyn's thoughts on this problem:
"Instead of thinking about `assent' to boiler-plate clauses, we can recognize that so far as concerns the specific, there is no assent at all. What has in fact been assented to, specifically, are the few dickered terms, and the broad type of transaction, and but one thing more. That one thing more is a blanket assent (not a specific assent) to any not unreasonable or indecent terms ... which do not alter or eviscerate the reasonable meaning of the dickered terms. The fine print which has not been read has no business to cut under the reasonable meaning of those dickered terms which constitute the dominant and only real expression of agreement...."
227 N.W.2d at 175 (quoting K. Llewellyn, the Common Law TraditionDeciding Appeals 370 (1960)).
We think this approach is reasonable and practical. The issue thus becomes whether paragraph 17 is an unreasonable or indecent term, or whether it alters or eviscerates the terms of the mortgage to which defendants specifically agreed. With regard to unreasonableness or indecency (which we understand as equivalent to the issue of substantive unfairness), much of our opinion in Martin v. Peoples Mutual Savings and Loan Association, 319 N.W.2d 220 (Iowa 1982), is relevant here. In Martin we noted that due-on-sale clauses are standard provisions, that they are not restraints on alienation, and that they serve the social and economic purpose of maximizing the number of home loans granted to first-time borrowers. In view of these facts, we do not believe that paragraph 17 is the sort of nefarious provision, inimical to the public good, that the doctrine of unconscionability is designed to invalidate. See Casey v. Lupkes, 286 N.W.2d 204, 208 (Iowa 1979) (evidence that terms of an agricultural lease were substantially more disadvantageous to lessor than normal agricultural lease provisions, and made the land unmarketable, would be probative on the issue of unconscionability).
Although paragraph 17 can operate to alter the terms of a mortgage by requiring accelerated payment instead of the original payment schedule, it is relevant that this is not the automatic result of the inclusion of paragraph 17 in the mortgage. If a mortgagor does not convey the realty, a due-on-sale clause can never be invoked, unlike the typical unconscionable contract provision *619 that alters the essence of the contract regardless of the subsequent acts of the parties. See C & J Fertilizer, 227 N.W.2d at 171 (narrow definition of burglary in burglary insurance policy); Henningson v. Bloomfield Motors, Inc., 32 N.J. 358, 161 A.2d 69 (1960) (disclaimer of warranty).
With regard to unfair surprise, we note that although defendants may indeed have been surprised upon eventually reading paragraph 17, the surprise can hardly be called unfair. They had time to read the mortgage and ask questions about it at the closing. Before that time they were invited by plaintiff to retain counsel for the transaction, but they chose not to have their lawyer examine the mortgage for them.
It is true that plaintiff did not give defendants specific notice that the mortgage contained a due-on-sale clause. But on this record we are unwilling to impose upon plaintiff the quasi-fiduciary duty of giving notice to defendants of every provision in the mortgage that might eventually prove disadvantageous to them. Our conclusion might be different had plaintiff stated or implied that there was no due-on-sale clause in the mortgage, or if defendants had not been afforded a fair opportunity to read it and consult an attorney about it. Cf. C & J Fertilizer, 227 N.W.2d 169 (insured given no opportunity to read insurance policy taken out to protect him against burglary; policy later discovered to contain provision defining "burglary" very narrowly; held, burglary definition unconscionable).
In regard to disparity of bargaining power, there is no dispute that defendants were in no position to bargain with plaintiff regarding the due-on-sale clause. Moreover, because the due-on-sale clause is a standard mortgage provision, it is almost certain that defendants could not have fared any better on that score with another lender. However, even though the mortgage can be characterized as a contract of adhesion with respect to paragraph 17, this does not mean paragraph 17 is automatically unconscionable. See Jim Hawk Chevrolet-Buick, Inc. v. Insurance Company of North America, 270 N.W.2d 466, 468 (Iowa 1978).
As an example, if defendants in this case had set out to obtain an interest-free loan and mortgage, they almost surely would have been unable to obtain one from plaintiff or any other commercial lender. This fact alone would not mean that interest provisions in notes and mortgages are unconscionable. We believe that the issue of whether a given contract is one of adhesion is in the nature of a threshold issue relevant to the question of applicability of the unconscionability doctrine. As was said in C & J Fertilizer:
"Standardized contracts ... drafted by powerful commercial units and put before individuals on the `accept this or get nothing' basis, are carefully scrutinized by the courts for the purpose of avoiding enforcement of `unconscionable' clauses."
227 N.W.2d at 180 (quoting 6A A. Corbin, Corbin on Contracts § 1376 at 21 (1963)).
Clearly a finding that a contract is adhesive does not require a determination of unconscionability. It merely alerts the court that the situation is one in which such a finding may be justified. Cf. Iowa Code section 554.2302 (1983) (Uniform Commercial Code Comment) ("The principle is one of the prevention of oppression and unfair surprise ... and not ... disturbance of allocation of risks because of superior bargaining power.") More is required to complete the case for unconscionability, and we are not satisfied that the case has been made here.
Consideration of the factors enumerated in C & J Fertilizer and of the policy reasons favoring due-on-sale clauses stated in Martin, 319 N.W.2d at 227-31, lead us to conclude that paragraph 17 is not unconscionable.
B. We have also stated that a bargain is unconscionable if it is such as no person in *620 his or her senses and not under delusion would make on the one hand, and as no honest and fair person would accept on the other. Smith v. Harrison, 325 N.W.2d 92, 94 (Iowa 1982). In view of the widespread use of due-on-sale clauses and the fact that their use by federal saving and loan associations is specifically authorized by the federal government, see 12 CFR § 545.8-3(f) (1982), we conclude paragraph 17 is well outside the reach of this statement of the unconscionability doctrine.
III. Defendants' reasonable expectations. Defendants next contend that, because the mortgage is at least to some extent a contract of adhesion, effect should be given to their reasonable expectations in signing it. See Farm Bureau Mutual Insurance Co. v. Sandbulte, 302 N.W.2d 104, 112 (Iowa 1981). We agree, but other factors must also be considered in our analysis. The doctrine of reasonable expectations will assist defendants if paragraph 17 (1) is bizarre or oppressive, (2) eviscerates terms explicitly agreed to, or (3) eliminates the dominant purpose of the transaction. See id.
We believe the preceding divisions suffice for discussion of (1) and (2). As regards (3), the dominant purpose of the mortgage transaction was to enable defendants to buy the house. That purpose was not affected by paragraph 17. Defendants contend strenuously that their purpose in buying the house was to sell it later at a profit. Even if this was true, paragraph 17 in no way prevented defendants from selling the property at any price they chose. See Martin, 319 N.W.2d at 227.
We believe that defendants had no reasonable expectations that would justify the nullification of paragraph 17. Nothing in the record before us indicates that plaintiff in any way misled or deceived defendants as to the terms of the mortgage, nor does the mortgage itself generally, or in any particular, suggest the absence of a due-on-sale clause. Any expectations defendants had regarding the nonexistence of paragraph 17 are based on their deliberate failure to read the mortgage and cannot be characterized as reasonable. Cf., Rodman v. State Farm Mutual Insurance Co., 208 N.W.2d 903, 908 (Iowa 1973) (doctrine of reasonable expectations did not invalidate insurance policy exclusion where ordinary layman would not have misunderstood extent of coverage from a reading of the policy and there were no circumstances attributable to insurer which would foster contrary expectations on part of insured who did not read policy).
IV. Exercise of the option to declare mortgage balance due. Defendants' next assignment of error is based on the fact that paragraph 17 does not automatically take effect upon conveyance or sale of the mortgaged premises. It merely gives the mortgagee the option, upon conveyance, to declare the mortgage balance due and payable. Defendants maintain that plaintiff never exercised this option and so cannot foreclose for their failure to pay the balance. Without deciding whether the letters from plaintiff to defendant after the conveyance constituted an exercise of the option, we hold that the bringing of the foreclosure action was sufficient to give defendants notice of the exercise of the option. See Wentland v. Stewart, 236 Iowa 661, 665, 19 N.W.2d 661, 663 (1945).
V. Forfeiture of the Moe contract. In the fall of 1980, the Moes defaulted and their interest in the sale contract they had signed with defendants for purchase of the mortgaged property was forfeited. Iowa Code ch. 656. Defendants contend that this forfeiture retroactively nullified any conveyance that may have triggered paragraph 17, and that as a consequence paragraph 17 cannot now be invoked by plaintiff. Defendants rely on the following language used by this court in a case holding that a mechanic's lien for work done on a contract vendee's land is *621 unenforceable against the vendor if the vendee forfeits the sale contract: "When the contract was forfeited .... the title stood in [the vendor], the same as though no contract ... had ever been entered into." Hunt Hardware Co. v. Herzoff, 196 Iowa 715, 718, 195 N.W. 264, 265 (1923).
We do not believe the quoted language means that the forfeiture of a sale contract operates retroactively to "untrigger" a due-on-sale clause. Both Herzoff, id., and Darragh v. Knolk, 218 Iowa 686, 693, 254 N.W. 22, 26 (1934), make it clear that the effect of the forfeiture is to divest the vendee of his interest. This is not consistent with saying that the interest, or the instrument that created it, never existed. Any language implying the contrary in Herzoff is best understood as a statement unnecessary to the holding in that case.
We hold here that forfeiture of the vendees' interest in a realty sale contract has no effect on the operation of a due-on-sale clause triggered by the making of that contract.
VI. Waiver or estoppel by plaintiff. Defendants next contend that because plaintiff continued to accept monthly mortgage payments from defendants after the foreclosure action was begun, plaintiff waived its right to request accelerated payment, or else should be held estopped to assert that right. We believe that both these contentions are answered by the following language from Babb's, Inc. v. Babb, 169 N.W.2d 211, 214 (Iowa 1969):
One can accept partial payments of a real estate mortgage quite consistently with foreclosure. Such payments merely reduce the balance due the mortgagee. "The mortgagee cannot be penalized for the mere receipt of that to which he is, in equity and good conscience, entitled." Jewell v. Logsdon, 200 Iowa [1327,] 1331, 206 N.W. [136,] 138 [(1925)].
The record does not show that the monies received by plaintiff from defendants (including a late payment charge of $8.92 imposed in December 1981) have been used for any purpose other than the wholly permissible one of reducing the balance due on the mortgage. We, therefore, find no merit to this contention of error.
VII. Determination of attorney fees. Paragraph 13 of the mortgage provided for payment by defendants of plaintiff's "statutory attorney's fee" in the event a foreclosure action was necessary. Defendants next contend that the trial court erred in its determination of the attorney fees due plaintiff.
On December 10, 1980, defendants filed an application to adjudicate law points, pursuant to Iowa R.Civ.P. 105, in which they requested that plaintiff's attorney fees be determined under Iowa Code section 625.22 (1979) as it read on the date the foreclosure action was begun. On that date, August 30, 1979, the statute provided for determination of fees on a percentage-of-recovery basis.
Plaintiff resisted defendants' application on the ground that effective on July 1, 1980, section 625.22 had been amended by 1980 Iowa Acts ch. 1182. The percentage-of-recovery system for determining fees was replaced in favor of determination of fees by the court.[1] Plaintiff contended that the amended statute, rather than the statute as it had read at the time the suit was begun, was applicable to the determination of its attorney fees.
On January 30, 1981, the court ruled that the unamended statute, providing for determination of attorney fees on a percentage-of-recovery basis, was applicable. Thereafter, on November 24, 1982, this court held in Bankers Trust Co. v. Woltz, 326 N.W.2d 274, 277-78 (Iowa 1982), that *622 where a written contract provides for an award of attorney fees, the determination of fees is made according to the statute in force at the time judgment is entered in the action in question.
Relying on Woltz, plaintiff filed a post-trial motion requesting that its attorney fees be determined in accordance with the amended section 625.22 in force at that time, which provided for determination of the fees by the court. The court concluded that it was bound by its prior rule 105 adjudication[2] only as to plaintiff's attorney fees incurred up to the time of that adjudication. With regard to the fees incurred since that time, the court concluded it was free to apply the amended statute, pursuant to our decision in Woltz. The court awarded plaintiff a total of $2,500 in attorney fees.
On appeal, defendants contend that the court was wholly bound, with respect to its fee determination, by its prior rule 105 adjudication and had no power to modify that ruling by restricting it to the determination of only the fees plaintiff had incurred up to the time of the ruling. We disagree.
Under defendants' interpretation of rule 105, a change in the award of attorney fees to bring the award in conformity with Woltz could be accomplished only on appeal. This is not the meaning of the rule. Allied Mutual Casualty Co. v. Long, 252 Iowa 829, 831-32, 107 N.W.2d 682, 683 (1961). A rule 105 adjudication is a guide by which the parties to an action may determine their conduct in future proceedings. Id. We are unwilling to construe the rule as barring modification of a prior adjudication of law points in order to conform to subsequent decisions of this court while the case is pending. Cf. Baty v. Binns, 354 N.W.2d 777, 779-80 (1984) (trial court, in personal injury action, allowed to correct its findings of fact and conclusions of law while case was still pending in order to conform to doctrine of comparative negligence adopted in Goetzman v. Wichern, 327 N.W.2d 742 (Iowa 1982) shortly after trial).
We hold that rule 105 did not preclude the trial court from taking the action it did with respect to plaintiff's attorney fee award. We do not reach the issue of whether that action was substantively correct because error on that basis has not been urged.
Defendants also contend that the award should be vacated because it is without evidentiary support in the record. It is not necessary for a court to hear evidence on a motion for award of attorney fees, because the court is presumed to be an expert on what are reasonable fees. See Nelson v. Iowa State Highway Commission, 253 Iowa 1248, 1256, 115 N.W.2d 695, 699 (1962). We have required evidence on the matter only when the award was made pursuant to a statute which, in our opinion, contemplated litigation of the issue. See, e.g., Maday v. Elview-Stewart Systems Co., 324 N.W.2d 467, 470 (Iowa 1982) (award made pursuant to Iowa Code § 91A.8). The court need not have received evidence on the award of attorney fees. The court heard the trial and was aware of the work plaintiff's counsel had done on the case. There is no error here.
VIII. Status and compensation of Mrs. Kalar. As noted in division I, Mrs. Marguerite Kalar, a retired teacher, testified for defendants regarding the interpretation of the word "shall" in paragraph 17 of the mortgage. Defendants twice moved the trial court to declare Mrs. Kalar an expert witness and to award expert witness fees to her pursuant to Iowa Code section 622.72 (1983). Apparently no ruling on the motion was ever made. Accordingly, we remand the case for the sole purpose of permitting the trial court to rule on the *623 motion. We do not suggest what the ruling should be.
We have considered all of defendants' contentions, whether discussed herein or not, and find them to be without merit. The judgment of the trial court is, therefore, affirmed and the case remanded for ruling on defendants' motion above stated.
AFFIRMED.
NOTES
[1]  Iowa Code section 625.22, as amended, now provides in relevant part:
When judgment is recovered upon a written contract containing an agreement to pay an attorney's fee, the court shall allow and tax as a part of the costs a reasonable attorney's fee to be determined by the court.
[2]  Iowa R.Civ.P. 105 provides that a ruling made pursuant to it "shall not be questioned on the trial of any part of the case of which it does not dispose."

=== CASE 2221081 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:03.76231+00 ===

357 N.W.2d 457 (1984)
218 Neb. 594
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Donald E. RUZICKA, Appellant.
No. 84-325.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
November 2, 1984.
*460 Patrick A. Brock of Cunningham, Blackburn, VonSeggern, Livingston, Francis & Riley, Grand Island, for appellant.
Paul L. Douglas, Atty. Gen., and Lynne R. Fritz, Lincoln, for appellee.
KRIVOSHA, C.J., BOSLAUGH, WHITE, HASTINGS, CAPORALE, and SHANAHAN, JJ., and COLWELL, D.J., Retired.
CAPORALE, Justice.
Defendant, Donald E. Ruzicka, appeals from his conviction, following a nonjury trial, of pandering, and from the sentence of 18 months' probation with confinement in the county jail for the first 60 days and final 30 days of the probationary period. He urges that the pandering statute is unconstitutional, that the trial court erred in admitting certain evidence, that the evidence is not sufficient to support his conviction, and that his plea in abatement should have been sustained. We find no error and affirm.
Neb.Rev.Stat. § 28-802 (Reissue 1979) provides that one commits pandering if, among other things, he agrees to receive money for procuring one to commit an act of prostitution. Neb.Rev.Stat. § 28-801(1) (Reissue 1979) provides in part: "Any person who performs, offers, or agrees to perform any act of sexual penetration, as defined in subdivision (5) of section 28-318, with any person not his spouse in exchange for money or other thing of value commits prostitution." At the relevant time, sexual penetration was defined in Neb.Rev.Stat. § 28-318(5) (Reissue 1979), now § 28-318(6) (Cum.Supp.1984), as
sexual intercourse in its ordinary meaning, cunnilingus, fellatio, anal intercourse, or any intrusion, however slight, of any part of the actor's body or any object manipulated by the actor into the genital or anal openings of the victim's body which can be reasonably construed as being for nonmedical or nonhealth purposes. Sexual penetration shall not require emission of semen.
Ruzicka's first constitutional attack, that the act is impermissibly vague, may be disposed of quickly. We have said:
A penal statute creating an offense must be sufficiently explicit to inform those who are subject to it what conduct on their part will render them liable to its penalties. Any statute which forbids the doing of an act in terms so vague that men of common intelligence must necessarily guess at its meaning, and differ as to its application, violates the first essential of due process of law.
State v. Adkins, 196 Neb. 76, 80, 241 N.W.2d 655, 658 (1976).
However, it is well established that "[o]ne to whose conduct a statute clearly applies may not successfully challenge it for vagueness." Parker v. Levy, 417 U.S. 733, 756, 94 S. Ct. 2547, 41 L. Ed. 2d 439 (1974); State v. Frey, 218 Neb. 558, 216 N.W.2d 357 (1984); State v. Sprague, 213 Neb. 581, 330 N.W.2d 739 (1983). As will be seen from the discussion which follows, there is no doubt that Ruzicka was engaging in conduct which § 28-802 clearly proscribes. The evidence establishes that Ruzicka agreed to receive money for procuring two women to commit acts of prostitution. Ruzicka thus cannot complain that the statute failed to provide him with notice that his acts were unlawful.
Ruzicka's second constitutional assault contends that § 28-802 violates the equal protection guarantees in that the penalties for pandering, a Class IV felony punishable by imprisonment for not more than 5 years *461 or a fine of $10,000, or both such fine and imprisonment, Neb.Rev.Stat. § 28-105 (Reissue 1979), and for prostitution, a Class V misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine of $100, Neb.Rev.Stat. § 28-106 (Cum. Supp.1984), are too disparate. Ruzicka reasons that one who engages in prostitution actually engages in a sex crime, yet is subject only to a maximum $100 fine, while one who merely facilitates the sex crime is subject to a substantially higher fine and possible imprisonment. Since, in Ruzicka's eyes, prostitution is morally more reprehensible than the act of pandering, the difference in penalties, he argues, denies equal protection rights.
A review of the legislative history demonstrates that the Legislature does not agree with Ruzicka's assessment of the relative vileness of the two crimes. That history reveals that in enacting § 28-802 the Legislature intended to curtail the business of prostitution and thereby reduce commercialized vice. Concern was also expressed during the floor debate about the well-being and safety of those who were under the control of panderers. The statute was specifically aimed at discouraging prostitution by punishing panderers, whom the Legislature considered to be a major source of the problem. Floor Debate, L.B. 38, Judiciary Committee, 85th Leg., 1st Sess. (Apr. 1, 5, 19, 1977).
It is clear that the more severe penalty for the crime of pandering is reasonably and rationally related to the legitimate governmental purposes of protecting the public and suppressing commercialized vice. This court does not sit as a superlegislature to review the wisdom of legislative acts. Bridgeford v. U-Haul Co., 195 Neb. 308, 238 N.W.2d 443 (1976). Our statement in State v. Haynes, 192 Neb. 445, 448, 222 N.W.2d 358, 361 (1974), disposes of this second constitutional argument:
It is well established that all reasonable intendments must be indulged to support the constitutionality of legislative acts, including classifications adopted by the Legislature. If the classification of persons singled out by the legislation is reasonable and not arbitrary, and is based on substantial differences having a reasonable relation to the persons dealt with and the public purpose to be achieved, it meets the constitutional test of equal protection.
Section 28-802 does not violate the constitutional guarantee of equal protection.
In his third and final constitutional argument, Ruzicka contends that the penalty for pandering, authorized by § 28-802, is disproportionate to the severity of the crime and thereby amounts to cruel and unusual punishment, in violation of both the U.S. and state Constitutions. Again, Ruzicka relies on the disparity between the penalties for prostitution and for pandering.
The U.S. Supreme Court has explained in Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 96 S. Ct. 2909, 49 L. Ed. 2d 859 (1976), that the eighth amendment to the U.S. Constitution prohibits punishment which is grossly disproportionate to the severity of the crime. However,
in assessing a punishment selected by a democratically elected legislature against the constitutional measure, we presume its validity. We may not require the legislature to select the least severe penalty possible so long as the penalty selected is not cruelly inhumane or disproportionate to the crime involved. And a heavy burden rests on those who would attack the judgment of the representatives of the people.
Id. at 175, 96 S. Ct. at 2926.
We find nothing in article I, § 9, of our Constitution which imposes greater limits upon our Legislature. Indeed, we have held that the language of article I, § 9, prohibiting "cruel and unusual" punishment does not abridge the Legislature's power to select such punishment as it deems most effective in the suppression of crime. State v. Tucker, 183 Neb. 577, 162 N.W.2d 774 (1968).
Ruzicka has failed to meet the heavy burden imposed by Gregg v. Georgia. As we have seen, the Legislature *462 chose a penalty for the crime of pandering which is reasonably and rationally related to valid governmental goals. Although the Legislature has concluded that a defendant who is convicted of prostitution should be treated more leniently than a defendant convicted of pandering, it does not follow that the punishment for pandering is thereby rendered cruel and unusual.
For an example of a situation which meets the heavy burden imposed by Gregg v. Georgia, see Solem v. Helm, 463 U.S. 277, 103 S. Ct. 3001, 77 L. Ed. 2d 637 (1983), which held that a sentence of life imprisonment without the possibility of parole for uttering a $100 no-account check was grossly disproportionate to the crime committed, and thus cruel and unusual.
In essence, Ruzicka's argument is that his sentence is an excessive one. The sentence can hardly be characterized as harsh, and is well within the statutory limits set out in § 28-105. The applicable rule is that a sentence will not be set aside if it is within the statutory limits, absent an abuse of discretion by the trial court. State v. Klappal, 218 Neb. 374, 355 N.W.2d 221 (1984). The record shows no abuse of discretion.
The facts were developed through a stipulated record consisting of certain police reports, to portions of which Ruzicka objected, and other documentary evidence. Ruzicka argues that the trial court erred in overruling his objections to certain statements made by two women who presented themselves to undercover investigators, as discussed later. His objections were grounded on the claims that the statements were hearsay and denied him his state and federal constitutional rights to confront the witnesses against him. He further objected on the ground that he had been unable to depose one of the women. We, however, need not address those claims, for, as will be seen from the discussion which follows, even if the statements made by the two women were improperly admitted, they were cumulative. There is sufficient evidence exclusive of those statements to sustain the conviction; if any error was made by admitting the statements, it was harmless error and not a ground for reversal. State v. Smith, 218 Neb. 201, 352 N.W.2d 620 (1984); State v. Smith, 209 Neb. 505, 308 N.W.2d 820 (1981); State v. Beam, 206 Neb. 248, 292 N.W.2d 302 (1980); Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18, 87 S. Ct. 824, 17 L. Ed. 2d 705 (1967), reh'g denied 386 U.S. 987, 87 S. Ct. 1283, 18 L. Ed. 2d 241. Moreover, in a case tried to the court without a jury, there is a presumption that the trial court, in reaching its decision, considered only evidence that is competent and relevant. In such a case this court will not overturn such a decision where there is sufficient material, competent, and relevant evidence to sustain the judgment. State v. Tomes, 218 Neb. 148, 352 N.W.2d 608 (1984).
This brings us to a review of the sufficiency of the evidence to support the conviction. The record, without reference to the statements of the two women, reveals the following.
On May 17, 1983, three men attending the annual fire school in Grand Island, Nebraska, were approached at the Ramada Inn by Ruzicka, who asked whether firemen would be able to pay $100 for a woman. Ruzicka advertised that he had plenty of girls in his "stable" who were clean, drug free, and herpes free. One of the men subsequently reported the incident to the Grand Island Police Department. The police enlisted the aid of the Nebraska State Patrol to investigate the matter.
On May 20, 1983, an investigator for the State Patrol, in an undercover capacity, met Ruzicka at a Grand Island bar. Upon inquiry, Ruzicka said that he had some girls for rent, two of whom were married and available for afternoon sessions, and another two of whom were single and available for evening sessions. During the course of the conversation, Ruzicka informed the investigator that he had only been in the business for 7 weeks and was attempting to recruit more women. However, he stated that the four women he had working for him were clean, "foxy" ladies. *463 Ruzicka set a price range of from $70 to $150. He then gave the investigator his business card and information as to how he could be contacted.
On May 25, 1983, the investigator contacted Ruzicka on the telephone and recorded the conversation. Ruzicka stated that they could do business during the afternoon of May 26, 1983, at a Grand Island motel. He told the investigator that he could furnish two "foxy" ladies who would not give them anything to take home. Ruzicka stated that the price for a "straight lay," "half-and-half," or "blow job" was $50, but for $90 he could provide a more attractive lady.
On May 26, at a predetermined time, Ruzicka arrived at the motel rooms rented by the investigator for himself and for a second investigator. Ruzicka showed the investigators photographs of three women, one of whom he indicated was available for that afternoon. Ruzicka stated that Dee Dee was available for $90, which included anything except anal intercourse and rough stuff. Ruzicka further stated that Ann, of whom he had no photograph, was also available for $70. After the investigators made their selections, Ruzicka consulted a book and called the two women on the telephone, telling them to go to the room of one of the investigators. He then told the investigators that he would call later to make arrangements to meet that evening, when payment would be made. Ruzicka then left the room.
About 10 minutes later Dee Dee and Ann arrived at the first investigator's room. One of the investigators and Ann then went to a separate room. The first investigator gave Dee Dee $90, and she began disrobing, following which she was arrested. Ann was given $70 and had completely disrobed before she was arrested. Ruzicka was arrested shortly thereafter.
It is well established in this jurisdiction that a verdict of guilty will not be overturned on appeal unless it is so lacking in probative force that it can be said as a matter of law that the evidence is insufficient to support it. State v. Lamb, 213 Neb. 498, 330 N.W.2d 462 (1983). See, also, State v. Christiansen, 217 Neb. 740, 351 N.W.2d 67 (1984). This is not such a case.
The foregoing record establishes beyond doubt that Ruzicka was engaged in the business of soliciting men to pay for the sexual services of women in his "stable." In the process of the undercover operation which ultimately led to his arrest, Ruzicka agreed to procure two women for the purpose of engaging in sexual activity with the investigators for a price. Ruzicka did in fact procure two women for the two investigators, and he arranged for payment after the acts were to have been completed. The women proceeded to assigned motel rooms, accepted money, and removed their clothing. Under these circumstances one would have to be more than ordinarily ignorant and naive to conclude that the two women were where they were at the behest of Ruzicka for any purpose other than to engage in prostitution as defined in §§ 28-801 and 28-318(5).
Ruzicka's argument that there is no evidence to show that he agreed to receive money is equally without merit. Direct evidence of an agreement to receive money was presented, showing that Ruzicka told the investigators he would make arrangements to meet them later to secure payment for his services in procuring the two women. Although the fee set by Ruzicka was actually paid to the women, the evidence overwhelmingly indicates that Ruzicka expected to be paid for his efforts.
Finally, Ruzicka claims the trial court should have sustained his plea in abatement, which addressed two issues, the sufficiency of the evidence at the preliminary hearing and a claim that he was denied an opportunity to present evidence at the preliminary hearing.
The standard of proof at a preliminary hearing requires only that the evidence establish that a crime has been committed and that there is probable cause to believe that the accused committed it. Kruger v. Brainard, 183 Neb. 455, 161 *464 N.W.2d 520 (1968). The evidence introduced at the preliminary hearing virtually duplicates the material evidence adduced at the trial in the district court. As we have seen, that evidence is sufficient to support the finding of guilt and therefore necessarily ample to justify binding Ruzicka over to the district court. State v. Tomrdle, 214 Neb. 580, 335 N.W.2d 279 (1983); State v. Franklin, 194 Neb. 630, 234 N.W.2d 610 (1975).
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2221083 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:03.797588+00 ===

357 N.W.2d 472 (1984)
218 Neb. 672
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
James L. GILLETTE, Appellant.
No. 84-322.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
November 9, 1984.
*474 Daniel E. Wherry of Johnston, Barber, Wherry & Knight, Lincoln, for appellant.
Richard T. Smith, Gage County Atty., Beatrice, for appellee.
KRIVOSHA, C.J., BOSLAUGH, WHITE, HASTINGS, CAPORALE, and SHANAHAN, JJ., and COLWELL, District Judge, Retired.
COLWELL, District Judge, Retired.
Defendant, James L. Gillette, was convicted on his guilty plea that on June 4, 1982, he caused to be made false statements or false bank entries in the books of First Security Bank and Trust, Beatrice, Nebraska (Security Bank). Neb.Rev.Stat. § 8-175 (Reissue 1983). The penalty for this Class III felony is 1 to 20 years' imprisonment, or $25,000 fine, or both. Neb. Rev.Stat. § 28-105 (Reissue 1979).
Defendant appeals his sentence of 16 months to 2 years, claiming these errors: (1) The trial court abused its discretion by considering irrelevant and unsubstantiated facts contained in the presentence report, including the Federal Bureau of Investigation reports; (2) The sentence is excessive and constitutes cruel and unjust punishment; and (3) The trial judge erred in not disqualifying himself because of an appearance of bias and because he was indirectly interested.
Defendant, a college graduate, age 40, is married to Nancy Copple; they are the parents of two minor children. At the time of the offense, defendant was president of Security Bank, which he acquired in 1980 along with First Security Savings Company, Beatrice, Nebraska (Security Savings), from Nancy's grandfather, S.E. Copple.
Prior to the guilty plea, defendant, his wife Nancy, and the Gage County attorney signed a written plea agreement providing (1) no further criminal charges would be filed against either defendant or Nancy Gillette as regarding Security Bank and Security Savings, and (2) defendant and Nancy would cooperate with the county attorney and federal authorities and "[i]n any criminal investigations concerning conduct of public officials or others in regards to the above-named institutions and Commonwealth Savings Company of Lincoln, Nebraska."
The thrust of defendant's first error assignment is that the presentence report contained information concerning other unproven state and federal bank violations that in some way involved defendant and that they should not be considered by the sentencing judge.
The presentence investigation and report shall include, when available, an analysis of the circumstances attending the commission of the crime, the offender's history of delinquency or criminality, physical and mental condition, family situation and background, economic status, education, occupation and personal habits, and *475 any other matters that the probation officer deems relevant or the court directs to be included.
Neb.Rev.Stat. § 29-2261(3) (Cum.Supp. 1984).
It is a long accepted practice in this state that before sentencing a defendant after conviction a trial judge has a broad discretion in the sourse [sic] and type of evidence he may use to assist him in determining the kind and extent of punishment to be imposed within the limits fixed by statute. Highly relevant, if not essential, to his determination of an appropriate sentence is the gaining of knowledge concerning defendant's life, character, and previous conduct. In gaining this information, the trial court may consider reports of probation officers, police reports, affidavits, and other information including his own observations of the defendant. A presentence investigation has nothing to do with the issue of guilt.... The latitude allowed a sentencing judge at a presentence hearing to determine the nature and length of punishment, other than in recidivist cases, is almost without limitation as long as it is relevant to the issue.
(Emphasis supplied). State v. Rose, 183 Neb. 809, 811, 164 N.W.2d 646, 648-49 (1969); State v. Harrington, 202 Neb. 356, 275 N.W.2d 294 (1979).
In Harrington, a forgery case, it was held relevant for the court to consider "`that you engaged in a deliberate and premeditated course of conduct over a period of 42 days which involved 5 separate incidents of embezzlement; while you're not charged with embezzlement, I think I'm entitled to consider that and have to consider that....'" Id. 202 Neb. at 358, 275 N.W.2d at 296.
The presentence report, prepared by a state probation officer, consisted of (1) general background information; (2) two lengthy statements given by defendant to Richard T. Smith, Gage County attorney, relating to a wide range of banking law violations, both state and federal; (3) a copy of an FBI investigative report dated June 16, 1983, concerning federal bank violations involving the Security Bank and other institutions; and (4) more than 50 personal, good character letters from defendant's friends and acquaintances. The full report was examined and studied by defendant's counsel and the sentencing judge. Defendant added to the report by furnishing documents showing that his residence in Tucson, Arizona, was in foreclosure and that his business assets had little value.
This colloquy occurred at the beginning of the sentencing hearing:
THE COURT: The presentence investigation report proper deals with the matters in Gage County. The FBI reports in particular and some of the matters in the statements to Mr. Smith deal with matters involving other jurisdictions and possible charges against other people. Those the Court has excluded from its consideration and limits itself to those matters dealing with the Gage County institutions....
MR. WHERRY: I realize that, and I appreciate that, your Honor, and with regard to and specifically on that, with regard to some of those matters that relate to the Beatrice situation that are included in the FBI report, I think it's fair to say that Mr. Gillette does not totally agree with all the conclusions that were reached by the FBI with regard to some of the other transactions.
Later, counsel made reference to defendant's faith and reliance on S.E. Copple and other Copple family members with whom "in-house" unsecured bank loans were made and that these were a part of his "sloppy" banking practices. Defendant's only statement to the court was, "I'm sorry."
Counsel's concluding statement was prefaced: "In summary, all we can say is that we know the Court has tried its best to separate the Beatrice problem from all the other matters of Commonwealth ...."
*476 The record clearly shows that the judge limited his consideration of the report to relevant information; there was no abuse of discretion.
Next, defendant contends his sentence is excessive, claiming probation should have been granted, since he met the statutory grounds to be accorded weight in favor of withholding sentence, Neb.Rev.Stat. § 29-2260(3) (Cum.Supp.1984), particularly, (1) the crime neither caused nor threatened serious harm; (2) the offender has no prior criminal history and has led a law-abiding life prior to the crime charged; (3) the crime was the result of circumstances unlikely to recur; (4) defendant is unlikely to commit another crime; (5) defendant would respond to probation; and (6) imprisonment would cause excessive hardship on his family.
The judge addressed all of these claims of defendant, and then concluded:
Of course, the sad fact is that in all of these situations, when a man falls as Mr. Gillette has fallen here, his family are the innocent victims of his acts, and unfortunately there's not a great deal that this Court can do about it. There are a number of things Mr. Gillette's attorney has suggested that would be a basis for this Court granting probation. And in other circumstances, that might be a viable alternative. Certainly the Court has studied it carefully here. But there is riding above all these other things that are in a sense in Mr. Gillette's favor, the facts that he knowingly engaged in a prolonged pattern of false and fraudulent transactions, and the worst part of it all is that in doing that, he treated these financial institutions as if they were his own private operations .... I certainly will take into account these matters in the imposition of sentence ....
Probation was then denied and sentence imposed.
The rule is firmly established in this state that in the absence of an abuse of discretion, a sentence imposed within statutory limits will not be disturbed on appeal.... It is also the rule in this jurisdiction that an order or sentence of the trial court denying probation will not be overturned on appeal unless there has been an abuse of discretion.
State v. Bridgmon, 196 Neb. 714, 717-18, 246 N.W.2d 57, 59 (1976).
That part of § 29-2260(2) providing that the court "may withhold sentence of imprisonment" is a guideline for the court and is not mandatory. See State v. Hunt, 214 Neb. 214, 333 N.W.2d 405 (1983).
The record supports the court's finding that to withhold a sentence of imprisonment would depreciate the seriousness of the offense. § 29-2260(2)(c). There was no abuse of discretion. The sentence imposed was not excessive, it being within the statutory limits.
Finally, defendant claims error of prejudice and bias on the part of the judge because the judge's brother and sister-in-law were unpaid depositors in the insolvent Commonwealth Savings Company, Lincoln, Nebraska, which company was founded and owned by S.E. Copple, Nancy Gillette's grandfather. Neb.Rev.Stat. § 24-315 (Reissue 1979) provides:
A judge or justice is disqualified from acting as such in the county, district or Supreme Court, except by mutual consent of the parties, in any case wherein he or she is a party or interested, or where he or she is related to either party by consanguinity or affinity within the fourth degree ....
The word "interested" in that statute has long been interpreted as one of a pecuniary nature. See Uerling v. State, 125 Neb. 374, 250 N.W. 243 (1933). See, also, 46 Am.Jur.2d Judges § 99 (1969).
"A party seeking to disqualify a judge on the basis of bias or prejudice bears the heavy burden of overcoming the presumption of judicial impartiality." Arnholt v. Arnholt, 129 Mich.App. 810, 817, 343 N.W.2d 214, 218 (1983). See, also, State v. Smith, 77 Neb. 824, 110 N.W. 557 (1906); 46 Am.Jur.2d, supra, § 220.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9739824 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:42.238795+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE LEIGHTON, dissenting: I believe that the right of an accused to be told he can have counsel to assist him in his defense, and if he is indigent, that one will be appoihted for him, is so important that judges should not engage in nice calculations about when that right should be enjoyed. Compare Glasser v. United States (1941), 315 U.S. 60, 86 L. Ed. 680, 62 S. Ct. 457, 467; People v. Noble, 42 Ill. 2d 425, 248 N.E.2d 96. In this case, defendant appeared in the trial court for a preliminary hearing on a theft charge. By the laws of this State, the judge was required to tell him that he had the right to counsel. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 38, par. 109 — 1(b)(2); Supreme Court Rule 401, Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 110A, par. 401.) It has been held that this right exists whether or not the accused is indigent. (See People v. Manikas, 87 Ill. App. 2d 227, 230 N.E.2d 577; compare Alexander v. City of Anchorage (Alas. 1971), 490 P.2d 910.) Furthermore, it is the law of this State that if an accused, without being advised of his right to counsel, is subjected to a trial for which he can be incarcerated, the judgment entered in that proceeding will be set aside. People v. Fletcher, 74 Ill. App. 2d 387, 220 N.E.2d 70 (abstract opinion); compare People v. McKenzie, 89 Ill. App. 2d 157, 231 N.E.2d 702. The record before us clearly shows that although defendant was in court for a preliminary hearing and then went to trial, he was not advised of his right to counsel. Defendant was charged with theft, an offense not punishable by fine only, (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 38, par. 16 — 1) and the State concedes that he was an indigent person when he appeared in the trial court. Accordingly, he should have been advised of his right to counsel. For these reasons, I vote to reverse this judgment and remand it for a new trial in which this defendant’s right to counsel will be preserved and protected. Therefore, I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 9739825 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:42.475971+00 ===

HAYDEN, Judge.
Defendants appeal from a judgment for plaintiff for wages withheld, liquidated damages, and attorney fees in this action brought under Iowa Code chapter 91A (1981).
Plaintiff was employed as the manager of one of defendant Freight Sales Company’s furniture stores. Defendant Van Ars-del is the president and majority shareholder of the company. Plaintiff was paid on a commission basis, receiving a nine percent commission on sales he made and a three percent commission on sales made by his subordinates.
On January 11, 1981, the furniture store was burglarized. A bank bag containing $5,061.31 was taken from plaintiff’s locked desk drawer. Plaintiff testified that since he was unable to make a night bank deposit he would ordinarily have taken the money home, but that he did not do so on that occasion because he was not going directly home from work. Beginning on February 1, 1981, defendants reduced plaintiff’s commission rate by one percent. In August or September of the same year the commission rate was restored to the original nine percent. The total amount of compensation plaintiff lost was $5,166.54.
Plaintiff left defendants’ employ several months after his commission rate had been returned to normal. He subsequently filed this action under the Iowa Wage Payment Collection Law for the amount withheld from his salary. The district court found in favor of plaintiff, awarding $5,166.54 for withheld wages, $5,166.54 liquidated damages, and attorney fees of $1,293.75.
On appeal defendants assert: (1) the trial court erred in applying chapter 91A to a situation where an employee’s compensation rate was modified; (2) plaintiff waived his right to complain of the wage reduction by continuing to work for defendants; (3) the trial court should have granted defendants’ motion to reopen the trial for the purpose of offering an exhibit which had been inadvertently omitted at trial; (4) the trial court erred in not allowing defendants to assert a counterclaim; and (5) judgment *41should not have been entered against Van Arsdel individually for actions taken as a corporate officer. Plaintiff has requested attorney fees on appeal.
Our review of this action at law is on assigned error. Iowa R.App.P. 4. The trial court’s findings of fact have the effect of a special verdict and are binding upon us if supported by substantial evidence. Iowa R.App.P. 14(f)(1). The record is reviewed in the light most favorable to the judgment; ambiguities are construed to uphold rather than defeat the judgment. Moody v. Bogue, 310 N.W.2d 655, 658 (Iowa Ct. App.1981).
1. Applicability of Iowa Code Chapter 91A. Iowa Code section 91A.5 provides in part:
2. The following shall not be deducted from an employee’s wages:
******
c. Losses due to breakage, lost or stolen property, unless such tools and equipment are specifically assigned to and their receipt acknowledged in writing by the employee from whom the deduction is made, damage to property, default of customer credit, or nonpayment for goods or services rendered so long as such losses are not attributable to the employee’s willful or intentional disregard of the employer’s interests.
“Wages” is defined in section 91A.2(4) as “compensation owed by an employer.” Defendants argue that plaintiff was an employee at will whose employment contract could be modified at any time. They assert that the reduction of plaintiff’s commission was a valid modification of his contract which he chose to accept by continuing in defendants’ employ. Therefore, there was no deduction of compensation owed to plaintiff; all of the compensation to which plaintiff was entitled pursuant to the terms of the modified contract was paid to him.
There is authority to support the proposition that an employment contract terminable at will is subject to modification by either party, and that an employee's decision to continue to work, knowing the new terms, results in the employee’s acceptance of the modification as a matter of law. Janda v. Iowa Industrial Hydraulics, Inc., 326 N.W.2d 339, 341 (Iowa 1982); Moody v. Bogue, 310 N.W.2d 655, 660-61 (Iowa Ct.App.1981). However, the facts of this case show that there was in fact no good faith modification of the employment contract. The asserted “modification” reducing plaintiff’s commission and the later “modification” restoring the original commission was clearly an attempt to circumvent the plain language of the statute.
Defendants argue that their actions were not prompted by the burglary. They claim the reduction in plaintiff’s compensation was due to a reduction in his duties and the necessity of hiring a bookkeeper at plaintiff’s store. At trial the evidence showed that bookkeepers were hired and were paid approximately $3,000. There is substantial support, however, for the trial court’s finding that the reduction of plaintiff’s salary was directly related to the burglary. Most revealing of defendants’ intentions is plaintiff’s exhibit 2, a printed ledger sheet prepared by defendants’ secretary and sent to plaintiff to show the weekly deductions from his wages. Exhibit 2 begins “cash short—$5,061.31.” On the second page of the exhibit the final figure in parenthesis is $105.23, the exact amount by which the deductions exceeded the amount of money stolen from the store.
We in no way imply that employers and employees cannot modify the terms of employment contracts. But when the alleged modification is so obviously an attempt to do what is prohibited by statute, we will disregard the name given to the transaction and look at its substance. Defendants’ actions in this case were nothing more than an attempt to deduct the burglary loss from plaintiff’s wages in contravention of Iowa Code section 91A.5(2)(c).
There is substantial evidence to support the trial court’s findings that there was no evidence of any written authorization from plaintiff for the deduction, see Iowa Code section 91A.5(l)(b), and that *42there was no evidence of plaintiffs willful or intentional disregard of defendants’ interests. See Iowa Code section 91A.5(2)(c).
Therefore, we agree with the trial court’s conclusion that chapter 91A of the Code is applicable to this case.
II. Waiver and Estoppel. Defendants assert that plaintiff assented to the deductions from his wages by continuing his employment. They argue that he either waived the right to later complain about the deductions or is estopped from doing so. We do not agree with this contention.
In Davenport Osteopathic Hospital Association v. Hospital Service, Inc., 261 Iowa 247, 254-55, 154 N.W.2d 153, 158 (1967), the supreme court held that a hospital which elected to stand by a contract and seek recovery for its breach did not assent to modification of the contract and was not estopped to challenge its breach by failing to terminate the contract and continuing to accept payments under the formula in the proposed modification.
We find nothing in chapter 91A which indicates that an employee faced with the prospect of illegal salary deductions forfeits the remedy provided by statute if he does not immediately quit his job. Plaintiff testified that he did not agree to the deductions but continued working because it was the only way he could support his family at that time. We do not believe that plaintiff’s conduct impliedly waived his right to pursue his statutory remedy.
III. Motion to Reopen Trial. During the trial defendants' sales manager testified that he informed plaintiff verbally of the reduction of his commission and also had the information listed on a sheet of yellow paper. The witness admitted that plaintiff did not sign the paper. The day following the conclusion of the trial defendants filed a motion to reopen the trial to admit into evidence this sheet of paper which they had inadvertently failed to offer as an exhibit. After a hearing the trial court denied the motion.
Trial courts enjoy a wide discretion in reopening a case for reception of additional testimony. Davidson v. Van Lengen, 266 N.W.2d 436, 440 (Iowa 1978). We cannot say the trial court abused its discretion in this case. The information on the paper was cumulative of testimony already in evidence. The fact that plaintiff’s commission was reduced by one percent was not disputed. Admittedly the sheet of paper did not shed any light on the question of whether plaintiff agreed to the reduction. Therefore, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying the motion to reopen the trial.
IV.Counterclaim. At trial defense counsel cross-examined the plaintiff as follows:
MR. CHWIRKA: Q. The month of September, 1981, do you recall taking some furniture home from the store?
MR. GILDEMEISTER: Just a minute, Mr. Salter. Before you answer that, Your Honor, I object to the question as being irrelevant and immaterial to any issue in this case. There are no counterclaims on file nor are there any claims for offset.
THE COURT: Mr. Chwirka?
MR. CHWIRKA: Well, we appreciate that, but I think we’re entitled to ask him if he still owes on some furniture.
THE COURT: What would that have to do with this case?
MR. CHWIRKA: I think if there is any award, I think it ought to be taken off regardless. I think the Court should consider that.
Defendants claim that this colloquy was “in effect” a motion for leave to amend their answer to assert a permissive counterclaim and that the trial court erred in failing to allow the amendment.
A trial court may not be put in error unless the issue was presented for a ruling, Linge v. Ralston Purina Co., 293 N.W.2d 191, 195 (Iowa 1980). The statements of defense counsel above are insufficient to alert the trial court of the contention defendants now assert on appeal. See State v. Fitz, 265 N.W.2d 896, 900 (Iowa 1978). Defendants never specifically re*43quested to amend their pleadings, but rather admitted that no counterclaim was on file. The trial court obviously ruled only on the relevancy of the question asked to the case as it stood; the trial court was not asked to rule on amending the pleadings to add new issues to the case.
Even if error was preserved on this issue, however, the trial court has considerable discretion in determining whether a request for leave to amend should be granted or denied. Atlantic Veneer Corp. v. Sears, 232 N.W.2d 499, 503 (Iowa 1975). Since defendants had ample opportunity before trial to amend the pleadings and the requested amendment was not based on any new information brought to their attention at trial, we could not say the trial court would have abused its discretion in denying an amendment if one had been requested. Mora v. Savereid, 222 N.W.2d 417, 422-23 (Iowa 1974).
V. Liability of Van Arsdel. Defendant Van Arsdel claims that since he was acting in his capacity as president of the corporation, he could not be held individually liable for his actions. The record reveals that this issue was not raised in the pleadings, in defendants’ brief submitted after the trial, or in defendants’ motion for a new trial, nor was the issue raised by defendants at trial in any way. A party’s objection that he was improperly joined as a defendant cannot be considered for the first time on appeal. Mitchell v. Pinckney, 127 Iowa 696, 700-01, 104 N.W. 286, 288 (1905); Morse v. Close, 11 Iowa 93, 95 (1860).
Van Arsdel argues that under Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 179(b) he can challenge on appeal the sufficiency of the evidence to support a finding of fact by the trial court without having objected to that finding. He challenges the trial court’s finding: “Plaintiff had been hired by Defendants in August of 1979 as an assistant manager to a small retail furniture outlet in Sioux City, Iowa.” There is substantial evidence in the record that both defendants were involved in the hiring process. This finding does not bring into issue the question of the liability of a corporate officer and owner for his decisions. Therefore, Van Arsdel cannot, by challenging this finding of the trial court, excuse his failure to raise the question of the propriety of a judgment against him individually at any time during the proceedings before the trial court.
VI. Attorney Fees on Appeal. Iowa Code section 91A.8 authorizes recovery of “any attorney’s fees incurred in recovering the unpaid wages and determined to have been usual and necessary.” The trial court awarded plaintiff $1,293.75 in attorney fees. Plaintiff has requested an additional award to recover fees incurred in this appeal. Since we have no record before us of those fees, we remand the case to the trial court for a determination of the usual and necessary fees incurred in this appeal. See Maday v. Elview-Stewart Systems Co., 324 N.W.2d 467, 471 (Iowa 1982).
AFFIRMED AND REMANDED.
SNELL, P.J., concurs.
SACKETT, J., dissents.

=== CASE 2221113 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:04.398888+00 ===

36 Ill. App. 3d 452 (1976)
343 N.E.2d 695
FREDERICK W. SHAPPERT, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
RICHARD ROETTGER, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 74-54.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District (1st Division).
Opinion filed February 6, 1976.
Rehearing denied April 1, 1976.
John A. Strom, of Strom, Strom, Oakley & Ellis, of Belvidere, for appellant.
Miller & Hickey, of Rockford, for appellee.
Order affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE SEIDENFELD delivered the opinion of the court:
The defendant, Richard Roettger, appeals from an interlocutory judgment order which denied his motion to dissolve a preliminary injunction prohibiting the sale of shared crops. He contends that the plaintiff did *453 not establish a right to the issuance of the injunction order and that the order therefore may not be a proper basis for a finding of contempt.
The plaintiff, Frederick W. Shappert, was the owner of a large farm property which he leased to the defendant under a share-crop lease. On August 9, 1973, Shappert filed a verified complaint in two counts. In Count I plaintiff alleged that under the lease he was entitled to an undivided one-half of all produce and one-half of the increase of all livestock on the farm; and that the defendant had converted a specified number of heifers and cows and an undetermined quantity of grain. In this count plaintiff prayed for a money judgment. In Count II plaintiff repeated the allegations of Count I and further stated that defendant had taken possession and sold cattle, a one-half interest which belonged to the plaintiff; that the defendant had threatened to convert to his own use and sell additional cattle; that this would destroy the value of the cattle, could not be adequately redressed exclusively by an action at law, and would cause further irreparable injury to plaintiff. In this count plaintiff prayed for a temporary injunction restraining the defendant from taking possession of, converting to his own use and selling cattle in which the plaintiff owned an undivided one-half interest.
Defendant filed a motion to dismiss the complaint. On August 17, 1973, the court in a docket order denied defendant's motion to dismiss, ruled on defendant to answer within 30 days, granted a "temporary" injunction against the sale of grain and cattle and continued the cause generally for a trial on the merits. The defendant's answer was filed on September 10, 1973. The preliminary injunction went into effect on September 13, 1973, upon filing of plaintiff's bond and the writ issued. The preliminary injunction order recited that defendant had sold cattle and grain in July of 1973 contrary to the lease agreement, that irreparable harm would result if defendant were permitted to sell livestock and grain in the future, and that defendant had stated in open court that he will make no sales of livestock or grain without the further order of the court. The order restrained defendant from:
"* * * taking possession of, converting to his own use and selling cattle and grain in which the plaintiff owns an undivided one-half interest, until further order of this Court, and that neither party shall sell any such property except by their agreement or upon the order of this Court."
On November 20, 1973, plaintiff filed a sworn petition seeking a contempt citation. He alleged that defendant had contracted to sell 4,000 bushels of corn and 1,000 bushels of soy beans for future delivery in violation of the injunction order and that defendant had made delivery of all of the soy beans and 2201.77 bushels of corn without the consent *454 of the plaintiff. On December 20, 1973, Count I of the complaint was dismissed by stipulation. On December 21, 1973, the court, over defendant's objection, permitted plaintiff to amend Count II to add "and grain" in the places where "cattle" alone had been specified. Subsequently a supplemental complaint was filed with leave of court alleging further sales and contracts unknown to plaintiff at the time of the filing of the original petition. The evidentiary hearing was held on December 21 and 22, 1973, and the record shows that inquiry was permitted into both the merits of the injunction and whether it had been violated.
The defendant, called by the plaintiff as an adverse witness, testified that on June 7, 1973, he had contracted with Sandahl Farm Service, Inc., to deliver 500 bushels of beans on November 17, 1973; and had contracted with Central Grain Co. on June 25, July 20 and August 22, 1973, to deliver a total of 4,000 bushels of corn on December 15, 1973. He acknowledged that deliveries were made under the contracts at various times in October and November of 1973. Defendant testified that he had told Patrick Mattison, plaintiff's son-in-law, and plaintiff's agent, Maxwell Newport, about the contracts in October of 1973 some time after he had entered into them; that Newport told him to fill the bins with corn and that they would go to town with the balance; that there was an estimated corn yield in 1973 of 18,500 bushels and only a 10,100 bushel capacity in the farm bins for storage. He also said that he had in previous years contracted for various future deliveries of commonly owned corn. He testified that in 1973 he told Keith Grennan, plaintiff's farm manager, that he had contracted to sell 500 bushels of soy beans out of an estimated 2,700 bushels and that he delivered the beans because he had no place to store them and not intending to disobey the court order. He said that he had sold beans in the same manner in 1972.
Patrick Mattison testified for plaintiff that he first learned of defendant's contracts to sell grain in a conversation with plaintiff on October 19, 1973. He further testified that he had on numerous occasions told Roettger not to sell "anything" unless "we" know about it. He recalled that he particularly told defendant this on both October 21 and October 31 in 1973.
Keith Grennan, plaintiff's farm manager, testified that he had no knowledge of any grain contracts in 1973 until he learned about the Central Grain contracts in August 1973 and the Sandahl contracts in October 1973. He testified that he and plaintiff followed the defendant's truck when the deliveries of beans were made to the Sandahl Company on October 16 and 17, 1973. He further testified that plaintiff instructed him to allow the deliveries to be made. He also testified that he had *455 no knowledge of Roettger's contract for future deliveries of grain and had never been told about them by defendant.
Plaintiff, however, testified that he had told defendant personally and by letter dated February 14, 1973, that no sales or purchases of property in which plaintiff and defendant had a one-half interest were to be made without discussion either with plaintiff or his then manager, Keith Grennan, prior to the transaction. He stated that he had never had any conversation with Roettger in 1973, in which Roettger told him that he had contracted to sell corn or soy beans. The plaintiff was shown various contracts with either the Sandahl Company or the Central Grain Company and testified that prior to October of 1973 when he saw the deliveries being made he did not know of the existence of the contracts. He also denied that he had any knowledge of sales of futures in any prior year. He said that when he saw the October 16 and 17 deliveries in the trucks he assumed that they were being sold on the open market and not on future contracts.
At the conclusion of the plaintiff's case defendant moved for a finding of the issues for defendant contending that the allegations of Count II related to jointly owned cattle and that there was no proof of conversion of cattle. The court ruled that the parties had proceeded throughout with reference to enjoining both sales of cattle and grain and permitted the amendment of Count II to include the words "and grain."
Defendant then testified in his own case that he had told no one about the corn sales until November 11, 1973, when he told Mattison who was then the farm manager and plaintiff's son-in-law. He stated that Mattison informed him that they wanted one-half and it was all right to go ahead and fill the orders. He further testified that on October 17, 1973, both the plaintiff and Keith Grennan, plaintiff's farm manager, told him to sell the corn. Maxwell Newport called by the defendant stated that he was hired to help run the farm and that in November of 1973 there was a conversation between himself, Roettger and Mattison to the effect that they knew that defendant had contracted to sell some corn. He stated that a few days later Roettger called and asked permission to sell the corn and that he gave him permission to deliver it.
On the evidence the court concluded that the original injunctional order was properly issued and further found defendant in contempt for having sold and delivered grain after the issuance of the injunction. He also found that the difference between the price of the grain which was delivered at market value rather than on the basis of the futures contracts amounted to $795.63.
*456 Following the court's finding the defendant, on January 11, 1973, filed a general motion to dissolve the preliminary injunction which the court denied. Defendant, as previously noted, appeals from this order.
Defendant argues that plaintiff did not establish his right to the issuance of a temporary injunction. He reasons that while the original complaint alleged the conversion and sale of cattle and the threat of additional conversion of cattle no evidence was presented relating to these allegations; that the evidence shows that plaintiff did not become aware of the contracts for future deliveries until a much later time and that therefore on the filing of the complaint the plaintiff could have had no knowledge or cause for alarm as to possible grain sales. He further argues that there was no showing of irreparable harm since the crop was more than adequate to cover defendant's contract from his own share. He argues that even though plaintiff should not have been permitted to amend the complaint to include grain as well as cattle after the evidence was in, that nevertheless there was still no evidence that on or prior to the date of the issuance of the injunction writ that defendant had converted or threatened to convert or sell grain to plaintiff's damage.
Plaintiff responds that the only issue is whether the court abused the large discretion which it had to grant a temporary injunction and that there was no available issue as to the burden of proof or whether the pleadings and proof must conform. He argues that the defendant has not shown any abuse of discretion and that the court heard evidence on the complaint as supplemented from which it was clearly shown that defendant deliberately violated the order of the court by selling grain after the entry of the injunction order without the plaintiff's consent.
 1 It is well settled that the trial court is vested with large discretionary power in granting an order for a preliminary injunction. (Seay & Thomas, Inc. v. Kerr's, Inc., 58 Ill. App. 2d 391, 400 (1965); O'Brien v. Matual, 14 Ill. App. 2d 173, 187 (1957); Schultz v. Agenlian, 90 Ill. App. 2d 131 (1967) (abstract opinion).) When the injunction is issued on the basis of the complaint the pleading must specify all facts necessary to justify the unusual relief sought. (Hall v. Orlikowski Construction Co., 24 Ill. App. 3d 60, 62-3 (1974).) The necessary showing, however, may be made both by the pleadings and by the evidence if evidence is taken. (See O'Brien v. Matual, 14 Ill. App. 2d 173, 187 (1957).) An applicant for a preliminary injunction need not make out a case which will entitle him to the ultimate relief he seeks but may raise only a fair question as to the existence of the right claimed, making it appear advisable that the position of the parties should remain the same *457 until the court has the opportunity to consider the case on its merits. Frederick Chusid & Co. v. Collins Tuttle & Co., Inc., 10 Ill. App. 3d 818, 821 (1973).
We must conclude based on the application of these principles that the preliminary injunction order was properly granted and that the motion to dissolve the order was properly denied.
The court before issuing the preliminary injunction had before it a complaint which charged actual sales of cattle and grain contrary to the covenants of the share-crop lease. The complaint was verified and the lease was attached. The colloquy between the court and counsel at the time the preliminary injunction was ordered is primarily directed at the actual sales and the threatened additional sales of cattle. However, it is clear that the parties were discussing the maintenance of the status quo by enjoining any sales of commonly owned property contrary to the lease agreement. Defendant's counsel stated that while he objected to the entry of any injunction order "there will be nothing sold until the outcome of this suit." The order and writ by its terms enjoined both the sale of cattle and the sale of grain.
The court's exercise of discretion in ordering a preliminary injunction and in refusing to dissolve it, while reviewable under Supreme Court Rule 307 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 110A, par. 307), will not be overturned absent a clear showing of abuse of discretion. (Jacobs v. Regas, 75 Ill. App. 2d 283 (1966); Weingart v. Weingart, 23 Ill. App. 2d 154 (1959); O'Brien v. Matual, 14 Ill. App. 2d 173, 186 (1957).) Under the circumstances the trial court acted within its discretionary powers in ordering the preliminary injunction.
 2 Similarly, the court did not err in refusing to dissolve the injunction. The motion to dissolve, made after the full evidentiary hearings which were held both on the merits and upon plaintiff's petition to cite defendant for contempt for violating the court's order and after the court had stated its findings, did not point out in what particulars the court's exercise of discretion in initially ordering the injunction was abused. In fact, the evidence which was then before the court at the conclusion of the hearing showed, if anything, the necessity for an injunction to prevent sales of commonly owned property contrary to the terms of the share-crop lease. There was proof of sales of cattle and grain prior to the entry of the injunction order. Even though Count I was thereafter dismissed by agreement these facts were before the court as a basis for some apprehension. In addition, there was proof of actual deliveries of commonly owned grain after the writ had issued in performance of the prior unilateral obligations of defendant. The motion to dissolve the preliminary injunction was properly denied.
*458 The order granting the preliminary injunction and denying the motion to dissolve are both therefore affirmed.
The plaintiff has suggested that if we affirm the preliminary injunction that we also affirm the order citing the defendant in contempt of court for violating the injunction order even though that issue has not been presented in this appeal. We do not feel justified in deciding an issue which has not been properly presented for review.
Affirmed.
GUILD and HALLETT, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2221106 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:04.259108+00 ===

36 Ill. App. 3d 234 (1976)
343 N.E.2d 573
In re DANIEL BUTLER, a Minor.  (THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Petitioner-Appellee,
v.
DANIEL BUTLER, Respondent-Appellant.)
No. 61741.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District (5th Division).
Opinion filed February 13, 1976.
James J. Doherty, Public Defender, of Chicago (David W. Hirschboeck, Assistant Public Defender, of counsel), for appellant.
Bernard Carey, State's Attorney, of Chicago (Laurence J. Bolon, Michael J. Shabat, and Michael J. Angarola, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel), for the People.
Reversed and remanded.
Mr. JUSTICE SULLIVAN delivered the opinion of the court:
Respondent, a juvenile, appeals from an order of the Circuit Court adjudging him delinquent and committing him to the Department of Corrections, Juvenile Division. The only issue presented for review is whether the trial court erred in failing to inform him of the maximum period of detention to which he might be subjected before accepting his admission.
*235 Respondent was charged in a delinquency petition with the offense of murder, unlawful use of weapons, illegal person harboring a firearm and involuntary manslaughter. Pursuant to a plea negotiation, he entered an admission to the offenses of unlawful use of weapons and involuntary manslaughter. In return, the other two counts were dismissed for want of prosecution.
The record reflects that the trial judge informed respondent that he would be committed to the Department of Corrections as a result of his admission. However, he was not informed that he might be confined until he became 21 years of age.
OPINION
 1, 2 The issue presented in this case is identical to that decided in In re Chatman (1976), 36 Ill. App. 3d 227. In Chatman, we held that both due process and Illinois Supreme Court Rule 402 (applicable in a juvenile proceeding through Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 37, par. 701-2(3) (a)) require that a juvenile be informed of the maximum period of detention provided by law before his admission may be accepted. That holding is equally applicable in this case, and consequently we hold that in not so informing respondent, substantial compliance with Rule 402 was not achieved.
For the reasons stated, the order finding respondent to be delinquent is reversed, and this cause is remanded with directions to permit him to plead anew.
Reversed and remanded with directions.
BARRETT and DRUCKER, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739827 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:49.819155+00 ===

Boslaugh, J.
The defendant, Michael E. McGuire, was charged in case No. 83-675 with robberies of Jerico’s restaurant in Omaha, Nebraska, on or about October 16 and November 20,1982, and use of a firearm in the commission of a felony on each occasion. In case No. 83-676 he was charged with first degree sexual assault and the robbery of the Spaghetti Works in Ralston, Nebraska, on or about November 13,1982. Upon the motion of *512the State these cases were consolidated for trial, and the jury returned verdicts of guilty on all counts.
The defendant pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to the remaining charges against him. Those included, in case No. 83-674, the robbery of Reuben’s restaurant in Omaha, Nebraska, on or about November 27, 1982, and use of a firearm in the commission of a felony; in case No. 83-677, the robbery of the Cinema Center in Omaha, Nebraska, on or about September 24, 1982, and use of a firearm in the commission of a felony; and in case No. 83-678, the kidnaping of Clarence Landen III on or about February 16,1983, and use of a firearm in the commission of a felony.
The defendant was adjudged guilty on all counts in all cases and sentenced to imprisonment for 61 to 170 years.
The defendant has appealed and has assigned as error the overruling of his motion to suppress the evidence taken from the automobile at the time of his arrest; the consolidation for trial of cases Nos. 83-675 and 83-676; and that the sentences imposed were excessive.
The first robbery of Jerico’s restaurant occurred on October 16, 1982. The evidence is that the defendant entered the lounge at approximately 11 p.m. and sat at the bar. At about 12:30 a.m. the defendant pulled out an automatic pistol and, while holding the gun on a waitress, ordered the bartender to put the money in a paper sack. Before leaving, he forced the bartender and waitress into a walk-in cooler.
The robbery of the Spaghetti Works occurred on November 12,1982. The evidence in that case is that the defendant entered the restaurant at about 10 p.m., sat at the bar, and had several conversations with the woman who was the assistant manager. At about 11:30 p.m., while approximately 12 persons including employees and customers were in the restaurant, the defendant pulled out an automatic handgun and committed the robbery. After he had collected the money he placed everyone except the assistant manager in the walk-in cooler and then sexually assaulted the assistant manager.
The second robbery of Jerico’s restaurant occurred on November 20, 1982. The evidence is that when the defendant entered the bar at about 12:30 a.m., he was recognized by the *513waitress who had been present during the first robbery. She attempted to leave, but the defendant pulled out a gun and forced her to stay. During this robbery, the defendant said something to the waitress about “dropping her drawers,” but she was able to talk the defendant out of an assault.
The defendant was arrested in Burlingame, California, on March 2,1983. The arresting officer had received information to be on the lookout for a gold Pontiac TransAm with Nebraska license plates, the rear plate in a holder with the word “Guam” inscribed on it. The bulletin further described a white male driver, armed and dangerous — possibly carrying a .45 automatic — and a white female passenger. At approximately 3:20 a.m., while making his rounds, the officer spotted the suspect vehicle parked in a convenience store parking lot near a phone booth in which both the defendant and his companion were standing.
The defendant was immediately handcuffed and placed in the back seat of an assisting officer’s patrol car. The woman was not arrested; at the time, however, she was instructed not to move as she was being watched by a K-9 police dog. The arresting officer thereupon looked into the TransAm, where he saw, in plain view, a clear plastic baggie containing marijuana and a pipe. Conducting a search of the interior of the car, the officer found, among other things, a loaded .357 Magnum and a Walther .380 in the console between the seats. When he did not find the .45 automatic described in the bulletin, the officer took the keys from the ignition and opened the trunk. Finding luggage inside, the officer asked the defendant if he wanted it left in the trunk, where its safety was not guaranteed, or taken to the police station and inventoried. The defendant chose the latter. The inventory yielded a pair of black driving gloves, a nylon jacket, a plaid, long-sleeved shirt, and a gray tweed coat; all of which were admitted into evidence at trial and identified by some of the witnesses.
The defendant’s first contention is that his motion to suppress should have been sustained because the search of the trunk of the automobile violated his fourth amendment rights.
In United States v. Ross, 456 U.S. 798, 825, 102 S. Ct. 2157, 72 L. Ed. 2d 572 (1982), the Supreme Court held: “If probable *514cause justifies the search of a lawfully stopped vehicle, it justifies the search of every part of the vehicle and its contents that may conceal the object of the search.” Ross involved two separate searches of a car’s trunk — one search made after the vehicle was stopped pursuant to an informant’s tip, another made after the car had been taken to police headquarters. Permitting the heroin and cash found to be used against the defendant, the court reasoned that a lawful search extends to the entire area in which the sought-after object may be found and that it is not limited by the necessity for separate acts of entry to complete the search.
When a legitimate search is under way, and when its purpose and its limits have been precisely defined, nice distinctions between... glove compartments, upholstered seats, trunks, and wrapped packages, in the case of a vehicle, must give way to the interest in the prompt and efficient completion of the task at hand.
456 U.S. at 821.
In this case the arresting officer was forewarned that the defendant might be armed with a .45 revolver. Since the description of the car and its occupants was on target and the search of the vehicle’s interior yielded marijuana and two other guns, it was not unreasonable for the officer to search for the .45 in the trunk. The search was further justified by the fact that the defendant’s female companion could have taken the alleged gun from the car later, as could have anyone.
In Cady v. Dombrowski, 413 U.S. 433, 448, 93 S. Ct. 2523, 37 L. Ed. 2d 706 (1973), the Supreme Court said: “Where, as here, the trunk of an automobile, which the officer reasonably believed to contain a gun, was vulnerable to intrusion by vandals, we hold that the search was not ‘unreasonable’ within the meaning of the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments.” In Cady a Chicago police officer was arrested; the arresting officer, who was under the impression that Chicago police officers were required to carry their service revolvers at all times, conducted a warrantless search of the car to find the gun. See, also, United States v. Nygard, 324 F. Supp 863 (W.D. Mo. 1971), where police officers had teletype information that the defendant was “alleged to have pistol in possession and has *515threatened to use same on father,” id. at 865, and where at the time of defendant’s arrest that gun was not on his person, officers had probable cause to search the car. It is well established that vehicles “may be stopped and searched on facts giving rise to probable cause that the vehicle contains contraband, without the protection afforded by a magistrate’s prior evaluation of those facts.” United States v. Ross, supra at 806 n.8.
It has also been established that where probable cause exists for the arrest of an individual in a motor vehicle, and at that time probable cause also exists to search the vehicle, then a search of the vehicle made at the police station a short time later is not unreasonable even if made without a warrant. State v. Franklin, 194 Neb. 630, 234 N.W.2d 610 (1975) (citing Chambers v. Maroney, 399 U.S. 42, 90 S. Ct. 1975, 26 L. Ed. 2d 419 (1970)). In Franklin, quoting Chambers, we said at 640, 234 N.W.2d at 616:
“For constitutional purposes, we see no difference between on the one hand seizing and holding a car before presenting the probable cause issue to a magistrate and on the other hand carrying out an immediate search without a warrant. . . . The probable-cause factor still obtained at the station house and so did the mobility of the car ....”
Thus, having probable cause to search the car, including its trunk and contents, at the time of the arrest, that probable cause still existed after the car was moved to the safety afforded at the police station.
Defendant contends, however, that United States v. Ross, 456 U.S. 798, 102 S. Ct. 2157, 72 L. Ed. 2d 572 (1982), does not apply to the facts at bar. Rather, he argues that New York v. Belton, 453 U.S. 454, 101 S. Ct. 2860, 69 L. Ed. 2d 768 (1981), limits the scope of the search to the passenger compartment of the car. In Belton the Court held that when a lawful custodial arrest has been made of the occupant of a vehicle, a search may be made of the passenger compartment. The defendant distinguishes Ross as entailing a search that resulted in an arrest, and states that “the unlocking of the trunk, observation of the suitcases and eventually taking them into custody was an unlawful search and seizure pursuant to Belton.” Brief for *516Appellant at 15.
Belton, however, was concerned with what constitutes “the area within the immediate control of the arrestee” when the arrestee is in a vehicle. 453 U.S. at 460. Where there is both probable cause for an arrest and probable cause to search, as in the case at bar, it would seem that the scope of the latter would be controlled by Ross.
Assuming, however, that there was no probable cause to search the trunk, the evidence obtained was still admissible. Under the inevitable discovery exception to the exclusionary rule, illegally obtained evidence can be admitted if it would have been discovered in the course of a proper investigation. United States v. Glenn, 577 F. Supp. 930 (W.D. Mo. 1984). In the case at bar the evidence objected to was first seen by the police when the luggage was opened in an inventory search. The U.S. Supreme Court has held that inventory searches are reasonable. Illinois v. LaFayette, 462 U.S. 640, 103 S. Ct. 2605, 77 L. Ed. 2d 65 (1983). Accord State v. Hack and Callans, 212 Neb. 406, 322 N.W.2d 806 (1982).
Finally, in light of the overwhelming evidence of guilt against this defendant and the number of positive identifications made, the admission into evidence of the articles of clothing objected to was not prejudicial.
Defendant’s next assignment of error relates to the consolidation for trial of the Jerico’s robberies and the Spaghetti Works robbery and assault. With respect to consolidation of cases for trial, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 29-2002 (Reissue 1979) provides in part:
(1) Two or more offenses may be charged in the same indictment, information, or complaint in a separate count for each offense if the offenses charged, whether felonies or misdemeanors, or both, are of the same or similar character or are based on the same act or transaction or on two or more acts or transactions connected together or constituting parts of a common scheme or plan.
(3) The court may order two or more indictments, informations, or complaints, or any combination thereof, to be tried together if the offense, and the defendants, if *517there are more than one, could have been j oined in a single indictment, information or complaint. The procedure shall be the same as if the prosecution were under such single indictment, information, or complaint.
If the offenses involved were of the same or similar character, they could be joined in one information and the trial court could order that they be tried together. State v. Cole, ante p. 1, 352 N.W.2d 154 (1984).
In all three robberies the same gun was described, a similar description of the man and some of the same articles of clothing — particularly black driving gloves — was made, and the same threats were said to have been used. Furthermore, in two of the robberies, references were made to calling a local disk jockey so that someone would know that persons were locked in a walk-in cooler.
Although not the “same,” the offenses were similar in nature.
The defendant contends that he was prejudiced by the joinder because of the highly emotional character of the evidence as to the sexual assault during the Spaghetti Works robbery and the fact that such a charge did not exist in the Jerico’s robberies. In State v. Walker, 200 Neb. 273, 263 N.W.2d 454 (1978), we found that the joinder was not prejudicial error where evidence relating to both offenses would have been admissible in a trial of either offense separately. In Walker the defendant was charged in an information with burglary with intent to commit rape and first degree sexual assault.
In the case at bar no sex-related offenses were charged in the Jerico’s robberies. However, there was testimony that during the second Jerico’s robbery, the defendant took a waitress aside, made advances toward her, and told her to “drop her drawers.” Evidence of the completed crime in the Spaghetti Works case would have been admissible in the Jerico’s cases to show method of operation and identity.
“The question of election between counts and the advisability of joint or separate trials is one directed to the sound discretion of the trial court . . . ‘and unless some prejudice has resulted from the ruling of the court, it will not be *518held that this discretion has been abused.’ ” State v. Rodgers, 186 Neb. 633, 635, 185 N.W.2d 448, 449 (1971) (quoting Robinson v. State, 107 Neb. 591, 186 N.W. 977 (1922)).
The defendant’s final assignment of error is that the sentences imposed were excessive.
Within 6 months after arriving in Nebraska, the defendant committed a dozen felonies. The presentence report indicates that he is wanted in Arizona for parole violation (he has been convicted there on four counts of armed robbery); he is wanted in Kansas on charges including rape, sodomy, and kidnaping; and he is wanted in Colorado for questioning in connection with a missing person believed killed. It is apparent that the defendant is a violent and dangerous man and that a long period of incarceration is necessary for the protection of the public.
The defendant could have been sentenced to imprisonment for well over 400 years. In the absence of an abuse of discretion by the trial court, a sentence imposed within statutory limits will not be disturbed on appeal. State v. Parks, 212 Neb. 635, 324 N.W.2d 673 (1982). The sentences which were imposed are well within statutory limits. A review of the record and the presentence report discloses that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in sentencing.
There being no error, the judgment of the district court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
White, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739828 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:49.823275+00 ===

Krivosha, C. J.,
concurring.
I concur in the results reached by the majority in this case. I write separately, however, because I believe that part of the rationale upon which the majority bases its decision is not correct. Specifically, I refer to that portion of the majority’s opinion in which it states that “[ejvidence of the completed crime in the Spaghetti Works case would have been admissible in the Jerico’s cases to show method of operation and identity.” For reasons more particularly set out in my dissent in State v. Ellis, 208 Neb. 379, 303 N.W.2d 741 (1981), I do not believe that evidence of the sexual attack in the Spaghetti Works case could have been admissible to show either operation or identity in the *519Jerico’s robbery, and could only have been introduced by the State for the purpose of showing that McGuire acted in conformity with his character to commit a crime, contrary to the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 27-404(2) (Reissue 1979). I believe that we continue to improperly extend this rule to the point that we have virtually repealed the statute.

=== CASE 9739829 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:50.069073+00 ===

CARTER, Justice.
This is an appeal in advance of final judgment from an order of the district court granting the application of the attorney general to grant immunity to appellant Theodore Girdler, Jr. with respect to any crime or public offense concerning which he might be compelled to give testimony in a civil antitrust action. We granted permission to appeal upon the application of appellant.
Theodore Girdler, Jr. is apparently an officer of Binney & Smith, Inc., a defendant in a civil action commenced in the Iowa District Court in Polk County. That action alleges that Binney & Smith, Inc. violated the Iowa Competition Law contained in Iowa Code sections 553.1-.17 (1983). As a corporate officer, Girdler was given notice by the attorney general pursuant to Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure 147(c) and (d) that his attendance was required in this state for the taking of his deposition for use in the pending civil antitrust action. As the result of this notice, he advised the attorney general by letter that he would assert his fifth amendment rights to decline to answer questions propounded during the taking of any such deposition.
This response by Girdler precipitated action by the attorney general purporting to act under authority of Iowa Rule of Criminal Procedure 19(3) to secure a grant of immunity for Girdler with respect to any crime or public offenses concerning which he might be compelled to testify as a witness in the pending civil antitrust litigation. This request was sought on the verified application of the attorney general reciting that Girdler’s testimony is necessary and material to the pending civil antitrust litigation, that he has refused to testify upon the ground that such testimony would tend to incriminate him and that it is the considered judgment of the attorney general that justice and the public interest require the testimony in question. Based upon this application, the district court ordered that Girdler be and is “granted immunity to prosecution for any crime or public offense concerning which he will be compelled to *597give competent and relevant testimony or to produce competent and relevant evidence _ [T]he testimony, documents or evidence which have been given ... shall not be used against him in any trial or proceeding.”
Girdler made timely application to this court for permission to appeal from the foregoing order. That application was granted. In challenging the court’s authority to issue the immunity order, Girdler advances three primary contentions: (1) The district court is not authorized to grant immunity from prosecution in order to compel testimony in a civil action; (2) the attorney general’s verified application was insufficient to support the granting of immunity in the present case; and (3) Girdler’s testimony may not be compelled notwithstanding the purported grant of immunity because the breadth of the immunity grant is not sufficient to displace his constitutional privilege against self-incrimination. In addition, Girdler also seeks to challenge on this appeal the authority of the State to compel his attendance in the state of Iowa for the giving of testimony. He also requests that if his testimony is compelled, an appropriate protective order should be granted requiring the taking of his testimony in the state of his domicile. We deal with these issues in the discussion which follows.
I. Authority of Court to Compel Testimony Under Grant of Immunity in a Civil Action.
Girdler’s first contention on appeal is that the grant of authority contained in Iowa Rule of Criminal Procedure 19(3) with respect to orders of immunity for purposes of compelling testimony is only applicable to criminal prosecutions. He notes that not only was the procedure in the present case invoked for purposes of compelling testimony in a civil action, but, in addition, the attorney general is precluded from maintaining a criminal action on the same facts by virtue of the election of remedies provisions contained in Iowa Code section 553.-15.
The State, in response to the contentions of Girdler, asserts that the language of criminal rule 19(3) does not limit its application to answers sought to be compelled from witnesses in criminal actions. Moreover, the State contends that such limitation does not necessarily follow from the fact that the procedure for granting immunity is set forth as part of the Iowa Rules of Criminal Procedure.
The Iowa Rules of Criminal Procedure seek to “provide procedures applicable to indictable offenses.” Iowa R.Crim.P. 1(1). We believe, however, that this circumstance does not necessarily aid Girdler in his challenge to the court’s use of rule 19(3) in the present case. This rule is of legislative origin and must be interpreted as any other statute.
Courts will construe a statute in conformity with its dominating general purpose and will read the text in light of overall context. State v. Bishop, 257 Iowa 336, 340, 132 N.W.2d 455, 458 (1965); Fabricius v. Montgomery Elevator Co., 254 Iowa 1319, 1322-23, 121 N.W.2d 361, 364 (1963). The object of statutory interpretation is to discover the true intention of the legislature considering the clearly-stated objects and purposes involved. Lau v. City of Oelwein, 336 N.W.2d 202, 203 (Iowa 1983); Dingman v. City of Council Bluffs, 249 Iowa 1121, 1127, 90 N.W.2d 742, 746 (1958). The court should, when possible, construe a statute so as to give an intelligent and meaningful purpose to its provisions and in so doing may assume that the legislature realized the need therefor. In re King’s Estate, 251 Iowa 1128, 1132, 104 N.W.2d 600, 603 (1960).
The inclusion of rule 19(3) in the Rules of Criminal Procedure is doubtless explained by the fact that it is ordinarily within a criminal context that the subject of immunity will arise. Even where the testimony sought to be compelled is for use in a civil proceeding, the resulting immunity from criminal prosecution which accompanies the compelled civil testimony has a decidedly criminal application. We believe that such application is an adequate explanation for *598placing these rules alongside other rules relating to indictable offenses even though the subject matter involved also affects civil cases.
The underlying policy of the rule is based upon the realization that certain designated representatives of the executive branch of government should be given the authority to obtain immunity through judicial proceedings for recalcitrant witnesses in those instances where it is in the state’s best interests so to do. One of the standards which rule 19(3) provides for making this determination is that “justice and the public interest require the testimony, documents or evidence in question.” The needs of justice and the public interest are surely not limited to criminal prosecutions nor does the role of the attorney general in seeking to foster the needs of justice and the public interest fall exclusively within the ambit of the criminal law.
Upon our balancing of the policy considerations involved, we believe that the interpretation which the State advocates is fully consistent with the policies of the legislation and is in no way precluded by its language. In identifying the type of proceeding to which the compelled testimony must relate, rule 19(3) is broadly worded so as to embrace “any judicial proceeding.” We therefore hold that the district court acted within the authority of rule 19(3) with respect to the immunity granted to Theodore Girdler, Jr. in the present proceeding.
Support for the foregoing views is found in United States v. Cappetto, 502 F.2d 1351 (7th Cir.1974), cert. denied, 420 U.S. 925, 95 S.Ct. 1121, 43 L.Ed.2d 395 (1975) (defendants in civil action properly compelled to answer questions upon grant of immunity); and Smith v. Superior Court, 17 Ariz.App. 79, 495 P.2d 519 (1972) (term “judicial proceeding” in immunity statute encompasses every proceeding before a competent court).
II. Sufficiency of Attorney General’s Application in Support of Grant of Immunity.
Girdler next contends that the State did not sufficiently fulfill the requirements of rule 19(3) to justify the grant of immunity issued by the district court. He contends that an evidentiary record is necessary in view of the language of the rule which provides “any testimony given in support of the application for immunity shall be reported.”
We do not share Girdler’s belief that the quoted language from rule 19(3) indicates that testimony is required in support of the application in all cases. The rule contains a list of requisites which must be verified by the attorney general or county attorney in the application. Certainly where, as here, all of these criteria are set forth in the verified statement by the attorney general, additional evidentiary support on the part of the State is not required in the absence of some challenge to the accuracy of the material contained in the verified application. We conclude that the district court acted properly in granting immunity as a result of the elements contained in the attorney general’s verified statement.
III. Adequacy of Scope of Immunity to Displace Privilege Against Self-Incrimination.
Next, Girdler contends that the scope of immunity which he was granted is not sufficient to displace his constitutional immunity under the fifth amendment to the federal constitution, and, therefore, such grant as has been given him is inadequate to permit the compelling of testimony. In raising this argument, Girdler appears to contend that he has been given only use immunity in the district court’s order. We disagree. He has been granted use immunity and transactional immunity by that order. Because derivative use immunity is also constitutionally mandated, we interpret the order to also confer that brand of immunity upon Girdler’s testimony. Gir-dler’s grant of immunity not only equals the constitutional privilege which will be displaced by virtue of compelling him to testify, it exceeds it. The constitutional immunity necessary under the fifth amend*599ment in order to justify compelling a witness to answer requires only use and derivative use immunity. Kastigar v. United States, 406 U.S. 441, 92 S.Ct. 1653, 32 L.Ed.2d 212 (1972). As indicated, Girdler was given transactional immunity as well. For these reasons, we find no merit in Girdler’s contention that the immunity granted him does not displace his constitutional privilege against self-incrimination.
Girdler also contends that the extent of the immunity granted to him is inadequate because it leaves him subject to criminal prosecution on the transactions to which he testifies in other states or in the federal courts. We disagree. Although neither the legislature nor the courts of this state have the power to grant Girdler extraterritorial transactional immunity from prosecutions by sister states or federal authorities, the fifth amendment to the federal constitution will provide him with use and derivative use immunity with respect to any testimony compelled under the conditions established in rule 19(3). Murphy v. Waterfront Commission, 378 U.S. 52, 79, 84 S.Ct. 1594, 1609-10, 12 L.Ed.2d 678, 695 (1964). This is sufficient to satisfy the constitutional requirements upon which such grants of immunity must depend.
IV. Authority to Compel Attendance of Nonresident Witness for Testimony in Civil Action.
Finally, we consider Girdler’s claims that the state of Iowa has no constitutional authority to compel his attendance for the taking of a deposition in this state under the provisions of Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure 147(c) and (d). This contention and his companion claim that he is entitled to a protective order providing that his deposition may only be taken in the state of his domicile are not proper matters for consideration in an appeal from the order granting immunity. These claims must be presented to the district court by appropriate filings in the underlying civil antitrust litigation and first considered by the court responsible for the proceedings with respect thereto. As a result, we have no issue in the present case which permits our consideration of those claims.
We have considered all issues presented and find no basis for disturbing the order from which this appeal has been taken.
AFFIRMED.
All Justices concur except SCHULTZ, J., who concurs specially.

=== CASE 9739831 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:21:50.452052+00 ===

*556CASE SUMMARY
Buchanan, J.
This is an appeal by Defendant-Appellant City of Indianapolis (City) from a trial court judgment of $7500 plus costs in favor of Plaintiff-Appellee Daniel J. Bates (Bates) upon his complaint for personal injury and personal property damage sustained in an automobile collision caused by a defective automatic control signal exhibited and maintained by City, claiming the trial court erroneously subjected City to a standard of strict liability.
We reverse.
FACTS
Upon an agreed statement of facts the trial court rendered the following specific findings of fact, conclusions of law, and judgment:
1. That on May 26, 1971, at about 8:25 A.M. there being daylight at said time, at the intersection of West Michigan Street and North Senate Avenue, in Indianapolis, Marion County, Indiana, an automatic traffic control signal exhibited and maintained by the defendant, City of Indianapolis, showed green for both Senate Avenue and West Michigan Street.
2. That as a proximate result of the above, plaintiff who was driving west on Michigan was in collision with an automobile being driven north on Senate Avenue by one Susan Murphy, both plaintiff and Susan Murphy having the green light.
3. That as a further proximate result of the above, plaintiff sustained various personal injuries including abrasions on the side of his face and on other parts of his body, received a bump on his head, bruised his left shoulder and left arm, injured his midsection and his right ankle, and developed headaches which still persist, as do many of the other above-mentioned injuries.
4. That as a further proximate result of the above, plaintiff incurred expenses for an ambulance, for hospitalization and for doctors, and will continue to incur said expenses; lost at least two (2) days work and lost his 1967 Chevrolet Truck which was totally wrecked.
5. That plaintiff complied with statutory requirements as to notice to the defendant, City of Indianapolis.
*5576. That at no time prior to the collision did the defendant, City of Indianapolis know or have any reason to know of any defect in said above mentioned automatic traffic control signal or any automatic traffic control signal at the intersection of Michigan and Senate.
7. That plaintiff has been damaged in the sum of $7500.00.
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW
1. The law is with the plaintiff.
2. The doctrine of strict liability applies against the City of Indianapolis in this cause regardless of the lack of prior notice of the double green light situation, or any other malfunction of any relevant automatic traffic control device at said intersection.
3. That plaintiff should recover from defendant $7500.00 plus costs.
JUDGMENT
IT IS CONSIDERED, ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED by the Court that the plaintiff, Daniel J. Bates, recover from the defendant, City of Indianapolis, the sum of $7500.00. Costs taxed to the defendant.
City appeals.
ISSUE
The sole issue for our disposition is:
Did the trial court commit reversible error by subjecting City to strict liability for damage to Bates (a user of City’s public streets) due to a defective automatic traffic signal?
City contends that traffic control devices such as automatic traffic signals are integral parts of the public ways, existing purely as a governmental function, and must be subject to the same notice requirements before liability may be found. Liability, if any, must be based upon negligence (and not strict liability) and must be preceded by notice of the defect and a reasonable opportunity to repair it. It also asserts no jurisdiction has ever applied strict liability to a governmental organization performing its public function.
*558Bates disagrees and contends the active (as opposed to passive) nature of this defect justifies imposition of strict liability.1 He asserts the situation was so dangerous that Indiana should extend strict liability to encompass the facts of this case regardless of any prior notice to City.
DECISION
CONCLUSION — It is our opinion the trial court committed reversible error by applying strict liability to City under the circumstances of this case.
The parties agree that sovereign (or governmental) immunity is not available to City in this case . . . and we indulge in a like assumption for the purpose of deciding this case.
See, Board of Commissioners of Delaware County v. Briggs (1975),
167 Ind. App. 96, 337 N.E.2d 852;
Campbell v. State (1972),
259 Ind. 515, 284 N.E.2d 733;
Chadwick v. City of Crawfordsville (1940),
216 Ind. 399, 24 N.E.2d 937.
In the void thereby created Bates would impose strict liability and City negligence. The law is with City.
All available Indiana authority supports the conelusion that City is liable under these circumstances, if at all, upon a negligence theory.
See, Board of Commissioners of Delaware County v. Briggs, supra;
Campbell v. State, supra;
Galbreath v. City of Logansport (1972),
151 Ind. App. 291, 279 N.E.2d 578;
Klepinger v. Board of Commissioners of Miami County (1968),
*559143 Ind. App. 155, 239 N.E.2d 160, appeal after remand 149 Ind. App. 377, 273 N.E.2d 109;
Gilson v. City of Anderson (1967),
141 Ind. App. 180, 226 N.E.2d 921;
City of Evansville v. Beheme (1912),
49 Ind. App. 448, 97 N.E. 565;
City of South Bend v. Turner (1900),
156 Ind. 418, 60 N.E. 271;
City of Madison v. Baker (1885),
103 Ind. 41, 2 N.E. 236;
Turner v. City of Indianapolis (1884),
96 Ind. 51.
See also, Miller v. Griesel (1974),
261 Ind. 604, 308 N.E.2d 701;
Annot., 34 A.L.R. 3d 1008 (1970);
MCQUILLIN, MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS § 54.102 (1967) ;
IC 1971, 34-4-16.5-1 ET. AL.
(Burns Code Ed. Suppl. 1975).
We find no Indiana authority (and are directed to none) that would extend strict liability in any form to meet the specific facts of this case.2
Having so decided our task is not complete. We must still affirm the trial court’s judgment if sustainable on any other theory, e.g., negligence.
See, Montgomery Ward & Co. v. Tackett (1975),
163 Ind. App. 211, 323 N.E.2d 242, 247;
Sheraton Corp. of America v. Kingsford Packing Co., Inc. (1974),
162 Ind. App. 470, 319 N.E.2d 852;
Hunter v. Milhous (1973),
159 Ind. App. 105, 305 N.E.2d 448;
Saloom v. Holder (1973),
Ind. App., 304 N.E.2d 217;
Gerlot v. Swartz (1937),
212 Ind. 292, 300, 7 N.E.2d 960.
*560However, the judgment is not supportable on a theory of negligence because the City must have actual or constructive knowledge of a defect or a reason to know that it exists and an opportunity to repair, as a prerequisite to its liability for negligence in such cases.
See, Galbreath v. City of Logansport, supra;
Gilson v. City of Anderson, supra;
City of Madison v. Baker, supra;
Turner v. City of Indianapolis, supra;
Annot., 34 A.L.R. 3d 1008 (1970);
MCQUILLIN, supra.
Bates stipulated and the trial court specifically found:
That at no time prior to the collision did the defendant, City of Indianapolis, know or have any reason to know of any defect in said above mentioned automatic traffic control signal or any automatic traffic control signal at the intersection of Michigan and Senate.
Under these circumstances the judgment must be reversed.
Reversed.
White, J., concurs; Sullivan, J., concurs with opinion.
. Both Bates and City couch their arguments in general terms of strict liability . . . speaking alternatively of strict liability as applied to animals, products and ultra hazardous activities. Therefore, we will do the same.
. Whether a municipality may be strictly liable under other circumstances is, of course, not before us.

=== CASE 9739838 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:01.264704+00 ===

VANDE WALLE, Justice,
concurring specially.
I concur in the result reached in the majority opinion. I agree that the trial court did not commit prejudicial error in allowing testimony regarding the financial status of the plaintiff under the circumstances of this case.
*249I write separately to express my concern relative to the motion to dismiss. Although Sulsky may have taken nothing from the judgment of the trial court because the trial court did not rescind the contract for deed as she requested, it is nevertheless inconsistent to accept payments due under the contract for deed and, at the same time, appeal from a judgment holding the contract for deed valid. Under ordinary circumstances acceptance of payments due under the contract for deed would, at least to me, clearly reveal an intention to acquiesce in the judgment. However, I agree with the majority opinion that under the circumstances of this case, wherein the second payment was tendered to Sulsky directly without knowledge of her counsel, dismissal of the appeal is not justified.

=== CASE 2221167 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:05.399138+00 ===

369 Mass. 836 (1976)
343 N.E.2d 859
DORIS PERRY
vs.
LAWRENCE MEDEIROS & another.[1]
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Bristol.
November 5, 1975.
March 4, 1976.
Present: HENNESSEY, C.J., QUIRICO, BRAUCHER, & KAPLAN, JJ.
Marc E. Antine for the plaintiff.
Brian J. Moran for the defendants.
QUIRICO, J.
This is an action of tort to recover damages for personal injuries sustained by the plaintiff in a fall on the exterior common stairs of a building in Taunton in which she occupied the third-floor apartment as a tenant of the defendants who owned the property. The case is before us on the plaintiff's amended bill of exceptions after a trial to a jury who returned a verdict for the defendants.[2]
The plaintiff argues two exceptions covered by her amended bill. One is to the Superior Court judge's exclusion from evidence of a portion of the Taunton building code requiring landings at certain doors opening on a flight of stairs. The other is to the judge's instruction to the jury concerning the requirement of G.L.c. 84, §§ 18-21, as in effect at the time of the plaintiff's injury, that in certain claims for injuries caused by a defect consisting in whole or in part of snow or ice, the claimant give written notice within a prescribed time to the owner of the allegedly defective premises. For the *838 reasons which follow, we sustain the first exception and overrule the second.
The pertinent allegations of the plaintiff's one count declaration are that on December 31, 1967, she was a tenant in a third floor apartment in premises of the defendants, that while in the exercise of due care in leaving the building by a common stairway she was caused to fall and was injured "because said premises had negligently been maintained by the" defendants, that on the day of the accident "the landing and stairs where she was caused to fall were covered with snow and ice," that as the result of her injuries she was hospitalized until January 30, 1968, "so that it was impossible for her to give notice to the Defendants," and that she gave such notice to the defendants on or about February 21, 1968. Each defendant filed an answer setting up a general denial and the defenses of contributory negligence, assumption of the risk, statute of limitations and failure to give the defendant notice of the accident as required by statute.
We summarize certain basic facts about which there appears to be no disagreement. The defendants, at all times material to this case, owned a three-apartment house. They occupied the first-floor apartment, they rented the third-floor apartment to the plaintiff, and they rented the second-floor apartment to another tenant. A set of exterior stairs consisting of seven steps leading from the ground to an enclosed porch, and the porch itself, were used in common by the defendants and their two tenants as a means of access to a first-floor hallway from which they ultimately reached their respective apartments. There was no landing at the top of the exterior stairs at the door used for entrance to or exit from the enclosed porch. The plaintiff was injured in a fall on the exterior stairs when leaving her house on the evening of December 31, 1967. At that time there was a door at the opening from the porch to these stairs and there was *839 some snow on the stairs. The plaintiff was taken to a hospital that evening and remained at the hospital until January 29, 1968. On February 21, 1968, she caused a written notice to be served on the defendants informing them of the date, time and place of her injury. The defendants contest the timeliness of the notice, but not its legal sufficiency or completeness. See G.L.c. 84, §§ 18-21.
The evidence as described in the bill of exceptions included the following relative to the alleged negligence of the defendants. The plaintiff first became the defendants' tenant at the property in question in August, 1963. At that time the porch described above was already enclosed, but there was no door at the head of the exterior stairs. Later in that year "when the cold weather began," the defendants installed a storm door at the head of those stairs thus completely enclosing the porch. Each year thereafter the storm door was removed in warm weather and reinstalled in cold weather. When the door was installed in the fall of 1967, a spring arrangement was also attached to close the door whenever it was opened. When a person leaving the building opened the door he then had to step out and down about seven inches to place his foot on the top step of the exterior stairs.
On the night of her accident, the plaintiff opened the outer porch door with her right hand in anticipation of stepping through the door opening to the top step of the stairs. Before she placed her foot on the step the door swung shut against her with such force that she was caused to lose her footing and fall down the stairs, landing at the bottom and sustaining serious injuries in the process. When the plaintiff first rented the apartment, there was a light outside the porch and it was in working condition. At some later date the light stopped working. She spoke to one of the defendants about it, but it never was repaired and it was not working at the time of the accident. Evidence concerning snow on *840 the stairs and the statutory notice thereof will be discussed later in this opinion.
1. Exclusion of building code provision. The plaintiff had the burden of proving her allegation that the defendants were guilty of negligence in their maintenance of the common area consisting of the porch and exterior stairs, and that their negligence caused her injuries. Stated differently, the plaintiff had the burden of proving that the defendants violated a duty which they owed to her as their tenant with respect to areas used by her in common with other occupants of the building. The duty of the defendants was "to use reasonable care to keep the common areas in as good a condition as that in which they were or appeared to be at the time of the creation of the tenancy." Goodman v. Smith, 340 Mass. 336, 338 (1960), and cases cited. Crea v. Stunzenas, 344 Mass. 265, 267 (1962). Shwartz v. Feinberg, 306 Mass. 331, 333-334 (1940).
As part of her case the plaintiff called the building inspector of the city of Taunton as a witness and through him offered § 6.08 of the city's building code which, on the date of the plaintiff's injury, provided in part as follows: "No exit door shall open immediately on a flight of stairs but a landing the length and width of not less than the width of such door shall be provided between such door and such stairs. No riser shall be located within one foot of an exit door."[3] The judge excluded this evidence. We hold that the exclusion of the quoted portion of § 6.08 was error.
There was evidence that when the plaintiff became a tenant of the defendants there was no door at the head *841 of the exterior stairs, and that thereafter the defendants placed a storm door at that opening. The municipal building code prohibited the resulting condition, viz., an exit door opening immediately on a flight of stairs without a landing. With the benefit of the excluded portion of § 6.08 the jury could have found that there was a violation of the building code which contributed to the plaintiff's injury. "The general rule in Massachusetts is that violation of the safety statute or ordinance does not in itself give rise to a cause of action but is evidence of negligence."[4]Dolan v. Suffolk Franklin Sav. Bank, 355 Mass. 665, 667 (1969). It is also the general rule that while the violation of a safety statute, ordinance or regulation is not conclusive on the issue of civil liability, it "... is evidence of negligence on the part of a violator as to all consequences that the statute, ordinance or regulation was intended to prevent." Follansbee v. Ohse, 293 Mass. 48, 52 (1935), quoting from Guinan v. Famous Players-Lasky Corp., 267 Mass. 501, 516 (1929). The provision of the Taunton building code which the judge excluded was clearly intended to eliminate or minimize the risk of falls, with resulting injuries, in passing through a doorway which opens directly to the top step of a set of stairs going down from the other side of the door.
The defendants rely on statements quoted from our opinion in Richmond v. Warren Institution for Sav., 307 Mass. 483, 485 (1940), to the effect that a statute which made it a misdemeanor for a person to permit any article to remain in a stairway of a building in a manner which impeded the passage of persons on the stairway did not affect the duty of a landlord to his tenants and that the violation of the statute "had no effect as evidence of *842 negligence." That reliance is misplaced since the rule would have no application to the facts of the case before us, assuming it would still be followed on facts similar to those in the Richmond case.
The plaintiff's bill states that the judge ruled that the building inspector "could not testify to the building code," and that thereupon the plaintiff offered to prove that had the inspector been allowed to testify, "he would have testified that in his opinion the stairs upon which the plaintiff fell were, on December 31, 1967, in violation of the building code of the City of Taunton." The opinion of the inspector on this point was properly excluded. The pertinent provisions of § 6.08 of the building code should have been admitted. There was evidence that there was no landing at the door at the head of the exterior stairs. It would then be a function of the jury to decide whether there was a violation of the code. The inspector was properly precluded from giving the jury his opinion interpreting the code and the effect thereof on facts to be found by the jury. S.D. Shaw & Sons v. Joseph Rugo, Inc., 343 Mass. 635, 639 (1962). Killam v. Standard Oil Co., 248 Mass. 575, 582 (1924). See Campbell v. Leach, 352 Mass. 367, 373 (1967).
2. "Snow or ice" notice. The plaintiff was not entitled to recover unless she proved first that her injuries were caused by a defective condition of a common area of the defendants' premises, and that the defect was due to the defendants' negligence. If the defective condition consisted in part of snow or ice, the plaintiff was required to prove additionally that she gave the defendants written notice of the time, place and cause of her injury, and that she gave the notice within the time prescribed by the applicable statute. G.L.c. 84, §§ 18-21. Walsh v. Riverway Drug Store Inc., 311 Mass. 326, 328 (1942). Regan v. Atlantic Ref. Co., 304 Mass. 353, 354 (1939). Baird v. Baptist Soc'y, 208 Mass. 29, 32 (1911).
*843 On the date of the plaintiff's injury the applicable statutes, G.L.c. 84, §§ 18-21, required notice within thirty days after injury, subject to the proviso in § 19, as appearing in St. 1965, c. 378, § 2, that "[i]f by reason of physical or mental incapacity it is impossible for the person injured to give the notice within the time required, he may give it within thirty days after such incapacity has been removed...."[5] The plaintiff first gave the defendants notice under the statute on February 21, 1968, fifty-two days after her injury. The judge advised counsel before their final arguments that in his opinion the notice was fatally tardy. He instructed the jury that if they found that the plaintiff's injuries were "caused by, or contributed to, in whole or in part, by an accumulation of snow and ice, they must find for the defendants." The plaintiff argues that this instruction was erroneous, and that the jury should have been permitted to decide whether her notice was seasonably given under the extended time permitted by the statute "by reason of physical or mental incapacity." We hold that the judge acted correctly.
In Goodwin v. Fall River, 228 Mass. 529, 533 (1917), involving R.L.c. 51, § 21, which included substantially the same language now found in G.L.c. 84, § 19, we said: "The physical or mental incapacity which enlarges the period of limitation within which notice as a condition precedent to a right to maintain an action must be given [in an action for injuries caused by a defective sidewalk], is an inability of the person injured to give the notice himself or through another which results from a loss of the faculties of the mind, or from a lack of power to use the mind because of the loss or impairment of the *844 organs of the body. Mere physical inability to move or to be moved about or to write are not evidence of mental or physical incapacity. [Citations omitted.] Ignorance of facts upon which the ability of the person injured may depend to give notice is not evidence of mental or physical condition; nor is the want of means to employ assistance to give the notice or to find out where the accident happened evidence that the plaintiff was incapable of giving the notice within thirty days because of mental or physical incapacity." In Townsend v. Boston, 232 Mass. 451, 452 (1919), involving a defective sidewalk consisting in part of ice thereon, this same rule was applied. Saunders v. Boston, 167 Mass. 595, 596 (1897). Lyons v. Cambridge, 132 Mass. 534, 535 (1882).
Applying to this case the test prescribed by the language quoted above from the Goodwin case, the judge correctly ruled that the evidence of the plaintiff's condition after she was injured as stated in her bill of exceptions and quoted in the margin below[6] was not sufficient to entitle her to have the question of her claimed "physical or mental incapacity" submitted to the jury for their determination whether her snow and ice notice to the defendants was timely under G.L.c. 84, § 19.
The plaintiff is strongly critical of this court's interpretation of the pertinent statutory language in the Goodwin case, supra, contending that it "is not only *845 grossly inconsistent with public policy, but it is also not necessarily called for by the statutory language." She asks that we reinterpret it. We decline to do so. The plaintiff points to the 1973 amendment to § 18 (see n. 5 to this opinion) presumably to suggest that the Legislature has given some relief from the strict interpretation in the Goodwin case. We note that the Legislature elected to give only limited relief, and did not attempt to change the statutory language of "physical or mental incapacity" which was interpreted in the Goodwin case.
3. Conclusion. The jury returned a verdict for the defendants. No special questions were submitted to the jury. It is therefore not now possible to determine whether the jury concluded (a) that the defendants were not negligent, or (b) that they were negligent, but the plaintiff's injury resulted in whole or in part from snow or ice and the plaintiff did not give the defendants notice within the time limited by G.L.c. 84, §§ 18-21. The plaintiff is entitled to a new trial. Since it has been established that the plaintiff did not seasonably give any "snow or ice" notice as required by G.L.c. 84, §§ 18-21, she will not be entitled to prevail at the new trial if the jury find that her injuries were sustained by reason of a defective condition which consisted in whole or in part of snow or ice contributing to the injuries.
The plaintiff's exception to the exclusion of the pertinent provisions of the Taunton building code is sustained; the other exception is overruled.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  Elizabeth Medeiros.
[2]  The action, originally entered in the Superior Court on October 6, 1969, was transferred to the District Court pursuant to G.L.c. 231, § 102C. After a trial in the latter court resulting in a finding for the defendants, the case was retransferred to the Superior Court for trial to a jury. The record on appeal was originally entered in the Appeals Court and the case was thereafter transferred by us to this court for direct appellate review. G.L.c. 211A, § 10 (A), inserted by St. 1972, c. 740, § 1.
[3]  Section 6.08 of the building code also provided as follows: "Direction of swing  Except in residence buildings, doorways that serve as exits shall have the door, including vestibule doors, so hung as to swing outward when opening" (emphasis supplied). Since this language excepts "residence buildings" and the present case involves a residence buiding, this portion of § 6.08 was properly excluded by the judge.
[4]  For a discussion of the view that statutes, ordinances and regulations dealing with residential buildings in the area of requirements for the safety of the occupants thereof should be held to create an obligation on landlords for the benefit of their tenants, see Boston Housing Authority v. Hemingway, 363 Mass. 184, 203, 206-214 (1973), concurring and dissenting opinion by Quirico, J.
[5]  By St. 1973, c. 1085, the following sentence was added to G.L.c. 84, § 18: "Failure to give such notice for such injury or damage sustained by reason of snow or ice shall not be a defense under this section unless the defendant proves that he was prejudiced thereby." That amendment does not apply to this case where the injury was sustained on December 31, 1967.
[6]  The bill states: "The plaintiff was unable to move from the position where she had fallen and remained there for approximately one-half hour until discovered by her daughter. Thereafter she was taken to the Morton Hospital in Taunton, Massachusetts, where she was confined from the date of the accident, December 31, 1967, to January 29, 1968.... That hospital report reveals that the plaintiff had suffered a fractured sacrum and that for twenty-one days after her admission to the hospital was not allowed to get out of bed at all, but was, in fact, strapped to a fracture board.... [A]fter twenty-one days in the hospital she was able to walk a distance of approximately eight to ten feet. The plaintiff was discharged from the hospital to her home on January 29, 1968. She was carried into her apartment and spent the next three weeks lying on the fracture board."

=== CASE 2221176 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:05.554732+00 ===

137 Mich. App. 238 (1984)
357 N.W.2d 669
FERRELL
v.
VIC TANNY INTERNATIONAL, INC.
Docket Nos. 69667-69669.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided May 7, 1984.
LeeRoy H. Temrowski, Jr., for plaintiffs.
Sommers, Schwartz, Silver & Schwartz, P.C. (by *241 Richard D. Toth and A. Albert Sugar), for defendant.
Before: J.H. GILLIS, P.J., and T.M. BURNS and R. ROBINSON,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Plaintiffs appeal as of right from the trial court's granting of defendant's motions for summary judgment on the grounds that plaintiffs have individually failed to state claims upon which relief could be granted, GCR 1963, 117.2(1). These cases have been consolidated on appeal on this Court's own motion.
Plaintiffs challenge the propriety of defendant's rules and regulations adopted after they became members of defendant's club, specifying the color of the apparel permitted to be worn by members at one of defendant's clubs. Specifically, plaintiffs question whether the defendant, Vic Tanny International, Inc., can direct its members to wear navy blue jogging suits or navy blue leotards and tights while exercising at the facilities and whether Vic Tanny can evict members for failing to wear navy blue exercise suits. Plaintiffs concede that defendant is willing to rescind the contracts between them and return their money paid toward their respective memberships. Nevertheless, plaintiffs seek sums of over $1 million dollars each as actual, punitive and exemplary damages for their humiliation and embarrassment in having been evicted from defendant's premises. The basis of plaintiffs' respective claims is that each challenge regarding defendant's dress code is individual, hence requiring separate judicial scrutiny. We disagree. Each of plaintiffs' complaints has four counts alleging respectively: (1) breach of contract; *242 (2) fraud, misrepresentation and deceit; (3) intentional infliction of emotional distress; and (4) constitutional, statutory and civil rights violations. Other than the time frame when each plaintiff joined the club and what was told to them during their respective registrations, these cases are essentially the same in every respect.
On November 12, 1982, defendant filed motions for summary judgment against plaintiffs' claims under both GCR 1963, 117.2, subds (1) and (3). On February 2, 1983, the trial court entered separate orders pursuant to GCR 1963, 117.2(1), against each of plaintiffs' claims. In doing so, the trial judge adopted and incorporated his earlier opinion from a previous case involving the same issues.
A motion based on a failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted pursuant to GCR 1963, 117.2(1) merely tests the legal sufficiency of the claim. Such a motion does not attack the competency of the evidence of the factual support for the allegations in the pleadings. A motion under GCR 1963, 117.2(1) assumes the existence of competent supporting evidence, but denies that the complaint sets forth a valid cause of action. See, generally, Bashara, The Elusive Summary Judgment Rule: Sifting Through the Maze, 1976 DC L Rev 397, 401. All well-pled allegations in plaintiffs' complaints are to be accepted as true. All conclusions based on the factual allegations that can reasonably be drawn in favor of the party opposing the motion must be accepted as true. Id., p 402. See also Karr v Bd of Trustees of Michigan State University, 119 Mich. App. 1, 3-4; 325 NW2d 605 (1982), lv den 417 Mich. 1100.8 (1983). Whenever a claim is founded upon a written instrument, a copy of the instrument must be attached to the pleadings and becomes a part of the pleadings for *243 all purposes. GCR 1963, 113.4. Accordingly, the trial court should review the written instrument when assessing whether the pleadings state a claim upon which relief can be granted.
Considering this standard, we first consider whether the trial court erred in granting defendant's motions for summary judgment against plaintiffs' breach of contract claims. The trial court properly reviewed plaintiffs' complaints and the contractual provisions relative to defendant's reservation of a right to prescribe rules and regulations which must be obeyed by its members. Plaintiffs, in their complaints, recognized defendant's right to make rules and regulations and conceded that they were in violation of a dress code requiring them to wear navy blue clothing in certain areas of the club which was enacted after they became members. As stated by this Court in Burkhardt v City National Bank of Detroit, 57 Mich. App. 649, 652; 226 NW2d 678 (1975): "Where a party to a contract makes the manner of its performance a matter of its own discretion, the law does not hesitate to imply the proviso that such discretion be exercised honestly and in good faith. See 3A Corbin, Contracts, § 644, pp 78-84." See also Restatement Contracts, 2d, § 205. The undisputed facts establish that defendant promulgated the dress code in good faith. Defendant states that "the principal purpose of such a dress code in its larger clubs is to provide for a uniformity upon patrons working out, which assists in avoiding feelings of embarrassment or self-consciousness in the exercise rooms which, experience has shown, is often detrimental to the willingness of some patrons to participate in exercise programs". Plaintiffs have not made any allegations which would indicate that there was a different *244 purpose for defendant's dress code. Plaintiffs have failed to show that the dress code was enacted in bad faith. Accordingly, we find that the trial court correctly ruled that the facts as pled failed to state a claim for breach of contract upon which relief can be granted.
We next consider whether the trial court erred in granting defendant's motions for summary judgment against the plaintiffs' claims of fraud, misrepresentation and deceit. Plaintiffs' claims seem to be based in part on Vic Tanny's advertisements which show attractive people exercising in multicolored spandex suits. Plaintiffs claim that Vic Tanny's representations were fraudulent since it knew at the time of contracting that plaintiffs would be required to wear navy colored exercise suits despite Vic Tanny's prior representations and advertisements indicating otherwise. Plaintiffs have failed to make allegations to support a conclusion that Vic Tanny intended to enact the navy exercise suit dress code when it accepted plaintiffs' memberships. Furthermore, even assuming that defendant intended to enact the dress code at the time of contracting, plaintiffs failed to show that defendant's silence was material and bore upon a fact crucial to plaintiffs' respective decisions to buy memberships in defendant's club. Papin v Demski, 17 Mich. App. 151, 154-156; 169 NW2d 351 (1969), aff'd 383 Mich. 561, 571; 177 NW2d 166 (1970).
The facts of this case show that Vic Tanny informed its members of the dress code soon after it was enacted. Plaintiffs have not alleged that defendant affirmatively stated that no dress codes would be adopted in the future. To the contrary, the contract contains a clause in which defendant reserves the right to make future rules and regulations. We affirm the trial court's dismissal of plaintiffs' claims of fraud, misrepresentation and deceit.
*245 We next consider whether plaintiffs stated a cause of action for intentional infliction of emotional distress. Michigan jurisprudence recognizes intentional infliction of emotional distress as a distinct and separate cause of action. Ledsinger v Burmeister, 114 Mich. App. 12, 17; 318 NW2d 558 (1982). In Ledsinger, pp 17-18, this Court adopted the standards set forth in 1 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 46, pp 71-72:
"(1) One who by extreme and outrageous conduct intentionally or recklessly causes severe emotional distress to another is subject to liability for such emotional distress, and if bodily harm to the other results from it, for such bodily harm.
"(2) Where such conduct is directed at a third person, the actor is subject to liability if he intentionally or recklessly causes severe emotional distress
"(a) to a member of such person's immediate family who is present at the time, whether or not such distress results in bodily harm, or
"(b) to any other person who is present at the time, if such distress results in bodily harm."
To state a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress, plaintiffs must allege that defendant's actions are extreme and outrageous:
"It has not been enough that the defendant has acted with an intent which is tortious or even criminal, or that he has intended to inflict emotional distress, or even that his conduct has been characterized by `malice,' or a degree of aggravation which would entitle the plaintiff to punitive damages for another tort. Liability has been found only where the conduct has been so outrageous in character, and so extreme in degree, as to go beyond all possible bounds of decency, and to be regarded as atrocious, and utterly intolerable in a civilized community. Generally, the case is one in which the recitation of the facts to an average member of the *246 community would arouse his resentment against the actor, and lead him to exclaim, `Outrageous!'
"The liability clearly does not extend to mere insults, indignities, threats, annoyances, petty oppressions, or other trivialities." 1 Restatement Torts, 2d, § 46, Comment d, p 73.
Plaintiffs' complaints failed to allege sufficient facts to establish extreme and outrageous conduct. Plaintiffs merely allege that defendant enforced its dress code. Nothing in plaintiffs' allegations suggests that the defendant acted in an extreme and outrageous way. The trial court correctly granted summary judgments for defendant on plaintiffs' claims for intentional infliction of emotional distress.
We next consider plaintiffs' claims for violations of their constitutional rights and violations of the equal accommodations act and Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act. Plaintiffs have not sufficiently alleged that defendant was engaged in state action which is necessary to their claim of a violation of constitutional rights. See Moose Lodge No 107 v Irvis, 407 U.S. 163, 171-173; 92 S. Ct. 1965, 1970-1971; 32 L. Ed. 2d 627, 636-637 (1972). Plaintiffs also do not allege a violation of the Michigan equal accommodations act. MCL 750.146, 750.147; MSA 28.343, 28.344. Vic Tanny violated this act when it refused membership to a blind person. Vidrich v Vic Tanny International, Inc, 102 Mich. App. 230; 301 NW2d 482 (1980). The act prohibits a public establishment from denying accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges on account of race, color, religion, national origin, sex or blindness. MCL 750.147; MSA 28.344. Plaintiffs do not allege that they were denied admission to Vic Tanny's gymnasium for any of these reasons. Plaintiffs have failed to state a claim under the equal accommodations *247 act. Likewise, plaintiffs have failed to state a claim under the Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act since they have not alleged that they were discriminated against because of their religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, or marital status. MCL 37.2302; MSA 3.548(302).
We next consider whether the trial court erred in granting defendant's motions for summary judgment before completion of discovery. As stated in Pauley v Hall, 124 Mich. App. 255, 263; 335 NW2d 197 (1983):
"this Court has held that a grant of summary judgment is premature if made before discovery on the disputed issue is complete. Goldman [v Loubella Extendables, 91 Mich. App. 212, 218; 283 NW2d 695 (1979), lv den 407 Mich. 901 (1979)]; Johnston v American Oil Co, 51 Mich. App. 646, 650-651; 215 NW2d 719 (1974). However, there must be a disputed issue before the court. If the party opposing a motion for summary judgment cannot present competent evidence of a disputed fact because his or her discovery is incomplete, the party must at least assert that such a dispute does indeed exist and support the allegation by some independent evidence, even if hearsay. An unsupported allegation which amounts solely to conjecture does not entitle a party to an extension of time for discovery, since under such circumstances discovery is nothing more than a fishing expedition to discover if any disputed material fact exists between the parties."
In the instant case, plaintiffs have shown no evidence that a factual dispute exists. The trial court, therefore, correctly granted summary judgment even though plaintiffs' discovery was incomplete.
Plaintiffs finally argue that the trial court was biased or prejudiced against their claims. Under the circumstances of this case, we cannot perceive any prejudice or bias toward plaintiffs' claims on the part of the trial court in its decisions. The trial *248 court properly ruled on each of plaintiffs' claims. Plaintiffs have failed to plead any cause of action upon which relief can be obtained. In the absence of a jury, the trial judge may comment about cases he believes to be frivolous, and if he renders a proper decision, he should not have to be disqualified merely because he openly discloses his views. Only when a litigant can show that the trial judge's views have controlled the decision-making process should the issue of bias or prejudice come to this Court's attention. Wayne County Prosecutor v Doerfler, 14 Mich. App. 428, 439-442; 165 NW2d 648 (1968).
We have reviewed all of plaintiffs' arguments and have found them to be without merit. The trial court is, therefore, affirmed.
Affirmed. Costs to defendant.
NOTES
[*]  Former circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 9739839 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:09.711746+00 ===

*630Per Curiam.
Charles D. Gleason (Charles) appeals the judgment of the district court for Lincoln County, namely, alimony claimed to be excessive. Betty L. Gleason (Betty) cross-appeals, claiming that the periodic payments ordered by the district court are not alimony and are exempt from modification. In addition to alimony, the district court ordered Charles to pay certain debts of the parties and to pay child support monthly in the amount of $300 for the teenage daughter of the parties, but on appeal the parties do not contest the debts to be paid by Charles or the child support. We reverse the judgment of the district court concerning alimony.
Charles and Betty were married in December 1953. Charles is 49 years of age, Betty is 47, and both are in good health. Since 1967, Betty has been self-employed as a licensed, practicing beautician and owner of “Betty’s Hi-Way Beauty Salon.” Charles is an executive whose primary duties consist of management and operation of three corporations, Gleason Truck Sales & Service, Inc.; Big Diesel Warehouse, Inc.; and Gleason Enterprises, Inc. The bulk of the marital estate is comprised of the Gleasons’ interest in the three corporations. Charles owns 75 percent of the stock of the corporations, while Betty owns 25 percent. The primary purpose of having three corporations is limitation of potential liability. Gleason Enterprises, Inc., owns the real estate on which the other two corporations operate. Each corporation is operated as a separate entity and files a small business corporation income tax return. Gains or losses from the various small business corporations are reflected on the individual income tax returns of the shareholders.
Recently, revenues of the three corporations have fallen off dramatically. Corporate tax returns for the past 3 years show a combined overall profit of $1,950 in 1980 and $7,560 in 1981, and a net loss of $40,085 in 1982, the year in which the dissolution action was filed.
Net profits of the corporations were distributed to the shareholders. Charles’ income is derived from the three corporations, which pay Charles an annual combined salary of $1,300. Living expenses of the family were paid from a “901 *631account,” which enabled Charles and Betty to withdraw money from the corporations as advances against dividends. In 1982, the only year for which complete records are available, approximately $27,000 was withdrawn in this manner.
Although Betty is and has been self-employed as a beautician, there is no information in the record about Betty’s income as a beautician. At times Betty has employed as many as four beauticians in her salon.
By the decree, Betty received the beauty shop, valued at $34,000, and the shop contents. Also, Betty received the family home and approximately 14 acres, free and clear, valued at $109,000 and located near North Platte. By the decree of dissolution, Charles is required to satisfy the real estate mortgage on the family home, in the amount of $8,895.37, with monthly installments of $221.42. Betty’s monthly utilities for the family home are expected to be $280. Monthly maintenance or repair of the residence is anticipated at $100. As a result of the property division, Charles received total control over the corporations and all corporate assets. Except for a debt of $530 pertaining to the beauty salon, the decree charged Charles with payment of all debts of the parties. Such debts are $278,000.
The decree of dissolution also provided:
[Betty] should have and recover from [Charles] as alimony, the sum of $96,800.00 at the rate of $800.00 per month for aperiod of 121 months, commencing forthwith and hereafter due and payable by [Charles] to [Betty] through the Clerk of the District Court of Lincoln County, Nebraska, on the 24th day of each month for a total of 121 months.
Charles claims the amount of alimony is excessive. In her cross-appeal Betty contends that the periodic payments ordered were an adjustment of property, not alimony, and should be exempt from modification or termination.
In appeals concerning dissolution of marriage, the Supreme Court is required to try the case de novo on the record and reach independent conclusions on the issues presented by the appeal without reference to the conclusions or judgment of the district court. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-1925 (Reissue 1979); Campbell v. Campbell, 202 Neb. 575, 276 N.W.2d 220 (1979).
*632Neb. Rev. Stat. § 42-365 (Cum. Supp. 1982) provides:
When dissolution of a marriage is decreed, the court may order payment of such alimony by one party to the other and division of property as may be reasonable, having regard for the circumstances of the parties, duration of the marriage, a history of the contributions to the marriage by each party, including contributions to the care and education of the children, and interruption of personal careers or educational opportunities, and the ability of the supported party to engage in gainful employment without interfering with the interests of any minor children in the custody of such party. Reasonable security for payment may be required by the court. Unless amounts have accrued prior to the date of service of process on a petition to modify, orders for alimony may be modified or revoked for good cause shown, but when alimony is not allowed in the original decree dissolving a marriage, such decree may not be modified to award alimony. Except as otherwise agreed by the parties in writing or by order of the court, alimony orders shall terminate upon the death of either party or the remarriage of the recipient.
While the criteria for reaching a reasonable division of property and a reasonable award of alimony may overlap, the two serve different purposes and are to be considered separately. The purpose of a property division is to distribute the marital assets equitably between the parties. The purpose of alimony is to provide for the continued maintenance or support of one party by the other when the relative economic circumstances and the other criteria enumerated in this section make it appropriate.
The determination of what will constitute proper alimony has been established by a long line of Nebraska cases. In Magruder v. Magruder, 190 Neb. 573, 576-77, 209 N.W.2d 585, 587 (1973), we held:
In determining whether alimony should be awarded, in what amount, and over what period of time, the ultimate criteria under the statute as well as under the former decisions of this court is one of reasonableness. . . . *633[Citations omitted.] The determination of whether it is reasonable to award alimony and if so how much takes into consideration all the circumstances of the parties, as well as the duration of the marriage and the ability of the supported party to engage in gainful employment without interfering with the interests of any minor children of the parties in the supported party’s custody.
Tax returns of the Gleason corporations for the fiscal year ending January 31,1982, indicate a net loss of $40,085. Of that loss, $17,021 is directly attributable to the depreciation of assets owned by the corporations. The removal of this noncash loss figure from the overall loss shown by the corporations reveals that the corporations nevertheless suffered a $23,064 loss for 1982. Although approximately $27,000 has been withdrawn from the corporations as advances against dividends and used by the parties to meet household or living expenses, neither party treats such advances as income. Little is offered to the court beyond corporate tax returns in clarifying any profit or loss from any Gleason corporation.
Determining what is reasonable alimony under given circumstances is never an easy task. The standard of reasonableness by its very nature defies clear and specific quantification inasmuch as the determination of reasonableness is directly tied to the virtually unique circumstances of each case. In Altschuler v. Coburn, 38 Neb. 881, 890, 57 N.W. 836, 838 (1894), we noted that an attempt to give a specific meaning to the word reasonable is “ ‘trying to count what is not number, and measure what is not space.’ ” There is no mathematical formula by which an award of alimony can be precisely determined. The amount of appropriate alimony is determined by the facts of each case, and the court will consider all pertinent facts in reaching an award that is just and equitable. Cole v. Cole, 208 Neb. 562, 304 N.W.2d 398 (1981).
Charles claims the alimony is excessive because the alimony annually exceeds his income. In Jenks v. Jenks, 200 Neb. 298, 263 N.W.2d 469 (1978), we recognized that the earning capacity of both parties in a dissolution of marriage is a proper inquiry and consideration by the court. Alimony in excess of one’s *634earning capacity is an abuse of discretion. The relevant inquiry becomes whether such an award is present here.
We are confronted with a situation where Charles, in effect, has been awarded patently unprofitable businesses. While the condition of a business is an important consideration in determining the propriety of alimony to be paid, the condition of a spouse’s business is not the sole factor in determining proper alimony. Rather, the earning capacity of a spouse operating a business is an element which is to be considered in determining alimony. Kosnopfl v. Kosnopfl, 206 Neb. 524, 293 N.W.2d 854 (1980); § 42-365. The actual earning capacity or ability of a spouse to engage in gainful employment is frequently more important than the profitability of a spouse’s business in resolving the question of alimony. Here, it is undisputed that Charles has acquired a degree of expertise in his present occupation. It is reasonable, therefore, that Charles would have an earning capacity or ability to earn a wage quite apart from his actually or personally managing the corporations involved in the dissolution proceedings. However, in the interests of equity, we must also take into consideration that Betty is a licensed beautician, in good health, and has been awarded her salon. Consequently, we are constrained to take into account Betty’s earning capacity in the same manner as was done regarding Charles’ earning capacity, notwithstanding a complete absence of information regarding Betty’s income from her beauty salon. Further, the record discloses that Betty’s beautician business does not interfere with rearing the Gleasons’ teenage daughter.
We are of the opinion that, taking into consideration that Betty received the house free and clear and her needs in maintaining the house, $800 per month as alimony is clearly in excess of what is a reasonable amount under the circumstances, especially in view of the earning capacity of each party. We believe that alimony in the amount of $400 per month would be reasonable under the circumstances. For this reason we modify the alimony to be paid by Charles to Betty so that Charles is required to pay alimony in the sum of $400 per month, provided such alimony shall terminate on the death of either party or on Betty’s remarriage.
*635We cannot accept Betty’s contention that the property division ordered by the court is unfair and inadequate. If we accept the values assigned by the parties to the respective assets they received, Betty received $143,000 and Charles received $447,000, offset by debts of $278,000 which he is required to assume under the decree. Therefore, the net value of Charles’ assets is $169,000. There was evidence presented by an appraiser who established the value of the real estate owned by Gleason Enterprises, Inc., at $322,000, which is $72,000 in excess of the $250,000 value asserted by Charles. Adjusting values in the light of the appraiser’s testimony, the net value of the assets received by Charles is $241,000. Under this formulation it is apparent that Charles receives approximately 63 percent of the marital property, while Betty receives 37 percent. These figures are within the guidelines approved in Martin v. Martin, 215 Neb. 508, 339 N.W.2d 754 (1983), where we held that, generally, in proceedings for the dissolution of a marriage, awards of property to a spouse from the marital estate vary from one-third to one-half of the value of the property involved, depending on the facts and circumstances of the particular case.
Further, we cannot accept Betty’s claim that the. periodic payments ordered by the district court and designated as “alimony” were in fact a property adjustment for distribution of marital property. We believe that the amount to be paid by Charles was correctly designated as “alimony,” a means to provide continued maintenance or support for Betty, especially since Betty has apparently had little, if any, income from her beauty salon, as reflected by the record before us. We believe that if the trial court had intended the periodic payments as part of a property adjustment and distribution, the district court would have expressed itself accordingly and not employed the term “alimony” in reference to the periodic payments. Betty’s attempts to characterize the payments as a property division or adjustment of property interests are without sound basis and are not supported by the record. Because we have directed that Charles pay alimony, and, further, because we have held that the division of property ordered by the district court is proper, Betty’s contention and characterization of the periodic *636payments are without merit.
Consequently, as previously indicated in this opinion, we modify the district court’s order regarding alimony to be paid by Charles, namely, Charles shall pay Betty alimony in the amount of $400 per month, provided such alimony shall terminate on the death of either party or on Betty’s remarriage. In all other respects the district court’s judgment is affirmed. We remand this matter to the district court for modification of the judgment regarding alimony consistent with this opinion.
This court awards to Betty’s attorney the sum of $750 as an attorney fee for services regarding the appeal.
Affirmed in part, and in part reversed and REMANDED WITH DIRECTIONS.

=== CASE 9739840 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:09.716711+00 ===

Caporale, J.,
dissenting.
I dissent. The record as presented to us demonstrates not only that the alimony awarded by the district court to Mrs. Gleason is excessive but that there is no basis for awarding any alimony to her.
The record is silent on the question of Mrs. Gleason’s earnings. Essex v. Essex, 195 Neb. 385, 238 N.W.2d 235 (1976), states that support is one of the primary reasons for awarding alimony and holds that it is not error to deny alimony in the absence of a showing of need. How can Mrs. Gleason’s need for alimony be determined in the absence of proof of that fact? Did Mrs. Gleason deliberately not prove her earnings because she would thereby establish a lack of need?
Whatever the reasons for the state of the record and whatever the answers to the foregoing questions, we cannot “review de novo on the record” what the record does not contain.
Moreover, how on earth can Mrs. Gleason be entitled to an attorney fee in this court for losing half of the alimony she had before she was brought here?
I would affirm in part and in part reverse with the direction that the judgment with respect to alimony be vacated and no alimony be awarded.
Krivosha, C. J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2221187 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:05.785+00 ===

137 Mich. App. 1 (1984)
357 N.W.2d 778
HILDEBRAND
v.
REVCO DISCOUNT DRUG CENTERS
SMITH
v.
B. P. OIL, INC.
Docket Nos. 63170, 70837.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided September 4, 1984.
Roy, Shecter & Vocht (by Lynn H. Shecter and Michelle E. Vocht), for plaintiffs Hildebrand and Tomlin.
Thomas H. Bleakley, P.C. (by Brian J. McKeen), for plaintiff Smith.
Dykema, Gossett, Spencer, Goodnow & Trigg (by Joseph A. Ritok, Jr., and Robert C. Ludolph), for Revco Discount Drug Centers.
Honigman, Miller, Schwartz & Cohn (by L.A. Hynds and L.A. Nathanson), for B P Oil, Inc.
Before: BEASLEY, P.J., and J.H. GILLIS and R.B. MARTIN,[*] JJ.
R.B. MARTIN, J.
In Smith v B P Oil, Inc, the plaintiff was the manager of one of the defendant's *4 service stations. After the station was burglarized, the plaintiff signed a statement granting permission for the taking of a polygraph examination. The examination was given, plaintiff was discharged from employment, and plaintiff brought suit on December 2, 1981, on four separate counts. Count II alleged that the defendant had violated the Michigan Forensic Polygraph Examiners Act, MCL 338.1701 et seq.; MSA 18.186(1) et seq. The defendant moved for a partial summary judgment on this count and the motion was denied. Leave to appeal was granted and the parties are here for a determination of the constitutionality of the Forensic Polygraph Examiners Act (FPEA).
In the Hildebrand case filed March 31, 1981, two employees of Revco, having had their employment terminated, sued the employer claiming Revco violated the FPEA and the polygraph provisions of the Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act, MCL 37.2101 et seq.; MSA 3.548(101) et seq., by requiring plaintiffs to undergo polygraph examinations as a condition of employment and by discharging them as a result of those examinations. Plaintiffs here claim they bring a class action in favor of all employees of the defendant in their situation.
In considering the Smith case we look at the history of the Forensic Polygraph Examiners act, 1972 PA 295. The title therein stated:
"An act to license and regulate persons who purport to be able to detect deception, verify truthfulness, or provide a diagnostic opinion of either through the use of any device or instrumentation as lie detectors, forensic polygraphs, deceptographs, emotional stress meters or similar or related devices and instruments; to create a state board of forensic polygraph examiners with licensing and regulatory powers over all such persons and instruments; to provide for administrative proceedings and court review; to establish minimum standards *5 and requirements for all such instrumentation or devices and to prohibit the use of instruments or devices which do not meet minimum standards and requirements; and to provide for injunctions and penalties."
The act then contained sections implementing the various items contained in the title. It also had a § 26 which provided that an employer could not discharge an employee because such employee refused a polygraph examination or because of the belief that the employee had failed one.
1975 PA 278 did not materially change the content of the title but it did amend § 26. In addition to prohibiting the employer from discharging the employee for refusing to take a polygraph examination or for apparently failing one, the act now added that an employer guilty of violating § 26 would be guilty of a misdemeanor and could be fined not more than $1,000. In addition, ¶ 7 stated that an employer found guilty of violating § 26 would be liable for double wages lost due to the illegal discharge in addition to court costs and reasonable attorney fees.
1982 PA 46 repealed § 26 of the FPEA and 1982 PA 44 created the Polygraph Protection Act of 1981 which specifically prohibited employers from using polygraphs as a basis of hiring or firing employees. MCL 37.201 et seq.; MSA 17.65(1) et seq. This was the sole purpose of the new act.
Was the FPEA unconstitutional? We begin with the hornbook rule of law in Rohan v Detroit Racing Ass'n, 314 Mich. 326, 342; 22 NW2d 433 (1946):
"`Every reasonable presumption or intendment must be indulged in favor of the validity of an act, and it is only when invalidity appears so clearly as to leave no room for reasonable doubt that it violates some provision *6 of the Constitution that a court will refuse to sustain its validity. A statute is presumed to be constitutional and it will not be declared unconstitutional unless clearly so, or so beyond a reasonable doubt.'"
See also Hall v Calhoun County Bd of Supervisors, 373 Mich. 642; 130 NW2d 414 (1964), and Cruz v Chevrolet Grey Iron Division of GMC, 398 Mich. 117; 247 NW2d 764 (1976).
The constitutional provision we are here dealing with is from the 1963 Constitution, art 4, § 24:
"No law shall embrace more than one object, which shall be expressed in its title. No bill shall be altered or amended on its passage through either house so as to change its original purpose as determined by its total content and not alone by its title."
There are four judicially recognized purposes behind the single object clause: (1) to prevent the Legislature from passing laws not fully understood, (2) to fairly notify the Legislature of a proposed statute's design and purpose, (3) to aid the Legislature and the public in understanding that only subjects germane to the title would be included in the legislation, and (4) to curtail "logrolling" by preventing the bringing into one bill of diverse subjects not expressed in its title. Green v Court Administrator, 44 Mich. App. 259; 205 NW2d 306 (1972); MacLean v State Bd of Control for Vocational Ed, 294 Mich. 45; 292 N.W. 662 (1940).
Our courts have expressed this in several ways. Rohan v Detroit Racing Ass'n, supra, p 356:
"`[T]he provision is designed to serve two purposes. First, to prevent * * * "bringing together into one bill subjects diverse in their nature, and having no necessary connection * * *." And, second, to "challenge the attention" of those affected by the act to its provisions. *7 People v Wohlford, 226 Mich. 166, 168; 197 N.W. 558 (1924).'" (Emphasis in original.)
Maki v City of East Tawas, 385 Mich. 151, 157; 188 NW2d 593 (1971), stated:
"`The constitutional provision was designed mainly * * * to avoid bringing into one bill subjects diverse in their nature and having no necessary connection'".
The Advisory Opinion re Constitutionality of 1972 PA 294, 389 Mich. 441, 465; 208 NW2d 469 (1973), stated succinctly:
"[T]he purpose of this constitutional limitation is to insure that both the legislators and the public have proper notice of legislative content".
In addition, in Kent County ex rel Bd of Supervisors v Reed, 243 Mich. 120; 219 N.W. 656 (1928), we find a disapproval of an act where a provision was not so connected to the act as to be germane to it. The object of the act in the objectionable provision could have been enacted in a separate law without either referring to or supporting the other.
A review of the title and the sections of FPEA clearly shows it was an act to control polygraph examiners, their qualifications, and their operation of their machines. Section 26 relative to employers and a penalty to be assessed against them for a particular use of polygraphs was a subject entirely separate and apart from the stated purpose of the act and was nowhere included in this title. No one reading the title of the act would be expected to know that employers might be subject to civil and criminal penalties if they used polygraph tests as the basis for discharge of an employee. We note the word "employer" is not even included in the *8 definitions of the act or its amendments. The very fact that the Legislature in 1982 by PA 46 repealed § 26 and by PA 44 created legislation specifically and solely aimed at the protection of employees from the use of polygraphs by employers is a sure indication that we have separate subjects in the statute governing the examiners and in the statute governing the employers. The provision relative to employer's liability was not included in the title of the act. FPEA was unconstitutional. Defendant B P Oil's motion for partial summary judgment should have been granted. Appellees wish to have any determination that the act was unconstitutional be effective prospectively only. This we decline to do because the provisions were unconstitutional from the very beginning.
In the Hildebrand case we have some of the same legal issues as we find in James Smith's lawsuit. In Hildebrand the attention is focused on the Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act. A brief history of that act is of some assistance in solving the problem arising from the questioning of its constitutionality. It was originally passed as 1976 PA 453. It was slightly amended in 1977. 1978 PA 610 added § 205a with eight subparagraphs. These subparagraphs prohibited most employers from governing their hiring and firing practices by polygraph test refusals or results. The title was not amended in any respect material to our issue. It stated:
"An act to define civil rights; to prohibit discriminatory practices, policies, and customs in the exercise of those rights based upon religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, height, weight or marital status; to preserve the confidentiality of records regarding arrest, detention, or other disposition in which a conviction does not result; to prescribe the powers and duties of *9 the civil rights commission and the department of civil rights; to provide remedies and penalties".
1979 PA 91 amended the title to include:
"to limit the use of polygraph * * * or similar tests in certain employment situations".
Section 205b was also added giving employers the right to announce that tests were available together with a notice that refusal to take the test would not affect employability. This act became effective August 1, 1979.
The individual plaintiffs underwent employer-operated polygraphs on January 27, 1981, and on May 11, 1981. They claim theirs is a class action but we are not sure if any of their claimed class had actions arising before the effective date of 1979 PA 91.
The Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act is a different statute entirely than FPEA with different goals and purposes, and different ways of arriving at those goals and purposes.
We believe that, as first amended, the act was unconstitutional as its title certainly contained nothing relative to the use of polygraph examinations in the long list of civil rights the act was created to protect. We would refer to the Smith discussion to avoid redundancy.
When the title was amended to include reference to polygraph tests, we then had an act with more than one object. The extremely broad scope of the civil rights act was definitely aimed at practices discriminating against persons because of their belonging to particular categories defined by religion, race, color, national origin, age, height, weight or marital status. It gave protection against discrimination because of belonging to one of these *10 classifications when seeking employment, use of public accommodations, education, real estate transactions, etc. It created a commission and set civil remedies for unlawful practices.
"The ultimate purpose of all civil rights legislation is to guarantee nondiscrimination in treatment and equality before the law, and to achieve such a purpose, civil rights legislation generally requires that each individual be considered on the basis of his individual capabilities and not on the basis of any characteristics generally attributable to a group." 15 Am Jur 2d, Civil Rights, § 1, p 282. (Emphasis supplied.)
Persons are protected if they belong to certain groups. The statute, § 202, states:
"(1) An employer shall not: (a) Fail or refuse to hire, or recruit, or discharge, or otherwise discriminate against an individual with respect to employment, compensation, or a term, condition, or privilege of employment, because of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, height, weight, or marital status." MCL 37.2202; MSA 3.548(202).
The groups protected are identifiable by known discernable characteristics as set forth in the act.
Applicants for employment or employees who may object to polygraphs are not an identifiable group. The reason for not using polygraphs in hiring and firing procedures are rooted in laws of evidence, not in the principle of equal treatment or equality before the law. Courts frown on the admissibility of polygraph tests because they are not consistently reliable, People v Barbara, 400 Mich. 352; 255 NW2d 171 (1977), and not because they deprive someone of civil rights. Very simply, the prohibiting of polygraphs as a basis for hiring or firing is not germane to the civil rights statute, *11 whose purpose is to prevent discrimination against a person because that person belongs to a stated group.
The fact the title was amended to include the polygraph provision does not remove the constitutional objection that the act contained more than one subject. Kent County ex rel Bd of Supervisors v Reed, supra.
Appellees seem to agree that perhaps on its face the use of polygraphs in employment situations does not seem to fit into the civil rights enactment. They do argue that in actual practice use of polygraphs and other similar tests do in fact discriminate against blacks and may well discriminate against older people, people with high blood pressure, etc. In their brief and in their oral argument appellees discussed an array of claimed scientific studies showing that racial differences exist in several components in resistance response to various tests similar to portions of the polygraph tests. They claim blacks suffer more from hypertension than whites and this also creates differential results in the tests between blacks and whites.
Our problem with appellees' studies are these: Apparently the studies have been given to relatively few people, so they are limited in the weight to be given them. They certainly are not well-known, recognized and accepted in legal circles. They have not been tested in the crucible of a trial or hearing with cross-examination of experts and rebuttal testimony. We cannot say at this time under the facts of our case that polygraph results discriminate against anyone simply because of their religion, age, race, color, national origin, etc. Polygraphs are a subject separate and distinct from civil rights protected by Elliott-Larsen.
We note that Seals v Henry Ford Hospital, 123 *12 Mich App 329; 333 NW2d 272 (1982), did not rule specifically on the question of the constitutionality of the Elliott-Larsen act with the polygraph provision included. The Court did specifically find that the polygraph provisions were severable. Thus, they saved the constitutionality of the act and certainly gave us a broad hint that it might well make the act unconstitutional if the provisions were left intact as a part of the act.
We agree with Seals that the polygraph provisions are severable and that this severability saves the balance of the act from being unconstitutional, and its real basic purpose of the defense of civil rights can continue. It is clear that the polygraph provision was put in as an afterthought, an attempt to wedge a regulation into a vessel not competent to carry it. In fact, the Legislature has since severed those portions: 1982 PA 45 removed the reference to polygraphs from the title and from § 102, and repealed §§ 205a(2)-(8) and 205b. As with the provisions removed from the FPEA, these provisions can be found in the Polygraph Protection Act.
If in actual practice polygraph examinations do discriminate against blacks, plaintiffs might have a right to prove their contentions by following the procedure apparently used in Griggs v Duke Power Co, 401 U.S. 424; 91 S. Ct. 849; 28 L. Ed. 2d 158 (1971).
Appellees argue that, if the polygraph amendments are severable, they can serve as a basis of an independent cause of action since polygraph tests are against public policy. They cite Sventko v Kroger Co, 69 Mich. App. 644; 245 NW2d 151 (1976). This allegation can best be tested by amended pleadings and motions thereon in the trial court.
*13 In the Hildebrand-Tomlin case the decision of the trial court to hold that Elliott-Larsen was constitutional is reversed. We hold that part of the act relative to polygraph examinations was unconstitutional and severable.
NOTES
[*]  Former circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 2221189 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:05.823505+00 ===

357 N.W.2d 24 (1984)
STATE of Iowa, Appellant,
v.
Randy G. CULLEN, Appellee.
No. 83-1163.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
October 17, 1984.
*25 Thomas J. Miller, Atty. Gen., Joseph P. Weeg, Asst. Atty. Gen., and David E. Richter, County Atty., for appellant.
Charles L. Harrington, Appellate Defender, and Linda Del Gallo, Asst. Appellate Defender, Des Moines, for appellee.
Considered by REYNOLDSON, C.J., and HARRIS, McCORMICK, SCHULTZ, and CARTER, JJ.
REYNOLDSON, Chief Justice.
After a jury found defendant Randy G. Cullen guilty of first-degree murder, trial court sustained defendant's mistrial motion, grounded on jury misconduct. We granted the State's application for discretionary review. We now reverse and remand for reconsideration by trial court in light of the correct rule to be applied when a party seeks to impeach a jury verdict.
In the early morning hours of April 8, 1983, several fights broke out in front of the Nashville Club, a Council Bluffs tavern. A number of people were involved in the fights, among them defendant and his alleged victim, Terry Doffin.
Trial testimony disclosed defendant arrived at the Nashville Club at about 11:30 p.m. on April 7, 1983. He sat at the bar next to a friend. A fight broke out in front of the club between some women. The decedent, Terry Doffin, and his brother became involved in the fight in an effort to break it up. Defendant, hearing of the fight, went outside. There was some evidence that defendant, a former amateur boxer, previously had served as a bouncer at the club. Once outside, defendant saw the Doffin brothers engaged in a scuffle with some women. Defendant grabbed one man, then the other, was hit on the head and finally fell to the ground, wrestling with Terry Doffin. In the course of this fight, Doffin bit defendant's finger, causing a severe cut.
From this point, trial testimony is wholly inconsistent. Defendant testified he returned to the bar to treat his bloody finger, and remained there for ten or fifteen minutes. He asserted his second confrontation with Terry Doffin came when he was called outside to break up a fight between Doffin and an unidentified man. While attempting to break up this fight, defendant scuffled with Doffin again. Defendant admitted striking Doffin in the face and kicking him in the legs. Doffin's fatal injury occurred, defendant testified, when Doffin slipped and fell, striking his head on a car bumper.
Other witnesses testified that defendant, angered that Doffin had bitten off "a piece of his finger," pulled the much smaller and bleeding Doffin from a car, and, while screaming "I am going to kill you," punched and kicked Doffin into unconsciousness. Doffin later was taken to a hospital where, on April 19, 1983, he died of brain damage.
At trial a factual dispute arose whether defendant had engaged Doffin in a one-on-one confrontation during the initial fight in front of the bar. On cross-examination, defendant denied he had. The State, however, presented three rebuttal witnesses who testified defendant had engaged Doffin individually during the "first" fight. Because these witnesses were not discovered by the State until shortly before their court appearance, the defense was not informed of their identity prior to trial. Consequently, defendant objected to this evidence prior to the time the witnesses testified as "improper rebuttal," raised the possibility that the witnesses might be related to the jurors, and contended the rebuttal witnesses "could have a prejudicial effect on the jurors."
*26 After the rebuttal witnesses had testified, defendant moved, in chambers, for a mistrial on the ground that some of the jurors resided in the same area as the rebuttal witnesses. Defendant again pointed out the possibility the jurors knew, or were related to, the witnesses. The court overruled the motion.
The court then went into the jury room to dismiss the jury for the day. At that point, three women jurors informed the court, in the presence of the other jurors, that they knew one of the rebuttal witnesses. The court admonished the jury not to discuss the matter and immediately informed counsel of the situation.
The next morning defendant renewed his motion for a mistrial, again citing prejudice as a ground. The trial court again overruled the motion. The jury was instructed and later returned a verdict of guilty of murder in the first degree.
July 25, 1983, defendant made post-trial motions for mistrial and a new trial, alleging several grounds, including jury misconduct. In support of those motions, defendant offered affidavits by jurors Smith, Rallis and Verpoorten, and the professional statement of his attorney.[1] The Smith and Rallis affidavits were sworn and signed, in conformity with section 622.85 of the Code; the Verpoorten affidavit was not. Verpoorten was one of the three jurors who originally informed the court she knew one of the rebuttal witnesses. At the August 25 hearing on the motions, the State lodged numerous objections to the competence of the affidavits. It specifically waived any objection, however, that the Verpoorten affidavit was unsworn and unsigned.
August 31, trial court entered its order granting defendant's motion for a mistrial. The court observed this action made "defendant's Motion for New Trial ... moot.' The court specifically found "the more significant statements made by the jurors were that the jurors `were terribly shocked and said they absolutely would not have served had they known these witnesses would be called to testify' and `I believe this statement possibly had an effect on the jury's verdict' and `These statements *27 made it easier to believe the rebuttal witnesses.'" In granting the mistrial, trial court relied heavily on our language in State v. Carey, 165 N.W.2d 27, 30 (Iowa 1969), that "[i]n order that the institution of jury trials be preserved and its usefulness continued, its deliberations and pronouncements must be kept pure, and untainted, not only from all improper influences, but from the appearance thereof." (Emphasis in original.)
The State filed application for discretionary review pursuant to Iowa Code section 814.5 on September 13, 1983. We granted the application ten days later.
I. At the threshold a question arises whether a motion for a mistrial is permissible after the jury has returned its verdict. Authorities generally agree that a new trial contemplates a case has been tried and a verdict or judgment rendered, and by motion set aside. A mistrial contemplates some error that prevents the jury from returning a verdict or the court from entering judgment. 66 C.J.S. New Trial § 1 (1950); In re Estate of Bartholomae, 261 Cal. App. 2d 839, 842, 68 Cal. Rptr. 332, 334 (1968); People v. Jamerson, 196 Colo. 63, 65, 580 P.2d 805, 806-07 (1978); Vilander v. Hawkinson, 183 Kan. 214, 218, 326 P.2d 273, 276 (1958); State v. Robbins, 455 S.W.2d 24, 26 (Mo.App.1970). In State v. Glenn, 234 N.W.2d 396, 403 (Iowa 1975), we wrote that "relief after return of a guilty verdict in a criminal prosecution is, in this state, statutorily limited to arrest of judgment or a new trial." The statutes referred to in Glenn, however, have since been repealed, and replaced by Iowa Rule of Criminal Procedure 23. That rule appears less restrictive. It provides, "Permissible motions after trial include motions for new trial, motions in arrest of judgment, and motions to correct a sentence." (Emphasis added.) The question whether a motion for a mistrial is available after a jury has returned its verdict thus is not settled in this state, but is not one we need to resolve here.
The defendant relied on jury misconduct as a common ground in both his motion for a new trial and mistrial. We look to the substance of a motion to determine its character. First National Bank v. Claiser, 308 N.W.2d 1, 2 (Iowa 1981). See also Brigham v. Hudson Motors, 118 N.H. 590, 593, 392 A.2d 130, 133 (1978). Without deciding whether defendant's mistrial motion was proper following the jury's verdict, we treat it as though it had been denominated a motion for a new trial.
II. Few principles of law are as well settled as our rules regarding post-trial motions predicated on jury misconduct. In recent years, we have confronted this issue several times. See State v. Harrington, 349 N.W.2d 758, 762-63 (Iowa 1984); State v. Christianson, 337 N.W.2d 502, 504-06 (Iowa 1983); Crowley v. Glessner, 328 N.W.2d 513, 514 (Iowa 1983); State v. Folck, 325 N.W.2d 368, 371-73 (Iowa 1982); State v. Rouse, 290 N.W.2d 911, 915-17 (Iowa 1980); Harris v. Deere & Co., 263 N.W.2d 727, 729-34 (Iowa 1978). These opinions establish that, to impeach a verdict on the basis of jury misconduct, three conditions must be met: (1) evidence from the jurors must consist only of objective facts as to what actually occurred in or out of the jury room bearing on misconduct; (2) the acts or statements complained of must exceed tolerable bounds of jury deliberation; and (3) it must appear the misconduct was calculated to, and with reasonable probability did, influence the verdict. See, e.g., Folck, 325 N.W.2d at 372; Harris, 263 N.W.2d at 729-30.[2] Trial court has a broad discretion in ruling on these matters. "We do not find an abuse of discretion ... unless the action of the trial court is clearly unreasonable under the attendant circumstances." Harrington, 349 N.W.2d at 761.
For the sake of clarity, we will discuss each of these three requirements in reverse order.
*28 III. In granting Cullen's motion for a mistrial, trial court stated:
The ultimate issue involved herein is whether or not the external matters, to-wit: The possibility that the jurors were unable to give the testimony of these rebuttal witnesses the same weight as any other witnesses, influenced their verdict. The Court concludes that the answer to this inquiry does not depend on to what extent but merely to the possibility that it did. The Court concludes that it must answer this inquiry in the affirmative.
(Emphasis added.)
This was an incorrect statement of law because it impermissibly lowered the threshold at which a verdict must be set aside. As we noted above, our cases hold a new trial is justified only when it appears the misconduct was calculated to, and with reasonable probability did, influence the verdict. Harris, 263 N.W.2d at 730. The difference between a possibility and a reasonable probability is significant. Our decisions demonstrate the reasonable probability requirement is not easy to satisfy. See Harrington, 349 N.W.2d at 762-63 (Jurors' affidavits attesting to discussion among themselves that defendant had on a previous occasion shot his brother, a fact not in evidence by reason of a limine motion, and this discussion had some effect on jurors' vote, held, not proof of misconduct which was calculated to, or with reasonable probability did, influence the verdict.); Christianson, 337 N.W.2d at 505-06 (Juror's telephone call during deliberations, by which he obtained information impeaching a witness, fell short of showing any reasonable probability that the jury's verdict was affected.); Folck, 325 N.W.2d at 372-73 (Though jurors' affidavits disclosed that manifestly improper alleged facts not in evidence were injected into the jury discussions, the objectionable matter could not have influenced the verdict.).
It is apparent trial court relied on Carey, 165 N.W.2d at 27. In Carey, defendant's attorney moved for a mistrial when he saw a sign in the jury room stating "Coffee will be furnished in the jury room by the county clerk and the county attorney." Id. at 28. The trial court overruled the motion on the ground it was improbable that prejudice had resulted. Id. at 29. We reversed, stating that while it was unlikely that jurors could be corrupted for the price of a cup of coffee, "the jury is to be above suspicion and ... any practice which brings its proceedings under suspicion is to be prohibited." Id.
As precedent under the facts of this case, Carey is inapposite. In Carey we were concerned with manipulation of the jury by outsiders; here, we are concerned only with the internal operation of the jury. We believe the former case justifies a stricter rule, designed to keep the jury above suspicion. We conclude, however, trial court read more into Carey than we intended. We reversed in Carey not solely upon the suggestion of manipulation arising from the coffee sign, but upon the cumulative effect of all assigned errors. Id. at 36 ("We find some merit in each of defendant's assigned errors. Perhaps none alone is sufficient to require a new trial....").
Trial court's application of an impermissibly restrictive standard requires reversal of its order granting defendant's mistrial motion. We remand to permit application of the court's discretion in light of the proper rule of law. On remand, questions inevitably will arise concerning the remaining two prongs of the rule governing the nullification of jury verdicts. The analysis that follows is intended to assist the trial court.
IV. Focusing on the second of the three requirements for impeaching a jury verdict, our decisions establish that jurors have "considerable latitude in their deliberations, and conduct or occurrences which are within tolerable limits are said to `inhere in the verdict' or constitute no ground for `impeachment of the verdict.'" Harris, 263 N.W.2d at 730. The factual content of our recent opinions gives life to this legal principle. In State v. Houston, 209 *29 N.W.2d 42, 44 (Iowa 1973), jurors several times during deliberations turned off the lights in the jury room to test nighttime visibility. This was done in an effort to check the accuracy of a witness's testimony. Id. Defendant's motion for a new trial was overruled, and we affirmed. Id. We wrote, "Historically, we have considered such situations with a bemused but limited tolerance for the ingenuity of jurors and the realization a rigid approach would result in interminable litigation." Id. at 45. In State v. Lass, 228 N.W.2d 758, 771 (Iowa 1975), several jurors related their personal observations of individuals suffering hypoglycemic and diabetic attacks. We affirmed trial court's denial of motion for a new trial and repeated our admonition that "[A]s a practical matter, courts cannot be too strict on jury discussions or few verdicts could stand." Id.
Turning to the last requirement for impeaching a jury verdict, our cases are clear that statements by jurors, subsequent to deliberations, as to whether they were influenced by certain matters or to what degree they were influenced, are incompetent for the purpose of impeaching a verdict and must be ignored. See, e.g., Harrington, 349 N.W.2d at 762 ("A juror may not by affidavit, testimony or otherwise state what influenced the jury in reaching its decision or verdict, as such showing inheres in the verdict."); Houston, 209 N.W.2d at 45 ("To justify a new trial for jury misconduct it must appear (independently of what jurors might later say) the misconduct was calculated to, and probably did, influence the verdict.") (emphasis added).
On remand, without suggesting what the ruling should be, trial court should reconsider defendant's motion, applying each of the above three conditions that must be met in order to nullify a jury verdict to reach a ruling consistent with our prior decisions.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.
NOTES
[1]  The Rallis affidavit provided as follows:
My name is Jacqueline Rallis and I was a juror in the case of State of Iowa v. Randy Cullen. During the course of the trial the State called rebuttal witnesses that some of the jurors knew. When we went back to the jury room the women who knew the witnesses were terribly shocked and said they absolutely would not have served had they known those witnesses would be called to testify. I believe these jurors felt that they had been put in a position of having to choose whether to believe the Defendant or people they knew.
During the jury's deliberation one of the women said she knew that one of the rebuttal witnesses was a good boy from a good family, and wouldn't lie on the witness stand. I believe this statement probably had an effect on the jury's verdict.
The Smith affidavit provided as follows:
My name is Larry Smith and I was a juror in the case of State of Iowa v. Randy Cullen. It is my opinion that the rebuttal witnesses were a critical part of the State's case against Randy Cullen. On Thursday when Judge Sulhoff came into the jury room to tell us he was going to excuse us for the day, a couple of the women jurors from the Neola area mentioned to the Judge that they knew some of the rebuttal witnesses. The Judge said "okay, I will look into it and we will go from here."
During the jury's deliberations, one of the women from Neola made a reference to one of the rebuttal witnesses that she knew and said "he's a good kid from a good family. I know he wouldn't lie on the witness stand." These statements made it easier to believe the rebuttal witnesses.
The Verpoorten affidavit provided as follows:
My name is Joann Verpoorten and I was a juror in the case of State of Iowa v. Randy Cullen. During the course of the trial, another juror and myself told Judge Paul Sulhoff that we knew some of the rebuttal witnesses. In my case I told the Judge that I knew Jeff Cook because my son went to school with Jeff Cook's brother. It was quite a surprise to us when these rebuttal witnesses took the stand. For that reason we told Judge Sulhoff we knew them and he told us he would check into it and get back to us.
I know that Jeff Cook is a good boy and have known him for several years. I believe that the rebuttal witnesses made the jury's decision a lot easier.
The professional statement of Cullen's attorney stated, inter alia, that Ms. Verpoorten had, on the advice of an attorney, declined to sign her affidavit.
[2]  The rules developed by our cases regarding impeachment of a verdict on the basis of jury misconduct are substantially the same as Iowa Rule of Evidence 606(b). See State v. Christianson, 337 N.W.2d 502, 504 n. 1 (Iowa 1983).

=== CASE 2221190 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:05.828396+00 ===

369 Mass. 846 (1976)
343 N.E.2d 372
RONALD BOUCHARD, INC.
vs.
HARTFORD ACCIDENT AND INDEMNITY COMPANY.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Worcester.
December 4, 1975.
March 4, 1976.
Present: HENNESSEY, C.J., QUIRICO, KAPLAN, & WILKINS, JJ.
Joseph F. Sawyer, Jr., for the defendant.
Edward F. O'Brien, Jr., for the plaintiff.
HENNESSEY, C.J.
This is a bill for declaratory relief to determine coverage under the provisions of a manufacturers' and contractors' schedule liability insurance policy issued by the defendant, Hartford Accident and Indemnity Company (Hartford), to the plaintiff, Ronald Bouchard, Inc. (Bouchard). The issue is whether a loss due to an explosion, allegedly caused by the negligence of Bouchard, was excluded from coverage by reason of a *847 "completed operations hazard" clause in the insurance policy.
Based on a statement of agreed facts, a judge of the Superior Court determined that there was coverage under the terms of the policy and entered a decree that Hartford was liable thereunder to defend Bouchard up to the policy limit, and to pay any judgment resulting from an action brought against Bouchard by one Charles E. Keene. The case comes here on Hartford's appeal from the Superior Court decree.
We conclude that the decree was in error, in contravention of the plain language of the policy, and that a new judgment must be entered declaring that the claim in question was excluded from coverage under the policy.
Bouchard, engaged in the business of installing floor carpeting and tiling, purchased the policy in question from Hartford insuring itself against liability for bodily injury and property damage. The policy was subject to certain exclusions, including a "completed operations hazard" clause which provided as follows: "This insurance does not apply ... (m) to bodily injury or property damage included within the completed operations hazards...."
"`Completed operations hazard' is defined in the policy as including bodily injury and property damage arising out of operations or reliance upon a representation or warranty made at any time with respect thereto, but only if the bodily injury or property damage occurs after such operations have been completed or abandoned and occurs away from premises owned by or rented to the named insured. `Operations' include materials, parts or equipment furnished in connection therewith. Operations shall be deemed completed at the earliest of the following times:
"(1) when all operations to be performed by or on behalf of the named insured under the contract have been completed,
*848 "(2) when all operations to be performed by or on behalf of the named insured at the site of the operations have been completed, or
"(3) when the portion of the work out of which the injury or damage arises has been put to its intended use by any person or organization other than another contractor or subcontractor engaged in performing operations for a principal as a part of the same project.
"Operations which may require further service or maintenance work, or correction, repair or replacement because of any defect or deficiency, but which are otherwise complete shall be deemed completed.
"The completed operations hazard does not include bodily injury or property damage arising out of
"(a) operations in connection with the transportation of property, unless the bodily injury or property damage arises out of a condition in or on a vehicle created by the loading or unloading thereof,
"(b) the existence of tools, uninstalled equipment or abandoned or unused materials, or
"(c) operations for which the classification stated in the policy or in the company's manual specifies `including completed operations.'"
The event for which coverage is claimed under the policy, an explosion, occurred on June 22, 1969, at the home of one Charles E. Keene. Bouchard had completed installation of carpeting in Keene's home approximately thirty-six hours prior to the explosion. Keene brought suit against Bouchard alleging negligence on its part in disconnecting, moving, and/or damaging gas pipes on his premises in connection with the carpet installation, thereby causing the explosion and resulting damage. Hartford maintains that it is not liable to defend Bouchard in the pending action by Keene by reason of the "completed operations hazard" exclusion.
Bouchard sets forth two arguments in support of its contention that Hartford may not disclaim liability under the "completed operations hazard" clause. First, in light *849 of the principle that insurance policies should be strictly construed and all ambiguities resolved against the insurer, Transamerica Ins. Co. v. Norfolk & Dedham Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 361 Mass. 144, 147 (1972), Bouchard argues that the "operations" provision in question should be interpreted as referring only to carpeting work, for it would be reasonable for the average businessman to assume that his risk from his operations is limited to his field of expertise. See Johnson v. National Union Fire Ins. Co., 56 Misc. 2d 983 (Sup. Ct. 1968), aff'd, 33 App. Div.2d 924 (N.Y. 1970); McAllister v. Century Indem. Co., 24 N.J. Super. 289, aff'd, 12 N.J. 395 (1953). But see Baker v. Maryland Cas. Co., 73 R.I. 411 (1948). Since Bouchard could anticipate being liable only for an injury arising from some defect or deficiency resulting from its work on carpets, the operations exclusion cannot be read to encompass any more than that. As a result, according to Bouchard, the explosion in Keene's home did not come within the exclusion, since it was not related to his carpeting work, and as such, any resulting injury was insured. Second, assuming that the occurrence that caused the damage does come within the meaning of "operations," Bouchard argues that it did occur before the completion of operations, for the damage was a continual one, completed only by the explosion. Under this theory, if the occurrence is found to be a part of Bouchard's operations, the operations could be considered completed at the time of the explosion.
We conclude that Bouchard's arguments are not persuasive because we do not agree with the central assertion that the exclusionary clause in the contract before us is ambiguous. We find, when viewing the policy as a whole and giving the words contained therein their usual and ordinary significance, Woogmaster v. Liverpool & London & Globe Ins. Co., 312 Mass. 479, 481 (1942); Estabrook v. Eastern Commercial Travelers Accident Ass'n, 308 Mass. 439, 442 (1941), that the language of the "completed operations hazard" is clear *850 and unambiguous. It sets out specifically that Bouchard is not covered for liability for bodily injury or property damage that occurs after operations have been completed or abandoned and that occurs away from premises owned by or rented to the named insured.
It is not disputed that the explosion which gave rise to Keene's claim against Bouchard occurred away from premises owned by or rented to Bouchard, and that the explosion occurred some thirty-six hours after Bouchard had completed the installation of carpeting at Keene's residence. The policy explicitly states that operations shall be deemed completed when all operations to be performed by or on behalf of the named insured at the site of the operations have been completed. Bouchard had finished its work and had left the premises thirty-six hours before the explosion.
The language clearly limits Hartford's liability to accidents occurring during the process of the contractor's work, and excludes liability for accidents, due to defective workmanship, occurring after completion. In such a case the principles argued by Bouchard, applicable to ambiguous language in insurance policies, have no application. See Sherman v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 297 Mass. 330, 336 (1937). Coverage for completed operations involves a separate risk, and we have no doubt that Bouchard could procure protection against that risk by paying an additional premium. We also have no doubt that an insured who read the plain language of the exclusion clause in the policy before us would be fully informed that he would have no coverage for an event that occurred in the circumstances here shown.
The decree previously entered is reversed and a judgment is to be entered to the effect that there is no coverage under the policy of insurance, and Hartford is under no liability to defend Bouchard against the action of Keene or to pay any judgment resulting from the action by Keene against Bouchard.
So ordered.

=== CASE 9739841 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:12.192869+00 ===

CASE SUMMARY
Buchanan, P.J.
Review is sought by Appellant-Wife Anna Liszkai (Anna) of a Dissolution Decree entered by the trial court awarding her a $5,000.00 “alimony” judgment to be paid at the rate of $250.00 per month for a period of twenty (20) months, claiming that the trial court abused its discretion by the manner in which it made the property disposition and in failing to grant her maintenance.
We affirm.
FACTS
The evidence and facts most favorable to the trial court’s judgment are:
Appellee-Husband Stephen Liszkai (Stephen) filed a Petition for Dissolution of Marriage in the Marion County Superior Court on April 17, 1974. Anna filed a Cross-Petition for Dissolution on August 16, 1974, requesting maintenance in addition to a division of the couple’s property.
The record reflects that Stephen and Anna were married in Hungary in 1950 and immigrated to the United States in 1956.
Four children were born to Stephen and Anna. Two of these children were emancipated at the time Stephen filed for dissolution; however, Stephen permitted one of them — an eighteen-year-old son — to continue to reside in the family residence. The other two children were minors living in the Liszkai home.
Stephen was employed as a janitor, with a weekly take-home pay of $185.00. He spent his spare hours as an upholsterer and received some income from this “hobby.” The income thus received was never established as significant. *538transition in the field of domestic relations. Familiar concepts have changed.
The now repealed divorce statutes5
6long contained a basic provision for alimony:
The court shall make such decree for alimony in all cases contemplated by this act, as the circumstances of the case shall render just and proper. . . . Ch. 43, § 20, [1873] Ind. Acts 107 (repealed 1973).6
Alimony could be paid in various ways:
* * * In determining the character of the payments of the alimony the court may require it to be paid in money, other property, or both, and may order the transfer of property as between the parties, whether real, personal or mixed and whether title at the time of trial is held by the parties jointly or by one of them individually. In determining the method of the payment of the alimony the court may require that it be paid in gross or in periodic payments, either equal or unequal, and if to be paid in periodic payments the court may further provide for their discontinuance or reduction upon the death or remarriage of the wife. . . . Ch. 43, § 22, [1873] Ind. Acts 107, as amended, ch. 120, § 3 [1949] Ind. Acts 310 (repealed 1973).7
A landmark case, Bahre v. Bahre (1962), 133 Ind. App. 567, 571, 181 N.E.2d 639, 641, analyzed prior case law and set out the factors to be considered by the trial court in determining how much alimony should be awarded:
(1) the existing property rights of the parties;
(2) the amount of property owned and held by the husband and the source from which it came;
(3) the financial condition and income of the parties and the ability of the husband to earn money;
*539(4) whether or not the wife by her industry and economy has contributed to the accumulation of the husband’s property;
(5) the separate estate of the wife, (citations omitted)
When the alimony statutes8 were repealed by the Indiana General Assembly they were replaced by a property division statute which defines the property available for division upon dissolution of the marriage:
In an action [for dissolution of marriage], the court shall divide the property of the parties, whether owned by either spouse prior to the marriage, acquired by either spouse in his or her own right after the marriage and prior to final separation of the parties, or acquired by their joint efforts. . . . IC 1971, 31-1-11.5-11 (Burns Code Ed., Supp. 1975).
This section 11 goes on to establish the mechanics or method of division:
in a just and reasonable manner, either by division of the property in kind, or by setting the same or parts thereof over to one [1] of the spouses and requiring either to pay such sum as may be just and proper, or by ordering the sale of the same under such conditions as the court may prescribe and dividing the proceeds of such sale. IC 1971, 31-1-11.5-11, supra.
and then closes with guidelines for the trial court to utilize in determining a just and reasonable division of the property:
In determining what is just and reasonable, the court shall consider the following factors:
(a) the contribution of each spouse to the acquisition of the property, including the contribution of a spouse as homemaker;
(b) the extent to which the property was acquired by each spouse prior to the marriage or through inheritance or gift;
(c) the economic circumstances of the spouse at the time the disposition of the property is to become effective, including the desirability of awarding the family residence *540or the right to dwell therein for such periods as the court may deem just to the spouse having custody of any children;
(d) the conduct of the parties during the marriage as related to the disposition or dissipation of the property;
(e) the earnings or earning ability of the parties as related to a final division of property and final determination of the property rights of the parties. IC 1971, 31-1-11.5-11, supra.
Although much of the Dissolution Act, including section 11, was patterned after the Uniform Marriage and Divorce Act,9 there is similarity between some of the factors previously considered by prior case law in arriving at a property division and those set out in section 11. The Dissolution Act now provides a more structured and detailed basis for the trial court’s disposition of the property upon dissolution of marriage.
In deciding this case, the trial court utilized section 11 to divide the property of Stephen and Anna so as to avoid sale of the principal asset, the family home. Payments equaling $5,000.00 were required of Stephen in accordance with one of the ways of dividing the property allowed by section 11:
[T]he court shall divide the property of the parties . . . by setting the same or parts thereof over to one [1 ] of the spouses and requiring either to pay such sum as may be just and proper.. .. IC 1971, 31-1-11.5-11, supra (emphasis added).
The trial court’s use of the term “alimony” in connection with payment of this sum is no longer technically correct. This word of art has experienced a confusing and convoluted history in Indiana. See Note, Indiana’s Alimony Confusion, *54145 Ind. L.J. 595 (1970). No doubt this is why the Dissolution Act eliminated “alimony” from the family law vocabulary entirely. See Fox, Domestic Relations, 1975 Survey of Indiana Law, 8 IND. L. Rev. 197 at 205 (1975) ; Hopson, Summary of the New Indiana Dissolution of Marriage Law, 1972-73 ICLEF Annual Survey op Indiana Law 7 at 27, n. 73 (1973).
Whatever the trial court’s terminology, there was statutory authority under the new Dissolution Act for the manner in which it divided the Liszkai’s property.
The net worth of the parties at most totalled $7,900.00. Stephen was awarded the home (subject to encumbrances) probably because the court awarded him custody of the children. One of the trial court’s guidelines for a just and reasonable division of property is:
the economic circumstances of the spouse at the time the disposition of the property is to become effective, including the desirability of awarding the family residence or the right to dwell therein for such periods as the court may deem just to the spouse having custody of any children. IC 1971, 31-1-11.5-11 (c), supra.
Anna was awarded the sum of $5,000.00 payable in installments. We see no other salient circumstances which would compel us to find that the trial court abused its discretion in not awarding Anna the remaining $2,900.00 of equity in their property. Even placing more emphasis on the earning ability of Stephen as Anna urges, the trial court still did not abuse its discretion as there was ample evidence that Stephen’s weekly salary would be consumed by his responsibilities for the home and the children in his custody.
In the final analysis, Anna’s major contention is that the trial court should have granted her maintenance, by one means or another, under the new Dissolution Act.
Prior to passage of the Dissolution Act there was an evident dichotomy in the cases considering the nature of *542alimony. One line of cases emphasized alimony as a property settlement; the other line considered alimony as maintenance and support. See the analysis by Judge Sullivan in Wellington v. Wellington (1973), 158 Ind. App. 649, 304 N.E.2d 347, and the cases cited therein.
Be that as it may, Anna presents us with no authority or cogent argument for the proposition that she is entitled to maintenance under a new statute which mandates a property disposition in the place of an award of alimony. To the contrary, it would appear that the Indiana General Assembly has adopted a concept of property division separate from the concept of maintenance by enacting a separate provision for maintenance — Indiana Code section 31-1-11.5-9 (c)10 (section 9(c)).
It allows maintenance only under certain limited circumstances :
The court may make no provision for maintenance except that when the court finds a spouse to be physically or mentally incapacitated to the extent that the ability of such incapacitated spouse to support himself or herself is materially affected, the court may make provision for the maintenance of said spouse during any such incapacity, subject to further order of the court. IC 1971, 31-1-11.5-9 (c) (Burns Code Ed., Supp. 1975) (emphasis added).
There was evidence to support the trial court’s refusal to fit Anna into these statutory circumstances. She had a history of employment outside the home. In weighing all the evidence as to whether she was either physically or mentally incapacitated to the extent that her ability to support herself was materially affected, the trial court in its discretion concluded she was not so incapacitated ... a conclusion for which there was a rational basis in the evidence.
Significantly, Anna fails to supply us with any authority for her belief that a poorly educated, middle-aged woman, *543with few marketable skills, is “incapacitated” within the meaning of section 9 (c), which is not surprising in view of the legislative history of this section.
When the Civil Code Study Commission submitted the Proposed Dissolution Act to the General Assembly, it included a section which could be construed as authorizing a trial court to grant maintenance to a spouse “unable to support himself”:
[T]he court may grant a support order, denominated a maintenance order, for either spouse only if it finds
(1) that the spouse seeking maintenance lacks sufficient income and property to provide for his reasonable financial needs and
(2) that the spouse seeking support is unable to support himself through employment or is the custodian of a child whose condition or circumstances make it appropriate that the custodian not be required to seek employment outside the home.
Report op the Civil Code Study Commission, Proposed Dissolution of Marriage Act § 210 (1970) (emphasis added)11
In rejecting this proposed section, the legislature finally adopted the more restrictive language of section 9(c) permitting the trial court to consider maintenance only if it finds the spouse “to be physically or mentally incapacitated to the extent that the ability of such incapacitated spouse to support himself or herself is materially affected.” See Temple v. *544Temple (1975), 164 Ind. App. 215, 328 N.E.2d 227. “Unable to support” (as proposed) is broad and could reasonably be interpreted as including spouses who for one reason or another find themselves unemployable but are not physically or mentally incapacitated, etc. Thus, the distinction made by the Legislature.
If we were not to abide by this distinction and were to construe section 9(c) as including general unemployability due to the lack of many marketable skills (as Anna proposes), we could justly be accused of ravishing section 9 (c).
By statute12 we are directed to give words their plain and ordinary meaning — this we have done.
Thus we conclude that the judgment of the trial court was not one which is “clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances before the court,” Weiss v. Weiss (1974), 159 Ind. App. 231, 306 N.E.2d 120, 125 (and cases cited therein), and therefore find there has been no abuse of discretion by the trial court.
Judgment affirmed.
White, J., concurs in result only; Sullivan, J., concurs with opinion.
. These repealed divorce statutes were formerly codified at IC 1971, 31-1-12-1 et seq. (Burns Code Ed.).
. This statute was formerly codified at IC 1971, 31-1-12-14 (Burns Code Ed.).
. This statute was formerly codified at IC 1971, 31-1-12-17 (Burns Code Ed.).
. These repealed alimony statutes were formerly codified at IC 1971, 31-1-12-14,17 (Burns Code Ed.).
. The Indiana General Assembly utilized section 209 of the Indiana Civil Code Study Commission’s Proposed Dissolution of Marriage Act in adopting section 11 of the Dissolution Act. The Proposed Dissolution Act was itself taken in part from section 307 of the Uniform Marriage and Divorce Act. See Fox, Domestic Relations, 1975 Survey of Indiana Law, 8 ind. l. rev. 197 at 206 (1975); Report of the Civil Code Study Commission, Proposed Dissolution of Marriage Act § 210 (1970); Uniform Marriage and Divorce Act § 308. A history of the legislative process in Indiana is set out in Note, Alimony in Indiana Under No-Fault Divorce, 50 Ind. L.J. 541 (1975).
. (Burns Code Ed., Supp. 1975).
. Section 210 of the Proposed Dissolution Act was based on section 308 of the Uniform Act — the language of each being almost identical. Even with this somewhat broader provision for maintenance, the Commissioner’s Prefactory Note to the Uniform Act took care to point out that:
* ** * The Act authorizes the division, upon dissolution, of property ... as the primary means of providing for the future financial needs of the spouses. Where the marital property is insufficient for this purpose, the Act provides that an award of maintenance can be made to either spouse under appropriate circumstances to supplement the available property. But, because of its property division provisions, the Act does not continue the traditional reliance upon maintenance as a primary means of support for the divorced spouse.
. IC 1971, 1-1-4-1 (Burns Code Ed.).

=== CASE 9739842 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:12.197744+00 ===

Concurring Opinion
Sullivan, J.
I concur in the result obtained by Presiding Judge Buchanan’s opinion in that it affirms the property distribution ordered by the trial court and in that it states that we may not reverse the trial court’s denial of maintenance as an abuse of discretion under the facts of this case.
However, I must disagree with Presiding Judge Buchanan’s attribution of negative significance to the Indiana General Assembly’s refusal to adopt the proposal of the Civil Code Study Commission to provide for maintenance if “the spouse *545seeking support (sic) is unable to support himself through employment.” More specifically, I disagree with the clear implication of Judge Buchanan’s opinion that “a poorly educated, middle-aged woman, with few marketable skills” may not, as a matter of law, be determined to be incapacitated within the meaning of § 31-1-11.5-9 (c).
I do not see the General Assembly’s choice of phrasing, vis-a-vis the Uniform Act phrasing suggested by the Civil Code Study Commission, as less amenable to maintenance awards. To the contrary, I view the existing provision as properly susceptible to a more liberal interpretation than the provision of the Uniform Act which was rejected. A spouse whose age, lack of education, inexperience and want of vocational skill or training renders him or her only marginally able to support himself or herself might appropriately be held to be “incapacitated to the extent that the ability ... to support himself or herself is materially affected. . . .”
Note. — Reported at 343 N.E.2d 799.

=== CASE 9739843 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:12.474771+00 ===

FOSHEIM, Chief Justice.
The jury awarded plaintiff (Mathews) $3,500 compensatory and $3,500 punitive damages. The trial court set aside the punitive damages and entered judgment against Iron Workers’ Local Union No. 184 (Union) for $3,500.1 Union appeals from a denial of motions n.o.v. and for a new trial. Mathews filed a notice of review as to punitive damages. We affirm in part and reverse in part.
This case was previously before us, 323 N.W.2d 901 (S.D.1982), to which we refer for further background. The trial court dismissed the action because the activity complained of was within the exclusive jurisdiction of the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB). Id. at 902. On appeal we held that because the complaint alleged a cause of action based on the existence of an agreement barred by provisions of our state “right-to-work” law, it was within the jurisdiction of our state courts to litigate and that Mathews should be permitted to prove his claimed grievance. Id. at 903. We accordingly reversed and remanded with directions to reinstate the complaint.
Mathews essentially alleged that after being called back to work, he was advised by an agent of Twin City Construction Company (Twin City) that his employment had to be terminated because of his nonunion status. He claimed that his termination was the result of an agreement between the Union and Twin City which required union membership as a prerequisite to continued employment on the project, all contrary to the provisions of SDCL ch. 60-8. He further alleged the defendant’s conduct exhibited oppression, malice, and an intent to vex or harm him, justifying punitive damages. The validity of a civil cause of action under these statutes was not disputed.
Union presents these issues:
I. Whether the doctrine of federal preemption rendered the Trial Court without subject matter jurisdiction over Mathews’ claims for relief.
The Trial Court concluded it did not.
II. Whether in order to recover against the Union for a violation of SDCL § 60-8 Mathews was required to prove the existence of a written union shop agreement between the Union and Twin City.
The Trial court concluded he was not.
III. Whether the Union stood entitled to an instruction providing for a privilege defense to Mathews’ claim insofar as it was based on an intentional interference with his employment contract.
The Trial Court concluded it was not. *503Mathews seeks review of the order setting aside the punitive damage award.
I. PREEMPTION
In 1935 Congress enacted the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) (29 U.S.C.A. § 151 et seq.), commonly referred to as the Wagner Act. Section 7 of that Act guaranteed to employees the right to self-organize and, pursuant to that section, employers and unions had the freedom to select a form of union security on which they could agree and which was not prescribed by such act.
The Wagner Act was amended in 1947 by the National Labor Management Relations Act (29 U.S.C.A. § 141 et seq.), known as the Taft-Hartley Act. That act guaranteed employees the right to refrain from participating in any, or all, union activities. The “closed-shop” was outlawed. However, in order to afford unions protection from “freeloaders,” certain union-security devices were authorized. Section 8(a)(3) of the Act permits employers to enter into security agreements with unions.2 One variety of a union security agreement covered by § 14(b) is a “union shop” which requires that no one will remain employed who does not join the union within a short time after being hired. Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers, International Union, AFL-CIO, v. Mobil Oil Corp., 426 U.S. 407, 96 S.Ct. 2140, 48 L.Ed.2d 736 (1976) (hereinafter referred to as Oil Workers). Another type of union security agreement is an agency shop.3
A hiring hall which, though exclusive, does not require union membership does not violate the closed shop prohibition of § 8(a)(3), Local 357, Int’l. Bhd. of Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen & Helpers of America v. NLRB, 365 U.S. 667, 81 S.Ct. 835, 6 L.Ed.2d 11 (1961), and thus is not within the ambit of § 14(b). Cf. Retail Clerks Int’l Ass’n. v. Schermerhorn, 373 U.S. 746, 751-752, 83 S.Ct. 1461, 1464-1465, 10 L.Ed.2d 678, 682-683 (1963). Strieker v. Swift Bros. Construction, 260 N.W.2d 500 (S.D.1977).
"(3) by discrimination in regard to hire or tenure of employment or any term or condition of employment to encourage or discourage membership in any labor organization: Provided, That nothing in this Act, or in any other statute of the United States, shall preclude an employer from making an agreement with a labor organization ... to require as a condition of employment membership therein on or after the thirtieth day following the beginning of such employment or the effective date of such agreement, whichever is the later_”
Section 14(b) of the Taft-Hartley Act, 29 U.S.C.A. § 164(b) provides:
“(b) Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as authorizing the execution or application of agreements requiring membership in a labor organization as a condition of employment in any State or Territory in which such execution or application is prohibited by State or Territorial law.”
Article VI, § 2 of our Constitution provides in part:
The right of persons to work shall not be denied or abridged on account of membership or nonmembership in any labor union, or labor organization.
SDCL 60-8-3 restates this constitutional provision. SDCL 60-8-1 further makes it unlawful to prevent a hired workman from continuing or performing his job. By these enactments, South Dakota has clearly elected to exercise the 14(b) exemption of the Taft-Hartley Act.
The National Labor Relations Act established a policy of national uniformity in labor relations. Congress implemented this policy through the creation of centralized administration, i.e. the National Labor Relations Board. Bebensee v. Ross Pierce Elec. Corp., 400 Mich. 233, 253 N.W.2d 633 (Mich.1977).
*504It has been the task of the United States Supreme Court to shape the federal preemption doctrine in this area whereby the rights allowed the States and Territories are protected and the Congressionally established policy of uniformity is achieved. Any discussion of this effort must start with the landmark case of San Diego Building Trades Council v. Garmon, 359 U.S. 236, 79 S.Ct. 773, 3 L.Ed.2d 775 (1959). In Garmon, the court announced that the overriding test in determining preemption “focuse[s] on the nature of the activities which the States have sought to regulate, rather than on the method of regulation adopted. When the exercise of state power over a particular area of activity threaten[s] interference with the clearly indicated policy of industrial relations, it has been judicially necessary to preclude states from acting _ [we have not required] withdrawal from the states of power to regulate where the activity regulated was a merely peripheral concern of the Labor Management Relations Act ... or where the regulated conduct touched interests ... deeply rooted in local feelings and responsibility^]” Id. at 243-244, 79 S.Ct. at 778-779. Several other significant cases followed. Specifically regarding the application of § 14(b), Justice Douglas accurately predicted in Retail Clerks International Ass’n. Local 1625 v. Schermerhorn, 375 U.S. 96, 84 S.Ct. 219, 11 L.Ed.2d 179 (1963):
As a result of § 14(b), there will arise a wide variety of situations presenting problems of the accommodation of state and federal jurisdiction in the union-security field.
375 U.S. at 105, 84 S.Ct. at 223. Justice Douglas further wrote:
[S]tate power, recognized by § 14(b), begins only with actual negotiation and execution of the type of agreement described by § 14(b). Absent such an agreement, conduct arguably an unfair labor practice would be a matter for the National Labor Relations Board under Gar-mon.
375 U.S. at 105, 84 S.Ct. at 223.4
The Union relies heavily on Local 926, Intern. Union of Oper. Egn. v. Jones, 46 U.S. 669, 103 S.Ct. 1453, 75 L.Ed.2d 368 (1983). In Jones, however, the plaintiff first filed a complaint with the NLRB alleging violations of § 8(b)(1)(A) and (B) of the NLRA. Id. at 1456. When NLRB refused to file suit, Jones proceeded in state court exclusively on the common-law tort theory of intentional interference with his bargaining agent employment contract. Id. at 1457. The court recognized the issue in that case involved only preemption of the common-law tort, not the validity or preemption of the Georgia “right to work” law. Id. at 1458, fn. 7. The Court in Jones did not discuss the application of § 14(b) as it relates to a state’s enforcement of “right to work” laws. It is thus distinguishable and can not be relied upon as controlling authority for the § 14(b) preemption issues herein.
Brown v. Hotel Employees, — U.S. -, 104 S.Ct. 3179, 82 L.Ed.2d 373 (1984), was decided after this case was argued. In Brown, the court held that the New Jersey Crime Control Act was not preempted by the NLRA. The Court discussed § 603 of the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act. Id. — U.S. at-, 104 S.Ct. at 3187-3189. Like § 14(b) at issue here, “§ 603(a) is an express disclaimer of pre-emption except where such preemption is expressly provided ...” Id. — U.S. at-, 104 S.Ct. at 3188. Again, like § 14(b), “[i]n affirmatively preserving the operation of state laws, § 603(a) indicates that Congress necessarily intended to preserve some room for state action ...” Id. — U.S. at-, 104 S.Ct. at 3189. The court discussed the presumption of federal preemption based on the primary jurisdic*505tion of the NLRB and stated that this presumption:
“properly admits to exception when unusually ‘deeply rooted’ local interests are at stake. In such eases, appropriate consideration for the vitality of our federal system and for a rational allocation of functions belies any easy inference that Congress intended to deprive States of their ability to retain jurisdiction over such matters. We have therefore, refrained from finding that the NLRA preempts state court jurisdiction over state breach of contract actions by strike replacements, Belknap Inc. v. Hale, 463 U.S. 591, 103 S.Ct. 3172, 77 L.Ed.2d 798 (1983), state trespass actions, Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Carpenters, 436 U.S. 180, 98 S.Ct. 1745, 56 L.Ed.2d 209 (1978), or state tort remedies for intentional infliction of emotional distress, Farmers v. Carpenters, 430 U.S. 290, 97 S.Ct. 1056, 51 L.Ed.2d 338 (1977).5
In Oil Workers, 426 U.S. 407, 96 S.Ct. 2140, 48 L.Ed.2d 736 (1976) the Court explained the application of § 14(b): “While § 8(a)(3) articulates a national policy that certain union-security agreements are valid as a matter of federal law[,] § 14(b) reflects Congress’ decision that any state or territory that wishes to may exempt itself from that policy.” Id. at 417, 96 S.Ct. at 2145. See also, Sherman v. St. Barnabas Hospital, 535 F.Supp. 564 (S.D.N.Y.1982). The Oil Workers case held that under § 14(b) the enforceability of state “right to work” laws is determined in part by looking to the location of an employee’s job situs. Id. 426 U.S. at 414, 96 S.Ct. at 2143. There is no question in this case that the job situs was not on a federal enclave; rather, it was entirely within the boundaries of the state of South Dakota.
The § 14(b) exemption allows states to prohibit posi-hiring conduct amounting to union or agency shops. Id. at 417, 96 S.Ct. at 2145. See also, Strieker v. Swift, 260 N.W.2d 500 (S.D.1977); Schermerhorn, 375 U.S. at 105, 84 S.Ct. at 223; International Union v. NLRB, 675 F.2d 1257 (1982), cert. denied, 459 U.S. 1171, 103 S.Ct. 816, 74 L.Ed.2d 1014 (1983). It clearly appears that this case involves post-hiring conduct: At all times relevant, a written collective bargaining agreement was in force between the Union and Twin City. This agreement required Twin City to use the Union’s hiring hall referral system in hiring workers, but without regard to membership in the Union.
It provides in part:
When a local union does not furnish qualified workmen within forty-eight (48) hours (Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excluded), the contractor shall be free to obtain workmen from any source.
Mr. Cahill, the Union representative, testified that the Union and Twin City conducted their labor negotiations for this project in the fall of 1979. He conceded that in these talks the Union did not require Twin City to hire its iron workers through the hiring hall. The evidence clearly indicates that pursuant to the collective bargaining agreement, and with the full knowledge and consent of the Union, Twin City bypassed the hiring hall procedure. Mathews was hired directly by Twin City because the hiring hall was unable, or for some reason chose not, to furnish the needed iron workers within the bargaining agreement time frame.
This evidence devastates the Union’s argument that Mathews’ termination was merely an enforcement of the written bargaining agreement. If he was admittedly hired in conformity with the bargaining agreement, he could hardly be fired on the grounds his employment was in derogation of that agreement. The Union, however, could not be expected to argue that Mathews was fired because his continued employment violated a separate union shop agreement.
*506As we indicated in Mathews I, supra, the critical question is whether there was sufficient evidence for the trier of facts to find a union shop agreement existed under our state right to work law. Counsel for appellant conceded in argument that if a formal security agreement did exist, the courts of this state have jurisdiction to enforce our right to work laws in that regard under § 14(b). See, Oil Workers, 426 U.S. 407, 96 S.Ct. 2140, 48 L.Ed.2d 736; Schermerhorn, 375 U.S. 96, 84 S.Ct. 219, 11 L.Ed.2d 179. We turn then to the evidence in the record.
Mathews was not a union member when employed, .nor did he ever join the union. He was paid below the union wage scale, but was given no indication that his nonunion status would cause him to be fired. He worked a little over a month as an iron worker tying rebar steel, from November 19, 1979 until the first week of January, 1980. He was able to do both rebar and structural steel work, and was also willing to work outside in mid-winter. Inclement weather, however, closed the entire construction project in early January, and Twin City temporarily laid off Mathews and other employees.
It was Twin City’s intention that Mathews return to work in the same capacity— i.e., as an iron worker — when weather conditions permitted. Mathews was so advised. In fact, during the lay off, Mr. Rich Doyle, superintendent of the construction project for Twin City, took him to North Dakota to observe a similar project so that they would be better prepared to resume work in Pierre.
When construction on the Pierre Mall resumed in late February, 1980, Mr. Doyle personally asked Mathews to return to work as an iron worker. Neither Mathews nor the other returning employees had to be “re-hired.” No new employment forms or applications were processed. They were in all respects regarded as continuing employees. When construction resumed, they were about to start the more desirable structural steel work.
However, when Mathews returned to work, problems immediately arose. It is significant that two new union iron workers then also appeared on the job, both of whom exhibited hostility to Mathews. One of these new workers telephoned Mr. Ca-hill, who negotiated contracts, placed employees and handled Union grievances and disputes. Cahill promptly contacted Twin City. We refer to Mr. Cahill’s testimony:
Q. And you would agree that Mr. Mathews was terminated, fired, laid off, whatever you want to call it, from his job as an iron worker because of the fact he was not union, and you complained to Twin City Construction that he had not been hired through the union, you know that to be true, don’t you?
A. Possibly, yes.
Mr. Doyle then summarily fired Mathews, telling him that because the Union and Twin City had some kind of an agreement, and because Mathews was not a union member, he had to be terminated. Mathews was further advised that he could no longer work for Twin City on the project and that this directive came from Cahill.
When the weather moderated the Union was, ostensibly for the first time, prepared to refer qualified iron workers. Mr. Cahill then advised Doyle that at the risk of a picket Twin City must henceforth hire all iron workers on the project through the hiring hall and that Mathews and the other nonunion iron workers that had been otherwise hired could not be retained. It is also significant that during the first month of employment Mathews had no problem with the Union. Neither Twin City or the Union contend Mathews would have been fired if he had joined the Union during this grace period. After Mathews’ termination, only union members were employed on the project. As a subsidiary of the preemption issue we now turn to appellant’s contention that the union shop security agreement must be in writing to become the subject of state jurisdiction under § 14(b).
An employer and union desirous of effecting a union shop arrangement would
*507unlikely reduce it to writing in a “right-to-work” state. No United States Supreme Court decisions requiring a security agreement to be written have been cited by the parties. See 52 Cal.Law Review 95, 108-109 (1965). At least one jurisdiction has concluded it need not be reduced to writing. In Moore v. Local No. 10, Plumbers & Steamfitters Union, 211 Va. 520, 179 S.E.2d 15,18 (1971), the Virginia court said:
The intent of § 14(b) of the Taft-Hart-ley Act is to permit state regulation of union-security agreements which otherwise would be allowed under § 8(a)(3) of the Act. In our opinion state regulation of such agreements, whether oral or written, is not only consistent with the intent of the Act, but also consistent with the language of § 14(b). To hold that § 14(b) applies only to written contracts would permit unions to thwart the purpose of that section by insisting that union-security agreements be solemnized orally and not reduced to writing.
We cannot conceive of agreeing that a written contract which violates a state right-to-work law is a proper subject of state court jurisdiction but that an equally violative oral contract is not proper for such jurisdiction.
In South Dakota, contracts may be oral except those that are specially required by statute to be in writing. SDCL 53-8-1. A contract may also be implied. An implied contract is one, the existence and terms of which are manifested by conduct. “Conduct” can be both acts and words. By its very nature, an implicit agreement is not as detailed as a written agreement formally negotiated. SDCL 53-1-3.
The Union’s adamant and successful insistence that Mathews be summarily fired when union labor became available manifested conduct corroborating the statement of Rich Doyle that an agreement existed between the Union and Twin City necessitating Mathew’s termination because he was not a union member. Mr. Cahill acknowledged that the collective bargaining agreement prohibited that procedure after the initial hiring. This evidence indicates the firing must have been pursuant to some other agreement.
The trier of fact could thus reasonably find from the evidence that aside from the written collective bargaining agreement, an unwritten but equally binding agreement also existed that was enforced by the union. This could be an agreement standing alone, or simply an accord that union shop agreements, valid in non-“right-to-work” states would, by reference, also be treated as controlling in this state. The jury could, and apparently did, find that this agreement required summary discharge of nonunion members, who did not join the union within a prescribed time and regardless of whether they were union referred, when the hiring hall was able to replace them with union workers. That is at least the functional equivalent of a union shop. For the reasons stated in Moore, 179 S.E.2d at 18, we conclude that either a written or an unwritten union security agreement violates South Dakota “right to work” laws.
Because § 14(b) expressly allows a state to enforce its “right to work” laws against union and agency shop agreements, this case does not emerge as more than a peripheral concern of the NLRB. Though it may be said a conflict exists between federal and state law, it is a conflict recognized and sanctioned by Congress. Schermerhorn, 375 U.S. at 103, 84 S.Ct. at 222. Union or agency shops are valid “only if they are valid 'under the laws of any State in which they are to be performed.” Oil Workers, 426 U.S. at 418, 96 S.Ct. at 2145. Such agreements are not valid in South Dakota. SDCL 60-8-1, 60-8-3. Moreover, it should be clear that “right to work” statutes “touch interests so deeply rooted in local feeling and responsibility that, in the absence of compelling congressional directive it could not be inferred that Congress intended to deprive the state of the power to act,” Garmon, supra, 359 U.S. at 244, 79 S.Ct. at 779, because the clear congressional directive in § 14(b) is that states retain the power to *508act. See also, Brown Hotel Employees — U.S.-at-, 104 S.Ct. 3179, 3188-3189, 82 L.Ed.2d 373 (1984). Otherwise, § 14(b)’s exemption becomes a token, granted indeed by Congress, but seldom if ever, recognized in practice. Based on a combination of factors; Mathews’ cause of action arose in this state, seeks relief available only in state courts,6 and rests entirely on an alleged violation of our “right to work” statutes; it seems reasonable that it can be litigated in our state courts.
II. DID THE TRIAL COURT ERR IN REFUSING THE UNION’S REQUESTED INSTRUCTION?
Appellant claims that the trial court should have given this instruction which it requested:
You are further instructed that under the laws of the United States the Union and Twin City Construction Company could lawfully enter into collective bargaining agreements which contained a clause commonly known as non-discriminatory hiring hall provisions. You are further instructed as a matter of law that the Union and Twin City Construction Company had, in fact, entered into such agreement. Under the law the Union was privileged and entitled to talk to Twin City Construction Company and to require the company to comply with the terms of the collective bargaining agreement. If you find that the Union was acting to enforce the provisions of the collective bargaining agreement and was not acting pursuant to any other agreement between it and the Twin City Construction Company you must find for Defendant.
We find the Instructions as a whole and particularly Instructions No. 11 and 187 adequately covered the pertinent law. From the instructions counsel could, and did, fully argue the issue.
III. PUNITIVE DAMAGES AWARD
The jury returned a verdict for Mathews assessing punitive damages against Union in the sum of $3,500. On September 19, 1983, after the jury verdict came in, the trial court entered an order on Union’s motion for directed verdict made at the close of Mathews’ evidence. Mathews filed a notice of review concerning the order of the trial court which set aside that *509part of the verdict. The order granted a directed verdict on punitive damages. The Union requested a directed verdict, however, on the grounds that the matter was preempted. The Union argued only that there was insufficient evidence to show a written or oral contract existed which would take the matter out of NLRB primary jurisdiction. No arguments were made disputing punitive damages or the claimed oppressive, fraudulent or malicious conduct of the Union. The trial court committed a procedural error under South Dakota law in setting aside the award. See, State v. Scott, 84 S.D. 511, 173 N.W.2d 287 (1969) cert. den. 400 U.S. 821, 91 S.Ct. 39, 27 L.Ed.2d 49 (1970); See also, Raebel v. Fishers Grove Golf Course, Inc., 88 S.D. 20, 214 N.W.2d 785 (1974).
While we believe that is enough to reverse the trial court and reinstate the award, we will address this further because of the importance of the issue. As we have stated, the action before us is strictly a state law matter governed by our “right to work” statute and not preempted because of the application of § 14(b). In Local 20, Teamsters, Chauffeurs & Helpers Union v. Morton, 377 U.S. 252, 84 S.Ct. 1253, 12 L.Ed.2d 280 (1964), the Supreme Court held that because the substantive law of a state had been preempted, it followed that a punitive damage award could not stand. Id. at 260-261, 84 S.Ct. at 1258-1259. The converse rationale is applicable here. Since the substantive state law in this case is not preempted, the punitive damages award is valid.
In South Dakota, punitive damages may be awarded for “any action for breach of an obligation not based on contract,” SDCL 21-3-2, and when circumstances demonstrate a defendant is guilty of oppression, fraud or malice. SDCL 21-3-2; See also, Hannahs v. Noah, 83 S.D. 296, 158 N.W.2d 678 (1968), reaffirmed in Till v. Bennett, 281 N.W.2d 276 (S.D.1979). Thus, our punitive damages statute contemplates tor-tious conduct carried out in a particularly abusive manner. While Farmer v. United Bhd. of Carpenters & Joiners of America, Local 25, 430 U.S. 290, 97 S.Ct. 1056, 51 L.Ed.2d 388 (1977), involved a common-law tort action rather than a statutory § 14(b) “right to work” law issue, the Court delineated similar considerations in upholding California’s jurisdiction. Id. at 305, 97 S.Ct. at 1066. Punitive damages were awarded by the state jury in Farmers. Id. at 294, 97 S.Ct. at 1060. The Court in Farmer held:
“On balance, we cannot conclude that congress intended to oust state-court jurisdiction over actions for tortious activity such as that alleged in this case [intentional infliction of emotional distress]. At the same time we reiterate that concurrent state court jurisdiction cannot be permitted where there is a realistic threat of interference with the federal regulatory scheme ... simply stated, it is essential that the state tort be either unrelated to employment discrimination or a function of the particularly abusive manner in which the discrimination is accomplished or threatened rather than a function of the actual or threatened discrimination itself.” (emphasis added). Id. at 305, 97 S.Ct. at 1066.
It follows then, and we hold the matter is not preempted and the punitive damage award must stand; 1), because South Dakota’s jurisdiction over this matter is only a peripheral concern of the NLRB and does not interfere with the federal regulatory scheme — any conflict that does exist is one sanctioned by Congress, Schermerhorn, 375 U.S. at 105, 84 S.Ct. at 223, 2), because enforcing South Dakota’s “right to work” law is a matter deeply rooted in local concern, the inference clearly being that Congress intended that states retain the power to act, Garmon, supra 359 U.S. at 244, 79 S.Ct. at 779, Brown, supra — U.S. at- -, 104 S.Ct. at 2188-2189, and 3), because the punitive damages award is merely a function of the “particularly abusive manner” Farmer, 430 U.S. at 305, 97 S.Ct. at 1066, in which the violation of our law occurred.
*510We affirm the judgment on the issue of preemption, but reverse on the punitive damages award and order that the award be reinstated.
WOLLMAN, MORGAN and HENDERSON, JJ., concur.
DUNN, Retired Justice, dissents.
WUEST, Circuit Judge, acting as Supreme Court Justice, not participating.
. Twin City and Mathews reached a settlement prior to trial. Twin City did not participate further and is not involved in this appeal.
. "Sec. 8. (1) It shall be unfair labor practice for an employer—
. The employee, though not required to join the contracting union, is required, as a condition of employment, to pay to the union initiation fees and regular dues. Retail Clerks Int'l v. Schermerhorn, 373 U.S. 746, 83 S.Ct. 1461, 106 L.Ed.2d 678 (1963). The record does not indicate an agency shop agreement existed here.
. For that reason, we distinguish this case from Stricker v. Swift, 260 N.W.2d 500 (S.D.1977). In Strieker, the employer and the Union were in the process of negotiating an agreement. We also distinguish Baumgartner’s Electric Const. Co. v. DeVries, 77 S.D. 273, 91 N.W.2d 663 (1958), reversed 359 U.S. 498, 79 S.Ct. 1117, 3 L.Ed.2d 976 (1959), reh. den., 360 U.S. 923, 79 S.Ct. 1431, 3 L.Ed.2d 1538 (1959), for the same reason. No agreement had been finalized in those cases. There is no indication here that any agreements were incomplete.
. We would note also that in Farmers v. Carpenters, the court’s decision rested in part on the outrageous character of the defendant's conduct. In this case, by their verdict on punitive damages, the jury found the Union’s conduct exhibited oppression, fraud or malice.
. The NLRB has no general compensation scheme. International Union, United Automobile Aircraft & Agricultural Implement Workers of America v. Russell, 356 U.S. 634, 78 S.Ct. 932, 2 L.Ed.2d 1030 (1958) reh. den., 357 U.S. 944, 78 S.Ct. 1379, 2 L.Ed.2d 1558 (1958).
. Instruction No. 11 stated:
In determining whether or not the defendant Union’s conduct in intentionally interferring with the employment contract between Twin City Construction Company and plaintiff Carl Mathews was improper or not, you may consider the following factors:
(a) The nature of the defendant Union’s conduct;
(b) The motive of the defendant Union;
(c) The interests of Twin City Construction Company with which the defendant Union interferred;
(d) The interest sought to be advanced by the defendant Union;
(e) The social interests in protecting the freedom of action of the defendant Union and the contractual interests of Twin City Construction Company and plaintiff Carl Mathews;
(f) The proximity or remoteness of defendant Union’s conduct to the interference; and
(g) The relations between the parties.
Instruction No. 18 stated:
In this state the “right-to-work” law makes it unlawful for the Defendants to enter into and to execute any agreement which required Plaintiff to join the Defendant Union, or to maintain membership in the Union in order to be hired to work for or to continue working for Defendant, Twin City Construction Company, within the state of South Dakota. Such an Agreement is generally known as a "union security agreement”.
The provisions of the "right-to-work” law, however, do not make it unlawful for the Defendant, Twin City Construction Company, and the Defendant, Union, to enter into and execute a collective bargaining agreement, which required Defendant, Twin City Construction Company, to hire workers on projects in the state of South Dakota only from among persons referred to it by the Defendant, Union. Such an agreement is generally known as a "referral system”. In this action, the Defendants had entered into and had executed a collective bargaining agreement, which contained a “referral system” which was lawful under the "right-to-work” law.

=== CASE 9739844 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:12.480739+00 ===

DUNN, Retired Justice
(dissenting).
The decision of the trial court should be reversed because the court lacked jurisdiction, as Mathews’ claims were preempted by federal law.
If Mathews claimed, and the jury found, that the Union interfered with his employment contract with Twin City, in violation of “right to work laws,” it is preempted because Sections 8(b)(1)(A) and 8(b)(2) of the NLRA, as amended, expressly prohibit such conduct and it would be an unfair labor practice.
If the claim is made that Mathews’ employment contract was in violation of SDCL ch. 60-8, the only evidence of contracts presented was the Union and Local agreements, which only contained nondiscriminatory referral system provisions and were not prohibited Union security agreements. Lacking evidence of a Union security agreement, there is no jurisdiction provided for state courts under SDCL ch. 60-8.
The majority would read in an oral Union security agreement “because that was the only way he could have been fired” under the written agreements. It overlooks the fact that his firing could arguably be an unfair labor practice under the federal act.

=== CASE 2221194 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:05.951177+00 ===

357 N.W.2d 216 (1984)
218 Neb. 558
STATE of Nebraska, Appellant,
v.
Doris FREY, Appellee.
No. 84-371.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
October 26, 1984.
*217 Michael G. Heavican, Lancaster County Atty., and David W. Stempson, Lincoln, for appellant.
Gerald Soucie of Rehm & Bartling, Lincoln, for appellee.
KRIVOSHA, C.J., BOSLAUGH, WHITE, HASTINGS, CAPORALE, and SHANAHAN, JJ., and COLWELL, District Judge, Retired.
CAPORALE, Justice.
Pursuant to leave, the State has appealed under the provisions of Neb.Rev.Stat. *218 § 29-2315.01 (Cum.Supp.1984), taking exception to the sustainment by the district court of the motion of defendant, Doris Frey, to quash the information charging her with abusing an incompetent or disabled person, on the ground that Neb.Rev. Stat. § 28-708 (Cum.Supp.1984) is unconstitutionally vague. We sustain the exception and remand the cause for further proceedings.
The State's operative information charges that on or about October 6, 1983, Frey, while in Lancaster County, Nebraska, committed manslaughter in violation of Neb.Rev.Stat. § 28-305(1) (Reissue 1979), in that she did
unintentionally and without malice kill Eva Caves while the defendant, Doris Frey, was in the commission of an unlawful act, to-wit: while the defendant and Eva Caves were living together at the residence owned by Eva Caves at 5025 Martin Street, Lincoln, Lancaster County, Nebraska, the defendant did knowingly and intentionally cause or permit an incompetent person or a disabled person, Eva Caves, to be placed in a situation that endangered her life or health or cruelly confined said person or deprived said person of necessary food, or care.
The unlawful act complained of is found in the statute which the district court decided was unconstitutional. That statute, § 28-708, reads as follows:
(1) A person commits abuse of an incompetent or disabled person if he or she knowingly, intentionally, or negligently causes or permits an incompetent person or a disabled person to be:
(a) Placed in a situation that endangers his or her life or health; or
(b) Cruelly confined or cruelly punished; or
(c) Deprived of necessary food, clothing, shelter, or care.
(2) The statutory privilege between patient and physician and between husband and wife shall not be available for excluding or refusing testimony in any prosecution for a violation of this section.
(3) Abuse of an incompetent or disabled person is a Class I misdemeanor if the offense is committed negligently.
(4) Abuse of an incompetent or disabled person is a Class IV felony if the offense is committed knowingly and intentionally.
Our analysis must first speak to the State's contention that, given the posture of the record, Frey lacks standing to challenge the constitutionality of § 28-708.
A statute may be constitutionally infirm by reason of being vague, or because it is overbroad.
A statute is vague if its prohibitions are not clearly defined. The standards for evaluating vagueness were stated by the U.S. Supreme Court in Grayned v. City of Rockford, 408 U.S. 104, 108-09, 92 S. Ct. 2294, 2298-99, 33 L. Ed. 2d 222 (1972):
Vague laws offend several important values. First, because we assume that man is free to steer between lawful and unlawful conduct, we insist that laws give the person of ordinary intelligence a reasonable opportunity to know what is prohibited, so that he may act accordingly. Vague laws may trap the innocent by not providing fair warning. Second, if arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement is to be prevented, laws must provide explicit standards for those who apply them. A vague law impermissibly delegates basic policy matters to policemen, judges, and juries for resolution on an ad hoc and subjective basis, with the attendant dangers of arbitrary and discriminatory applications.
(Footnotes omitted.) For a recent application of the concept of vagueness by this court, see State v. Hamilton, 215 Neb. 694, 340 N.W.2d 397 (1983). We held therein that a statute attempting to prohibit the making of a threat to commit a crime "likely to" result in a variety of consequences to another was unconstitutional as vague because it left uncertain what constituted a threat.
Moreover, an enactment which is clear and precise, and therefore not vague, *219 may nonetheless fail to pass constitutional muster by virtue of being overbroad in the sense that it prohibits the exercise of constitutionally protected conduct, such as the exercise of first amendment rights. Zwickler v. Koota, 389 U.S. 241, 88 S. Ct. 391, 19 L. Ed. 2d 444 (1967); Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471, 90 S. Ct. 1153, 25 L. Ed. 2d 491 (1970), reh'g denied 398 U.S. 914, 90 S. Ct. 1684, 26 L. Ed. 2d 80.
Hoffman Estates v. Flipside, Hoffman Estates, 455 U.S. 489, 102 S. Ct. 1186, 71 L. Ed. 2d 362 (1982), teaches that in a facial challenge to the overbreadth and vagueness of a law, that is, in this context, a claim that the law is invalid in toto and therefore incapable of any valid application, our first task is to determine whether the enactment reaches a substantial amount of constitutionally protected conduct. If it does not, then the overbreadth challenge must fail. We are to then examine the facial vagueness challenge and, assuming the enactment implicates no constitutionally protected conduct, uphold the challenge only if the enactment is impermissibly vague in all its applications. In order to have standing to challenge a vague statute, one must not have engaged in conduct which is clearly proscribed by the statute, and cannot complain of the vagueness of the law as applied to the conduct of others. We should therefore examine Frey's conduct before analyzing other hypothetical applications of the law. See, also, United States v. Mazurie, 419 U.S. 544, 95 S. Ct. 710, 42 L. Ed. 2d 706 (1975); State v. Sprague, 213 Neb. 581, 330 N.W.2d 739 (1983).
An examination of § 28-708 reveals that it implicates no constitutionally protected conduct. Therefore, any overbreadth challenge fails.
The difficulty with completing the second step in the constitutional analysis, determining whether § 28-708 is impermissibly vague, is that the record is devoid of any facts which would tell us whether Frey's conduct was clearly proscribed by the statute. Consequently, we are unable to determine whether Frey has standing to attack the constitutionality of § 28-708. We have held in several civil cases that absent facts in the record which establish standing, no standing exists. See, Hall v. Cox Cable of Omaha, Inc., 212 Neb. 887, 327 N.W.2d 595 (1982); West Fort Residents Assn. v. Housing Auth. of City of Omaha, 205 Neb. 397, 288 N.W.2d 27 (1980); Stahmer v. Marsh, 202 Neb. 281, 275 N.W.2d 64 (1979). See, also, McGowan v. Maryland, 366 U.S. 420, 81 S. Ct. 1101, 6 L. Ed. 2d 393 (1961); Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S. 297, 100 S. Ct. 2671, 65 L. Ed. 2d 784 (1980).
We conclude, in accordance with Hoffman Estates v. Flipside, Hoffman Estates, supra, that on this record Frey lacks standing to challenge the constitutionality of § 28-708. That being the case, we do not reach the constitutional issues argued by Frey.
Frey not having been placed in jeopardy, see, Tibbs v. Florida, 457 U.S. 31, 102 S. Ct. 2211, 72 L. Ed. 2d 652 (1982), Burks v. United States, 437 U.S. 1, 98 S. Ct. 2141, 57 L. Ed. 2d 1 (1978), State v. Munn, 212 Neb. 265, 322 N.W.2d 429 (1982), and Skinner v. Jensen, 178 Neb. 733, 135 N.W.2d 134 (1965), we remand, pursuant to the provisions of Neb.Rev.Stat. § 29-2316 (Reissue 1979), for further proceedings.
EXCEPTION SUSTAINED, AND CAUSE REMANDED FOR FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.

=== CASE 2221195 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:05.98217+00 ===

343 N.E.2d 828 (1976)
Robert GREEN and David Whitaker, Appellants (Defendants below),
v.
STATE FARM MUTUAL AUTOMOBILE Insurance Company, Appellee (Plaintiff below).
No. 1-975A159.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, First District.
March 16, 1976.
*829 John C. Cox, Evansville, for appellant.
Robert H. Hahn, George A. Porch, Evansville, for appellee; Bamberger, Foreman, Oswald & Hahn, Evansville, of counsel.
LOWDERMILK, Judge.
Plaintiff-appellee State Farm brought its action for a declaratory judgment against defendants-appellants Green and one Whitaker, the owner of the car which was insured by State Farm. The court sustained State Farm's motion for summary judgment on the issues and judgment was entered accordingly.
FACTS OF THE CASE:
State Farm's insured, Whitaker, had resided in Indiana many years before he left and resided at other places in other states, including Laurel, Mississippi. He returned with his family to Evansville, Indiana, in January of 1970. Soon afterward, he left his wife and son at Evansville and returned to Laurel to clear up rights to railroad retirement and Social Security.
While in Laurel, Whitaker, on June 23, 1970, purchased liability insurance on his automobile and gave his address as Laurel, Mississippi. His wife sent a check for payment of the policy from Evansville to the agent at Laurel. Whitaker visited and lived with friends and at a motel while in Laurel a number of months, during which time he got his railroad retirement and Social Security established. He then returned to Evansville with his State Farm liability policy which complied with the Mississippi law as to limits of liability. Mississippi required a policy with limits of coverage of $5,000 for each person and $10,000 for each accident, while Indiana's requirement for public liability coverage was $10,000 for each person and $20,000 for each accident at that time.
Whitaker, after returning to Evansville, held an Indiana drivers license, purchased Indiana license plates and on one occasion paid his premium for automobile coverage to an Indiana agent of State Farm. The agent forwarded the premium to the writing agent at Laurel, Mississippi, for the year of 1971.
Green, on the 9th day of May, 1971, was a passenger in a car operated by his brother which collided with a car owned by Whitaker and insured by State Farm as aforesaid and as a result of the collision Green sustained personal injuries.
Green sued Whitaker for his injuries and damages which State Farm undertook to defend.
State Farm then filed the action at bar in order to determine its limits of liability. The policy stated that "this policy is certified as proof of financial responsibility for the future under the provisions of the motor vehicle financial responsibility law of any state or province, such insurance as is afforded by this policy for bodily injury, liability or for property damage liability shall comply with the provisions of such law ... but in no event in excess of the limits of liability stated in this policy."
COURT'S FINDINGS AND JUDGMENT:
The trial court found the undisputed facts to be as follows:
1. (a) The policy was issued to Whitaker by State Farm on June 23, 1970, in *830 the State of Mississippi at which time Whitaker was a resident of Laurel, Mississippi.
(b) The limit of coverage for personal injury was $5,000 per person and $10,000 per accident.
(c) Following the purchase of the policy Whitaker moved to Indiana where he was involved in an automobile accident on May 9, 1971.
2. There is no statute under the facts before the court, of the State of Indiana, that requires that automobile liability insurance be written in an amount exceeding the coverage of the policy in issue.
3. There is no issue as to any material fact and plaintiff is entitled to judgment against both defendants as a matter of law.
The judgment of the court was that the plaintiff have judgment against the defendants and that plaintiff's limit of liability under its insurance policy issued by plaintiff to Whitaker on or about June 23, 1970, for any person making claim for personal injury and damages, was in the sum of $5,000.
ISSUE PRESENTED:
The issue presented here is  Does the financial responsibility law requirement of fixed insurance limits for automobile coverage apply to the plaintiff-insurance company's policy?
DISCUSSION:
Green contends that the Indiana Financial Responsibility Statute conflicts with the provision of Whitaker's policy which affords coverage for an Indiana driver in the amount of $5,000.00. He further contends the Indiana statute must prevail and the policy be declared to be in the amount of $10,000.00.
Green cites the Indiana statute, IC 1971, 9-2-1-15 (Burns Code Ed.) which reads in part, as follows:
"Proof of financial responsibility defined  Injury to person or property or death  Amount of proof required.  Proof of financial responsibility shall mean proof of ability to respond in damages for liability thereafter incurred, arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle, in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars [$15,000] because of bodily injury to or death of any one [1] person, and, subject to said limit respecting one [1] person, in the amount ... of ten thousand dollars [$10,000] because of injury to or destruction of property in any one [1] accident... ."
The Indiana law at the time of the wreck provided the amount of $10,000 to any one person rather than the amount set out in the above statute.
Green discusses Whitaker's place of residence and claims that if he were a resident of Indiana when he purchased the policy he should have purchased a policy complying with the Indiana statute.
We have carefully examined the Safety Responsibility Act and for reasons hereinafter set out are of the opinion Green's arguments are not well founded in that the case at bar does not come under the Act.
IC 1971, 9-2-1-15, supra, defines proof of financial responsibility as meaning "... proof of ability to respond in damages for liability thereafter incurred, arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle... ." (Our emphasis.)
After a wreck of the type we have here the Commissioner of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles shall require security under IC 1971, 9-2-1-4 (Burn Code Ed.) as follows:
"(a) ...
"... security sufficient in the discretion of the commissioner to indemnify the injured party against loss and guarantee the payment and satisfaction of any judgment or judgments for damages resulting from such accident as may be *831 recovered against such owner or operator ..., and in addition thereto, the commissioner may require such operator ... (or owner, or both) ... to file proof of financial responsibility for a period of two [2] years following the date of the accident: Provided, however, that if such owner or operator shall satisfy the commissioner that the liability, if any, for damages resulting from such accident is insured by an insurance policy or bond, the commissioner shall not require security from such owner or operator: Provided further, that the words `shall require' are to be construed as being words of direction rather than words of mandate.
(b) Such security, where ordered, shall be in such form and in such amount as the commissioner may require, but in no case in excess of the amount of proof required by IC 1971, 9-2-1-15... ." (Our emphasis.)
The statute is not a compulsory insurance statute and is not applicable until a circumstance occurs which requires a motor vehicle owner or operator to give proof of financial responsibility. The statue speaks only after the occurrence of an accident, conviction or entry of judgment.
This interpretation is fortified by the case of Hill v. Standard Mutual Casualty Company (7th Cir., 1940) 110 2d 1001, 1006:
"In our opinion this particular law seeks to increase public protection in respect to motor vehicle operation. But the Indiana Law is not a general compulsory insurance law. It merely guarantees the ability of a selected group of drivers or owners to respond in damages for future accidents. In other words, the Indiana Financial Responsibility Law protects the victim against the automobile operator's second accident, and in this case it was the operator's first accident. Thus, even if we believed that the reference here would give rise to ambiguity, we would be inclined to think that reliance thereon is dependent on the applicability of the law."
No action is required until after the occurrence of a vehicle owner or operator's first accident. It is only after the first accident that proof of the owner or operator's financial responsibility is required. The Act is for the purpose of protecting victims against an owner or operator's second or subsequent accident.
We must come to the inescapable conclusion that our Legislature did not intend the financial responsibility law to be or to become a compulsory insurance statute.
A vehicle owner or operator after having his first accident must, under our statute, give proof of his ability to respond in damages or lose his privilege of operating a motor vehicle on the public highways of Indiana.
Green further urges that Whitaker was a resident of Indiana and paid for his insurance two years before the wreck involved in this litigation and that the automobile liability insurance policy did not meet the minimal financial responsibility requirements of the Indiana statute.
Further, Green urges that the statute was automatically read into the policy and therefore State Farm would have a coverage of $10,000 rather than $5,000 under their policy.
We necessarily come to the conclusion that we can give no credence to that argument for the reason that the case at bar does not come under the Safety Responsibility Act.
We find that there was no issue of a material fact and that the court correctly granted the motion for summary judgment.
Judgment affirmed.
ROBERTSON, C.J., and LYBROOK, J., concur.

=== CASE 9739845 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:13.714848+00 ===

WUEST, Acting Justice.
This case arose out of a collision at an intersection controlled by traffic signals. Appellant Rodney A. Nelson (appellant) sued for damages to his pickup and appel-lee Frederica W. McClard (appellee) counterclaimed for damages to her vehicle. The right to a jury trial was waived and the case was tried before the court. The court concluded both were negligent and that neither could recover. We reverse and remand.
There was some dispute between the parties as to the facts but the court found appellant, who was driving his pickup truck in a northerly direction on 6th Street in *518Brookings, South Dakota, had stopped for a red light. It further found appellee, who was operating her automobile in an easterly direction on 17th Avenue, was traveling about twenty-five to thirty miles per hour; that as she approached the intersection the light changed to yellow and before she entered the intersection it changed to red. The court found that when the light turned green for appellant, he entered the intersection without observing appellee’s automobile approaching the intersection. A collision occurred in the intersection, causing property damage to both vehicles. Traffic lights at the intersection are timed, so the green light will not show until the yellow light has ceased and all four signals have been red for one second.
The trial court concluded appellee was negligent for running a red light and appellant was negligent for failing to observe appellee’s vehicle approaching the intersection and not keeping a proper lookout. The court made no finding or conclusion under the comparative negligence statute.
A green light indicates vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through. SDCL 32-28-2. A steady yellow light alone indicates the vehicular traffic facing the signal is warned that the red signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection when the red signal is exhibited. SDCL 32-28-3. A steady red light alone indicates vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green is exhibited alone. SDCL 32-28-4.
There are no South Dakota cases dealing with stop lights except First Northwestern Trust Co. v. Schnable, 334 N.W.2d 16 (S.D. 1983), which is factually different. There are, however, numerous cases dealing with stop signs.
In Grosz v. Groth, 78 S.D. 379, 102 N.W.2d 834 (1960), the court held a traveler on the through highway had the right to assume cross traffic would come to a stop before entering the intersection he was approaching; however, he had to make timely observation of the crossroad for oncoming traffic. Citing Alborn v. Arms, 74 S.D. 277, 52 N.W.2d 101 (1952); Robertson v. Hennrick, 72 S.D. 37, 29 N.W.2d 329 (1947); Kundert v. B.F. Goodrich Co., 70 S.D. 464, 18 N.W.2d 786 (1945); McKiver v. Theo. Hamm Brewing Co., 67 S.D. 613, 297 N.W. 445 (1941); 5A Am.Jur., Automobiles and Highway Traffic, § 323.
In Burmeister v. Youngstrom, 81 S.D. 578, 139 N.W.2d 226 (1965), we held that
the presence of a stop sign does not relieve a motorist of the duty to use the favored highway with reasonable care and with due regard to the safety of others, Robertson v. Hennrich, 72 S.D. 37, 29 N.W.2d 329 [1947], but where the driver upon a road knows it is protected by a stop sign at an intersection with another road he can reasonably assume until the contrary is observed that a motorist approaching the intersection on an intersecting road will stop, look, and yield the right-of-way to the driver on the favored road.
81 S.D. at 583, 139 N.W.2d at 229.
An argument could be made that Bur-meister modified the rule stated in Grosz and earlier cases. However, we are dealing with signals, as distinguished from stop signs. Ordinarily, signals are used for congested areas, whereas stop signs are used on less busy highways and streets.
Modern day intersections are dangerous enough with left turn lanes, turn arrows, delayed signals, right turns on red, etc. The driver of the car entering the intersection on the preferred street is kept sufficiently busy by the action at the intersection. If we required this driver to additionally check the oncoming traffic on the non-preferred street we would probably cause more accidents than we would prevent.
Anderson v. Pre-Fob Transit Co., Inc., 409 N.E.2d 1157, 1164 (Ind.App.1980) citing Wallace v. Doan, 155 Ind.App. 316, 292 N.E.2d 820 (1973). See also Walton v. Kolb, 31 Colo.App. 95, 500 P.2d 149 (1972); Pfister v. West, 53 Ill.App.2d 305, 203 N.E.2d 35 (1964); Lehar v. Rogers, 208 Kan. 831, 494 P.2d 1124 (1972).
*519In the California case of Taylor v. Sims, 72 Cal.App.2d 60, 63, 164 P.2d 17, 19 (1945), the court stated:
Since the intersection here involved was controlled by an electric traffic signal plaintiff was not required to look into the cross streets before entering the intersection. The signal permits him to move in an easterly and westerly direction. The rule being that where the intersection movement of traffic is governed by signaling devices the determination of the question as to whether the one driver or the other is responsible for a collision at the intersection depends primarily upon the showing as to whether one vehicle or the other was being operated in conformity with the signal. The driver proceeding pursuant to the “Go” signal is not to be deemed negligent because he fails to maintain a lookout for a vehicle which might enter the intersection in violation of the signal, (citations omitted)
In the Michigan case of Stillwell v. Grubaugh, 357 Mich. 344, 351, 98 N.W.2d 490, 493 (1959) (citations omitted), the court stated:
If one crossing with a green light cannot depend upon the safety the law affords him, but must wait each time to see whether the driver approaching the red light will observe the light and stop, he may find himself in a dangerous position, particularly if the light changes against him before he has completed his trip across the street.
We believe a motorist proceeding on green should not be deemed negligent because he failed to maintain a lookout for a vehicle which might enter the intersection in violation of the signal. He has the right to assume the other traffic will obey the signal. Of course, this does not relieve him from keeping a lookout, or using reasonable care, with due regard for the safety of others. In other words, a motorist may not be blithely oblivious to the obvious.
Accordingly, we reverse and remand with directions to enter judgment for appellant for his damages.
POSHEIM, C.J., and WOLLMAN and HENDERSON, JJ„ concur.
MORGAN, J., concurs specially.

=== CASE 9739850 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:19.977945+00 ===

Supplemental Opinion On Denial of Rehearing Attorney Lowell Myers in his petition for rehearing requested that this court clarify its opinion by specifying that its decision will apply only to the taxpayers who appealed from the order of the circuit court setting attorneys’ fees and that the order of the circuit court is final as to the 63 taxpayers who did not appeal from that order. This request is not in accord with the holding of the opinion. The judgment of the trial court found that reasonable attorneys’ fees in this case is a sum of money equal to 15% of the accumulated fund of $4,785,883.25 and ordered that Bernard J. Korzen, county treasurer and ex-officio county collector of Cook County, pay this amount from the segregated fund to the attorneys “as and for a fee for legal services rendered collectively by them on behalf of members of the class who made payments into the segregated special fund ***.” This case has been prosecuted as a class action and the award of attorneys’ fees was for the representation of the class to be paid from the segregated fund to which the members of the class had contributed. The award is not a judgment at law against each individual taxpayer. This is a suit in equity, and the direction of the circuit court was that the payment of the attorneys’ fees be made from the segregated fund. The principle that “a decree is final as to a party who did not appeal” (see Shedd v. Alexander, 270 Ill. 117; Glos v. Woodward, 202 Ill. 480) is not applicable to this case. The opinion filed by this court reversed the judgment of the circuit court referred to above and set the amount of attorneys’ fees at $270,000. This amount is to be paid from the segregated fund as was the original award of the circuit court, and the balance remaining in the fund is to then be distributed to the taxpayers who contributed to that fund, according to their respective interests therein.

=== CASE 9739851 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:20.980003+00 ===

Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE KARNS delivered the opinion of the court: Defendant-appellant, William Frary, was convicted after a jury trial in the Circuit Court of Jackson County of involuntary manslaughter, recldess homicide, and leaving the scene of an accident involving death and was found not guilty of driving while intoxicated. After denying defendant’s post-trial motion and hearing evidence in mitigation and aggravation, the court sentenced defendant to 2 to 6 years’ imprisonment on the involuntary manslaughter conviction. The issues presented by this appeal are: whether the essential elements of involuntary manslaughter and reckless homicide were proven beyond a reasonable doubt; whether the jury was properly instructed; and whether the sentence imposed should be reduced. Early on the morning of the offense, the defendant was at the Road Runner Club, a night club located between Carbondale and DuQuoin, Illinois. At some time between 2 and 4 a.m., Robert Dickson, a friend of the defendant, arrived at the Road Runner on his motorcycle seeldng gasoline for an automobile stranded on highway 51, south of the Road Runner. The defendant offered to follow Dickson to the stalled auto and siphon gas from his car’s tank. Dickson and Fraiy shortly thereafter left the Road Runner and proceeded south on Route 51. Frary testified that he had consumed between two and three beers since midnight. The defendant followed Dickson at a speed of approximately 75 miles per hour. Defendant did not know that the stalled car was located just south of the Big Muddy bridge. Frary testified that he had no notice that Dickson was slowing down until Dickson was exiting from the bridge and he was still on the bridge, three or four car lengths behind. He stated that he heard Dickson shift to a lower gear and that the motorcycle appeared to be out of control and began to fall on its side. The defendant also thought that Dickson was perhaps deliberately “dumping” his cycle. As defendant’s auto passed, the cycle went out of control, throwing Dickson and his rider, Maureen Grady. Ms. Grady fell on the pavement in the north-bound lane sustaining numerous injuries including a compound fracture of her left leg. Dickson landed in the ditch on the east side of the road, sustaining fatal head injuries. Defendant testified that he braked to avoid hitting the motorcycle but could not swerve because he was still on the bridge, and that he was not sure that he actually struck the cycle. Two persons in the stalled car, Mary Ellen Owens and Robert Kruse, stated that it appeared that the car following the motorcycle was gaining on the motorcycle as the vehicles approached and that as the cycle crossed the center line it was struck from the rear by defendant’s automobile* which did not stop but sped away from the scene. Frary testified that he could not remember anything after the alleged collision but that he left the scene because he was afraid Dickson would blame him for damaging his motorcycle. A few hours later, after daybreak, the defendant’s auto was found obstructing a railroad crossing on Dillinger Road, about 2Vz miles east of Route 51. The defendant was discovered around 8 a.m. by Robert Scott, a deputy sheriff of Jackson County who had investigated the motorcycle accident, face down in a driveway a few blocks from his car. The defendant was awakened by Deputy Scott only when the latter lifted him from the driveway and placed him against his patrol car. Frary told Scott that he could not remember how he or his car came to be where they were found. Scott testified that he noted an odor of alcohol on the defendant’s breath but said that this odor could result from one beer. No tests were administered and no other indications of intoxication were observed. The defendant was picked up for questioning in connection with the motorcycle accident the next day after paint chips observed on tire rearview mirror of Dickson’s motorcycle and extracted from oil deposits on the roadway at the scene of the accident were observed by police to be of a color similar to that of defendant’s car. (At trial, however, the testimony indicated that the latter paint chip might have come from defendant’s auto, while the former could not have.) Upon being duly advised of his constitutional rights he admitted that he was involved in the accident and that his car struck the motorcycle. He detailed other matters leading up to the accident which were similar to his testimony at trial. Defendant first contends that he was not proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of involuntary manslaughter. He also argues that the allegations that he was driving while under the influence of alcohol and at an excessive rate of speed were material allegations which the State was required to prove; that the State did not prove these allegations beyond a reasonable doubt; and that, therefore, his convictions for involuntary manslaughter and reckless homicide must be reversed. We believe that regardless of whether the State was required to prove these allegations, the State failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant committed the offense of involuntary manslaughter or reckless homicide.  A person commits the offense of involuntary manslaughter when he kills an individual without lawful justification and his acts “which cause the death are such as are likely to cause death or great bodily harm to some individual, and he performs them recklessly.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 38, par. 9 — 3 (a).) The gravamen of the offense of involuntary manslaughter with a motor vehicle is criminal negligence, which must be reckless or wanton negligence “and of such a character as to show an utter disregard for the safety of others under circumstances likely to cause injury. [Citations.]” (People v. Crego, 395 Ill. 451, 70 N.E.2d 578 (1946).) Before a guilty verdict of involuntary manslaughter in operating an automobile can be allowed to stand, it must appear from the record that the defendant knew of the danger of collision and recklessly, or wantonly collided with the decedent without using those means reasonable and at his command to prevent the accident. (People v. Crego.) In the present case, it was established that defendant was traveling at a rate of speed, 10 to 15 m.p.h. above the posted limit, but driving a vehicle in excess of the speed limit does not constitute criminal negligence or willful and wanton misconduct in the absence of aggravating factors. (People v. Potter, 5 Ill. 2d 365, 125 N.E.2d 510 (1955); People v. Johnson, 30 Ill. App. 3d 974, 333 N.E.2d 258 (1975).) While Robert Krus¿ testified that it appeared to him that the- defendant’s auto was going faster than the decedent’s motorcycle the entire time they were within his sight, and Mary Ellen Owens testified that it seemed that the two vehicles were “awfully close” and that the defendant’s auto did not seem to be slowing down, the record indicates that the two vehicles had been traveling at approximately the same speed. The State argues that deféndant was criminally negligent in failing to drive onto the shoulder to avoid striking the motorcycle, which was described as turning across the center line of Route 51 when the alleged collision occurred. However, the defendant did not know the location of the stalled car. In hindsight it would appear that defendant should have veered to the right to avoid Dickson’s motorcycle, but at the time, with Dickson’s motorcycle apparently out of control, we do not believe that defendant was reckless or criminally negligent in not doing so. He did not know when or where Dickson would turn off or what path the motorcycle might take if it went out of control. Furthermore, the State failed to prove that the defendant was under the influence of alcohol at the time of the accident. The only improper conduct with which defendant can reasonably be charged is failure to maintain a safe interval and driving in excess of the speed limit, which we hold is insufficient in this case to prove beyond a reasonable doubt willful or wanton conduct, recklessness, or criminal negligence. Therefore the conviction of involuntary manslaughter must be reversed and the verdict finding him guilty of reckless homicide must be vacated.  Defendant does not challenge his culpability for leaving the scene of an accident involving death and failure to report the same (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 38, pars. 11 — 401(a) and (b)), and hence that conviction still stands. However, since a sentence of 2 to 6 years in the penitentiary is not a permissible term of imprisonment for these offenses (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 38, pars. 1005 — 8—1(b) (5), (c)(5), and 1005 — 8—3 (a)(1)), we remand this cause to the Circuit Court of Jackson County for resentencing on these charges. For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the judgment entered on the verdict of involuntary manslaughter and vacate the finding of guilt of reckless homicide. The sentence imposed is vacated and the cause remanded to the Circuit Court of Jackson County for resentencing. Reversed and remanded. JONES, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739852 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:20.984413+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE CARTER, dissenting: The testimony of the witnesses for the prosecution all pointed to the fact that the defendant was traveling at an excessive rate of speed just prior to the accident. There was also testimony that defendant’s car was following too closely behind the motorcycle. Driving at an excessive rate of speed and following too closely, in conjunction with other circumstances indicating a conscious disregard of a substantial risk likely to cause great bodily harm or death, justifies a finding of recklessness. People v. Prendergast, 95 Ill. App. 2d 41. The case presented by the prosecution and the testimony of the defendant that he had a lapse of memory and remembers nothing from the time of the impact to the time he was awakened 3 hours later were more than sufficient to sustain the jury’s verdict that the defendant was guilty of involuntary manslaughter. Since the defendant was convicted of both reckless homicide and involuntary manslaughter arising from the same facts, I would vacate the conviction for the lesser offense of reckless homicide. I would affirm the conviction of involuntary manslaughter.

=== CASE 9739853 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:21.251999+00 ===

Shepherd, P.J.
Plaintiff appeals as of right from a trial court order granting accelerated judgment *530in favor of defendant for lack of personal jurisdiction.
Plaintiff was injured in an automobile accident which occurred on September 3, 1981, in Detroit. Plaintiff was a passenger in a car owned and driven by Joseph Mader. Both plaintiff and Mader were and are Canadian residents and citizens. Defendant Allstate is a Canadian insurance company.
Defendant paid benefits to plaintiff, its insured, until July, 1982. At that point, defendant determined that plaintiff was no longer disabled and discontinued benefits. Plaintiff brought suit in Wayne County Circuit Court on September 28, 1982, seeking resumption of the benefits allegedly still owed him under the policy with defendant. Accelerated judgment was granted in favor of defendant on the ground that the trial court had no jurisdiction over defendant.
It is clear that defendant is not a resident of Michigan. It has no registered agent in Michigan, nor does it maintain offices in this state. It is not licensed to do business in Michigan, nor, apparently, does it seek customers who are residents of this state. The question, therefore, is whether Michigan may assert long-arm jurisdiction over defendant in the instant case. MCL 600.715; MSA 27A.715 provides that the courts of this state may exercise limited personal jurisdiction over a corporation and enter judgments against the corporation as a result of an act which creates or consists of the following relationships:
"(1) The transaction of any business within the state.
"(4) Contracting to insure any person, property, or *531risk located within this state at the time of contracting.”
Defendant contends that this statute does not confer personal jurisdiction in the instant case and, even if it did, such a construction of the statute would be contrary to the requirements of due process under the United States Constitution. We disagree.
MCL 600.715 was intended to give Michigan courts the full extent of power possible to gain personal jurisdiction over nonresident defendants as is consistent with the principles of due process. Northern Ins Co v B Elliott, Ltd, 117 Mich App 308; 323 NW2d 683 (1982), lv den 417 Mich 968 (1983); Korcos v Lola Cars, Ltd, 97 Mich App 379; 296 NW2d 32 (1980). Consistent with this goal, we are of the opinion that defendant transacted business within the State of Michigan to an extent sufficient to meet the requirements of MCL 600.715(1); MSA 27A.715(1).
Defendant voluntarily chose to file a certificate of compliance with Michigan no-fault laws pursuant to MCL 500.3163; MSA 24.13163. That statute provides that:
"(1) An insurer authorized to transact automobile liability insurance and personal and property protection insurance in this state shall file and maintain a written certification that any accidental bodily injury or property damage occurring in this state arising from the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of a motor vehicle as a motor vehicle by an out-of-state resident who is insured under its automobile liability insurance policies, shall be subject to the personal and property protection insurance system set forth in this act.
"(2) A nonadmitted insurer may voluntarily file the certification described in subsection (1).
"(3) When a certification filed under subsections (1) or *532(2) applies to accidental bodily injury or property damage, the insurer and its insureds with respect to that injury or damage have the rights and immunities under this act for personal and property protection insureds, and claimants have the rights and benefits of personal and property protection insurance claimants, including the right to receive benefits from the electing insurer as if it were an insurer of personal and property protection insurance applicable to the accidental bodily injury or property damage.”
Defendant, who was not licensed to do business in Michigan, filed its certification pursuant to MCL 500.3163(2). Defendant was therefore clearly aware that its insureds might be travelling in the State of Michigan and involved in accidents therein; it would appear that defendant sought to make its insurance policies more attractive to potential customers who might be regular travellers in the State of Michigan and/or sought to avail itself of the potential benefits provided by Michigan’s no-fault system by filing its certification. This activity, combined with the fact that the accident out of which plaintiff’s claim arose occurred in the State of Michigan, leads us to conclude that the courts of this state do have jurisdiction over defendant in the instant case.
Under Michigan’s no-fault system, one entitled to benefits under an insurance policy is possessed of the right to sue the insurance company when benefits are unreasonably denied. Under MCL 500.3163, therefore, plaintiff was permitted to initiate proceedings against defendant.
In order for a state court to assert jurisdiction over a nonresident defendant, that defendant must have minimum contacts with the state, and its involvement with the forum must be freely and intentionally entered into. Speckine v Stanwick International, Inc, 503 F Supp 1055 (WD Mich, *5331980). We find defendant’s voluntary filing of a certificate of compliance with Michigan no-fault insurance laws to constitute a free and intentional act of involvement with the State of Michigan insofar as defendant might be subject to liability for accidents involving its insureds which occurred in this state. Defendant made a deliberate and presumably advantageous business decision to restrict its liability toward others when its insureds drove in this state in exchange for its agreement to pay no-fault insurance benefits where warranted without regard to fault. We therefore find the requirements for long-arm jurisdiction under MCL 600.715(1) to be satisfied.
Although it is not entirely clear whether such is the case from the facts available to us on appeal, we would also hold that, if defendant deliberately filed a certification of compliance with the Michigan no-fault act in order to attract customers who were known to drive frequently in the State of Michigan, we would also find jurisdiction appropriate under MCL 600.715(4); MSA 27A.715(4). While in general, Canadian citizens could not properly be defined as "located within this state at the time of contracting”, a customer-related risk would be so located for purposes of long-arm jurisdiction if Canadian citizens regularly travelled within this state and defendant deliberately elected to abide by the no-fault insurance rules of this state in order to attract those who might frequently be found in this state and who would therefore be more likely to be involved in accidents and subject to the no-fault processes here.
We are convinced that this interpretation is consistent with the requirements of due process. See Sifers v Horen, 385 Mich 195, 198; 188 NW2d 623 (1971); Alan B McPheron, Inc v Koning, 125 *534Mich App 325; 336 NW2d 474 (1983). It is likely that defendant insures a number of drivers who enter this state, particularly given the close proximity of Michigan’s borders to Canada. A proportion of those drivers will certainly be involved in automobile accidents, and defendant will be responsible for payment of no-fault benefits as a result of some of those accidents. Defendant has specifically agreed, by filing its certificate of compliance, to be responsible for no-fault benefits mandated by Michigan law in such circumstances where they are required. Since defendant has voluntarily subjected itself to the provisions of the no-fault insurance act, we find it both fair and reasonable (and foreseeable by defendant) that the courts of this state should have personal jurisdiction over defendant in cases concerning no-fault benefits provided for by the Michigan no-fault insurance act. In determining that the courts of this state may properly exercise their jurisdiction over defendant, however, we do not necessarily hold that this state or Wayne County is the best forum in which to try this case. We therefore reverse the trial court’s order for accelerated judgment and remand for trial, without prejudice to defendant’s motion to dismiss on the grounds of forum non conveniens. Should defendant so move, and should such motion be found by the trial court to be timely, the trial court should consider all factors relevant to determining whether it should decline to exercise its otherwise properly assumed jurisdiction. See Anderson v Great Lakes Dredge & Dock Co, 411 Mich 619; 309 NW2d 539 (1981); Dayton Mall Motor Inn v Honeywell, Inc, 132 Mich App 174; 347 NW2d 15 (1984).
Reversed and remanded.
Costs to abide the final outcome.
*535W. J. Caprathe, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9739854 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:21.25581+00 ===

Beasley, J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent.
As indicated in the majority opinion, plaintiff, Jon Kriko, is a Canadian resident and Canadian citizen who carried automobile liability insurance with defendant, Allstate Insurance Company of Canada, which is a Canadian insurance company.
Defendant Allstate paid benefits to plaintiff as a result of an automobile collision on September 3, 1981, in Detroit, Michigan, in which plaintiff was a passenger in a car owned and driven by Joseph Mader, also a Canadian resident and citizen. In July, 1982, defendant Allstate discontinued payments to plaintiff when defendant Allstate decided plaintiff was no longer disabled. Plaintiff disputed that factual determination and brought this action to require defendant Allstate to resume payments under the insurance policy. Thus, this is a claim for damages for breach of contract.
I would hold that under the facts of this case there is simply nothing upon which to base jurisdiction.1 The fact that the accident occurred in Michigan is irrelevant to where plaintiff may prosecute a civil, contractual claim against his own insurance company. The suit belongs in Canada. I see no public policy requiring Michigan to extend its jurisdiction to a Canadian contract action between Canadian litigants.
I would vote to affirm.
See Hall v Scott, 416 So 2d 223 (La App, 1982).

=== CASE 2221225 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:06.606816+00 ===

136 Mich. App. 721 (1984)
357 N.W.2d 750
MICHIGAN COUNCIL 25, AMERICAN FEDERATION OF STATE, COUNTY & MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES, AFL-CIO
v.
ST. CLAIR COUNTY
Docket No. 70006.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided August 20, 1984.
Boyle O'Connor, for charging party.
Touma, Watson, Nicholson, Whaling, Fletcher & DeGrow (by Gary A. Fletcher), for respondent.
Before: BEASLEY, P.J., and GRIBBS and J.R. ERNST,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
St. Clair County appeals as of right from a decision and order of the Michigan Employment Relations Commission (MERC) dated February 23, 1983.
In approving the recommendation of the hearing referee, MERC specifically determined that the county had violated § 10(1)(e) of the public employees relations act (PERA), MCL 423.201 et seq.; MSA 17.455(1) et seq., which makes it unlawful for *726 an employer "to refuse to bargain collectively with the representatives of its public employees".
The facts in this case are largely uncontroverted. On July 27, 1976, Michigan Council 25, AFSCME, AFL-CIO (hereinafter the union), was certified in MERC Case No. R 76E-282 as the exclusive representative of the general county bargaining unit, including professional and technical employees.
On April 28, 1977, the assistant prosecuting attorneys in St. Clair County wrote a letter to the union representative indicating that they were not "includable among your county workers because, among other things, we have duties and responsibilities of a different nature from those of other county employees". Accordingly, the assistant prosecuting attorneys requested to be excluded from union representation.
A similar letter was sent to the county administrator, advising him that these attorneys did not desire to be represented by the union and that the union had no authority to negotiate on their behalf. On May 19, 1977, a follow-up letter was sent to the union by the assistant prosecuting attorneys, noting that they had not received any response to their previous letter and requesting that the union take whatever steps were necessary to ensure that they would no longer be considered a part of the union bargaining unit.
On October 3, 1977, the union was again certified as the general county bargaining unit under MERC Case No. R 778-390, including professional and technical employees and not excluding assistant prosecuting attorneys. Included in the list of eligible voters prepared by the county for the 1977 union election were the names of the assistant prosecuting attorneys. Pursuant to the 1977 certification, *727 a collective-bargaining agreement covering the period from January 1, 1978, to December 31, 1980, was negotiated between the union and the county.
On January 3, 1978, the assistant prosecuting attorneys and clerical personnel of the prosecuting attorneys' office filed a petition for election with MERC requesting that the union be decertified as to them. On May 4, 1978, a letter was written to the county personnel officer and to the union representatives notifying them that the assistant prosecuting attorneys were not and would not be part of the union bargaining unit. In addition, the letter indicated that they intended to contest unionization by filing suit for ex parte injunctive relief in the circuit court.
On May 16, 1978, the assistant prosecuting attorneys, clerical staff, and office investigator filed suit against the county, the county commissioners, the county administrator, and the union. The complaint reiterated the previous claim that the assistant prosecutors did not wish to be represented by the union and that each of them was an employee of the then county prosecutor, Peter E. Deegan, serving at his pleasure.
Based upon the allegations in this complaint, then Circuit Court Judge Halford Streeter granted the plaintiffs' motion for a preliminary injunction and temporary restraining order to prevent the collection of union dues or service fees from the named plaintiffs. The injunction effectively excluded the assistant prosecuting attorneys from the bargaining unit since, as the union representative testified, in order to be a member in good standing of the union, it was necessary to be a dues-paying member.
In August of 1978, the assistant prosecuting *728 attorneys reversed direction, decided to become part of the union bargaining unit and filed a grievance, claiming that they were covered by and entitled to wage increases under the 1978-1980 collective-bargaining agreement between the union and the county.
The county personnel officer, Terry Pettee, sent a letter to the union representative advising that the county would remain neutral in regard to the assistant prosecuting attorneys' grievance. The county offered to provide full retroactive pay to the named employees, should it be determined that they were members of the bargaining unit, but only if the attorneys withdrew "the matter from further litigation". The assistant prosecuting attorneys accepted the county's offer and voluntarily dismissed the circuit court action.
On June 11, 1979, the county sent a letter to the union acknowledging that the assistant prosecuting attorneys were now a part of the union bargaining unit. The letter, however, indicated that there were some areas of the collective-bargaining agreement which had questionable application to the assistant prosecutors because of their professional status. Specifically, the letter noted that the discharge provisions were inapplicable because of the statute providing that assistant prosecutors serve at the pleasure of the county prosecuting attorney. According to the union representative, the position taken in this letter was never disputed or responded to by the union. Similarly, the county never proposed amending the contract to include special language regarding the assistant prosecuting attorneys.
On August 13, 1980, prior to expiration of the 1978-1980 collective-bargaining agreement, a memorandum was sent to department heads informing *729 them that the bargaining agreement would expire at the end of 1980 and that a meeting had been scheduled so that the department heads could express their concerns regarding negotiations for a new agreement. In response, Prosecutor Deegan sent a letter to the personnel office indicating that he intended to take an active part in the negotiations which affected the employees of his office. The prosecutor also sent a letter to the local union representative in which he again announced his intention to take an active part in the upcoming negotiations. He, however, stated that he was not bound by the then-current collective-bargaining agreement because he "took no part in its formation, negotiation or execution".
On December 31, 1980, a new collective-bargaining agreement had not been reached, so an agreement was made extending the formal union contract on a day-to-day basis. Robert Cleland took office as St. Clair County Prosecuting Attorney on January 1, 1981, when the contract day-to-day extension was in effect. On February 12, 1981, Cleland wrote to the county administrator, advising that no one had the authority to negotiate on his behalf and that, as prosecuting attorney, he intended to retain all of his statutory prerogatives. Nevertheless, he provided that he did not have any objection to negotiations being undertaken in his behalf with respect to wage scales and other financial matters. At the county's request, he did not, however, assert his right to exercise his statutory powers as prosecutor until the negotiations on the new bargaining agreement were concluded. In accordance with the county's request, the prosecutor waited until a tentative agreement had been reached between the county and the union before advising the union of his objections to the county's *730 negotiations on his behalf as to nonfinancial matters.
In a letter dated March 11, 1981, he informed the union that "[t]he county administration does not now have, nor has it ever had, permission or authority from me, or my predecessor, to negotiate or bargain or agree upon any issue, with the employees of my office, which touches upon the hiring, discipline, discharge, or conditions of work of my office". The letter further provided that he did not object to financial matters "being resolved by the collective-bargaining undertaken by the county". The 1981-1982 collective-bargaining agreement was ratified on March 12, 1981. The union does not admit receiving the prosecutor's letter until sometime after that date.
On January 8, 1981, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney Sharon Mormon Parrish filed a grievance against Prosecutor Cleland for having terminated her employment on January 1, 1981, without just cause. In her February 23, 1981, demand for arbitration, she claimed that she was entitled to arbitration under the 1980 collective-bargaining agreement. Following her demand for arbitration, Prosecutor Cleland and the county filed suit in the St. Clair County Circuit Court requesting a permanent injunction to restrain the use of arbitration by Assistant Prosecutor Parrish and the union. In that case, plaintiffs also sought a declaratory judgment regarding the employment status of Assistant Prosecutor Parrish.
On November 5, 1981, visiting Circuit Court Judge Martin E. Clements rendered an opinion recognizing that the question before the court was one of arbitrability. He noted that whether a dispute is arbitrable is a question for the court, but that the inquiry was confined to ascertaining *731 whether the parties seeking arbitration are making a claim which, on its face, is governed by the contract. After deciding that, on its face, there is no question as to the applicability of the contract provisions regarding arbitration to assistant prosecutors, he determined that Prosecutor Cleland could legally reserve unto himself the right under the statute to discharge assistant prosecutors at will, whether or not any provisions to the contrary were contained in the collective-bargaining agreement.
The trial court further held that because the prosecutor did not negotiate with the bargaining agent and did not consent to the contract provisions regarding employee tenure, the arbitration provisions of the collective-bargaining agreement did not bind the prosecutor. Accordingly, the trial court ruled that neither the union nor the assistant prosecutor, Sharon Parrish, was entitled to arbitration. On December 14, 1981, an order was entered enjoining "all arbitration proceedings concerning the termination or discharge of Sharon Mormon Parrish from her employment".
The judgment of the trial court was reversed by this Court in Cleland v American Federation of State, County & Municipal Employees, AFL-CIO, an unpublished per curiam opinion released June 29, 1983, Docket No. 61665. We held that:
"When the parties to a collective bargaining agreement have agreed to submit questions on the document's interpretation to arbitration, a court's initial review is merely for the purpose of determining whether the party seeking arbitration is making a claim which on its face is governed by the agreement. * * *
"The union claimed in this case that the county and the prosecuting attorney had violated a specific provision *732 of the contract in terminating an assistant prosecutor's employment without just cause. The county took the position that it had not violated that clause because the prosecuting attorney intended to retain his statutory power to fire at will and without just cause notwithstanding the collective bargaining agreement's just-cause provision. There was, therefore, a dispute over whether the discharge was `improper', and the contractual provision outlining a specific grievance procedure, leading to binding arbitration, should have been followed. * * * The circuit court was without jurisdiction to rule on the merits of the parties' dispute.
"We hold that whether the prosecutor relinquished, waived, or otherwise lost his statutory authority to fire at will as a result of the bargaining process and agreement is a proper question for arbitration." (Citations omitted.)
An application for leave to appeal from our decision reversing the trial court has been filed in the Supreme Court, which application has not been ruled upon as of this writing. Consequently, for purposes of this opinion, we treat our decision under Docket No. 61665 as being the law of this case.
In addition to the demand for arbitration filed under the 1980 collective-bargaining agreement, the union filed a charge against defendant county for an alleged unfair labor practice under § 10 of PERA.[1]
The original charge was filed on June 3, 1981, claiming that termination of Sharon Mormon Parrish's employment was a result of or in retaliation for her exercise of rights granted under PERA. She apparently believed that she had been fired because of an alleged active role on behalf of herself and fellow employees regarding various employment issues.
*733 An amended charge was filed on September 1, 1981, claiming that in addition to the original charge the county had repudiated its negotiated collective-bargaining agreement with the union insofar as it related to employees in the prosecutor's office. Because the county allegedly refused to acknowledge the contract provisions regarding discipline, discharge, arbitration, and overtime pay, the union claimed that the county was in violation of § 10(1)(e) of PERA.[2]
On September 3, 1982, a hearing referee filed a decision and recommended order. It must be noted that at the time he filed his decision this Court had not yet reversed the circuit judge's judgment. The hearing referee did not accept the determination of the circuit judge, but largely acted in disregard of and as though he were not bound by the circuit judge's ruling. Whether or not he was correct on the merits in his disagreements with the circuit judge's conclusions, he seems to have missed the fact that the county and the prosecuting attorney were not in a position to make independent determinations of the merits of the circuit judge's judgment and to decide whether or not they would obey. Consequently, until June 29, 1983, when we reversed the circuit court, we believe that the county and the prosecuting attorney for St. Clair County were bound by and entitled to rely on the judgment of the circuit court.
On February 23, 1983, before this Court reversed the circuit court's judgment, MERC issued its decision and order, largely affirming the decision and recommended order of the hearing referee, albeit in a more temperate fashion than by the latter. MERC held:
*734 1. The circuit court's judgment was not res judicata with respect to the union's charges before MERC.
2. The interpretation of the prosecutor's removal statute made in the circuit court's judgment was not binding on MERC.
3. MERC does not purport to decide whether the grievance of the assistant prosecutor, Sharon Parrish, is arbitrable.
4. The county and the prosecutor must recognize and comply with both collective-bargaining agreements (one retroactive to January 1, 1981, and the other which, by its terms, expired December 31, 1980), a provision of each being arbitration of grievances (thus, requiring arbitration of the assistant prosecutor's grievance).
5. The prosecutor is not a joint employer with the county.
6. The alleged failure of Prosecutor Cleland to give more timly notice of his intention to keep the prosecutor removal statute as a working part of any collective-bargaining agreement "affirmatively subverted good faith bargaining".
7. The county violated § 10(1)(e) of PERA.
On appeal, appellant, St. Clair County, raises four issues. We note that appellant's brief was filed before the other panel of this Court reversed the judgment of the circuit court.
First, appellant claims that MERC should have applied the doctrine of res judicata based upon the circuit court's decision on the issue of whether there was an enforceable agreement to arbitrate. The so-called res judicata issue is rendered moot by our reversal of the circuit court's decision. However, to say that the circuit court's judgment was not res judicata is not to say that either MERC, the hearing referee, the union, the prosecutor, *735 or the county was at liberty to totally disregard it prior to the time when it was reversed.
Sharon Parrish was discharged as an assistant prosecuting attorney on January 1, 1981, by the then newly elected prosecutor, Robert Cleland, under the statute which provided that assistant prosecuting attorneys hold their offices "during the pleasure of the prosecuting attorney".[3]
The collective-bargaining agreement between the union and the county subsequently entered into, but made retroactive to January 1, 1981, provided that the county had the right to "discharge for just cause" and that such right was subject only to the provisions of the collective-bargaining agreement. The agreement permitted discharged employees to follow specific grievance procedures which ultimately led to binding arbitration. The union filed a grievance as a result of the discharge of Sharon Parrish and requested binding arbitration of the dispute pursuant to the terms of the binding arbitration agreement.
In reversing, we said that:
"Although public employers are under a statutory duty to bargain in good faith with public employees over discharge rights and grievance procedures, the employers may resist any proposed changes during negotiations."
In the March, 1981, collective-bargaining agreement, there is not any provision excluding assistant prosecuting attorneys nor does the prosecuting attorney retain the power to discharge assistant prosecuting attorneys at will. However, we also did indicate that there is not any reference to *736 a "posited inapplicability of MCL 49.42; MSA 5.802".
We then went on to hold that there was a bona fide dispute over whether the discharge was "improper" and that the collective-bargaining agreement outlined a specific grievance procedure leading to binding arbitration which should have been followed. For these reasons, the circuit court judgment was not res judicata and binding on MERC and the hearing referee.
Second, the county maintains that the county prosecutor is a co-employer of the assistant prosecuting attorneys. We agree and find that MERC was in error in holding otherwise. In Wayne County Civil Service Comm v Wayne County Board of Supervisors,[4] we defined the general characteristics of an employer as being:
"(1) that they select and engage the employee; (2) that they pay the wages; (3) that they have the power of dismissal; (4) that they have the power and control over the employee's conduct."
MCL 49.41; MSA 5.801 authorizes the county prosecutor to select assistant prosecutors subject to the consent of the circuit court:
"The prosecuting attorney of any county is hereby authorized and empowered to appoint an assistant prosecuting attorney, by and with the consent of the circuit judge of the judicial circuit in which such county may *737 be situated, which appointment shall be in writing and filed with the clerk of his county."
Moreover, MCL 49.42; MSA 5.802 authorizes the county prosecutor to dismiss assistant prosecuting attorneys:
"Any such assistant prosecuting attorney shall hold his office during the pleasure of the prosecuting attorney appointing him, perform any and all duties pertaining to the office of prosecuting attorney at such time or times as he may be required so to do by the prosecuting attorney and during the absence or disability from any cause of the prosecuting attorney, but he shall be subject to all the legal disqualifications and disabilities of the prosecuting attorney, and shall before entering upon the duties of his office take and subscribe the oath of office prescribed by the constitution of this state and file the same with the county clerk of his county. The compensation of any such assistant prosecuting attorney shall be paid by the prosecuting attorney appointing him."
Accordingly, the prosecutor has at least two attributes specifically recognized by this Court as belonging to a public employer.
Additional precedent for determining that the county prosecutor and the county are co-employers under PERA may be found in cases dealing with the same issue in regard to the status of the county sheriff.[5]
*738 In Capitol City Lodge No 141, FOP v Meridian Twp,[6] this Court ruled that a sheriff is not an "agent of a public employer", as used in PERA, but has a somewhat more independent status. The Court reasoned that the sheriff could not be found to be an agent of the township since the township had no authority to control the actions of the sheriff in regard to his statutory powers. Accordingly, the Court held that the sheriff's relationship to the township was that of an independent contractor and that the actions of the sheriff could not, therefore, be imputed to the township.
Similarly, in Local 1518, Council 55, AFSCME, AFL-CIO v St Clair County Sheriff;[7] this Court ruled that the county sheriff and county board of commissioners were co-employers under PERA. Specifically, the Court stated:
"While the board of commissioners may be the employer to the extent that it controls the economic factors involved in the employment contract, there is no question but that the sheriff is the employer who has control over the day to day operation of the sheriff's department. In at least one state, in a similar situation it has been held that the board of commissioners and the sheriff are dual employers for collective bargaining purposes. See County of Ulster v CSEA Unit of Ulster County Sheriff's Dep't, 37 App Div 2d 437; 326 NYS2d 706 (1971)."[8]
*739 In the instant case, MERC incorrectly ruled that the county prosecutor and the county were not joint employers. MERC based its decision on the fact that the prosecutor could not be a separate employer under PERA. In coming to this conclusion, MERC did not consider the possibility that some of the attributes, rather than all the attributes, of an employer had been delegated to the prosecutor. Under the rulings in St Clair County Sheriff and Capitol City Lodge, supra, the delegation of the power to hire and fire the employees in his office establishes the prosecutor as a co-employer with the county. Therefore, MERC erred in failing to rule that both the county and the prosecutor (Cleland) were required to engage in collective bargaining with the union.
However, while we hold that MERC erred in failing to recognize that the county prosecutor was a co-employer, it does not necessarily follow that MERC also erred in determining that Prosecutor Cleland gave up his statutory right to hire and discharge at will by failing to actively participate in the collective bargaining with the union. The statutory right of an elected official to remove and appoint persons in his office is subject to the collective-bargaining provisions of PERA.[9]
In Local 1383, International Ass'n of Fire Fighters v City of Warren,[10] the provisions of the parties' collective-bargaining agreement adopted under PERA conflicted with the county civil service act. The Supreme Court held that the statutory powers and duties of public officials were "diminished pro tanto" by PERA so that PERA could be freely administered. In addition, the Supreme *740 Court said that the free administration of collective bargaining "can only be achieved when all subjects of bargaining are included in the collective-negotiation process".[11] Accordingly, in City of Warren, supra, the Supreme Court concluded that the collective-bargaining agreement negotiated and reached under PERA would govern as to seniority and promotions, even though the civil service commission had the power by statute to determine qualifications, through competitive examinations, for the promotion of fire department employees.
In the within case, there is a potential conflict between § 15 of PERA, which requires a public employer to bargain collectively and execute a written contract in regard to "wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment", and the prosecutor's right under MCL 49.41; MSA 5.801 and MCL 49.42; MSA 5.802 to hire and fire assistant prosecuting attorneys at will. Under § 15 of PERA, elements, procedures, and criteria involving evaluations for purposes of reappointment, retention, and promotion are "other terms and conditions of employment" and, hence, are mandatory subjects of collective bargaining.[12] Since the grounds on which an employee may be discharged is a term or condition of employment, it can be argued that it is a mandatory subject for collective bargaining under PERA. Based on this premise, MERC would require the county and/or the prosecutor to engage in negotiations on this issue, notwithstanding the statutory provisions that allow the prosecutor to hire and fire assistant prosecuting attorneys at will.
*741 Under the facts in City of Warren, supra, the collective-bargaining agreement providing that county employees could only be discharged for just cause was upheld to the extent that the parties had agreed to limit the statutory powers of the prosecutor. Unanswered is what happens if a prosecutor engages in collective bargaining and does not agree to traditional discharge and grievance provisions common in private employment.
In this case, even though Prosecutor Cleland did not actively engage in the negotiations with the union that occurred after he took office and that led to the collective-bargaining agreement, he did join with the county in a circuit court action attempting to establish his right to hire and fire under the statute.
In view of the ultimate result, namely, the reversal by this Court of the circuit court's judgment (assuming the Supreme Court does not alter the decision of this Court) in hindsight, it can be said that the procedure which he chose to follow was neither wise nor successful. However, we do not choose to penalize the prosecutor, because his choice of procedure proved unsuccessful, by permitting his reliance on the circuit court's judgment to be used as a basis for a finding by MERC of a PERA violation.
In light of the notification given to the union that the prosecutor intended to retain in the collective-bargaining agreement his statutory rights to discharge the assistant prosecuting attorneys, then Prosecutor Deegan cannot be said to have acquiesced in the discharge provisions of the collective-bargaining agreement.
In addition, we recently held that where an existing collective-bargaining agreement is applied to newly represented employees, the agreement's *742 terms do not automatically apply to employees who do not perform the same duties as the employees who previously comprised the bargaining unit.[13]
In Howell Educational Secretaries Ass'n, MESPA v Howell Public Schools,[14] this Court decided that to decline to apply a pre-existing collective-bargaining agreement to newly acreted employees does not deny them entrance into the bargaining unit which they elected to join; it merely requires the parties to bargain with respect to their agreement. This Court provided that when the pre-existing contract expired, the employer was required to bargain for a single contract to cover the entire bargaining unit.
In the within case, the assistant prosecuting attorneys joined the union bargaining unit after the 1978-1980 contract was already in effect. Under the Howell decision, the "just cause" provision of that contract did not automatically apply to the assistant prosecuting attorneys. Therefore, Prosecutor Deegan did not act to waive his statutory rights in regard to the assistant prosecuting attorneys by failing to bargain collectively at the time that the 1978-1980 agreement was adopted. However, by its terms, that contract had expired at the time that Sharon Parrish was discharged by the newly elected Prosecutor Cleland. Although the 1981-1982 contract was not ratified until after she was discharged, the contract was deemed to apply retroactively so that it was in effect as of January 1, 1981. Since the 1981-1982 contract was in effect on January 1, 1981, the date Sharon Parrish was discharged, Prosecutor Deegan's reservation of *743 rights under the previous contract is irrelevant. Consequently, we decline to find that MERC erred in holding that Prosecutor Cleland waived his right to hire and fire at will in the agreement reached in 1981.
MERC considered the question of whether the county engaged in bad-faith bargaining, even though bad-faith bargaining was not specifically charged by the union. The amended charge filed by the union alleged that the county had violated PERA by engaging in unfair labor practices within the meaning of § 10(1)(e) of the statute.
Section 10(1)(e) provides that it is unlawful for a public employer or agent of the employer to "refuse to bargain collectively with the representatives of its public employees". This provision has been interpreted by this Court as requiring a "good faith effort" by all parties.[15] However, while a bad-faith charge may have been brought by the union under the cited portions of the statute, the fact is that no such charge was made, namely, that the county had failed to bargain as mandated by the statute. Under these circumstances, we are reluctant to approve a finding that the county had engaged in unfair labor practices. This reluctance is particularly supported in this case where the county and the prosecuting attorney were confronted by conflicting judgments, the one by the circuit court and the other by the hearing referee. In view of that fact, we do not believe that the evidence can be said to support a finding that the county did not engage in bargaining with an open mind and a sincere desire to reach a binding agreement.
It is understandable that at a time when the *744 county was close to an agreement with the union that would cover all employees it would be reluctant to have the entire agreement torpedoed by a few assistant prosecutors whose prosecutor did not want to waive his statutory rights. The assistant prosecutors appear to have comprised a small and relatively unimportant part of the total unit negotiating a collective-bargaining agreement.
We find no evidence to support the conclusion of the hearing referee that the actions of the county and the prosecutor approached a conspiracy to subvert the good-faith bargaining requirement of §§ 10(1)(e) and 11 of PERA. His finding indicates a manifest disregard for the judgment of the circuit court. Neither do we believe that MERC was at liberty to disregard the circuit court's judgment. We see no basis for the conclusion that the county, by instituting the circuit court action, intended to subvert the provisions of the collective-bargaining agreement. The union was entitled to seek summary dismissal of the circuit court action if it was ill-founded, procedurally incorrect and contrary to the statutes relating to governmental labor relations. In fact, if such a motion to dismiss were denied, the union could have sought an emergency appeal to this Court. But these efforts were not made.
Under these circumstances, we hold that MERC erred in finding that the county engaged in unfair labor practices by attempting to resolve these issues within the jurisdiction of the circuit court. Further, it was error for MERC to conclude that the county had refused to bargain. Those findings are reversed. In so holding, we do not alter the conclusion that Sharon Mormon Parrish is entitled to arbitration of her grievance based upon her claim that there was no just cause for her discharge.
Affirmed in part and reversed in part.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.
[1]  MCL 423.210; MSA 17.455(10).
[2]  MCL 423.210(1)(e); MSA 17.455(10)(1)(e), which reads: "to refuse to bargain collectively with the representatives of its public employes, subject to the provisions of section 11."
[3]  MCL 49.42; MSA 5.802.
[4]  22 Mich App 287, 294; 177 NW2d 449 (1970), rev'd in part 384 Mich 363; 184 NW2d 201 (1971). The Supreme Court held that PERA and the county civil service act could not be harmonized and that the civil service commission has no lawful part in the administration of PERA. The court specifically did not determine the status of any divisions of county employers other than affirming this Court's ruling that the county road commission alone was the "public employer" of its employees.
[5]  Capitol City Lodge No 141, FOP v Meridian Twp, 90 Mich App 533; 282 NW2d 383 (1979), lv den 408 Mich 856 (1980); Local 1518, Council 55, AFSCME, AFL-CIO v St Clair County Sheriff, 77 Mich App 145; 258 NW2d 168 (1977), rev'd on other grounds 407 Mich 1; 281 NW2d 313 (1979). In granting leave in St Clair County Sheriff, the Supreme Court specifically limited review of the case to two questions and, on the basis of these limited issues, reversed the Court of Appeals decision. This Court's opinion concluded that by enacting MCL 423.233; MSA 17.455(33), which provides for arbitration of public police and fire department labor disputes, the Legislature implicitly repealed MCL 51.70; MSA 5.863, empowering sheriffs to appoint and discharge their deputies. The Supreme Court held that the issue of whether the PERA provision concerning compulsory arbitration procedures for police and fire departments took prcedence need not have been considered because, as the Legislature's amendment of that statute in 1977 PA 303 made clear, the police and fire compulsory arbitration act does not apply to individual grievances. The Supreme Court did not review this Court's findings relative to the co-employer status of the county sheriff and county board of commissioners under PERA.
[6]  Supra.
[7]  Supra.
[8]  St Clair County Sheriff, supra, pp 149-150.
[9]  Id.; Local 1383, International Ass'n of Fire Fighters v City of Warren, 411 Mich 642; 311 NW2d 702 (1981).
[10]  Supra.
[11]  City of Warren, supra, p 663.
[12]  National Union of Police Officers Local 502-M, AFL-CIO v Wayne County Bd of Comm'rs, 93 Mich App 76; 286 NW2d 242 (1979).
[13]  Howell Educational Secretaries Ass'n, MESPA v Howell Public Schools, 130 Mich App 546; 343 NW2d 616 (1983).
[14]  Id.
[15]  Lamphere School Dist v Lamphere Federation of Teachers, 67 Mich App 485; 241 NW2d 257 (1976).

=== CASE 2221226 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:06.627732+00 ===

35 Ill. App.3d 942 (1976)
343 N.E.2d 6
LAKE COUNTY FOREST PRESERVE DISTRICT, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
CONTINENTAL ILLINOIS NATIONAL BANK AND TRUST COMPANY OF CHICAGO et al., Defendants-Appellants.
No. 74-417.
Illinois Appellate Court  Second District (1st Division).
Opinion filed February 20, 1976.
*943 Norman J. Barry and Roger J. Guerin, both of Rothchild, Barry & Meyers, of Chicago, for appellants.
Donald T. Morrison, of Morrison & Nemanich, of Waukegan, for appellee.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE SEIDENFELD delivered the opinion of the court:
*944 The defendants appeal from a judgment of condemnation in which they were awarded $205,000 as just compensation in accordance with the jury verdict. They contend that various trial errors deprived them of a fair trial, that the verdict was not within the range of the evidence, that they were improperly refused permission to file a cross-petition for severance damages, and that no prejudice would result from ordering a new trial because a necessary party was not joined in the proceeding.
The condemnation petition was filed on February 16, 1973, and the case was tried in March, 1974. The subject property consists of 56.1 acres of land located on the north side of Route 60 (Town Line Road) about a quarter of a mile east of Route 21 (Milwaukee Avenue), south of the town of Libertyville. It is bounded on the west by the Des Plaines River with the property to the west, between the river and Route 21, being under the same ownership. The Hawthorn Shopping Center and a related development called New Century Town are located immediately northwest of the intersection of Routes 21 and 60. The entire condemned parcel is heavily wooded and contains no building improvements. Public sanitary sewer and water serve the area immediately west of Route 21 but do not serve the condemned property or the commonly owned property between the condemned property and Route 21. According to a topographical map introduced into evidence, approximately 28 acres of the 56.1 are within the flood plain of the Des Plaines River Valley. The applicable Lake County Zoning Ordinance contained a set of special regulations restricting the use of property in the flood plain.
George C. Duffy, a professional real estate appraiser, testified for the plaintiff. It was his opinion that as of February 16, 1973, the highest and best use of the subject property was to hold for future development for uses that would be permitted under the existing zoning regulations and that the fair cash market value of the property was $190,000. Plaintiff's other expert, William A. McCann, was of the same opinion as to the highest and best use of the property. He stated that in his opinion the fair cash market value of the property as of February 16, 1973, was $220,000. The evidence of comparable sales adduced by the plaintiff ranges from $4,800 to just under $5,000 an acre.
John F. Butler, Jr., testified for the defendants and gave his opinion that the highest and best use of the subject property was for 200,000 square foot home sites, a use permitted under current zoning. It was his opinion that the fair cash market value of the property as of the date of the filing of the petition to condemn was $436,340.
Defendants argue first that the conduct of plaintiff's counsel in allegedly bringing to the attention of the jury the wealth of the Cuneo *945 family, the beneficial owners of the property, and in allegedly and repeatedly referring to inadmissible evidence prejudiced the jury and prevented a fair trial. Defendants note in this connection that the jury, although confronted with several complicated exhibits, deliberated only 15 minutes and then reached a verdict in the amount requested by plaintiff.
On the question of whether plaintiff improperly prejudiced the jury by a reference to the owners' wealth, the following facts are considered: The defendants called Lawrence Bern to rebut testimony of one of the plaintiff's witnesses who had indicated that almost all of the condemned property was under water for a good portion of the year. On direct examination of Mr. Bern defendants' counsel established that Bern had been employed by a Mr. Cuneo as a farm manager for 12 years, that he had observed the condemned property at close range once or twice a week during that time, and that he resided at Hawthorn Mellody Farm. Mr. Bern described his home as being located on the "farm proper" and gave a description of its location which would place it on the west side of Route 21 between Route 60 and the E.J. & E. tracks. On cross-examination Mr. Bern was asked to step down from the stand and answer certain questions, utilizing an aerial photograph which had been admitted into evidence as Defendants' Exhibit No. 1. The questions and answers objected to by the defendants as being designed to improperly introduce the matter of the Cuneos' wealth into the proceedings are as follows:
"Q. * * * Now, you recognize the intersection of Milwaukee Avenue and Route 60 here in the lefthand corner of this picture?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay, and you live between that intersection and the EJ&E tracks, which runs along this line that I am putting the pointer on here now, across the upper third of the picture, right?
A. That's correct.
Q. You live in that house there?
A. No, sir, I don't.
Q. Who lives in that house?
[Defendants' Counsel]: I object, Your Honor.
THE COURT: I will sustain the objection, you may interrogate him as to anything that he testified to on direct examination.
Q. [By Plaintiff's Counsel]: This is the Hawthorn Mellody farm, as I understand it, is that right?
A. No, that's extensive; it goes all the way over to Butterfield Road here.
Q. Where is Butterfield Road?
*946 A. I can't determine that on the map.
[Defendants' Counsel]: I object to this line of inquiry, Your Honor, it has no relevancy.
* * *
[Plaintiff's Counsel]: I would like to connect it up, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Please confine your questions as to what he testified to about the land itself."
After establishing that Mr. Bern had observed the condemned property from time to time while supervising farming operations being conducted on the parcel of property located immediately west of the condemned property, plaintiff's counsel asked the following questions:
"Q. And you say there is more area than just this little piece that you supervise?
A. Oh, yes.
Q. How many acres in addition to that do you supervise?
[Defendants' Counsel]: I object, Your Honor.
THE COURT: Objection is sustained.
[Plaintiff's Counsel]: Okay, I have no further questions."
 1 Reference to the financial status of the parties may constitute reversible error. (Panos v. McMahon, 23 Ill. App.3d 776, 786 (1974). Cf. Panelle v. Chicago Transit Authority, 31 Ill.2d 560 (1964), Hickey v. Chicago Transit Authority, 52 Ill. App.2d 132, 139-140 (1964), Wellner v. New York Life Insurance Co., 331 Ill. App. 360, 366 (1947).) However, the language complained of must be reasonably understood to refer to the financial status of one of the parties (Delany v. Badame, 49 Ill.2d 168, 177-78 (1971)) and must actually prejudice the cause of the complaining party. (Dupay v. New York Central R.R. Co., 110 Ill. App.2d 146, 154-55 (1969).) The defendants contend that in utilizing the aerial photograph to establish where the witness Bern lived, plaintiff's counsel pointed to a large mansion far from the condemned property which plaintiff's counsel knew to be the Cuneo home. The defendants also contend that the other two lines of questioning to which they objected were designed to emphasize the vastness of the Cuneo family's land holdings in the area and that the questions themselves accomplished that purpose even though objections were sustained before they were answered.
An examination of the entire cross-examination supports plaintiff's claim that the cross-examination was designed to undermine the witness's claim that he had observed the property regularly and frequently over a period of 12 years and had seen no substantial flooding by demonstrating that the witness lived some distance from the condemned property, could not see the entire property very clearly due to the *947 thickness of the woods, and did not have much opportunity to walk around in the woods due to the substantial nature of his other responsibilities.
 2 While the question "Who lives in that house" appears to have no proper and relevant purpose, we cannot agree with defendants' argument that the question itself introduced the matter of Cuneos' wealth into the proceedings and created prejudice to the extent that a new trial is mandated. The question is ambiguous. We do not believe that it could only be understood as a reference to the financial status of one of the parties. (Cf. Panos v. McMahon, 23 Ill. App.3d 776, 786-787 (1974).) In addition, the objection to the question was promptly sustained by the court, and the question was not answered.
Defendants also argue that plaintiff's counsel prejudiced the jury by interrupting defense counsel's closing argument with an objection in which plaintiff's counsel offered to introduce a document which had not been previously offered. It appears that during plaintiff's counsel's initial closing argument, he stated:
"Duffy and McCann put their opinions in writing, sent them to me, I sent those opinions of value in writing to [defendants' counsel], who of course made great use of them in the course of this trial; but Mr. Butler didn't do that. He didn't make an appraisal report and send it to [defendants' counsel], who couldn't send it to me. That's [sic] wasn't done, so I think that is something that can be considered. Mr. Butler said he was on this property back last September, but we couldn't get any information with regard to what his opinion of value was until last Wednesday, and that by way of a deposition.
[Defendants' Counsel]: Object, Your Honor, that is a misstatement. That was a week ago Wednesday that they had the deposition.
[Plaintiff's Counsel]: All right, a week ago.
[Defendants' Counsel]: 100 pages of Mr. Butler.
THE COURT: Very well.
[Plaintiff's Counsel]: Now, there has to be, I think, some consideration given by you as a jury to those circumstances. * * *"
During the defendants' closing argument the following exchange occurred:
"[By Defendants' Counsel]: But what happened with Mr. Butler? Now, counsel has pretended that Mr. Butler was a great big mystery to him when Mr. Butler got on the witness stand. They deposed Mr. Butler 
[Plaintiff's Counsel]: I am objecting to any reference to that *948 unless the whole deposition is admitted in evidence, and I will offer it in evidence right now.
THE COURT: The objection is overruled."
The defendants contend that plaintiff's counsel knew that the effect of his objection could only be to create an erroneous impression among the jurors that the deposition differed from Butler's oral testimony, or that defendants were unilaterally withholding information from the jurors which would be adverse to the defendants. The plaintiff's counsel answers that he believed defendants' counsel was about to discuss the contents of a document which was not in evidence. The plaintiff argues that he was therefore merely interposing a timely objection to an improper line of argument. The plaintiff's counsel also contends that he felt that he had to indicate his willingness to offer the entire document in order to keep the jury from thinking the plaintiff had something to hide.
 3 "In arguing a case to a jury, counsel are privileged to discuss the evidence introduced and all reasonable inferences that may be drawn therefrom * * *." (Forest Preserve District v. Alton R.R. Co., 391 Ill. 230, 236 (1945).) It is also true that counsel should not offer into evidence something which has already been held inadmissible by the court (Vasic v. Chicago Transit Authority, 33 Ill. App.2d 11, 11-o (1961)) and that in closing argument an attorney should not argue that if evidence which the court has held inadmissible had been admitted, it would have been adverse to the opposing party. (Forest Preserve District v. Alton R.R. Co.; Reinmueller v. Chicago Motor Coach Co., 341 Ill. App. 178, 184 (1950).) It is apparent that the deposition was not in evidence and could not have been properly offered.
 4 Under the circumstances the argument of plaintiff's counsel that he was attempting to prevent defendants' counsel from delving into the contents of a document not in evidence is reasonable. In addition, the trial court again quickly overruled the plaintiff's objection, and we cannot find from the whole record that the conduct prejudiced the jury against the defendants. See Bruske v. Arnold, 44 Ill.2d 132, 139 (1969).
Defendants' counsel also argues that counsel for the plaintiff improperly influenced the jury by implying that the defendants had not introduced the entire appraisal report of the plaintiff's witness Duffy because it would be unfavorable to them. Duffy had stated in his report that the highest and best use for the condemned property would be "to hold for future use for a Planned Development such as an Office Park or Institutional Use." This reference appeared on one page of the appraisal report and was used by the defendants' counsel to impeach Duffy's testimony at trial that the highest and best use of the condemned *949 property "is to hold for future development, for uses that would be permitted under the existing zoning regulations." When confronted with the statement in the appraisal report, Duffy stated at trial that there should have been a comma between Office and Park. Suffice it to say that there is very little sense to be found in Duffy's statement that there should have been a comma between Office and Park. Defendants' counsel strenuously emphasized in closing argument that because of the dispute about the comma, Duffy was not a credible witness and that his valuation was low considering that he had originally stated that the highest and best use would be for an office park (presumably a planned development akin to an industrial park.) In rebuttal, plaintiff's counsel used an allusion to the conduct of an octopus in releasing a cloud of ink into the water and attempting to escape under its cover. He asked the jury to consider the question of the omission of the comma in the light of Duffy's testimony taken as a whole, which he argued was consistent with the uses permitted in the zoning classification, and then said:
"Don't take  Rip one page out of his appraisal report, find one phrase that omits one bit of punctuation. There is no contention that Mr. Duffy's conclusion of value in that appraisal report wasn't exactly what he testified to here, or that anything else that he said in that long appraisal report wasn't the fact, or as near as he could determine it to be a fact. Most important of all, there is no connection between the lack of that comma and his testimony here. No connection. Where is the logic? Is his value wrong because he forgot that comma? Maybe so, but if so I haven't been told about it, I haven't heard how his value is wrong. I have heard he omitted a comma, okay, he omitted a comma. I made a mistake once myself, as I recall. Maybe you people have each made one. Now, there is no  There was no attempt made to give you his whole report, just one page. That's all, one page, one comma, one little bit of punctuation which you have to consider by itself, not in connection with this whole report, and not in connection with his testimony here. That's ink from an octopus." (Emphasis added.)
The italicized language complained of could be fairly construed as a legitimate response to defendants' argument which emphasized the importance of the missing comma as a ground for the invitation to the jury to disregard all of Duffy's testimony. We find Bulleri v. Chicago Transit Authority, 41 Ill. App.2d 95, 102-104 (1963), cited by defendants, factually distinguishable.
On the whole record it does not appear to us that the trial judge has abused his discretion in finding that the jury was not misled by *950 improper remarks of counsel. We will therefore not set aside the verdict on this ground.
Defendants also argue that the court erred in denying their motion to strike the entire testimony of plaintiff's expert Duffy. The corollary argument is made that in the absence of Duffy's testimony, the verdict would not fall within the range of the testimony and should therefore be set aside (see Central Illinois Public Service Co. v. Rider, 12 Ill.2d 326, 329 (1957)). Defendants reason that the opinion which Duffy gave was not shown to be based on sufficient physical evidence to provide the data needed to form the conclusion (cf. Craft v. Acord, 20 Ill. App.3d 231, 236 (1974)). In this connection defendants note that Duffy admitted that he had not done any soil tests or run costs on forced mains, lift stations, and development. Defendants also question whether Duffy was familiar with the land in view of his admission that he had not observed the land with any regularity. They contend that his evaluation was influenced by a belief that the land was under water most of the time which had no support in the evidence and was contradictory to the admitted fact that the property contained many trees which do not usually grow in flooded areas.
 5 The determination of the competency of an expert witness is within the discretion of the trial court. County of Cook v. Holland, 3 Ill.2d 36, 47 (1954). See also Department of Public Works & Buildings v. Jensen, 11 Ill. App.3d 93, 97 (1973); Forest Preserve District v. Harris Trust & Savings Bank, 108 Ill. App.2d 65, 72 (1969).
 6 Duffy limited his consideration of soil conditions to actual field observation and published soil condition reports of governmental bodies and testified to actual experience in developing, building and subdividing. His general qualifications as an appraiser were not seriously questioned, and he was shown to have been sufficiently qualified to consider soil conditions and development costs from his experience. In our view Duffy was a competent witness. The weight of his testimony becomes a jury question.
We also find no merit in defendants' argument that they were surprised and prejudiced by Mr. Duffy's attempt to insert the comma between "Office and Park." It appears that defendants' counsel was aware that both Duffy and McCann, the other expert witness for the plaintiff, would testify that the highest and best use of the property was to hold it for future development consistent with the current zoning. The affair of the allegedly missing comma could have minimal bearing on defense counsel's ability to effectively cross-examine the witness.
Defendants' argument that the trial court abused its discretion in ruling upon comparable sales is also not meritorious. The trial judge *951 has considerable discretion in ruling on the admission of such evidence. The rule has often been stated that "Where * * * a reasonable basis for comparison exists, the dissimilarities, which are disclosed to the jury, affect the weight and value of the testimony rather than its competency." (Forest Preserve District v. Kercher, 394 Ill. 11, 20 (1946). See also City of Evanston v. Piotrowicz, 20 Ill.2d 512, 522 (1960).) Here there appeared to be sufficient similarities to show a reasonable basis for comparison. Defendants emphasize the dissimilarities. They point out that one of the properties was much farther from sewer and water than the condemned property and that in both, the land across which sewer and water lines would have to be extended was owned by strangers to the sale. Defendants also note the absence of testimony as to whether either of the other two properties was or was not in the flood plain or flood table. In addition, defendants allege that neither of the compared properties were within the sphere of influence of the Hawthorn Shopping Center. On the record, it appears that the trial judge found to the contrary and ruled that any difference in the extent of the influence on the value of condemned property and the other parcels within the sphere, but further away from the development than the condemned land, could be considered by the jury. We find that these are dissimilarities which affect the weight and value of the evidence rather than its admissibility.
 7 We next consider defendants' contention that the court improperly denied their motion to file a cross-petition alleging damage to the property west of the river. The motion to file the cross-petition was presented on March 20, 1974, six days before the date set for the beginning of the trial and more than a year after the filing of the condemnation petition. The petition did not contain any allegation of the amount of damages. Interrogatories had been filed on December 19, 1973, in which plaintiff had asked if the defendants claimed any damage to the remaining property. The answer to the interrogatories was not filed until the date of the presentment of the motion to file the cross-petition and informed the plaintiff that a preliminary estimate of damage to the remainder was about $1 million. The motion was denied by the motion judge on the basis that it "is not timely and would delay the trial of this cause, and also does not appear to be proper as a matter of law because of lack of contiguity." The motion was renewed before the trial judge on March 26, 1974, and again was denied. Under the circumstances the denial of the motion to file the cross-petition for lack of timeliness was not an abuse of discretion. See Forest Preserve District v. Krol, 12 Ill.2d 139, 151 (1957).
In this view we do not reach the question of whether the judge was *952 correct in his additional ruling that the remaining property was not contiguous as a matter of law. We do note, however, that the cross-petition did not allege unity of use and that the answer to interrogatories simply indicated that the entire tract was vacant.
Next, defendants argue that a new trial would not prejudice the plaintiff since a further trial would be necessary to assess the damage to the interest of Robert A. Sharpe, a successor trustee who not joined as a defendant.
 8 The original petition to condemn named as defendants the successor trustees under the declaration of trust executed by John F. Cuneo individually on August 12, 1935. The successor trustees were named. They included the Continental Illinois National Bank & Trust Company of Chicago and four individuals. Unascertained acting trustees were made parties defendant to the action as "unknown owners," and publication was made. The defendants' answers to plaintiff's interrogatories filed on March 20, 1974, and the motion to dismiss one of the named trustees as a party, indicated that one of the trustees had resigned in 1970 and had been replaced by Robert A. Sharpe. A properly joined defendant may not claim as error the fact that other persons having an interest in the condemned property are not made defendants. (See South Park Commissioners v. Livingston, 344 Ill. 368, 372 (1931).) We conclude, therefore, that defendants are precluded from effectively urging that we order a new trial on the basis of this argument.
Finally, defendants argue that taking into consideration the record as a whole, they are entitled to a reversal because the verdict was the result of passion, prejudice, or clear mistake.
 9 It is clear that where an award is made by a jury in an eminent domain proceeding in which the evidence is conflicting and the jury views the property and fixes the amount of compensation within the range of the evidence, the verdict will not be disturbed unless there has been a clear and palpable mistake or a showing that the verdict was the result of passion or prejudice. (See, e.g., Trustees of Schools v. Schroeder, 23 Ill.2d 74, 79 (1961).) Here the jury viewed the property and the verdict was within the range of the evidence. The fact that it was only slightly larger than the valuation of plaintiff's expert Duffy and only slightly less than the valuation of plaintiff's second expert McCann does not establish that there has been a clear and palpable mistake. (Department of Public Works & Buildings v. Finks, 10 Ill.2d 15, 19 (1956).) On this record we are not justified in interfering with the award made by a jury which viewed the premises and returned a verdict within the range of the evidence. (See Department of Public Works & *953 Buildings v. Jensen, 11 Ill. App.3d 93, 99; Trustees of Schools v. Schroeder, 23 Ill.2d 74, 78-79; Waukegan Park District v. First National Bank, 22 Ill.2d 238, 247 (1961).) The judgment is therefore affirmed.
Affirmed.
GUILD, P.J., and HALLETT, J., concur.

=== CASE 9739855 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:26.016741+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE SCHAEFER delivered the opinion of the court: This case concerns the authority of a non-home-rule municipality to superimpose the requirements of its own “environmental protection ordinance” upon the holder of a permit for the operation of a sanitary landfill issued by the State Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Environmental Protection Act. On June 9, 1971, the plaintiff, Harry A. Carlson, obtained a permit from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency which authorized him to install and operate a sanitary landfill within the Village of Worth, a non-home-rule municipality. On June 22, 1971, the Village enacted its ordinance, which made it unlawful to operate a sanitary landfill within the Village without a permit from the Village. Issuance of such a permit was conditioned upon compliance with the requirements of the “Village of Worth Environmental Protection Ordinance,” which included the requirement of compliance with the village zoning ordinance. The circuit court of Cook County enjoined the enforcement of the ordinance, the Appellate Court, First District, affirmed (25 Ill. App. 3d 315), and we allowed leave to appeal. The appellate court found it unnecessary to consider what authority, if any, the municipality might have had to regulate a sanitary landfill prior to the enactment of the Environmental Protection Act in 1970, because it concluded that local regulation was preempted by that statute. We agree with that conclusion, which was based upon our opinion in O’Connor v. City of Rockford (1972), 52 Ill.2d 360. Although the plaintiff in that case was the City of Rockford, the decision is equally applicable to a private individual or a corporation. In that case the court held: “In our opinion, to hold here that the city’s use of the proposed site as a landfill may be permitted only upon issuance of a conditional use permit by Winnebago County, or that the county, . by reason of its zoning ordinance may prohibit such use, contravenes the clearly expressed legislative intent that such operations be conducted only upon issuance of a permit from the Environmental Protection Agency. By the enactment of the Environmental Control Act, the General Assembly has expressly declared the need for ‘a unified state-wide program’ and provided the means for issuance of appropriate permits under regulations promulgated after taking into account precisely the conflicting interests shown by this record.” 52 Ill.2d 36.0, 367. The O’Connor case would dispose of the contentions of the Village in the present case were it not for the following statement in City of Chicago v. Pollution Control Board (1975), 59 Ill.2d 484, 489: “We conclude therefore that a local governmental unit may legislate concurrently with the General Assembly on environmental control.” The Village’s case is based primarily upon that statement. The statement was dictum, for the issue in the City of Chicago case was whether or not a sanitary landfill and three incinerators, operated by the City itself, were subject to the provisions of the Environmental Protection Act. No issue relating to the power of a municipality to legislate concerning environmental control was before the court, and certainly it was not intended to overrule the decision of this court in the O’Connor case. The opinion in the O’Connor case reviewed the history of legislative efforts to control refuse disposal sites, and that history need not be repeated here. Shortly stated, it indicated that local regulation had proved unsatisfactory. The difficulties encountered resulted in the passage of the Environmental Protection Act, which contains the following legislative finding: “(ii) that because environmental damage does not respect political boundaries, it is necessary to establish a unified state-wide program for environmental protection and to cooperate fully with other States and with the United States in protecting the environment; ***.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 111½, par. 1002.) And the opinion of the appellate court in the present case pointed out that provisions which would have expressly reserved concurrent authority to local governmental units were deleted prior to passage of the Environmental Protection Act. 25 Ill. App. 3d 315, 322. Our subsequent opinion in American Smelting & Refining Co. v. County of Knox (1974), 60 Ill.2d 133, dealt with a similar problem. In that case, Knox County sought to apply its zoning ordinance to a surface-mining operation for which a permit had been issued by the Department of Mines and Minerals pursuant to the “Surface-Mined Land Conservation and Reclamation Act.” The court compared that statute with the Environmental Protection Act and decided that the reasoning of the O’Connor case was applicable, saying: “In O’Connor-v. City of Rockford, 52 Ill.2d 360, an attempt was made to prohibit the creation of a sanitary landfill in an unincorporated county area by use of county zoning requirements. After review of various provisions of the Environmental Protection Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1971, ch. 111%, par. 1001 et seq.) we held that the legislature had expressed an intent to resolve conflicting interests which could arise in such matters by authorizing a sanitary landfill when a permit was issued by the Environmental Protection Agency. Thus operation of a sanitary landfill was not dependent upon the issuance of a conditional use permit by tiie county, nor could the county zoning power be used to prohibit the operation if a State permit authorized said use.” 60 I11.2d 133, 139. As a subsidiary proposition, the Village contends that its local ordinance was given vitality by the following language contained in the permit issued by the State, agency: “This authority *** does not release the permittee from compliance *** with applicable local laws, regulations or zoning ordinances.” This identical contention, too, was raised and rejected in the O’Connor case. The State permit granted by the Environmental Protection Agency authorized the operation of a sanitary waste disposal site upon the property legally described in the application for the permit. As the appellate court pointed out in this case, the Environmental Protection Agency has not been authorized to delegate the responsibility placed upon it by the General Assembly to decide whether or not a sanitary landfill should be permitted to operate at a specified location. The judgment of the appellate court is affirmed. Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9739856 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:26.020552+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE RYAN, dissenting: I cannot concur in the majority opinion which overrules a substantial part of the very recent opinion of this court in City of Chicago v. Pollution Control Board, 59 Ill.2d 484, and which not only prohibits non-home-rule units of local government from legislating on environmental matters but also casts serious doubt upon the authority of home-rule units to do so. If, as the majority holds, the legislature prior to the 1970 Constitution has by the enactment of the Environmental Protection Act declared environmental matters to be so exclusively of statewide concern as to deprive any local unit authority to act in the field, how can it later be contended under the new constitution that the same matters pertain to the government and affairs of local governmental home-rule units? See Const. 1970, art. VII, sec. 6(a). Following a rather detailed analysis of the environmental provisions of the 1970 Constitution and after also considering the Environmental Protection Act, we concluded in City of Chicago that local governmental units may legislate concurrently with the General Assembly on environmental control. The majority in this case passes off this holding as “dictum.” In that case there were several interrelated issues. The City of Chicago had enacted an environmental ordinance and permits had been issued by the City’s Department of Environmental Control for the operation of the disposal facilities by the city. The State had argued that the city had no authority to legislate in this field contending that the authority to do so was vested exclusively in the State. We held that it was not. I am not so concerned with whether this holding is dictum as I am with the correctness of the conclusion. I also do not find that it is impossible to reconcile “the dictum” of City of Chicago with the holding in O’Connor v. City of Rockford, 52 Ill.2d 360, a case which I fear has been too broadly read. Both the majority opinion and the appellate court opinion in this case rely on O’Connor. However, that case involved only a conflict between a permit issued by the State agency involved and a local zoning ordinance. It was not the import of that case that a unit of local government could not legislate in the field of environmental control. O’Connor held only that the county, by reason of its zoning ordinance, could not prohibit the use of the land for a landfill operation which had been authorized by a permit issued by the State agency. We noted in that case that the Pollution Control Board under section 27 of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 111½, par. 1027) in promulgating regulations pursuant to which the permit is to be issued is required to take into account the existing physical conditions, the character of the area involved, including the character of surrounding land uses and the zoning classification. Thus the very conflict that was in issue in O’Connor was required to be considered by the State agency issuing the permit before the permit was issued. In the case before us we are not dealing with a zoning ordinance. Involved in this case, as in City of Chicago, is a comprehensive local ordinance 23 pages in length. It covers in detail the use and operation of solid waste disposal sites and sanitary landfills and only incidentally mentions zoning requirements in two brief sentences. The trial court decided this case on a motion for summary judgment. The pleadings, the order of the court, the statements of counsel in the trial court and the comments of the trial judge all indicate that the zoning ordinance of the village is not involved in this case. Thus, we are not concerned with the narrow holding of O’Connor. We are concerned with the broader question of whether local governmental units can legislate in the field of environmental protection. The appellate court and the majority opinion conclude that the General Assembly by the enactment of the Environmental Protection Act has preempted local regulation. It must be remembered that the Environmental Protection Act was enacted in 1970 prior to the effective date of our Constitution. In City of Chicago, we found that it was the intent of the constitutional convention as reflected in the committee reports that if the State legislates in the environmental field, but does not express exclusivity, local governmental units retain the power to act concurrently. If we accept the majority’s view that the Environmental Protection Act prohibits local governmental units from legislating in this field then the act is “contrary to, or inconsistent with” the intended import of the environmental provision in the Constitution and contrary to the intent expressed in the convention. Thus under section 9 of the transition schedule of the Constitution, any preemption that may have been implied in the Environmental Protection Act in 1970 did not survive after the effective date of our new Constitution on July 1, 1971. As observed in City of Chicago, section 2(a) (iv) of the Environmental Protection Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 111½, par. 1002(a)(iv)) states that the General Assembly finds that it is the obligation of the State government “to encourage and assist local governments to adopt and implement environmental-protection programs consistent with this Act.” It is true that this is not a specific grant of authority to a city to legislate in this field but it does express an intent that the State is not to be the sole occupant of the field. The authority of a non-home-rule unit to legislate in this field is found in its police powers. This court stated in Montgomery v. City of Galva, 41 Ill.2d 562, at 564: “The right of a municipality under its police power to regulate the collection and disposition of garbage and refuse for the promotion of public health has been recognized in the case law. [Citations.] ” Thus in this case the defendant had the authority to enact the ordinance regardless of the absence of a specific grant in the Environmental Protection Act. This authority is subject to constitutional limitations as expressed in the constitutional proceedings that local regulation must conform to the minimum standards established by the State. (See City of Chicago v. Pollution Control Board, 59 Ill.2d 484, at 488-489.) The ordinance in this case complies with this requirement by specifically providing that where the provisions of the ordinance are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by other provisions of any applicable law, rule or regulation, the more restrictive provisions (those which impose higher standards or requirements) shall govern. Summarizing, O’Connor involved only a conflict between a local zoning ordinance and a permit issued by a State agency and is not relevant to the issues in this case. We are here concerned with a local ordinance regulating the use and operation of solid waste disposal sites. The authority to enact such an ordinance stems from the village’s police power exercised for the promotion and protection of public health. The ordinance does not attempt to exclusively occupy the field but provides that its requirements shall conform to the minimum standards established by law or regulation. The intent of the framers of the Constitution was that the State and local governmental units could legislate concurrently on environmental matters. I think the decision of this court in City of Chicago is controlling and should be followed.

=== CASE 9739857 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:26.02438+00 ===

Supplemental Opinion On Denial of Rehearing Several amicus curiae briefs have been filed in connection with the petition for rehearing in this case. The new issues raised, as well as the importance of the basic question, have prompted us to file this supplemental opinion. The Attorney General has filed an amicus brief on behalf of the Environmental Protection Agency. This brief concentrates upon two sections of the Act which authorize the Pollution Control Board to adopt regulations. Section 27 applies generally to all regulations, and provides: “In promulgating regulations under this Act, the Board shall take into account the existing physical conditions, the character of *** surrounding land uses, zoning classifications, the nature of the existing air quality, ***.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 111½, par. 1027.) The other section which the Agency emphasizes is section 22, which relates specifically to refuse disposal, and authorizes the Board to adopt regulations, which among other matters may prescribe: “(a) Standards for the location, design, construction, sanitation, operation, maintenance, and discontinuance of the operation of refuse collection and disposal sites and facilities; ***.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 111½, par. 1022.) It is the position of the Agency that the Pollution Control Board has not adopted any standards “whereby the Environmental Protection Agency can make rational decisions regarding location of sanitary landfills” and that authority to govern their location may therefore be exercised only by local government units. Several considerations persuade us that this position must be rejected. Rule 316 of the Board’s solid waste regulations requires that an application to the Environmental Protection Agency for a development permit for a sanitary landfill contain, among other things, a legal description of the proposed site, maps of the site and of the area within a quarter mile of its boundaries showing the location of waterways, surface drains and “land use and population density of the proposed sanitary landfill site and of the area surrounding the site within one mile of the site boundaries.” It thus appears that the Board has complied with its statutory duty. Moreover, we deal in this case with the issuance of a permit for a sanitary landfill. Such a permit must relate to a specific site. With respect to the issuance of permits the Act provides: “The Agency shall adopt such procedures as are necessary to carry out its duties under this Section. In granting permits the Agency may impose such conditions as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Act, and as are not inconsistent with the regulations promulgated by the Board hereunder.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 111½, par. 1039.) A condition which makes a permit for a sanitary landfill upon a specific parcel of land subject to local zoning ordinances or other locally imposed conditions is not, in our opinion, consistent with the basic purpose of the Act — to “establish a unified, state-wide program supplemented by private remedies” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 11 PA, par. 1002(b)). The agency also argues that it “has no authority to adopt substantive regulations regarding the location of sanitary landfills.” But as we have pointed out, a sanitary landfill permit must be issued for a specific site, and the Board’s regulations require that the application for a permit contain detailed information concerning surrounding land uses and conditions. The Agency thus has before it the information necessary to enable it to determine the suitability of the location of a proposed sanitary landfill. An amicus curiae brief upon rehearing was also filed on behalf of the City of Chicago. That brief relies upon section 2(a)(iv) of the Act, which provides: “The General Assembly finds: * * * (iv) that it is the obligation of the State Government to manage its own activites so as to minimize environmental damage; to encourage and assist local governments to adopt and implement environmental-protection programs consistent with this Act; to promote the development of technology for environmental protection and conservation of natural resources; and in appropriate cases to afford financial assistance in preventing environmental damage.” (Italics supplied.) By concentrating solely upon the italicized clause and disregarding its context, the city is able to perceive a legislative grant of “concurrent jurisdiction over environmental matters within the municipal boundaries of Chicago, with the State regulations setting the minimum permissible standards.” This, in our opinion, is a misreading of the provision, which appears to relate to State assistance in the elimination of pollution problems stemming from the activities of the local governments themselves. In any event the clause is a part of a legislative finding as to the duties of the State. It is not a grant of authority to units of local government. And certainly there is in the italicized words no grant of power to local governments to impose requirements more stringent than those imposed by the State. The opinion of the appellate court in this case recites the history of earlier legislative efforts to achieve environmental control, and continues: “The original draft of the Environmental Protection Act was introduced on April 17, 1970, at the 76th General Assembly as House Bill 3788. Both in its original form and as amended, prior to being sent to the Senate for consideration, section 45(b) of the bill provided that apolitical subdivision could enact and enforce measures for the control, prevention, abatement or punishment of air or water pollution, or any other environmental damage. This subsection further provided that upon a proper showing to the Pollution Control Board a political subdivision could be certified as the agency with primary responsibility for such matters within its jurisdiction, although the Board and the Environmental Protection Agency would retain their full authority to exercise their respective functions within that certified subdivision. Thus, as sent to the Senate, House Bill 3788 expressly reserved to local public entities the power to enact concurrent legislation concerning those subjects included within its scope.” (25 Ill. App. 3d at 321-22.) But the powers thus reserved to local public entities were subsequently eliminated from the Act, and efforts to restore them were defeated. (Senate Journal, 76th General Assembly, May 28, 1970, at 4797-4800, Amend. Nos. 13 and 14.) Both the original provision and the rejected Senate amendments 13 and 14 authorized municipal regulations “at least as stringent as the corresponding provisions of this Act and of regulations thereunder.” The simple fact is that the Act does not contain the grant of municipal authority that the city would like to have it contain. Such a grant of authority was deliberately deleted by the General Assembly, and the General Assembly deliberately refused to put it back. The Environmental Protection Agency has not been authorized to confer upon municipalities the power that the General Assembly refused to give them. We agree with the appellate court’s conclusion which states: “It is clear from the Environmental Protection Act itself, its legislative history, and preceding legislation in the same area that the General Assembly intended to thereby exclude any authority of local political entities which could interfere with or frustrate the objective of establishing a unified state-wide system of environmental protection.” 25 Ill. App. 3d at 322.

=== CASE 9739858 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:26.02827+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE RYAN, dissenting: It is apparent that there are substantial differences between my interpretation of the Environmental Protection Act and that of the majority of this court. These differences prompted my dissent in the original opinion in this case and cause me to disagree with the conclusions stated in the supplemental opinion. The Attorney General of this State and the corporation counsel of the city of Chicago have filed amicus briefs in support of the petition for rehearing indicating that these offices also share my concern for this court’s interpretation of the Act, which I consider vests more authority in the Environmental Protection Agency than the legislature intended. The Act is lengthy. It covers broad areas of activities which affect many facets of modern living, industry and business. In very general language it vests certain authority in the Pollution Control Board. In language just as general it vests in the Agency the authority to administer and enforce the Act. The Agency is intimately familiar with all aspects of the Act and the interrelationship between its various provisions. The Attorney General, speaking for the Agency, whose duty it is to administer and enforce the Act, states that this court’s interpretation vests in the Agency too much authority; that this court’s interpretation creates serious problems in administering the Act. In view of these remonstrations coming from those who have an overall familiarity with the Act, this court, which only has the opportunity to consider the Act in piecemeal fashion on a case-by-case basis, should grant rehearing. In fact, I would favor asking for additional briefs and a reargument of the case so that this court may be fully informed of all ramifications of the question and fully understand the consequences of its decision. In this dissent I will discuss the area of my disagreement with the supplemental opinion and will not restate my objections to the original opinion. Before stating the substance of my dissent, there is what I consider to be an erroneous assumption in the supplemental opinion which should be considered. The majority did not accept the representation of the Attorney General that the Board has not adopted any standards regarding location of sanitary landfills and that authority to govern their location may be exercised by local government units. The opinion finds in the requirement of Rule 316 of the Board’s solid waste regulations that the application for a permit contain a legal description of the proposed site, maps of the site and land use and population density of the site and the area within one mile of its boundaries some standard upon which the Agency may issue a permit. Rule 316 has nothing to do with standards. Although other rules of the Board covering this subject do contain standards, there are none relating to location of. landfills. Rule 316 only specifies what information should be contained in the application for a development permit for a sanitary landfill. If the Agency uses this information as the supplemental opinion suggests, it would be establishing standards which it has no authority to do under the Act. For example, if the Agency were to decide that to accomplish the purpose of a unified statewide program as stated in section 2(b) of the Act no permit for a sanitary landfill will issue if the map and information submitted pursuant to Rule 316 show a population density of 500 people within the area of one mile from the site’s boundary this would be establishing a standard which the Agency has no authority to formulate. The fact that the Environmental Protection Act does not contain a specific grant of authority to municipalities to regulate sanitary landfill operations does not manifest an intent by the legislature that the State preempt all authority in this field. The supplemental opinion indicates that the failure of the Act to specifically grant to the municipality any authority is evidence that no such authority exists. As stated in my original dissent, municipalities possess authority to legislate in the area involved in this case by virtue of other statutory grants. In City of Nokomis v. Sullivan, 14 Ill.2d 417, this court found that the statute conferring on cities the power to define, prevent and abate nuisances could be used to compel property owners to discontinue the use of water closets and privies not connected to the city sewer. Our statute still provides: “The corporate authorities of each municipality may define, prevent, and abate nuisances.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 24, par. 11-60-2. In Strub v. Village of Deerfield, 19 Ill.2d 401, the village, by ordinance, limited the number of scavenger licenses. This court held that the village had the authority to regulate the collection, removal and disposal of garbage either under the general police power conferred on it by statute or under the statute authorizing a municipality “to do all acts and make all regulations necessary or expedient for the promotion of health and the suppression of disease.” (19 Ill.2d 401, 402.) This court found that the ordinance limiting the number of scavenger licenses “bears a real and reasonable relation to the objects of public health sought to be attained ***.” (19 Ill.2d 401, 405-406.) The present statute has retained the provisions relied upon in Strub and provides: “The corporate authorities of each municipality may do all acts and make all regulations which may be necessary or expedient for the promotion of health or the suppression of diseases ***.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 24, par. 11-20-5. In Consumers Co. v. City of Chicago, 313 Ill. 408, 413, it was held that the police powers granted to the city “to pass and enforce all necessary police ordinances” gave to municipalities the authority to regulate and provide for the collection and disposition of garbage. This court stated: “The right of a municipal corporation, under its police powers, to regulate the collection, removal and disposition of garbage and other noxious and unwholesome substances accumulating within its limits, as a sanitary measure for the promotion of the public health, has been sustained. [Citations.] ” (313 Ill. 408, 413.) See also Montgomery v. City of Galva, 41 Ill.2d 562. Our statute still provides: “The corporate authorities of each municipality may pass and enforce all necessary police ordinances.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 24, par. 11-1-1. In addition to the above statutory provisions which have been construed as granting to municipalities the authority to adopt ordinances similar to that of the Village of Worth, the Illinois Municipal .Code also specifically provides: “Every city, village or incorporated town may provide such method or methods as shall be approved by the ' corporate authorities for the disposition of garbage, refuse and ashes. Such methods may include, but need not be limited to land fill, feeding of garbage to hogs, incineration, reduction to fertilizer, or otherwise. ***” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch. 24, par. 11-19-5. Also, the Illinois Municipal Code confers zoning powers upon municipal authorities “[t] o the end *** that the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and welfare may otherwise be promoted. ***” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1973, ch 24, par. 11-13-1. Historically the regulation of the collection of refuse and its disposition have been functions performed by municipalities under the authority delegated by the legislature or that necessarily implied by such delegation. Those statutes from which this authority has been derived are still in effect. If it were the intent of the legislature that the Environmental Protection Act place these functions under the exclusive control of the State, such an intent could have been easily clearly expressed in the Act, or the particular sections of the Code conferring that authority on the municipalities could have been amended or repealed. This was not done, and the authority is still vested in the municipalities to be exercised as stated in City of Chicago v. Pollution Control Board, 59 I11.2d 484, in conformity with the minimum standards established by the legislature. The Village of Worth is a non-home-rule unit. However, the city of Chicago in its amicus brief voiced concern as to the effect of this court’s holding in this case upon its home rule powers which we sustained in City of Chicago v. Pollution Control Board. As noted above, the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse has long been a function delegated to local governmental emits. It would thus appear to be a power or function pertaining to the government and affairs of a home rule unit and thus a home rule power. Also, under the rationale of Strub v. Village of Deerfield the provisions of section 6(a) of article VII of the 1970 Constitution giving home rule units “the power to regulate for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare,” the regulation of the collection and disposal of garbage would be a home rule function. The State has chosen through the Environmental Protection Act to regulate in this area concurrently with the home rule units; however, it has not specifically limited the concurrent exercise of a home rule unit’s authority, nor has it specifically declared the State’s exercise of authority in this area to be exclusive, as it may do under section 6(i) of article VII of the 1970 Constitution. The supplemental opinion and the opinion of the appellate court in this case conclude that the failure of the legislature to enact amendments No. 13 and 14 evidences' an intent that municipalities should not be authorized to regulate in the areas covered by the Environmental Protection Act. I cannot read that meaning into the defeat of these amendments. There obviously are many reasons why a bill or an amendment to a bill may be voted down. We do not have the benefit of the transcribed debates on these amendments. It may well be that the General Assembly thought the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code, several sections of which I have cited, conferred adequate power upon municipalities and that a further grant was not needed in the Act. In reading the two amendments in question there appears to be a very valid reason for their defeat aside from that suggested by the supplemental opinion. The amendments would have completely fragmented the enforcement of the Act by providing for its enforcement in certain cities by the municipality alone and in other areas of the State by a political subdivision and the Agency or the Board, and in areas where no political subdivision had been certified as the agency with primary responsibility, presumably the amendment would have required enforcement by the Agency or the Board alone. We are in this case dealing only with the regulation of solid waste disposal sites ánd sanitary landfills. The sections of the Illinois Municipal Code cited grant to municipalities authority to regulate these operations. The Village of Worth has adopted the ordinance in question pursuant to this statutory authority. There may be areas covered by the Environmental Protection Act in which the Illinois Municipal Code has not authorized municipalities to legislate, thus denying, at least to non-home-rule units, the power to act and leaving that power solely in the State. The area with which we are dealing in this case, however, is not one of these.

=== CASE 9739859 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:26.031997+00 ===

MR. JUSTICE UNDERWOOD, also dissenting: I agree with Mr. Justice Ryan in his discussion relating to the powers of the Environmental Protection Agency. I also agree generally that existing statutes conferring power upon non-home-rule municipalities to legislate upon environmental matters of purely local concern have not been abrogated, and that O’Connor has been too broadly read if it is thought to indicate the contrary. I do not interpret the majority opinion here to preclude local legislation by non-home-rule municipalities under existing statutory authority except as that legislation may affect environmental areas of more than purely local concern or is inconsistent with the Environmental Protection Act. My greater concern with the opinion of the court, however, is the implied overruling of our recent decision in City of Chicago v. Pollution Control Board, 59 Ill.2d 484, which became final only last year. It seems to me the inference to be drawn from the majority opinion here is that because City of Chicago misinterpreted, as a grant of authority to municipalities to legislate in the environmental area, certain language in the Environmental Protection Act which was not so intended, and because legislative efforts to expressly delegate that authority were defeated, the State has totally preempted the area of environmental regulation. Whatever their relevance to the authority of non-home-rule units may be, those facts are not relevant in any discussion of preemption of the power of a home rule unit of local government. A home rule unit derives its powers from section 6 of article VII of our 1970 Constitution, and, except as limited by that section, “may exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its government and affairs.” Unless the General Assembly exercises its preemption responsibilities under paragraphs (g) or (h) of section 6, that body’s actions or failure to act cannot inhibit the authority of a home rule unit. Whether a home rule unit has power to enact a given ordinance is, in my judgment, determined by two questions: (1) Does the subject matter pertain to its government and affairs? (2) If so, has that power been limited or denied it by the General Assembly under 6(g) or 6(h)? Those questions are not considered, nor could they properly be, in the court’s opinion in this case since the issue here does not involve a home rule municipality.

=== CASE 9740176 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:29:27.067238+00 ===

Arterburn, J.
Appellant Eaymond Miller was indicted for first degree murder by the Marion County Grand Jury on March 7, 1974. He was charged with striking Arie Stanley Byrd with a hatchet on October 2, 1973, inflicting wounds which caused Byrd’s death on December 23, 1973. Appellant *596pled no guilty by reason of temporary insanity. He was found guilty of second degree murder, an included offense, and on September 26, 1974, was sentenced to imprisonment for not less than fifteen and not more than twenty-five years.
Appellant presents three issues in this appeal. First, he claims error in the admission into evidence of statements made by Appellant in the absence of proper Miranda warnings. Second, Appellant contends that there was fatal variance between the cause of death as proven and the cause of death as charged in the indictment. Third, it is maintained that this variance results in evidence insufficient to support the verdict. Because these last two issues revolve around the same question of law, whether or not the blows struck by the Appellant were the legal cause of the victim’s death, they will be consolidated in this opinion.
I.
Appellant contends that the standard four part Miranda warning given him by police officers who questioned him was inadequate in light of Green v. State, (1971) 257 Ind. 244, 274 N.E.2d 267. In that decision, this court said:
“The requirements set out in Miranda relating to the custodial interrogation of the criminally accused, to provide the necessary procedural safeguards are:
(1) The person must be warned that he has a right to remain silent;
(2) The person must be warned that any statements he does make may be used as evidence against him;
(3) The person must be informed that he has a right to the presence of an attorney, either retained or appointed;
(4) If the person indicates at any stage of the process he wishes to consult with an attorney before speaking there can be no questioning until the request is granted;
(5) If the person indicates at any stage of the process that he wishes not to be further interrogated, the interrogation must stop.” Green v. State, (1971) 257 Ind. 244, 250, 274 N.E.2d 267, 270.
*597Appellant contends that this requires a five part warning. Appellant has misread the Green decision. What it requires in the way of information to an accused is the four part test of Miranda, parts (1) - (3) above. Parts (4) and (5) are guidelines for police conduct, not additional elements of the required warning. This contention by Appellant is thus without merit.
II.
Appellant inflicted hatchet wounds on the victim on October 2,1973. Death of the victim came on December 21, 1973, with pneumonia as the immediate cause. Appellant thus contends that there is inadequate connection between the blows he struck and the death to establish those hatchet blows as the cause of death.
We can not agree with this contention. Testimony at trial drew a direct connection between the victim’s pneumonia and the blows struck by the Appellant. The pathologist who performed the autopsy on the deceased testified upon direct examination:
“My opinion is that this individual died as a result of pneumonia secondary to cranius malingre, meaning an injury to the skull and underlying brain.”
Upon cross examination the doctor said:
“No. sir. Up until now I had not interpreted your question to be that directly. You have always talked in terms of possibility; therefore, anything is possible. So, my answer has to be ‘anything is possible.’ In regard to medical certainty and probability, it would be my opinion that his pneumonia resulted from his head injury.”
Appellant contends that the failure of the indictment in this case to mention pneumonia constituted a fatal variance between that indictment and the proof offered at trial. The indictment charged that the Appellant murdered the victim by striking at and against the head of the deceased and that the deceased died of the mortal *598wounds so inflicted. In view of the pathologist testimony-above, the indictment’s failure to mention pneumonia constituted no variance from the proof presented at trial. Even if we assume that a variance has occurred here, Appellant’s contention is without merit. It is well-accepted that where a variance between the indictment and proof appears, in order to be considered a material variance it must have misled the defendant in the preparation of his defense or be of such a degree as is likely to place him in double jeopardy as a result. Majors v. State, (1969) 252 Ind. 672, 251 N.E.2d 571; DeBruler v. State, (1965) 247 Ind. 1, 210 N.E.2d 666; Roberts v. State, (1964) 245 Ind. 185, 197 N.E.2d 304; Madison v. State, (1955) 234 Ind. 517, 130 N.E.2d 35. The Appellant has not shown that he was misled in the preparation of his defense, nor that double jeopardy was somehow made more likely.
Because Appellant’s sufficiency of the evidence argument also turns upon the question of legal causation, we find that it too is without merit. An individual who inflicts injury upon another is deemed by law to be guilty of homicide if the injury contributes mediately or immediately to the death of that other person. Wahl v. State, (1951) 229 Ind. 521, 98 N.E.2d 671; Hicks v. State, (1938) 213 Ind. 277, 11 N.E.2d 171, cert. denied 304 U.S. 564, 82 L.Ed. 1531, 58 S.Ct. 951. The evidence presented in this case was such that the jury could draw a reasonable inference that the blows admittedly struck by Appellant caused the ultimate death of their target.
Finding no error, we affirm the judgment of the court below.
Givan, C.J., Hunter, Prentice, JJ., concur; DeBruler, J., concurs in result with opinion.

=== CASE 9740177 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:29:27.071795+00 ===

Opinion Concurring in Result
DeBruler, J.
Miranda v. Arizona, (1966) 384 U.S. 436, 88 S.Ct. 1602, 16 L.Ed.2d 694, requires that a person in *599police custody be apprised prior to interrogation of the privilege against self-incrimination and the right to counsel which the Constitution grants him. In Green v. State, (1971) 257 Ind. 244, 274 N.E.2d 267, in conformity with this requirement, we set out the five categories of information which must be imparted to such persons in order to adequately apprise them of the extent of those rights in the interrogation context. Those five categories are quoted in the majority opinion from Green v. State, supra, and I shall not repeat them here. The advisement of rights given appellant here is as follows:
“1) You have a right to remain silent.
2) Anything which you say can be used against you in court.
3) You have a right to have a lawyer present now.
4) If you do not have the money to retain a lawyer, you have the right to have one appointed for you by the court.”
This advisement is constitutionally deficient, in that it does not inform the person about to be interrogated that, if he chooses to answer questions without counsel present, he has a right at any time during interrogation to invoke the right to remain silent and to answer no further questions. It is also deficient in that it does not inform the person that, if he submits to the interrogation without counsel, he has a right at any time during interrogation to stop answering until he talks to a lawyer.
I would hope that prosecutors throughout the State, who have not already done so, would insist that law enforcement officials within their jurisdiction include in their advisement of rights some statement comparable to this:
“If you want to answer questions now without a lawyer present you will still have the right to stop answering at any time. You also have the right to stop answering at any time until you talk to a lawyer.” United States v. Poole, 495 F.2d 115, 117 n. 2 (D.C.Cir. 1974) ; accord, United States v. Bailey, 468 F.2d 652, 659 n. 6 (5th Cir. 1972).
However, under the circumstances of this case, the erroneous admission of appellant’s statement given in the inter*600rogation which followed this deficient advisement was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Chapman v. California, (1967) 386 U.S. 18, 87 S.Ct. 824, 17 L.Ed.2d 705; Harrington v. California, (1969) 395 U.S. 250, 89 S.Ct. 1726, 23 L.Ed.2d 284. According to the testimony of the interrogating officer, this statement consisted of the answers to two questions. The officer testified in relation to them as follows:
“I again asked him how long it took him to get the beer and he stated approximately five minutes, at which time I stated that there’s no way that he could get to Tenth Street and back in five minutes if he ran, at which time he stated well, that’s how long it took him.”
Appellant gave no other information on this occasion.
Prior to giving this testimony, the same officer had testified that appellant was at the scene when the police arrived and accompanied them about the house and talked with them during their investigation at the scene. The victim at this time was alive and being administered medical treatment. During this initial investigation, appellant told the officer that he had been in the same house as the victim on the night of the attack, that he left the house for five minutes to get some beer, returned to the house, went to sleep in the basement, was awakened by the victim calling to him from the first floor through a register in the floor, went upstairs, turned on the light and discovered the injured victim, went outside to a neighbor’s house and called the police and an ambulance. The admissibility of the officer’s testimony describing what appellant said during this period of investigation is not an issue in this appeal. The information given by appellant in his two responses following the deficient advisement of rights at the police station was minimally and circumstantially inculpatory and was repetitive of this unchallenged statement given at the scene.
And further, when the victim died a month later, a warrant was issued for appellant’s arrest on a murder charge. He surrendered in the company of his lawyer, and, with *601his lawyer present, he gave a confession, in which he admitted for the first time that he had struck the victim. This statement was admitted without objection.
Note. — Reported at 335 N.E.2d 206.

=== CASE 9740178 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:29:27.312457+00 ===

FINE, J.
¶ 1. We granted the petition for leave to appeal filed by the defendants.1 They seek reversal of the trial court's non-final order directing them to return to the plaintiffs documents produced during discovery *807that the trial court held were protected by the attorney-client privilege. We reverse.
I.
¶ 2. This is an inter-family dispute over money, the specific details of which are not material to this appeal. During the litigation before the trial court, Robert L. Elliott, Esq., while he was the plaintiffs' attorney, turned over to the defendants documents that he determined were responsive to the defendants' discovery request. The plaintiffs later contended that some of the documents were protected from disclosure by the attorney-client privilege. The defendants asserted that the plaintiffs had waived whatever privilege there was.
¶ 3. The trial court referred the dispute over what documents were privileged and whether that privilege was waived to a referee, designated as a "discovery master," pursuant to Wis. Stat. Rule 805.06. The referee, Theodore J. Hodan, Esq., heard thirteen hours of testimony and argument and issued a comprehensive thirty-three-page report, encompassing his findings of fact and conclusions of law. See Wis. Stat. Rule 805.06(5)(a). On review, see Wis. Stat. Rule 805.06(5)(b), the trial court adopted the referee's findings of fact, but overturned the referee's conclusion that the plaintiffs had waived the attorney-client privilege. See ibid. ("In an action to be tried without a jury the court shall accept the referee's findings of fact unless clearly erroneous."). At oral argument, the plaintiffs conceded that the referee's findings of fact were not "clearly erroneous." Thus, we accept the facts material to our decision as they were found by the referee. See Wis. Stat. Rule 805.17(2) (appellate court bound by trial court's findings of fact unless they are "clearly errone*808ous"). We also assume, without deciding, that the documents are within the attorney-client privilege.
¶ 4. The referee found that Elliott "is a prominent, experienced, competent, well-respected, board certified civil trial lawyer, who is known to have handled many difficult complex and high-profile civil lawsuits," and that he "dealt primarily" with the plaintiff Beth Bauer as a " 'contact' person" in connection with the lawsuit during the time he was the plaintiffs' lawyer. Bauer testified that she gave the documents that are the subject of this appeal to Elliott. She also testified that the documents were produced by Elliott without her knowledge, and, as phrased by the referee, that she "did not intend, nor at any time agree that the documents in question could be or would be turned over to the defendants." She did, however, concede that Elliott had authority to respond to the discovery request.2
¶ 5. Bauer helped Elliott with the discovery request, but Elliott did the " 'privileged document review' " by himself. Although he could not recall whether he had looked at the specific documents that are the subject of this appeal, Elliott testified, as found by the referee, "that it was his practice (which he believed he followed in this case) to read every page of every document and if a question (about it being privileged) came up, he would ask the clients about the document." Further, Elliott reviewed the challenged documents at the hearing before the referee and Elliott testified that he saw "no reason for him to conclude that [the documents were] privileged."
*809¶ 6. The referee opined however, that Elliott "should have realized that they were privileged or, at the least, realized that further information from the client regarding their creation was required prior to turning them over to the" defendants. As noted, the referee concluded that the plaintiffs had waived their attorney-client privilege in connection with the documents.
¶ 7. In reaching his decision, the referee surveyed the law dealing with the inadvertent disclosure of attorney-client privilege documents and concluded that the issue had not been addressed by an appellate court in Wisconsin. Nation-wide, he discovered, there were three approaches: lenient, strict, and intermediate. The "lenient" rule holds that "inadvertent" disclosure by an attorney of materials clothed with the attorney-client privilege does not waive the privilege. See, e.g., Mendenhall v. Barber-Greene Co., 531 E Supp. 951, 954-955 (N.D. Ill. 1982). The "strict" rule holds that disclosure, whether authorized by the client or not, is waiver because, in essence, the sounds of a bell once rung cannot be recaptured. See, e.g., International Digital Sys. v. Digital Equip. Corp., 120 F.R.D. 445, 449-450 (D. Mass. 1988) (decision by a United States Magistrate Judge). The intermediate, "totality-of-the-circumstances" approach attempts to balance such amorphous elements as: the reasonableness of safeguards in-place to prevent unauthorized disclosure of attorney-client privileged material; the extent of the document production request and the attendant burdens on the party responding to that request (for example, does the request seek a few documents or a few hundred thousand); any unreasonable delay in trying to retrieve the inadvertently produced documents; the number of times the producing party or its *810lawyers have disclosed protected materials before; and an overall interests-of-justice, fairness calculus. See, e.g., United States ex rel. Bagley v. TRW, Inc., 204 F.R.D. 170, 174-185 (C.D. Cal. 2001) (applying federal common law) (none of the parties "challenged the appropriateness of steering the middle course between the strict rule that disclosure always constitutes a waiver and the forgiving rule that disclosure never results in a waiver unless a waiver actually was subjectively intended") (decision by a United States Magistrate Judge).
¶ 8. The referee concluded that of the three approaches, the intermediate approach was a better way of resolving the inadvertent production of privileged documents, even though it was "cumbersome, time-consuming, expensive, and in some cases, may be impracticable." The referee, however, determined that none of the approaches was applicable to this case because the documents were not produced inadvertently.3 The referee found:
• "Elliott, in fact, reviewed each of the documents in question and then intentionally determined that they should be turned over to opposing counsel";
• "Attorney Elliott's actions [in producing the *811documents] were deliberate and intentional"; and
• "Thus, Attorney Elliott's decision to turn over the documents was not 'inadvertent,' it was 'intentional.'"
(Emphasis by the referee.) Accordingly, the referee concluded that Elliott's production of the documents waived his clients' attorney-client privilege as to those documents. As an alternative ground for his decision, the referee applied the totality-of-the-circumstances test and determined that the defendants prevailed under it as well.
¶ 9. The trial court disagreed with the referee's conclusion, and held that "Elliott could not waive the Plaintiffs' attorney/client privilege," as to the documents because, in its view, "the law in Wisconsin is only the client can waive attorney/client communications."
II.
¶ 10. This appeal presents a very narrow issue: whether a lawyer's intentional discovery-request production to opposing counsel of documents covered by the attorney-client privilege waives that privilege when the lawyer does not recognize the privileged character of the documents. Although an excursion through the various rules courts and ethics committees have adopted in connection with the "inadvertent" production of privileged material might make an interesting journey,4 we agree with the referee that, based on his *812finding of fact, Elliott's transmission of the documents to the defendants was deliberate, intentional and not inadvertent; the rules applicable to "inadvertent" disclosure do not apply here. Rather, our decision turns on the nature of the attorney-client relationship, and what constitutes waiver under Wis. Stat. Rule 905.II.5
¶ 11. Our decision is based on two common precepts. First, under ordinary attorney-client agency principles, compliance with discovery requests is something that the client delegates to the attorney. The referee found that this was done here. Second, as recognized by the Federal Advisory Committee note to proposed Fed. R. Evid. 511, which was adopted in Wisconsin as Wis. Stat. Rule 905.11, the formulation of waiver by Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U.S. 458, 464 (1938), as the intentional relinquishment of a known right, *813does not apply to waiver of evidentiary privileges.6 The Federal Advisory Committee observed that "once confidentiality is destroyed through voluntary disclosure, no subsequent claim of privilege can restore it, and knowledge or lack of knowledge of the existence of the privilege appears to be irrelevant." Wisconsin Rules of Evidence 59 Wis. 2d at Rp. 151.7
A. The attorney-client agency relationship.
¶ 12. A lawyer has actual authority to act on behalf of the client, and the client is bound by what the lawyer does, where "the client has expressly or impliedly authorized the act." Restatement (Third) of The Law Governing Lawyers § 26 (1998). The Restatement *814observes: "The word 'act' includes failures to act, for example when a lawyer does not object to something done in court." Id. at cmt. a. "Likewise, the client is bound by authorized lawyer action or inaction during litigation, for example when the lawyer asks a question that elicits an answer harmful to the client or files a frivolous motion." Id. at cmt. d. These comments recognize that the lawyer has actual authority to conduct litigation and does not need a specific delegation of authority with respect to each thing done or not done.
¶ 13. Closely related to the actual authority of the lawyer to bind the client is the lawyer's apparent authority to do so. These twin concepts "often lead to similar results." Restatement (Third) of The Law Governing Lawyers § 27 cmt. b (1998). The black-letter rule on apparent authority is:
A lawyer's act is considered to be that of the client in proceedings before a tribunal or in dealings with a third person if the tribunal or third person reasonably assumes that the lawyer is authorized to do the act on the basis of the client's (and not the lawyer's) manifestations of such authorization.
Id. at § 27. Manifestation of authorization is generally the attorney-client relationship itself. "[Sjimply retaining a lawyer confers broad apparent authority on the lawyer unless other facts apparent to the third person show that the lawyer's authority is narrower." Id. at cmt. a. The Restatement explains: "By retaining a lawyer, a client implies that the lawyer is authorized to act for the client in matters relating to the representation and reasonably appropriate in the circumstances to carry it out." Id. at cmt. c. Although this "creates a risk that a client will be bound by an act the client never *815intended to authorize," id. at cmt. b, the rule is necessary if the gears of the law are not to be embedded in the intractable sand of continual second-guessing and the attendant evidentiary hearings that, as the referee here recognized, would inevitably follow.
¶ 14. The attorney-client agency rule in Wisconsin mirrors that recognized by the Restatement. Thus, a client is responsible for the acts of his or her lawyer, even if that means suffering the harsh result of dismissal. Johnson v. Allis Chalmers Corp., 162 Wis. 2d 261, 283-284, 470 N.W.2d 859, 867-868 (1991):
"There is certainly no merit to the contention that dismissal of petitioner's claim because of his counsel's unexcused conduct imposes an unjust penalty on the client. Petitioner voluntarily chose this attorney as his representative in the action, and he cannot now avoid the consequences of the acts or omissions of this freely selected agent. Any other notion would be wholly inconsistent with our system of representative litigation, in which each party is deemed bound by the acts of his lawyer-agent and is considered to have 'notice of all facts, notice of which can be charged upon the attorney.' "
(Quoting Link v. Wabash R.R. Co., 370 U.S. 626, 633-634 (1962); internal quoted source omitted by Johnson, 162 Wis. 2d at 284, 470 N.W.2d at 868.) Thus, in the context of whether a medical-malpractice case is barred by the statute of limitations or is saved by the "discovery rule" adopted by Hansen v. A.H. Robbins Co., 113 Wis. 2d 550, 560, 335 N.W.2d 578, 583 (1983), "what a lawyer retained by a plaintiff knows is imputed to that plaintiff." Estate of Hegarty v. Beauchaine, 2001 WI App 300, ¶ 84, 249 Wis. 2d 142, 189-190, 638 N.W.2d 355, 378 (Fine, J., dissenting, but writing the opinion of the *816court on that issue, see id., 249 Wis. 2d 142, ¶ 79); see also Groom v. Professionals Ins. Co., 179 Wis. 2d 241, 250 n.3, 507 N.W.2d 121, 125 n.3 (Ct. App. 1993) ("A party is bound by the acts of her lawyer-agent and has notice of all the facts in the possession of her attorney.").
¶ 15. We now turn to how the attorney-client agency relationship affects the intentional — albeit allegedly erroneous — production of claimed attorney-client-privilege documents pursuant to a discovery request.
B. Waiver.
¶ 16. The attorney-client privilege is set out in Wis. Stat. Rule 905.03(2):
GENERAL Rule of PRIVILEGE. A client has a privilege to refuse to disclose and to prevent any other person from disclosing confidential communications made for the purpose of facilitating the rendition of professional legal services to the client: between the client or the client's representative and the client's lawyer or the lawyer's representative; or between the client's lawyer and the lawyer's representative; or by the client or the client's lawyer to a lawyer representing another in a matter of common interest; or between representatives of the client or between the client and a representative of the client; or between lawyers representing the client.
The privilege belongs to the client, State ex rel. Dudek v. Circuit Court, 34 Wis. 2d 559, 605, 150 N.W.2d 387, 412 (1967); Swan Sales Corp. v. Jos. Schlitz Brewing Co., 126 Wis. 2d 16, 31-32, 374 N.W.2d 640, 648 (Ct. App. 1985), and may be claimed by the client or, among *817others, by the attorney who was the client's lawyer when the client made the communication. Wis. Stat. Rule 905.03(3).8
¶ 17. The attorney-client privilege, as with all privileges recognized by Wis. Stat. ch. 905, may be waived. The general rule of waiver is in Wis. Stat. Rule 905.11:
A person upon whom this chapter confers a privilege against disclosure of the confidential matter or communication waives the privilege if the person or his or her predecessor, while holder of the privilege, voluntarily discloses or consents to disclosure of any significant part of the matter or communication. This section does not apply if the disclosure is itself a privileged communication.
At oral argument, the plaintiffs contended that the word "voluntary" was qualified by the requirement that it be both volitional and knowing — that there could be no waiver without the intentional relinquishment of a known right, referencing and adopting, in response to the court's question, Johnson v. Zerbst. But as we have seen, the Federal Advisory Committee's Note to proposed Fed. R. Evid. 511, from which Wis. Stat. Rule 905.11 was copied, recognized that the Johnson v. Zerbst standard does not apply to waiver of evidentiary privileges. Thus, if the "holder of the privilege," namely *818the client, "voluntarily discloses" a communication shielded by the attorney-client privilege, that disclosure need only be volitional. Given the attorney-client agency relationship, the same rule applies to disclosure by the client's attorney.
¶ 18. The black-letter rule is found in Restatement (Third) of The Law Governing Lawyers. Section 79 recognizes:
The attorney-client privilege is waived if the client, the client's lawyer, or another authorized agent of the client voluntarily discloses the communication in a non-privileged communication.
As with the Federal Advisory Committee's Note to proposed Fed. R. Evan 511, whether the disclosure is done "voluntarily" is a matter of volition only: "The disclosing person need not be aware that the communication was privileged, nor specifically intend to waive the privilege." Restatement (Third) of The Law Governing Lawyers § 79 cmt. g. Similarly, "disclosure through a voluntary act constitutes a waiver even though not intended to have that effect." Id. at cmt. h. This is true because "[i]t would, after all, be an unusual case in which any person released a document for the purpose of surrendering a recognized right." Liggett Group, Inc. v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., 116 F.R.D. 205, 208 (M.D.N.C. 1986) (inadvertent disclosure) (emphasis in Liggett) (decision by a United States Magistrate Judge).
¶ 19. In re Grand Jury Investigation of Ocean Transportation, 604 F.2d 672 (D.C. Cir. 1979) (per curiam), cert. denied sub nom. Sea-Land Services, Inc. v. United States, 444 U.S. 915, is helpful to our analysis because the facts there are similar to the facts here. In *819that case, Sea-Land Services sought return of documents produced by its lawyer to the United States Department of Justice pursuant to a subpoena duces tecum. Id., 604 F.2d at 673. Two groups of documents were produced, and we discuss the group that is most analogous to the situation here.
¶ 20. The Department served its subpoena on Sea-Land, which told its original lawyer to comply but also "to withhold from production all documents which were felt might be covered by the attorney-client privilege." Id., 604 F.2d at 674. As to the group of documents pertinent to our inquiry, the lawyer, for an unknown reason deemed irrelevant by the court, "did not mark these papers as potentially privileged and voluntarily turned them over." Ibid. Ocean Transportation opined as to the effect of this volitional transmission:
This must be deemed a complete waiver. Original counsel's responsibility was to determine the privileged status of Sea-Land's documents. Its decisions in this regard were binding on its client. Privilege claims cannot be reopened by retaining new counsel who read the privilege rules more broadly than did their predecessor.
Ibid.
¶ 21. Plaintiffs contend that what the referee found to be Elliott's volitional transmission of the documents to the defendants could not waive the attorney-client privilege because of language in Dudek and Swan Sales that only the client may waive the attorney-client privilege. But the cases are inapposite.9
*820¶ 22. In Dudek, an insurance-policy holder sued the insurance company, and subpoenaed the company's lawyer, Edward A. Dudek, Esq., to give testimony at a deposition. Dudek, 34 Wis. 2d at 568-569, 150 N.W.2d at 392-393. Although responding to some questions, Dudek refused to answer questions that in his view sought answers that invaded both the attorney-client privilege and the work-product doctrine. Id., 34 Wis. 2d at 570, 150 N.W2d at 393. The trial court directed Dudek to answer all but "28 inquiries in the transcript of the deposition." Id., 34 Wis. 2d at 571, 150 N.W.2d at 394.
¶ 23. Although dealing mainly with the work-product doctrine, id., 34 Wis. 2d at 583-605,150 N.W.2d at 400-412, Dudek also addressed the attorney-client privilege, id., 34 Wis. 2d at 578-583, 150 N.W.2d at 398-400. The policy holder contended that because Dudek had verified the company's answer and amended answer, Dudek had, as paraphrased by Dudek, "placed himself in the position of a party" and thus had waived the client's attorney-client privilege. Id., 34 Wis. 2d at 605, 150 N.W2d at 412. Dudek disagreed, noting only that "as an attorney Mr. Dudek may not waive any *821objections to discovery which are based upon the attorney-client privilege. Only the client can waive these objections." Ibid.
¶ 24. In Swan Sales, an in-house lawyer for one of the parties testified at a deposition in the case and submitted an affidavit in support of the party's motion for summary judgment. Swan Sales, 126 Wis. 2d at 30-31, 374 N.W.2d at 648. Swan argued that this waived both the attorney-client privilege and the work-product doctrine in connection with materials the lawyer used to prepare himself for the deposition and to draft the affidavit. Id., 126 Wis. 2d at 30-31, 374 N.W.2d at 648. Holding to the contrary, Swan Sales opined: "[T]he mere fact that an attorney offers him- or herself as a witness does not automatically waive the attorney-client privilege or work product doctrine as to documents reviewed by the attorney in preparing to testify. We note that these privileges are owned by the attorney's client and can only be waived voluntarily at the client's direction." Id., 126 Wis. 2d at 31-32, 374 N.W.2d at 648 (citing, in a footnote, Wis. Stat. Rules 905.03 and 905.11).
¶ 25. Neither Dudek nor Swan Sales dealt with the situation presented here: the volitional transmission of documents by a lawyer, pursuant to a discovery request, who was authorized by his client to deal with discovery matters. Moreover, in both Dudek and Swan Sales, the lawyers asserted the attorney-client privilege the moment the other side sought to invade the privilege; neither lawyer transmitted or disclosed confidential attorney-client-privilege material. Plaintiffs' attempt to morph the language from Dudek and Swan Sales into a hook with which to retrieve documents produced volitionally by their lawyer would transform *822that language from a "holding" (because the language was clearly pertinent to the issues decided by those cases) into dictum. As we pointed out in State v. Leitner, 2001 WI App 172, ¶ 50, 247 Wis. 2d 195, 216-217, 633 N.W.2d 207, 217, aff'd, 2002 WI 77, ¶ 22, 253 Wis. 2d 449, 463-464, 646 N.W.2d 341, 348, a statement in a judicial decision is dictum if the issue argued to be controlled by that statement was not before the court making the statement, unless the statement is a" 'judicial act'" by a " 'court of last resort,'" which intends to lay down a rule to govern future cases, 253 Wis. 2d 449, ¶ 22 n.16 (quoted source omitted). The statements in Dudek and Swan Sales are not "judicial acts," and to apply them to an issue that was not even on the horizon for either court would violate the fundamental principle that has long been the spine of the judicial-decision process. As Chief Justice John Marshall observed:
It is a maxim not to be disregarded, that general expressions, in every opinion, are to be taken in connection with the case in which those expressions are used. If they go beyond the case, they may be respected, but ought not to control the judgment in a subsequent suit when the very point is presented for decision. The reason of this maxim is obvious. The question actually before the Court is investigated with care and considered in its full extent. Other principles which may serve to illustrate it, are considered in their relation to the case decided, but their possible bearing on all other cases is seldom completely investigated.
Cohens v. Virginia, 6 Wheat. (19 U.S.) 264, 399-400 (1821) (emphasis added). In short, observations that are neither essential to the opinion in which they appear nor "judicial acts" by a "court of last resort" should not be allowed to leak from the container of *823matters actually decided and affect issues not envisioned by the authors of that dicta.
¶ 26. To let the words that the plaintiffs quote from Dudek and Swan Sales, rather than the concepts or principles encompassed by those words in the context in which they were uttered, control the issue presented here, would, in our view, be akin letting the words of the Fourth Amendment protecting "[t]he right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects" exclude telephone booths. That, of course, is not the law. Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347, 351-353 (1967).10
III.
¶ 27. In sum, we conclude that what the referee found to be Elliott's volitional act of transmitting the documents to the defendants pursuant to a discovery request, waived whatever attorney-client privilege the plaintiffs had in connection with those documents. Accordingly, we reverse and remand this matter to the trial court for further proceedings consistent with this decision.
By the Court. — Order reversed and cause remanded with directions.
The plaintiffs in the trial court are: the Harold Sampson Children's Trust, the Beth Bauer Trust, the Jamie L. Sherman Trust, and the Kay Yuspeh Trust. The defendants in the trial court are: Ann Mandelman, Nancy Simos, and Sampson Investments, as well as the Linda Gale Sampson 1979 Trust, the Steven J. Sampson 1979 Trust, and the Scott A. Sampson 1979 Trust — all successors to the B.J. Sampson Children's Trust.
The referee found that "Elliott indicated that he believed he had authority to disclose all non-privileged documents," and that this was "consistent with the testimony submitted by Beth Bauer."
The referee insightfully observed that, in contrast to the facts of this case, "[m]ost of the cases [he] reviewed outline occurrences where privileged documents were clearly turned over 'inadvertently.' Factual situations that have been litigated include: Confidential documents that were supposed to be removed from a file or box were not removed; post-it notes that were supposed to identify confidential documents were inadvertently removed or fell off the privileged materials; [and] confidential materials were attached and sent to opposing counsel due to failures by clerical personnel."
For example, we would find in Pennsylvania an opinion by the Philadelphia Bar Association's Professional Guidance Committee that it does not violate the Pennsylvania Rules of Professional Conduct for a lawyer to keep and seek to use an *812inadvertently faxed privileged document (Opinion 94-3, found online at: http://www.philabar.org/public/ethics/displayethics .asp?id=21622212000), and an informal opinion by the Pennsylvania Bar Association Committee on Legal Ethics and Professional Responsibility (Informal Opinion No. 95-57) disapproving the Philadelphia view.
The Dissent ignores the referee's findings of fact, especially the finding of fact that Elliott deliberately gave the documents to the defendants, and discusses what we respectfully submit is a red herring- — -whether the referee's alternate conclusion that the intermediate approach in assessing whether the inadvertent production of privileged documents is a waiver of that privilege. Given the referee's governing findings of fact, which no one suggests are clearly erroneous, the Dissent's extensive discussion in paragraphs thirty-four through thirty-six of what may or what may not (or should or should not) be the law of privilege in the face of inadvertent disclosure is immaterial.
As submitted by the United States Supreme Court to Congress for its approval pursuant to 1973 Public Law 93-12, the Federal Rules of Evidence included an Article Y, dealing with privileges. Stephen A. Saltzbubg, Michael M. Mahtin, & Daniel J. Capra, 1 Federal Rules of Evidence Manual 3-4; 2 FedeRAL Rules of Evidence Manual 587 (6th ed. 1994). Congress removed a listing of specific privileges from Article V from the Federal Rules of Evidence. 2 Federal Rules of Evidence Manual at 585-588.
Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U.S. 458 (1938), concerned whether a criminal defendant had waived his constitutional right to counsel. Id., 304 U.S. at 464. Johnson determined that the defendant's decision to go to trial without a lawyer might not have been an effective "waiver": "A waiver is ordinarily an intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known right or privilege. The determination of whether there has been an intelligent waiver of the right to Counsel must depend, in each case, upon the particular facts and circumstances surrounding that case, including the background, experience, and conduct of the accused." Ibid. Johnson remanded the case to the district court for such an evaluation. Id., 304 U.S. at 469.
Wisconsin Stat. Rule 905.03(3) provides:
The privilege may be claimed by the client, the client's guardian or conservator, the personal representative of a deceased client, or the successor, trustee, or similar representative of a corporation, association, or other organization, whether or not in existence. The person who was the lawyer at the time of the communication may claim the privilege but only on behalf of the client. The lawyer’s authority to do so is presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary.
Plaintiffs also rely on In re Grand Jury Subpoena Dated July 13, 1979, 478 F. Supp. 368, 372-373 (E.D. Wis. 1979), which held that the voluntary disclosure to the Securities and Ex*820change Commission, a grand jury, and the Internal Revenue Service of a report prepared by a law firm hired to assess its client's potential civil and criminal liability did not waive the attorney-client privilege with respect to notes of the underlying interviews. The district court opined that voluntary cooperation with the named agencies "should be encouraged," and not "substantially curtailed" by a rule that treated such cooperation as a waiver. Ibid. The district court did not even discuss, however, whether the privilege was waived with respect to those to whom the report was given, which, of course, is what we have here.
We have borrowed this analogy, applied in a different context, from Silveira v. Lockyer, 328 F.3d 567, 568 (9th Cir. 2003) (order denying petition for rehearing era banc) (Kozinski, J., dissenting).

=== CASE 9740179 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:29:27.317575+00 ===

WEDEMEYER, EJ.
¶ 28. (dissenting). I respectfully dissent from the majority opinion for the following reasons.
*824A. The Wisconsin Court of Appeals Standard of Review and Limited Power of Authority.
¶ 29. This court reviews questions of law de novo. Reyes v. Greatway Ins. Co., 227 Wis. 2d 357, 364-65, 597 N.W.2d 687 (1999). However, we must still adhere to the applicable supreme court precedent regardless of our disagreement with it. Professional Office Bldgs., Inc. v. Royal Indem. Co., 145 Wis. 2d 573, 581, 427 N.W.2d 427 (Ct. App. 1988). In addition to being obligated to follow the applicable supreme court precedent, this court is precluded from adopting and/or applying rules from foreign jurisdictions that contradict the Wisconsin Supreme Court precedent. Wolski v. Wilson, 174 Wis. 2d 533, 497 N.W.2d 794 (Ct. App. 1993).
¶ 30. Our supreme court is the only state court that has been granted the authority and power to create and modify principles of law. Cook v. Cook, 208 Wis. 2d 166, 189, 560 N.W.2d 246 (1977).1 Unlike this court, it has been designated by the constitution of this state and the legislature as the sole "law-declaring" state court. State ex rel. La Crosse Tribune v. Circuit Court, 115 Wis. 2d 220, 229-30, 340 N.W.2d 460 (1983). This court does not have the same authority or power. Rather, our primary function is to act as an error correcting court. State v. Schumacher, 144 Wis. 2d 388, 398, 424 N.W.2d 672 (1988); State v. Mosley, 102 Wis. 2d 636, 665-66, 307 N.W.2d 200 (1981); State v. Grawien, 123 Wis. 2d 428, 432, 367 N.W.2d 816 (Ct. App. 1985). The Wisconsin Supreme Court, in State ex rel. Swan v. *825Board of Elections, 133 Wis. 2d 87, 93-94, 394 N.W.2d 732 (1986) summarized the role of this court best in stating:
The court of appeals is intended to be a high-volume, error-correcting court, having a close relationship to the circuit courts in respect to the superintending control of circuit court functions.... The supreme court is primarily concerned with the institutional functions of our judicial system, while the court of appeals is charged primarily with error correcting in the individual case.
B. Wisconsin Attorney-Client Privilege Standard.
¶ 31. An attorney-client communication is privileged if it is "not intended to be disclosed to 3rd persons other than those to whom disclosure is in furtherance of the rendition of professional legal services to the client or those reasonably necessary for the transmission of the communication." Wis. Stat. § 905.03(l)(d). The attorney-client privilege belongs to, and is for the benefit of, the client; accordingly, only the client can "refuse to disclose and to prevent any other person from disclosing confidential communications made for the purpose of facilitating the rendition of professional legal services to the client. . . ." Wis. Stat. § 905.03(2).
¶ 32. It is the law in Wisconsin that only the client can waive the attorney-client privilege. State ex rel. Dudek v. Circuit Court, 34 Wis. 2d 559, 605, 150 N.W.2d 387 (1967); Swan Sales Corp. v. Joseph Schlitz Brewing Co., 126 Wis. 2d 16, 31-32, 374 N.W.2d 640 (Ct. App. 1985); Borgwardt v. Redlin, 196 Wis. 2d 342, 352-53, 355, 538 N.W.2d 581 (Ct. App. 1995). Only the client has the authority to direct the attorney to waive the attorney-client privilege. Dudek, 34 Wis. 2d at 605; Swan Sales Corp., 126 Wis. 2d at 31-32.
*826¶ 33. The Majority sets forth the three different tests used nationwide to determine the admissibility of previously disclosed attorney-client privileged documents: (1) the lenient test; (2) the strict test; and (3) the intermediate test. Majority slip op. at ¶ 8. In surveying the law, the referee discovered these three approaches.
¶ 34. Regardless of the tests being used by foreign jurisdictions across the nation, however, the circuit court here was bound to follow Wisconsin law. Any deviation from applying the law of this state will be corrected through an error of law analysis by this court.
¶ 35. The appellants contend that the circuit court incorrectly applied the leniency test to the instant case. They turn to the referee's opinion for support of their claim, pointing to the following excerpt:
However, even though I have found [Attorney] Elliott's actions do not allow plaintiffs to qualify for the "totality of the circumstances" test, if it is ultimately determined that Elliott's actions do not, as a matter of law, disqualify plaintiffs from the applicability of this rule, I will also apply the five factors making up the totality of the circumstances test to the facts in this case ...[.]
I have weighed all of the legal factors, and applied them to the testimony and evidence submitted in this case. I hold and conclude that plaintiffs have failed to meet their burden of proof. I find that plaintiffs' attorney-client privilege in the documents, exhibits 1-25, has been waived. Therefore, plaintiffs' motion must be denied.
¶ 36. A referee, however, must apply the law that exists in this state, and does not have the authority to make or speculate what law the Wisconsin Supreme Court may apply. In reaching his decision, it is my *827opinion that the referee did not follow precedent and arbitrarily applied his own conclusion. The referee came to the above-referenced conclusion despite finding that the documents in question were clearly privileged communication, as defined by Wis. Stat. § 905.03. He further found that the documents were made for the purposes of rendering legal services, that Ms. Bauer told Attorney Elliott the documents were prepared for counsel and constituted her thoughts, and that Ms. Bauer never intended or agreed that the documents in question could be disclosed to the defendants. Clearly, Ms. Bauer, as the client, never consented to waiving her attorney-client privilege; therefore, such privilege, under the laws of the State of Wisconsin, could not have been waived. The circuit court, although agreeing with the referee's findings of fact, correctly reversed its conclusion that the respondents waived their right to assert the attorney-client privilege, stating:
But I'm going to say that even though I think the world of Mr. Hodan as a lawyer and as a good human being and as a friend, our professional responsibilities are our professional responsibilities. Though I feel that way about Mr. Hodan, he's not on the court of appeals or on the Wisconsin State Supreme Court. And myself as a lowly, subservient trial judge is not on the court of appeals or on the supreme court, and we're not supposed to be making law. That's not our function. I tried that. I tried that gap in the past and did a dance with three of them up there and seven on another occasion. I think there's a distinction between applying legal consents recognized in Wisconsin which fall within a judge's discretion, exploring a whole new area of law that hasn't been addressed in Wisconsin but has been addressed by other states. So it's not within my province to make new law.
*828But the law in Wisconsin is only the client can waive attorney/client communications. The lawyers for the client is there to zealously protect, and the lawyer is not supposed to allow a waiver. You generally find a lot of this dialogue in criminal proceedings, the divorce arena or the family court arena, and civil court arena are a little bit different. The cases cited by plaintiffs' counsel are correct.
¶ 37. In reversing the referee's decision, the circuit court applied the standard currently espoused by the Wisconsin Supreme Court. The circuit court correctly concluded that it is bound to follow and apply Wisconsin law. As a result, the circuit court was forced to amend the referee's conclusions of law to accurately reflect proper Wisconsin precedent. In my opinion, we are bound to follow the existing precedent until the Wisconsin Supreme Court concludes otherwise.2 Accordingly, I would affirm.
1n some circumstances, we perform a second function, "that of law defining and law development, as [we] adapt[ ] the common law and interpret ] the statutes and federal and state constitutions in the cases [we] decide[ ]." Cook v. Cook, 208 Wis. 2d 166, 188, 560 N.W.2d 246 (1977).
The Majority concludes that the existing law does not control the issue presented in this case because the waiver here was intentional and the existing case law addresses solely inadvertent disclosures. I disagree. In my opinion, we are bound to apply the general law applying to the attorney-client privilege until the Wisconsin Supreme Court, or our legislature, determines otherwise.

=== CASE 9739860 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:26.035321+00 ===

MR. CHIEF JUSTICE WARD, also dissenting: I share the concern which Mr. Justices Underwood and Ryan have expressed. It is remarkable, as Mr. Justice Ryan observes, that the opinion of the majority imposes upon the Environmental Protection Agency an authority which not only the Village but the Agency itself and the Attorney General as well object to and correctly (to me) say the Agency has not been given by the legislature. I do not have the small confidence that Mr. Justice Underwood appears to have in the survival of our decision in City of Chicago v. Pollution Control Board, 59 Ill.2d 484, as to the power of home rule units to act concurrently with the State in the environmental regulatory area. It is clear to me, especially from the majority’s discussion' of the amicus curiae brief filed in behalf of the City of Chicago, that the question as to the exclusivity of the State’s authority has been settled by this opinion. The view expressed by this court in City of Chicago has been, in practical terms, interred, though it seems obvious to me that environmental pollution pertains to a municipality’s “government and affairs.”

=== CASE 2221237 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:06.826643+00 ===

136 Mich. App. 682 (1984)
357 N.W.2d 741
PEOPLE
v.
WILLIAMS
Docket No. 67970.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided August 20, 1984.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Louis J. Caruso, Solicitor General, John D. O'Hair, Prosecuting Attorney, Edward Reilly Wilson, Deputy Chief, Civil and Appeals, and Larry L. Roberts, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
Leslie D. Cooper, for defendant.
Before: ALLEN, P.J., and WAHLS and M. WARSHAWSKY,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Defendant was convicted by a jury of two counts of first-degree murder, MCL 750.316; MSA 28.548, and one count each of armed robbery, MCL 750.529; MSA 28.797, and felony-firearm, MCL 750.227b; MSA 28.424(2). He was sentenced to a prison term of two years on the felony-firearm, *684 to be served prior to concurrent prison terms of life on each murder count and 20 to 40 years on the armed robbery count. He appeals as of right.
Defendant first argues that the trial court erred in permitting the prosecutor to impeach witness Diane Johnson, defendant's girlfriend, with her prior statement. The witness was indorsed and called by the prosecutor. Defendant preserved the issue with a timely objection. We agree with defendant that the prosecutor was not entitled to impeach his own witness under MRE 607(2). The rule provides in pertinent part:
"The credibility of a witness may be attacked by:
"(1) an opposing party; or
"(2) the calling party if
"(A) the calling party is the prosecutor and he is obliged to call the witness,
* * *
"(C) the witness's testimony was contrary to that which the calling party had anticipated and was actually injurious to the calling party's case." MRE 607.
Subsection (A) is inapplicable because the prosecutor was not obliged to call the witness. Johnson was not a res gestae witness. Furthermore, the prosecutor's indorsement of Johnson on the information created only the obligation to produce her at trial and not the duty to call her as a witness. People v Terry, 80 Mich App 299, 307; 263 NW2d 352 (1977), quoting People v O'Dell, 10 Mich App 87, 92; 158 NW2d 805 (1968). Subsection (C) is also inapplicable because, even assuming Johnson's testimony was contrary to that which the prosecutor had anticipated, it was not actually injurious to the prosecutor's case.
Although the impeachment evidence was improperly admitted, we find that the error does not *685 mandate reversal under the facts of this case. The prosecutor produced ample evidence tying defendant to the charged offenses. The error was not intrinsically offensive to the maintenance of a sound judicial system and, had the trial been free of the error, we believe it is not reasonably possible that any juror would have voted to acquit defendant. People v Bailey, 101 Mich App 144, 152; 300 NW2d 474 (1980); GCR 1963, 529.1.
Defendant next contends that the court erred in permitting the prosecutor to elicit hearsay testimony on cross-examination of Officer Dunn. Over defense counsel's objection, the prosecutor elicited prior statements given to Officer Dunn by Roger Holman and Sylvester Williams concerning descriptions of the clothes defendant was wearing on the night of the offense.
We agree with defendant that Dunn's testimony concerning statements made to him by Holman and Williams was clearly hearsay and was erroneously admitted. We again apply the harmless-error test, however, and conclude that the error does not require reversal. The hearsay testimony given by Dunn was consistent with the trial testimony of Roger Holman and Sylvester Williams as well as the testimony of co-perpetrator Herbert Hammock. We believe it is not reasonably possible that even one juror would have voted to acquit had the hearsay testimony been excluded.
Defendant next asserts that the court erred in excluding on hearsay grounds a statement given by Lee Lewis to the police at the time of his arrest. Charges brought against Lewis in connection with this incident were dismissed prior to defendant's trial. Lewis asserted the Fifth Amendment and refused to testify at defendant's trial. Defendant sought to introduce under MRE *686 804(b)(3) an exculpatory statement made by Lewis at the time of his arrest to the effect that Lewis and others, including defendant, were out stealing cars at the time the murders took place. The trial court found rule 804(b)(3) inapplicable and excluded the statement.
MRE 804(b)(3) provides:
"The following are not excluded by the hearsay rule if the declarant is unavailable as a witness:
* * *
"A statement which was at the time of its making so far contrary to the declarant's pecuniary or proprietary interest, or so far tended to subject him to civil or criminal liability, or to render invalid a claim by him against another, that a reasonable person in his position would not have made the statement unless he believed it to be true. A statement tending to expose the declarant to criminal liability and offered to exculpate the accused is not admissible unless corroborating circumstances clearly indicate the trustworthiness of the statement."
There is no question that Lewis was unavailable at trial due to his assertion of the Fifth Amendment. The crucial issue is whether Lewis's statement was against his penal interest. To be admissible under this exception, a statement must truly be against the declarant's penal interest. People v Blankenship, 108 Mich App 794; 310 NW2d 880 (1981), lv den 412 Mich 857 (1981).
In McCormick, Evidence (2d ed), ch 27, § 279, pp 677-678, the authors note a qualification of this exception to the hearsay rule, namely, that even though a statement may be against the declarant's penal interest, if it appears that he had some other motive, whether of self-interest or otherwise, which would likely lead him to misrepresent the facts, the declaration should be excluded.
*687 In determining whether a statement is truly against penal interest, the court must do more than merely look at whether the declarant has admitted his involvement in some crime; the decision must necessarily be made in view of the context in which the out-of-court statement was given. Where a declarant is arrested for murder and, at the time of his arrest, denies involvement in the murder but asserts as an alibi the commission of a much less serious offense, the guarantees of trustworthiness underpinning the MRE 804(b)(3) exception to the hearsay rule are no longer present. Lewis in this case may reasonably have believed that his exculpatory statement as to the murders would be more persuasive if he admitted involvement in other crimes. We cannot say that a reasonable person in Lewis's position would not have made the statement unless he believed it to be true. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in excluding Lewis's out-of-court statement.
Defendant next challenges the admission into evidence of written out-of-court statements given to the police by witnesses Diane Johnson, Herbert Hammock, Roger Holman, and Sylvester Williams. Johnson's statement was used by the prosecutor to impeach her trial testimony. The statements of the other three witnesses were used by the prosecutor to refresh their recollections.
We agree with defendant that the written statements were hearsay and inadmissible as substantive evidence under People v Rodgers, 388 Mich 513; 201 NW2d 621 (1972), adopting the dissenting opinion of Judge (now Justice) LEVIN in People v Rodgers, 36 Mich App 211; 193 NW2d 412 (1971). However, we apply the harmless-error test and again find that admission of these documents into evidence does not mandate reversal.
*688 Defendant finally challenges a remark made by the prosecutor during closing argument. We find that the challenged remark was based on fair inferences reasonably drawn from the evidence at trial and that no reversible error occurred.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.

=== CASE 9739861 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:22:26.92087+00 ===

Staton, P.J.
A jury found Walter E. Payne, Jr. guilty of possessing marijuana which was in violation of IC 1971, 16-6-8-3(c) (Burns Code Ed.). Payne was fined $700.00 and sentenced to imprisonment for a term of not less than one (1) year nor more than ten (10) years. His motion to correct errors raises these issues on appeal:
(1) Should the initial issue of the voluntariness of Payne’s waiver of rights and subsequent confession have been decided in the presence of the jury?
(2) Was there probable cause to suspect Payne’s criminal activity when the police set up a plan to buy marijuana from him?
*397(3) Was Payne’s motion to suppress the marijuana evidence improperly overruled ?
(4) Was a sufficient chain of custody established to warrant admission of the marijuana into evidence?
(5) Did the trial court err in admitting oral testimony regarding marijuana seized in a vehicle in Long Beach, Indiana?
We conclude that the trial court erred when it determined the initial question of voluntariness in the presence of the jury. It is the opinion of the majority of this court, not including the author of this opinion, that this cause should be remanded to the trial court for a hearing on the issue of voluntariness. If the trial court, on remand, makes an independent determination that the waiver of rights statement and the subsequent confession were voluntary, then the judgment of conviction must be affirmed, since we find no reversible error in the remaining issues presented for our review. If, however, the trial court on remand finds the confession involuntary, Payne’s conviction must be set aside, and a new trial must be granted.
I.
Voluntariness of Confession
The State’s first witness, Sergeant Abraham, testified that Payne had been informed of his rights before signing a written waiver of rights form which indicated that he was willing to talk to the police. The State then asked Abraham what Payne said after the waiver was signed. Payne’s defense counsel objected to any testimony about conversations after the waiver was signed for the reason that neither the waiver of rights nor any subsequent statements were shown to have been voluntarily made. The trial court treated the initial question of voluntariness as a question for the jury and, in the presence of the jury, permitted evidence to be heard.1 *398At the conclusion of the evidence, which included the voir dire of Sergeant Abraham,2 the trial court overruled the objection. Abraham testified that Payne confessed his ownership of marijuana found in his suitcase.
IC 1971, 35-5-5-1 (Burns Code Ed.) mandates the trial court to hear evidence out of the presence and hearing of the jury to determine any issue as to voluntariness before admitting confessions3 in evidence:
“In any criminal prosecution brought by the state of Indiana, a confession, as defined in section (5) [35-5-5-5] hereof, shall be admissible in evidence if it is voluntarily given. Before such confession is received in evidence, the trial judge shall, out of the presence and hearing of the jury, determine any issue as to voluntariness. If the trial judge determines that the confession was voluntarily made, it shall be admitted in evidence and the trial judge shall permit the jury to hear relevant evidence on the issue of voluntariness and shall instruct the jury to give such weight to the confession as the jury feels it deserves under all the circumstances.” (emphasis added).
The trial court’s action, determining voluntariness in the presence of the jury, constituted a violation of section 35-5-5-1, as well as a violation of Payne’s fifth and fourteenth amendment rights. Jackson v. Denno (1964), 378 U.S. 368, 84 S.Ct. 1774, 12 L.Ed.2d 908.4 The only remaining question is the disposition of the case in the face of this error.
*399In Jackson v. Denno, supra, petitioner Jackson filed a petition for habeas corpus in the federal district court asserting that his New York conviction was invalid because it was founded on a confession not properly determined to have been voluntary. Consistent with the New York practice when a question was raised about the voluntariness of a confession, the trial court had submitted the issue to the jury.5 The United States Supreme Court concluded that the New York procedure was inadequate to “insure a reliable and clear-cut determination” of voluntariness “unbeclouded by other issues and the effect of extraneous but prejudicial evidence.” 378 U.S. at 390, 391, 84 S.Ct. at 1788, 12 L.Ed. at 923, 924. The Supreme Court determined that Jackson was entitled to a full evidentiary hearing in the New York courts to determine the factual context of Jackson’s confession. The Court said:
“It does not follow, however, that Jackson is automatically entitled to a complete new trial including a retrial of the *400issue of guilt or innocence. Jackson’s position before the District Court, and here, is that the issue of his confession should not have been decided by the convicting jury but should have been determined in a proceeding separate and apart from the body trying guilt or innocence. So far we agree and hold that he is now entitled to such a hearing in the state court. But if at the conclusion of such an evidentiary hearing in the state court on the coercion issue, it is determined that Jackson’s confession was voluntarily given, admissible in evidence, and properly to be considered by the jury, we see no constitutional necessity at that point for proceeding with a new trial, for Jackson has already been tried by a jury with the confession placed before it and has been found guilty. True, the jury in the first trial was permitted to deal with the issue of voluntariness and we do not know whether the conviction rested upon the confession; but if it did, there is no constitutional prejudice to Jackson from the New York procedure if the confession is now properly found to be voluntary and therefore admissible. If the jury relied upon it, it was entitled to do so. Of course, if the state court, at an evidentiary hearing, redetermines the facts and decides that Jackson’s confession was involuntary, there must be a new trial on guilt or innocence without the confession’s being admitted in evidence.” 378 U.S. at 394, 84 S.Ct. at 1790,12 L.Ed.2d at 925-26 (footnote omitted).
The Court further stated:
“It is both practical and desirable that in cases to be tried hereafter a proper determination of voluntariness be made prior to the admission of the confession to the jury which is adjudicating guilt or innocence. But as to Jackson, who has already been convicted and now seeks collateral relief, we cannot say that the Constitution requires a new trial if in a soundly conducted collateral proceeding, the confession which was admitted at the trial is fairly determined to be voluntary.” Id. at 395-96, 84 S.Ct. at 1790-91, 12 L.Ed.2d at 926-27.
Clearly, Jackson stands for the proposition that an accused has a constitutional right “at some stage in the proceedings to object to the use of [his] confession and to have a fair hearing and a reliable determination on the issue of voluntariness.” Id. at 376-77, 84 S.Ct. at 1780-81, 12 L.Ed.2d at 915. However, Jackson finds no con*401stitutional requirement that an accused, once tried and convicted at a trial at which his confession was considered by the jury, be given a new trial if, later, an independent and reliable determination is made that the confession was voluntary and, thus, was properly before the jury.
It is the opinion of this writer that, since Jackson only establishes the minimum to which an accused is constitutionally entitled, this Court must be bound by the procedure established by the Indiana legislature. IC 1971, 35-5-5-1 (Burns Code Ed.) clearly requires that the independent and reliable determination of voluntariness be made “[bjefore such confession is received in evidence.” A new trial is necessary to comply with the statute, which is mandatory. Remanding this case for an evidentiary hearing on the issue of voluntariness may remedy any constitutional defects in the trial court’s procedure, but will not correct the trial court’s disregard of the legislative mandate that the hearing be held before the confession is received into evidence. I would grant Payne a new trial in the face of the trial court’s error.
It is the opinion of the majority of this Court, however, that Payne is first entitled only to an evidentiary hearing on the issue of voluntariness. If it is determined at this evidentiary hearing that Payne’s confession was voluntary, then no prejudicial error was committed at trial when the confession was received in evidence. Of course, if the trial court determines after hearing that the confession was involuntary, a new trial will be required, since Payne’s conviction on the basis of an involuntary confession cannot stand. Rogers v. Richmond (1961), 365 U.S. 534, 81 S.Ct. 735, 5 L.Ed.2d 760; Payne v. Arkansas (1958), 356 U.S. 560, 78 S.Ct. 844, 2 L.Ed. 975. The majority reasons that, pursuant to Jackson, remand for such a hearing is constitutionally acceptable. Further, so long as Payne receives an independent and reliable determination of the voluntariness of his confession, out of the presence of the jury, he cannot establish harm from the trial court’s error.
*402The case is remanded for an evidentiary hearing on the issue of the voluntariness of Payne’s confession, consistent with the majority views expressed herein. If the trial court finds the confession involuntary, Payne’s conviction should be set aside and Payne should be granted a new trial. If the trial court finds the confession voluntary, Payne’s conviction is affirmed, since we find no reversible error in the remaining issues presented for our review.
II.
Entrapment
On the basis of information supplied by informer Kaeding, the police decided to set up a controlled buy of marijuana from Payne. Payne contends that the police had no probable cause to suspect that he was engaged in illegal conduct; therefore, the police had no reasonable basis to set up the plan to buy marijuana from him. The State responds that informer Kaeding supplied the probable cause to suspect that Payne was dealing with and in possession of drugs.
The substantive defense of entrapment arises when “the idea of committing a crime originated with law enforcement officers or their agents, and the accused had no previous intent to violate the law but is induced by the police or their agents to commit a crime.” May v. State (1972), 154 Ind. App. 75, 289 N.E.2d 135, 137-38. See Smith v. State (1972), 258 Ind. 415, 281 N.E.2d 803; Walker v. State (1970), 255 Ind. 65, 262 N.E.2d 641; Fischer v. State (1974), 160 Ind. App. 641, 312 N.E.2d 904. This substantive defense goes to the merits of the charge against the defendant and is a factual question to be resolved by the jury. Locklayer v. State (1974), 162 Ind. App. 64, 317 N.E. 2d 868.
The jury was instructed on the defense of entrapment, and it denied the defense by returning a verdict of guilty. Payne does not contest the jury’s verdict.
*403When the defendant raises the defense of entrapment, the State must introduce evidence establishing that, before the initiation of the transaction which is alleged to be entrapment, the law enforcement agents had information which supplied probable cause to suspect that the accused was engaged in illegal activities. Hauk v. State (1974), 160 Ind. App. 390, 312 N.E.2d 92; Smith v. State, supra; Walker v. State, supra; Locklayer v. State, supra. In Indiana, the probable cause for “baiting the trap” issue is a question separate and distinct from the substantive entrapment issue and is a matter of law for the trial court’s determination. Walker v. State, supra; Locklayer v. State, supra. The State’s failure to establish probable cause precludes the use of the work product of the scheme. Smith v. State, supra; Locklayer v. State, supra.
The trial court overruled Payne’s objection to the introduction of the marijuana evidence and implicitly determined as a matter of law that the police had probable cause to suspect that Payne was engaged in illegal activities. The question before this Court is whether the evidence is sufficient to support the trial court’s determination. We conclude that it is.
Probable cause to suspect Payne’s illegal activities was based solely on the information supplied by informer Kaeding. He informed the police of Payne’s past dealing in marijuana on a quantity basis and Payne’s frequent visits to Michigan City. We conclude that the information supplied by informer Kaeding was sufficiently extensive and reliable to form the necessary probable cause.
We recognize that informer’s tips may vary greatly in value and reliability. What may be sufficient indicia of reliability to justify one type of police action may be insufficient to justify another. See Adams v. Williams (1972), 407 U.S. 143, 92 S.Ct. 1921, 32 L.Ed.2d 612. We also recognize that informers are frequently used in the enforcement of narcotics laws and that théir use has been *404approved by our courts upon a showing of reliability. See Wagner v. State (1968), 249 Ind. 457, 233 N.E.2d 236.
The reliability test is most often stated in cases discussing probable cause to arrest:
“While probable cause may be supported and indeed created by information supplied by an informer, it must be demonstrated that the probability of accuracy of the ‘tip’ is sufficiently high. That is, the informer must be shown to be reliable. One manner of doing this is by referring to his past record of reliability. Another is by reference to extrinsic facts, including those which he may relate, to test his accuracy.” Bowles v. State (1971), 256 Ind. 27, 30, 267 N.E.2d 56, 58, citing McCray v. Illinois (1967), 386 U.S. 300, 87 S.Ct. 1056, 18 L.Ed.2d 62; Draper v. United States (1959), 358 U.S. 307, 79 S.Ct. 329, 3 L.Ed.2d 327; United States v. Franke (7th Cir. 1969), 409 F.2d 958; Weigel v. State (1969), 252 Ind. 464, 250 N.E.2d 368.
An arrest is a significantly more severe invasion of a person’s constitutionally protected rights than a plan to set up an opportunity to commit a crime. An arrest involves an invasion of privacy by seizure and often search of the accused’s body. A scheme to trap a particular suspect also involves an invasion of privacy by the infiltration of police agents into the group of the accused’s friends and acquaintances, but this invasion cannot be said to be as intrusive as an arrest or a detention of the person. Thus the probable cause tests differ. To bait a trap, the police must have probable cause to suspect criminal activity; to effect an arrest, the police must have probable cause to reasonably believe that a crime has been or is being committed. Stuck v. State (1970), 255 Ind. 350, 264 N.E.2d 611. The degree of credibility required when information must be sufficient to justify a suspicion of criminal activity is less than that required when information must be sufficient to justify a reasonable belief that criminal activity has occurred or is occurring. Locklayer v. State, supra, 317 N.E.2d at 872 n.3.
*405*404When the police officers set up the plan to buy marijuana from Payne, there were no extrinsic facts available to test *405informer Kaeding’s credibility. However, Kaeding was not an anonymous informer whose past reliability could not be independently determined. Compare Bowles v. State, supra; Jackson v. State (1973), 157 Ind. App. 662, 301 N.E.2d 370 (anonymous informers not shown to be reliable). Kaeding was personally known to two officers involved in the investigation. The officers had grown up in the same neighborhood only two blocks from Kaeding’s family home and had known Kaeding for over twenty-seven years. The officers testified that during that time Kaeding had no previous charges against him and had always been honest in his answers to police inquiries. We conclude that the trial court could have found Kaeding’s information sufficiently reliable and credible to establish probable cause to suspect Payne’s criminal activity.
III.
Suppression of the Evidence
Seven pounds of marijuana and a scale were admitted into evidence over Payne’s objections. The marijuana and scale were in a green suitcase which was found in the informer Kaeding’s car. Payne contends that this evidence is the fruit of an illegal search, since the police were without probable cause to arrest him without a warrant. He further contends that the evidence was not so mobile as to fall within an exception to the search warrant requirement.
The State contends that Payne has no standing to object to the search, since the vehicle in which the suitcase was found belonged to informer Kaeding who consented to the search. Further, the State contends that there was probable cause to seize known contraband. It relies upon the information supplied by informer Kaeding, and the exigent circumstances.
*406A. Standing
The right to object to an unreasonable search and seizure of property is personal. A violation of a third party’s constitutional rights by unreasonable search and seizure cannot be claimed by an accused as a ground for suppression. Butler v. State (1972), 154 Ind. App. 361, 289 N.E.2d 772; Kirkland v. State (1968), 249 Ind. 305, 232 N.E.2d 365. The standing requirement is satisfied when the defendant establishes a possessory interest in the property searched or when possession of the seized property is an essential element of the offense. Jones v. United States (1960), 362 U.S. 257, 80 S.Ct. 725, 4 L.Ed.2d 697; Burton v. State (1973), 260 Ind. 94, 292 N.E.2d 790. Since possession of the marijuana contained in the suitcase is an essential element of the offense in the present case, Payne has standing to object to the search and seizure of the suitcase and its contents.
B. Probable Cause to Arrest
In Indiana, an arrest warrant must be obtained whenever practicable. Stuck v. State (1970), 255 Ind. 350, 264 N.E.2d 611; Throop v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 342, 259 N.E. 2d 875; Bryant v. State (1973), 157 Ind. App. 198, 299 N.E.2d 200. An exception to the arrest warrant requirement arises when there is probable cause to arrest, coupled with exigent circumstances making the obtaining of an arrest warrant impracticable. Stuck v. State, supra; Bryant v. State, supra.6 It is the exigent circumstances that *407justify the substitution of the police officer’s on-the-spot judgment as to probable cause for the judgment of an impartial judicial officers issuing a warrant.
Probable cause to arrest exists “where facts and circumstances are known to an arresting officer, or he has sufficiently trustworthy information of them, to reasonably lead him to believe that a crime has been or is being committed.” Stuck v. State, supra, 255 Ind. at 356-57,
264 N.E.2d at 614. Exigent circumstances exist when the police officer has reasonable cause to believe that a crime is being committed in his presence. Von Hauger v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 69, 257 N.E.2d 669; Williams v. State (1969), 253 Ind. 316, 253 N.E.2d 242. Exigent circumstances may also exist when the suspect is traveling in a moving vehicle which may quickly and easily transport him from the jurisdiction.
Probable cause to arrest may exist upon information supplied by a reliable informer. Wagner v. State (1968), 249 Ind. 457, 233 N.E.2d 236. Reliability may be shown by reference to the informer’s past record of reliability or by extrinsic facts proving the informer’s information reliable. Bowles v. State (1971), 256 Ind. 27, 267 N.E.2d 56. See the discussion in Section II supra.
We conclude that the arrest without a warrant was justified. When informer Kaeding’s vehicle turned west on Second Street, this was a prearranged signal to the police that the vehicle contained marijuana. In addition to Kaeding’s past relationship with the police and his past record of trustworthiness, there were extrinsic facts available to the officers by which to test the reliability of Kaeding’s information: Payne had arrived in Michigan City; Kaeding told the police *408that he was to meet Payne at a Lake Shore Drive address; an officer followed Kaeding to this address, and saw him enter a residence and emerge with Payne; and an officer observed Payne carrying the large green suitcase described by Kaeding. These extrinsic facts verified part of the information supplied by Kaeding. Further, Kaeding had no reason to turn west on Second Street if there was no marijuana in the car. When Kaeding turned on Second Street as arranged, the police were justified in reasonably believing that contraband was contained in the vehicle.
The exigent circumstances of the moving vehicle coupled with probable cause to believe that the vehicle contained contraband justified the arrest without a warrant.
C. Scope of the Search
The police officers placed Payne under arrest and seized the large green suitcase from the rear of Kaeding’s car without a warrant. The scope of a search incident to a valid arrest is generally limited to a search of the person of the arrestee and the area within his immediate
control to which he could reach for weapons or to destroy evidence.7 Chimel v. California (1969), 395 U.S. 752, 89 S.Ct. 2034, 23 L.Ed.2d 685. However, when the exigent circumstance of a movable vehicle is combined with probable cause to believe that seizable contraband items are contained within that movable vehicle, the inherent necessities of the circumstances permit a search of the entire vehicle and its contents within regard to the officer’s safety or the possible destruction of evidence. See Chambers v. Maroney (1970), 399 U.S. 42, 90 S.Ct. 1975, 26 L.Ed.2d 419; Carroll v. United States (1925), 267 U.S. 132, 45 S.Ct. 280, 69 L.Ed. 543; Paxton v. State (1970), 255 Ind. 264, 263 N.E.2d 636.
*409Kaeding’s car was temporarily stopped. It could have abruptly left the scene. The green suitcase could have been taken out of the car and hidden from the officer’s view or could have fallen into the hands of others. We conclude that there was sufficient evidence of probable cause and exigent circumstances to support the trial court’s determination that the search without a warrant was justified.
Since the warrantless arrest of Payne and the warrantless search of the suitcase were valid, the motion to suppress the evidence obtained as a result of the arrest and search was properly overruled.
IV. Chain of Custody
Payne contends that all the evidence seized from the suitcase should have been excluded because there was evidence that the contents of the suitcase were tampered with by the addition of informer Kaeding’s marijuana while the suitcase was in police custody. Payne’s
contention is without merit. In the present case, there is no missing link in the chain of custody, and there is no suggestion of tampering or loss.8 See Graham v. State (1970), 253 Ind. 525, 255 N.E.2d 652; Kelley v. State (1974), 161 Ind. App. 253, 315 N.E.2d 382, transfer denied, 324 N.E.2d 158 (1975), for a discussion of the purpose of the chain of custody rule. Officer Johnson testified that he marked and separately identified nine bags of marijuana and other items within the suitcase shortly after the suitcase was obtained from Kaeding’s car.9 Officer Johnson turned the suitcase over to Sergeant Abraham, who kept the suitcase and its contents in his exclusive possession in a locked evidence cabinet. Abraham later released the suitcase to Officer Johnson, who took the suitcase *410and its contents to the lab for testing and then returned the suitcase to Abraham. Thereafter, the suitcase and its contents remained in locked cabinets. The testimony of various custodians established a complete and unbroken chain of custody. Nine bags of marijuana were introduced into evidence at trial.
Our review of the record discloses no evidence of tampering. We conclude that the evidence was properly admitted at trial.
V. Admission of Oral Testimony
Shortly after Payne was arrested on July 26,1972, he signed a waiver of rights form and was questioned by the police. He confessed his ownership of a suitcase containing marijuana and, in response to an inquiry about any other marijuana in his possession, informed the police that he had another pound in his car in Long Beach, Indiana. Payne consented to a search of this car, and, later on July 26, 1972, the police went to Long Beach and retrieved this other bag.
On August 1,1972, Payne was formally charged by affidavit with possession of seven pounds of marijuana in LaPorte County, Indiana, on July 26, 1972. This affidavit was accompanied by a supporting affidavit which specified that Payne was in possession of seven pounds of marijuana at Second and Wabash Streets in Michigan City, Indiana, at 8:15 p.m. on July 26, 1972. Both Michigan City and Long Beach are in LaPorte County.
At trial, the State introduced into evidence the suitcase and its contents, and introduced expert testimony that there was a little over seven pounds of marijuana in the suitcase. The State did not offer evidence that the bag found in Payne’s car contained marijuana and did not introduce this bag into evidence. There was, however, oral testimony concerning this other bag and how it was retrieved. Payne objected to this testimony on the ground that proof of Payne’s possession of this other bag constituted proof of a crime separate and distinct from the crime of possessing marijuana at Second *411and Wabash Streets, the crime with which Payne was charged, such that there was a material variation between the charging affidavit and the proof presented at trial which misled Payne in the preparation of his defense.
The State argued that Payne was charged with possession of marijuana in LaPorte County on July 26, 1972, and that it was immaterial whether the marijuana was found in Payne's car or in the suitcase. Further, the State argued that the testimony concerning the retrieval of this other bag was relevant to the issue of the voluntariness of Payne’s waiver of rights and subsequent confession of ownership of the suitcase.
After the testimony was admitted and after the State had identified the bag as State’s Exhibit # 14, the court admonished the jury as follows:
“THE COURT: The jury is admonished to disregard State’s Exhibit Number 14, which appeared to be a bag of some crumbled leaf-like material alleged to be marijuana, or believed to be marijuana; to totally disregard it and any comment or testimony surrounding that particular State’s Exhibit Number 14, except that it would tend to indicate or not tend to indicate the defendant’s willingness to cooperate with the police department after the arrest on the date of the alleged crime at Wabash and 2nd Streets. Is that clear ?”
It is clear that one crime cannot be proved to establish another distinct crime. Sumpter v. State (1974), 261 Ind. 471, 306 N.E.2d 95; Layton v. State (1966), 248 Ind. 52, 221 N.E.2d 881. In the present case, the particular crime with which Payne was charged was possession of marijuana in LaPorte County, Indiana, on July 26, 1972. The purpose of a charging affidavit is to inform the accused of the specific offense against him in order that he may adequately prepare his defense. Wilson v. State (1975), 164 Ind. App. 665, 330 N.E.2d 356. By the terms of the charging affidavit, Payne was informed that he was charged with possession of any marijuana seized from his possession on *412July 26, 1972.10 Any prejudice to Payne which may have resulted from the fact that the supporting affidavit referred to the specific location of Second and Wabash Streets was doubtless mitigated by the trial court’s admonishment to the jury to consider the testimony concerning this other bag only for the limited purpose of showing Payne’s willingness to cooperate with the police on the date of the offense.
This cause is remanded to the trial court for a full evidentiary hearing on the issue of the voluntariness of Payne’s confession of ownership of the suitcase and for further proceedings consistent with the majority views expressed in this opinion.
Garrard, J., concurs with opinion; Hoffman, J., concurs as to Issue I, Issue III, Issue IV and Issue V. Concurs in result as to Issue II; also concurring in concurring opinion of Judge Garrard.
. Under the New York rule, the trial judge was required to make a preliminary determination and to exclude a confession if under no circumstances could it be deemed voluntary. However, any question as to voluntariness was left to the jury. The jury was instructed that if it found the confession involuntary, it was to disregard it entirely; if, on the other 'hand, it found the confession voluntary, it was to determine its truth or reliability and afford it weight accordingly. Jackson v. Denno, supra, 387 U.S. at 374-75, 84 S.Ct. at 1779, 12 L.Ed.2d at 914.
. “THE COURT: I think it can be resolved at this point by asking the witness what happened, where it happened, what time it happened, who asked the questions, who responded, was the conversation between *398the witness and the defendant. I presume we all know what time it was, where it was, what room it was and who was present, but I am not sure what impression the jury is getting.
“MR. ROPER: Also whether or not the statement was given voluntarily
“THE COURT: You have the right to cross examine and also have the right, if you choose, to put your client on the stand. This is a question for the jury.”
. Payne’s defense counsel asked Abraham if he had any conversation with Payne, prior to the signing of the waiver, regarding the fact that Payne’s mother or wife might be arrested unless he cooperated. Abraham denied having any such conversations.
. A confession is defined as “any confession of guilt of any criminal offense or any self-incriminating statement made or given orally or in writing.” IC 1971, 35-5-5-5 (Burns Code Ed.).
. We might affirm Payne’s conviction if we could determine that both the statutory error and the federal constitutional error were harmless beyond a reasonable doubt under the facts of this case. See *399Chapman v. California (1967), 386 U.S. 18, 87 S.Ct. 824, 17 L.Ed.2d 705; Harrington v. California (1969), 395 U.S. 250, 89 S.Ct. 1726, 23 L.Ed.2d 284; Greer v. State (1969), 252 Ind. 20, 245 N.E.2d 158; Moreno v .State (1975), 166 Ind. App. 441, 336 N.E.2d 675; Moss v. State (1975), 165 Ind. App. 502, 338 N.E.2d 141; Larimer v. State (1975), 163 Ind. App. 673, 326 N.E.2d 277. Aside from Payne’s confession, only informer Kaeding’s testimony directly established Payne’s possession of the suitcase containing marijuana. Kaeding’s testimony was supported only by the circumstantial evidence that Payne carried the suitcase from a house to Kaeding’s car. Without the confession, Payne’s conviction would have been based primarily on the credibility of informer Kaeding. Other testimony was introduced to impeach Kaeding and to establish his reputation in the community for moral turpitude. We cannot say, in light of the powerful probative impact of Payne’s confession of guilt and the questionable probative impact of the remaining evidence absent the confession, that, “beyond a reasonable doubt, an honest and fair-minded jury would have rendered a guilty verdict based solely on the remaining . . . evidence.” Larimer v. State, supra, 326 N.E.2d at 279. Thus, we cannot say that any error in the introduction of the confession was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Without the confession, the case against Payne was not overwhelming.
. In a recent decision, United States v. Watson (1976), 423 U.S. 411, 96 S.Ct. 820, 46 L. Ed. 2d 598, 44 U.S.L.W. 4112, reversing 504 F.2d 849 (9th Cir. 1974), the United States Supreme Court upheld a postal inspection statute which allowed warrantless arrests for felonies if the arresting- officer had “reasonable grounds to believe that the person to be arrested has committed or is committing such a felony.” 18 U.S.C. § 3061(a). The Court held that the fourth amendment permits warrant-less arrests for felonies upon probable cause without regard to the existence of exigent circumstances:
“Congress has plainly decided against conditioning warrantless arrest power on proof of exigent circumstances. Law enforcement officers may find it wise to seek arrest warrants where practicable to do so, and their judgments about probable cause may be more readily accepted where backed by a warrant issued by a magistrate. . . . But we *407decline to transform this judicial preference into a constitutional rule when the judgment of the Nation and Congress has for so long been to authorize warrantless public arrests on probable cause rather than to encumber criminal prosecutions with endless litigation with respect to the existence of exigent circumstances, whether it was practicable to get a warrant, whether the suspect was about to flee and the like.” 96 S. Ct. at 827, 44 U.S.L.W. at 4115-16 (citations and footnote omitted).
. The United States Supreme Court in United States v. Robinson (1973), 414 U.S. 218, 94 S.Ct. 467, 38 L.Ed.2d 427, and Gustafson v. Florida (1973), 414 U.S. 260, 94 S.Ct. 488, 38 L.Ed.2d 456, held that a thorough search of the person incident to a valid custodial arrest needs no independent justification apart from the arrest.
. Payne suggests that Kaeding’s marijuana was commingled with the marijuana in the suitcase because the suitcase and its contents were identified by a case number assigned to “Defendant Walter Payne and Lance Kaeding.” The inference to be drawn from this evidence alone is clearly insufficient to establish tampering.
. Apparently, one other bag of marijuana, retrieved from Payne’s car at another location, was marked, identified, and placed in the suitcase. However, this bag was not introduced into evidence.
. The fact that there was a little over eight pounds of marijuana in Payne’s possession, instead of seven pounds, would not amount to a material variation between the affidavit and the proof.