=== CASE 9741698 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:40.782424+00 ===

Edwards, J.
(concurring in partial denial of compensation) . Plaintiff in this matter, Harvey Loucks, was injured June 20, 1947, in the course of his employment as an oil well pumper. It appears that on the date in question, in attempting to start an oil well pump by kicking the flywheel with his foot, the pump started suddenly, catching his foot or feet and throwing him around. Essentially undisputed facts indicate severe mangling of the left leg which resulted in its amputation, and injury to his right knee.
Claimant filed application for compensation October 24, 1947, listing the nature of his disability as “left leg amputated above the knee,” and he was subsequently awarded compensation for 200 weeks for this specific loss against the 2 coemployers currently named.
The 200-week payments expired on April 20, 1951. Three years subsequent thereto, on November 12, 1954, plaintiff filed another application for hearing and adjustment of claim, in this instance citing injury to the right leg, acknowledging compensation for the loss of the left leg, but claiming that the injury to the right leg was the basis for present disability.
On hearing before Referee James Nolan, the referee found:
“Plaintiff has a disability in his right leg as a result of the injury of June 20, 1947. However, he has suffered no wage loss since November 9, 1953, and is therefore not entitled to compensation benefits.”
It is apparent that the hearing referee felt that he was governed in his limitation of compensation *530by tbe provisions of a 1943 amendment to the workmen’s compensation act, being CL 1948, § 413.14 (Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 17.188).
Plaintiff Loucks did not appeal this award. Defendants, seeking relief from an “open end” award which would occasion compensation in the event of disability-induced loss of wages, did appeal. Defendants’ appeal claimed (1) that the original order for specific loss of the left leg was res judicata as to all injuries sustained at the time of the accident and that the effect of the subsequent award by the appeal board was to grant a rehearing beyond the authority of the appeal board; and (2) that there was no notice of injury to the right leg within statutory limitations.
No issue was presented to the appeal board relevant to the 1943 amendment, since obviously its application by the referee was in defendants’ favor and there was no cross appeal by plaintiff.
The workmen’s compensation appeal board found that a disabling injury to the right knee did take place in 1947 and that notice of the accident was ample notice to the employer of such injury. Thus, the 2 grounds for appeal urged by defendants were rejected by the appeal board and as to them it affirmed the referee’s award.
The appeal board also went further, however, and on its own motion modified this award by granting compensation for 2 periods preceding November 9, 1953 — from May 11, 1951, to December 31, 1951, at the rate of $21 per week, and from January 1, 1952, to December 31, 1952, at the rate of $8.68 per week. In this regard it was undoubtedly acting under decisions of this Court which have held that an appeal board hearing is de novo and not limited to just those questions which one party seeks to present. CL 1948, § 413.11 (Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 17.185); Margenovitch v. Newport Mining Co., 213 Mich 272; Thompson v. *531Continental Motors Corporation, 320 Mich 219; Fawley v. Doehler-Jarvis Division of National Lead Co., 342 Mich 100.
Subsequent to the appeal board decision defendants again appealed, this time with an added ground. We granted leave to appeal limited to the contention that the 1943 amendment to the workmen’s compensation act served to bar recovery for any period which is more than 1 year prior to the date of the filing of the application.
In its opinion the appeal board did not deal at all with the effect of the 1943 amendment which reads:
“If payment of compensation is made (other than medical expenses) and an application for further compensation is later filed with the commission, no compensation shall be awarded by the commission for any period which is more than 1 year prior to the date of the filing of such application.” CL 1948, § 413.14 (Stat Ann 1950 Rev § 17.188).
This omission does not, however, appear to be sheer inadvertence. The appeal board did, apparently, have the issue before it, since its order makes reference to the 1-year limitation date applied by the referee. Whatever the reason may be for the appeal board’s omission, in my view, the language of the amendment is clear and, as the referee indicated, it bars recovery in the fact situation presented as to any compensation prior to November 9, 1953. See Lynch v. Briggs Manfg. Co., 329 Mich 168.
I agree with the Chief Justice that the findings of fact of the appeal board indicate that this was a claim for further compensation due to another injury which occurred at the same time as the original accident, rather than a subsequent development from the original injury (cf., Morgan v. Lloyds Builders Inc., 344 Mich 524) or a change in physical condi*532tion after the original adjudication (cf., White v. Michigan Consolidated Gas Co., 352 Mich 201).
Under the record presented to us it appears to the writer that defendants are entitled to argue before us their claim of error as to failure of the appeal board to apply the 1943 amendment limitation in its own modification sua sponte of the referee’s award.
The award of the appeal board should be affirmed, except as to the compensation awarded prior to November 12,1953.
Kavanagh, J., did not sit.

=== CASE 2228449 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:01.844169+00 ===

7 Wis.2d 404 (1959)
ESTATE OF STRANGE: STATE, Appellant,
v.
STRANGE and others, Respondents.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
May 5, 1959.
June 2, 1959.
*405 For the appellant there were briefs by the Attorney General and John E. Armstrong and E. Weston Wood, assistant attorneys general, and oral argument by Mr. Wood and Mr. Armstrong.
For the respondents there was a brief by Morris Warzinik of Neenah, attorney, and D.E. McDonald of Oshkosh of counsel, and oral argument by Mr. Warzinik.
For the respondent guardian ad litem there was a brief and oral argument by E.C. Joyce of Neenah.
*406 BROWN, J.
The appeal is from a judgment allowing the supplemental final account of the executors of the will of John Strange. The judgment contains an allowance and order for the payment of fees to the attorney of the executors and to the guardian ad litem. The judgment confirms possession of $27,480.44 in the hands of the executors and presumably is available for payment of fees to the executors' attorney and to the guardian ad litem. The appellant challenges the adjudication that this sum is held by the executors as such and also appeals from the order allowing and directing attorney's and guardian ad litem fees to be paid out of this amount.
This is a continuation of the litigation presented in Estate of Strange (1958), 3 Wis. (2d) 104, 87 N. W. (2d) 859. In 1928 in the course of the probate of the estate of John Strange the county court of Winnebago county entered a judgment declaring:
"It is further ordered and adjudged: That the sum of Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000) accumulated as directed be by the executrix and executors set apart, held, kept, and invested by them as trustees, in some safe, reliable, and profitable manner, and the income thereof they pay over to or use and expend for divers public uplift and charitable purposes according to the will of said deceased."
The executors, acting as trustees pursuant to that judgment, administered the trust till 1957. Then the surviving executor and trustee brought a proceeding to declare void the 1928 judgment and the trust so established. In Estate of Strange, supra, we held that in 1957 the court lacked jurisdiction to reverse or amend the 1928 judgment. Upon remittitur, pursuant to our mandate, the trial court reinstated the 1928 judgment. The sum of $27,480.44, just referred to, consists of the original trust fund of $25,000 and that which remains from its undistributed income.
Present respondents were engaged in the effort to declare void the 1928 trust and to bring about the distribution of the *407 trust fund among John Strange's heirs. They failed. Ordinarily no one would contend that the attorney's fees incurred in that attempt by the losing party must be paid by the winner out of trust funds and we find no authority for it now. However, the respondents assert that they are entitled to this because the county judge then in office ordered the executors to bring the 1957 proceeding to upset the judgment which he had pronounced in 1928. There is no such order of record, but never mind. Respondents also submit that executors are allowed their proper disbursements, which include fees to their attorney. Such fees are normally charges against executors, to be allowed only as a credit on the executors' account. Estate of Braasch (1957), 274 Wis. 569, 80 N. W. (2d) 759.
We need not quarrel with respondents' contention that the undistributed estate of John Strange remaining in the executors' hands may be applied, when approved by the probate court, to pay the executors' attorney. The practical problem, however, is that there is no such estate, as far as we can discover. Certainly, the $25,000 trust fund and its avails are not a part of the undistributed estate remaining in the hands of the executors. That sum was set aside and put in trust by the judgment of 1928. They cannot now recapture it from the trustees, by holding themselves out as executors, to finance a destruction of their trust. As trustees, respondents have the obligation of loyalty to their trust which is required of fiduciaries unafflicted with split personalities. We conclude that attorney's fees recently incurred by the executors in derogation of the trust are not to be paid from funds assigned in trust thirty years ago and administered as such in the interim. The attorney and his client must look to other sources for payment.
Passing now to the allowance of fees to the guardian ad litem, the record shows that Mr. John W. O'Leary was appointed on January 26, 1957, "... guardian ad litem for *408 said minors, unknown heirs, devisees, legatees, or incompetents, for the sole purpose of appearing for them and taking care of their interests...." Appellant protests, and the record bears it out, that all heirs and devisees are known and they are known not to be minors or incompetents. On June 13, 1928, the county court judicially determined the identity of the heirs of John Strange. In the succeeding thirty years there is no claim that others were omitted, no others have appeared, nor have any such been discovered. The guardian ad litem has found no one whom he represents nor one who could or did benefit by his service.
Guardians ad litem are appointed by the courts pursuant to sec. 324.29 (2), Stats.:
"When it shall be necessary to appoint a guardian ad litem for any person under disability, the court may appoint such guardian at the time of making the order for hearing the matter, and require notice thereof and of such hearing to be served upon such guardian; or such guardian may be appointed on the day of the hearing, and before any proceedings are had." (Our italics.)
Guardians ad litem are not to be appointed to deplete an estate unless there is some necessity for one to serve a useful purpose. And, generally speaking, it is improper for a court to order paid out of trust funds the expenses of litigation of a defeated party respecting such fund except to the extent of his interest in the fund. Will of McNaughton (1909), 138 Wis. 179, 118 N. W. 997, 120 N. W. 288.
The guardian ad litem is faced by the same embarrassment that the executors are. No wards can be found who have any interest in the trust fund from which fees may be paid. In very similar circumstances, in Estate of Austin (1951), 258 Wis. 578, 46 N. W. (2d) 861, although there was an identified ward in that case, as here, the alleged ward had no financial interest in the outcome and there was no fund out of which to pay the fee. And, as here, the county court had *409 no jurisdiction to hear the petition. No guardian ad litem or attorney should have been appointed for the alleged ward. We reversed the order allowing guardian ad litem fees. We do so here.
Appellant has moved to strike the brief of the guardian ad litem. That is immaterial now.
Respondents have moved for a review of the county court order which reduced their respective fees. That motion becomes immaterial also, under this decision.
By the Court.Order and judgment reversed.
MARTIN, C. J., took no part.

=== CASE 2228458 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:02.230175+00 ===

357 Mich. 3 (1959)
97 N.W.2d 615
HENSLEY
v.
HENSLEY.
Docket No. 43, Calendar No. 47,749.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided July 13, 1959.
Joseph J. Mainolfi, for plaintiff.
Curry & Curry, for defendant.
VOELKER, J.
On June 10, 1955, defendant-appellant, Roselma Hensley, upon her cross bill of complaint was granted a decree of divorce from plaintiff-appellee, Lewis Hensley. Pursuant to that decree defendant was given custody of their one child, Lynn Lewis Hensley, subject to the following condition, "and the said child shall remain and be cared for at his present residence unless otherwise agreed upon by the parties or until the further order of the court."
At the time of that decree the child was in a foster home. The child was about 5 years old at the time the present action was instituted and the foster parent felt that she could no longer properly manage him. The plaintiff-father petitioned the circuit court to modify the original decree so as to allow him custody of the child. The defendant-mother answered that petition and filed a cross petition praying that the quoted condition be deleted from the original decree, thus giving her absolute custody.
After a full hearing on the petitions the trial court asked both sides for briefs on the law involved, and allowed ample time for the preparation and filing of such. Only the plaintiff submitted a brief.
*5 The court then rendered an oral opinion from the bench and decreed that the plaintiff-father should have custody of the child subject to certain rights of visitation in the defendant-mother. From that decree the defendant has appealed, setting out the following as questions involved:
"1. Should the decree of divorce dissolving the marriage between the plaintiff and defendant be modified so as to award the custody of the minor child to the plaintiff father?
"2. Should the decree of divorce be modified so as to strike therefrom the provision thereof reading as follows, to-wit: `and the said child shall remain and be cared for at his present residence unless otherwise agreed upon by the parties or until the further order of the court' and thus leave the custody of the child in the defendant?"
From the record and the opinion of the chancellor it appears (largely from the testimony of the foster mother, originally selected by the mother) that the mother took little or no interest in the welfare of the child while it was in the foster home, visiting it only infrequently over a period of several years, although the child was in the same general area. It further appears that the father visited the child regularly. The chancellor also found that the father had a more suitable home environment for the child.
In essence it appears that the defendant is not happy with the result reached by the chancellor and wants this Court to review the facts. This being an appeal from a chancery decree, we hear it de novo on the record, necessarily according grave consideration to the findings of the trial court, however, who manifestly has the better opportunity to appraise the evidence and the credibility of the witness. As we said in Gorton v. Gorton, 316 Mich. 375, 382, and prior cases:
*6 "`The reviewing Court ought not to reverse the determination of the trial court in such a case, unless convinced that it must have reached a different conclusion had it occupied the position of the lower court, under like circumstances.'"
The law in this State seems to pose 3 questions which must be answered in cases of this type:
1. What effect does the statute, CL 1948, § 722.541 (Stat Ann 1957 Rev § 25.311) have upon the case?
2. Is a modification of the original decree in the best interest of the child? See, generally, Remus v. Remus, 325 Mich. 641; Knowles v. Knowles, 340 Mich. 238.
3. Has the petitioner shown a change of circumstances sufficient to warrant a modification of the original decree? See, generally, Sweet v. Sweet, 329 Mich. 251.
We think that the first question is well answered in Vines v. Vines, 344 Mich. 222, 225, where we said:
"We are mindful of the statute, CL 1948, § 722.541 (Stat Ann § 25.311), which provides that the mother of children under 12 shall be entitled to their custody, although a court of competent jurisdiction may deem it just and proper to make a different order. The question before us is what is best for the child."
We have gone over the trial transcript as well as the briefs and records on appeal. We agree with the decision of the trial court, as indicated in its opinion, that there was a sufficient change in circumstances since the original decree and that its modification was in the best interest of the child. A detailed review of the evidence presented in the trial court would be surplusage and of no value to the profession, and will not here be set out.
*7 The decree of the chancellor is affirmed, costs to appellee.
DETHMERS, C.J., and CARR, KELLY, SMITH, BLACK, EDWARDS, and KAVANAGH, JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 9741699 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:47.059777+00 ===

*153Black, j.
That the profession may properly be informed with respect to the unusual nature of this case and the self-reversible result I would reach, the opinion of the presiding chancellor is quoted in continuing part as follows:
“The plaintiff, Spoon-Shacket Company, Inc., a Michigan corporation, is the owner of lots 65 through 83, inclusive, and outlot A of Spoon-Shacket Subdivision, city of Madison Heights, Oakland county, Michigan. Except for outlot A, those lots were assessed by the township of Royal Oak for tax purposes in the year 1955 at valuations, ranging from $150 to $400.
“In 1955 a number of homes were built in the subdivision, and in preparing the tax rolls the new homes were assessed by the new city of Madison Heights at a more or less uniform valuation of $5,500 each. Through inadvertence or mistake the assessing officer did not discover that lots 65-83, inclusive, had remained vacant and they too, were assessed at $5,500 each for tax purposes.
“The error in assessment was discovered by the city in 1956 and the assessment for the year 1957 on these lots reverted back to an amount approximately twice the 1955 valuations, but less than 1/10 of the valuations for 1956.
“Although plaintiff must be charged with constructive knowledge of the existence and amount of the 1956 assessment, it did not receive a tax statement from the new city in that year and hence did not have actual knowledge of the excessive assessment until April, 1957, when it attempted to pay the tax on 1 of the lots. It then offered to pay the tax to the county treasurer under protest but that offer was refused. Obviously and it is conceded, the plaintiff neither appeared before the board of review nor made prior inquiry at the city offices in regard to the assessment. As a result of the assessing officer’s mistake for 1956, plaintiff’s tax liability for that year was more than 10 times greater than in the following year of 1957.
*154“Within less than 2 months after its actual knowledge of the assessments, plaintiff brought this action in chancery for a declaration of rights  alleging an existing controversy between the parties, asking that for the purpose of determining the parties’ rights the tax for 1956 be considered as paid under protest, and praying for a decree determining the assessments to be excessive, invalid and illegal, and for other related relief.
“It should be here noted that the plaintiff seeks the same decree in relation to outlot A as asked in respect to the other vacant lots. The assessed valuation of that lot was $7,500 in 1955; $15,000 in 1956, and $19,000 in 1957. The progressive increase in valuation during the 3 periods was consistent with other assessments in the area, and the court is convinced, and so finds, that the assessing officer committed no error of omission or commission in connection with the assessment of this well-located property. Plaintiff itself is, at best, half-hearted in its concern over the assessment on outlot A, and this court finds no cause for complaint as to that assessment.
“In contrast it is apparent from the record that the assessing officer did make a significant mistake in the assessment of plaintiff’s remaining property for the levy of 1956 taxes, a mistake of such significance as to constitute in the opinion of this court, a constructive fraud. The assessing officer is now deceased and it is suggested by the testimony that he did not view the property at the time he fixed the assessment. On the other hand it is conceivable that he may have visited the property but was confused as to lot numbers. Whatever the fact, there can be no doubt that a mistake was made which resulted in the plaintiff being charged some 10 times the tax levied on comparable property in the area. The defendants will benefit measurably from that mistake. Obviously this chancery court should not *155permit the fruition of this injustice if it has the right to intercede.
“The situation herein presented parallels the problem discussed in the recent case of Consumers Power Company v. County of Muskegon, 346 Mich 243. The plaintiff in this cause would have the court rely upon the well reasoned dissent of Justice Smith in that case. In his dissent the Justice, citing the common law and decisions from other States, rebels against the existence of a double standard of morality as between individuals and municipalities. It is his conclusion that under established precedents in this State the chancery courts will not permit an individual to benefit to the detriment of another through a mutual mistake, but that, at least in the field of taxation, a municipality may do so if the error is not timely discovered. His summation (pp 265, 266) is worth repeating.
“ ‘This is the Supreme Court of Michigan speaking, the possessor of all the historic powers of law and equity, the keeper of the conscience of our sovereign people, a constitutional court of plenary powers, not a legislative court of enfeebled and circumscribed jurisdiction. What we are faced with is a simple case of constructive fraud. If, in such a case this Court must stand by with eyes downcast, protesting our impotence as we explain to this victim that we cannot “exercise legislative prerogatives,” then the arm of justice has indeed withered and its conscience shriveled. Our constitutional duties may not be thus easily abandoned. Retreat before fraud, actual or constructive, carries us down a path forbidden to our feet. Under the clearest principles of good conscience and fair dealing this plaintiff should have restitution as prayed.’
“This court believes that Justice Smith’s reasoning is sound, but, be that as it may, the doctrine of stare decisis must prevail in the trial courts of this State. The majority of Justices in the cited case ruled against the conclusion of the dissenting Justice, and unless and until the majority of that Court comes *156to a different conclusion,' this court finds itself constrained to follow the prevailing rule.”
Having signed Mr. Justice Smith’,? dissenting opinion of Consumers Power Company v. County of Muskegon, 346 Mich 243, 251, I would apply — as would the chancellor had he been able — the reasoning of that opinion to this essentially duplicating case. The controlling declaration, written by Mr. Justice Smith in Consumers, is that equity can and should intervene whenever it is made to appear that one party, public or private, seeks unjustly to enrich himself at the expense of another on account of his own mistake and the other’s want of immediate vigilance — litigatory or otherwise. That declaration, so written, has become our most constantly gnawed bone of contention as it recurrently passes from place to place around our solemn conference table. Starting with the notorious “thirty-six-cent tax case” (Farr v. Nordman, 346 Mich 266) * — in which 5 then members of this Court proclaimed (p 270) that they had “diligently sought, as did the lower court, to find a way to grant them (the appealing plaintiffs) the relief prayed for,” and yet declared themselves hamstrung by the rigors of the law — and proceeding on through the recent case of Romatz v. Romatz, 355 Mich 81 — where a new majority seated here vigorously cast aside (p 84) “the false premise that equity must find her jurisdiction * * * in legislative enactments granting direct and specific authority,”— this disputatious debate has continued since submission of the case at bar and, doubtless, will endure until the light of greater experience and deeper study —of equity’s creative purposes — fully penetrates the slowly disappearing thought-shadows of our claus-tral quarters.
*157In essence it is the so-called Blackstonian theory, that equity must subordinate herself to law, that divides us. Mr. Justice Kelly, relying on Blackstone by quotation from Judge Story’s work on Equity Jurisprudence (Vol 1 [14th ed], § 15, p 16), happily makes this clear.† Blackstone’s steadfast view (taken from Mr. Justice Kelly’s quotation) was this: “By equity we mean nothing but the sound! interpretation of the law.” But Story certainly did: not support Blackstone, as we shall presently see. Neither did Pomeroy, as we shall likewise perceive. The fact is that Blackstone’s “Commentaries on the Laws of England” were written and published (1765-1768), and Blackstone died (1780), before the valued lessons of mature experience in equity’s limitless, field were fully learned, and it was a full century later that parliament adopted its equity-guarding amendment of the English judicature act of 1873.* The amendment came about this way:
“While the supreme court of judicature act was pending before the British parliament, there appeared in the Saturday Review a series of articles written by one of the ablest lawyers and most profound thinkers of the English bar, which pointed out a grave danger threatening the jurisprudence of England in the plan, as then proposed, for combining legal and equitable rights and remedies in the same action and administering them by the same tribunal. The writer showed, as the inevitable result of the system, that equitable principles and doctrines would gradually be suppressed and disappear in the administration of justice; that they would gradually be dis*158placed and supplanted by the more inflexible and-arbitrary rules of the law; until in time equity would practically cease to be a distinctive branch of the national jurisprudence. The reasoning of these remarkable articles was so cogent and convincing that it produced a deep impression, not only upon the English bench and bar, but even upon parliament, and it ultimately led to an amendment of the act by the addition of the following clause, which has undoubtedly averted the anticipated danger: ‘Generally, in all matters in which there is any conflict or variance between the rules of equity and the rules of the common law with reference to the same matter, the rules of equity shall prevail.’ ” (1 Pomeroy’s Equity Jurisprudence [5th ed, Symons], pp xxiii, xxiv.) ,
Chafee and Re tell the same story (Cases and Materials on Equity [4th ed], ch 1, § 2, pp 17, 18) :
“To this [the English act] was added a section regulating certain special situations involved in the change, which concluded with the significant declaration that ‘generally in all matters not hereinbefore particularly mentioned, in which there is any conflict or variance between the rules of equity and the rules of the common law, with reference to the same matter, the rules of equity shall prevail.’ Thus equity, as before, was to have the last word, but now that word was to be spoken in time to foreclose the adverse word of the common law. This difference between the 2 statutes in the manner of approach accounts in some measure, at least, for the smoother working of the English system in the present regard.”
Now what was Story’s own position vis-a-vis. Blackstone’s insistence that equity be ruled by law? Mr. Justice Kelly’s quotation of Blackstone (from Story) starts — but does not end — Story’s connected discourse. Immediately following my Brother’s quotation Judge Story, supported by enduring quotation; *159of Lord Kaims, proceeds as follows (This, I emphasize, is Judge Story — not Blackstone — speaking):
“§ 16. Same — Yet it is by no means uncommon to represent that the peculiar duty of a court of equity is to supply the defects of the common law, and next,, to correct its rigor or injustice. Lord Kaims avows, this doctrine in various places and in language singlarly bold. ‘It appears now clearly,’ says he, ‘that a court of equity commences at the limits of the common law, and enforces benevolence where the law of nature makes it our duty. And thus a court of equity, accompanying the law of nature, in its general refinements enforces every natural duty that is not provided for at common law.’ And in another place he adds, a court of equity boldly undertakes ‘to correct or mitigate the rigor, and what in a proper sense may be termed the injustice of the common law.’ ”, (1 Story’s Equity Jurisprudence [14th ed], p 17.)
And what is Story’s own summation? He gives if by footnote (same page):
“Lord Kaims’s remarks are entitled to the more consideration, because they seem to have received in some measure at least the approbation of Lord Hardwicke (Parke’s Hist of Chan Appx 501, 502; Id. 333, 334); and also from Mr. Justice Blackstone’s having thought them worthy of a formal refutation in his commentaries. (3 Black Comm 436.)”
I turn next to Pomeroy. Mr. Justice Kelly quotes entire section 47 of Pomeroy’s work, the text of which declares that no court of chancery would consciously attempt to correct the severity of the law, or to supply its defects, to any extent or under any circumstances, “beyond the already-settled principles of equity jurisprudence.” Of course this is true. No one has ever suggested, so far as our reports disclose, that any chancellor of Michigan should step beyond or over the settled principles of equity. So our present disagreement turns on the pivot question: *160What are these settled principles of equity? Pomeroy — presumably a reliable authority since my Brother has quoted him in continuing detail — supplies the answer in terms of praiseworthy certainty.
Let us read on into Pomeroy’s introductory chapter; the chapter our Brother has opened at page 61. In the very next section (section 48, p 63) we find the author, proceeding step by step in masterful exposition of the true and proudly independent office of equity, writing this:
“The very growth of equity, as long as it was in its formative period, was from its essential nature an antagonism to the common law, either by way of adding doctrines and rules which the law simply did not contain, or by way of creating doctrines and í rules contradictory to those which the law had settled and would have applied to the same facts and circumstances. It would be a downright absurdity, a flat contradiction to the plainest teachings of history, to deny that the process of building up the system of equity involved and required on the part of the chancellors an invasion, disregard, and even open '’violation of many established rules of the common law; in no other way could the system of equity jurisprudence have been commenced and continued so as to arrive at its present proportions.”
Having engaged these premises, Pomeroy goes on (under the heading “Establishment of Equitable Doctrines Contrary to Legal Dogmas”) to develop the exalted force and weight of equity’s conscience in action (pp 65-67):
“How far the early chancellors went in recognizing and upholding primary rights and granting remedies, which were not only overlooked, but were expressly denied, refused and prohibited by positive, and well-settled rules of the common law, is seen, from a brief summary of a few instances in which such equitable doctrines were established in contra*161diction to legal dogmas. One executor or joint tenant might sue his co executor or cotenant in the court of chancery in respect to their joint interests, although forbidden to do so by the law. * * *
“Again, the court of chancery, acting upon its equitable principles, relieved parties in many instances from forfeitures which had been clearly incurred according to express rules of the law, and which courts of law still enforced according to the strictest letter of the provisions from which they resulted.
“Notwithstanding statutes which prohibited the court of chancery from reviewing judgments rendered by the courts of law, the chancellor gave relief, where it was demanded by equity and good conscience, against the operation of such judgments. He avoided the express prohibitory language of the statutes by not assuming to act directly upon the judgment itself, but upon the parties personally, by restraining the one who had recovered the judgment from taking or prosecuting any measures for its enforcement, and even by compelling him to restore the property which he had acquired by its means. There is no higher example of the equity jurisdiction than this, nor one which more directly interferes with the administration of the law, since the legal right controverted and overthrown by chancery no longer existed in the form of an abstract rule, but had been established in a concrete form as the right existing between the parties.”*
I return at this point to the subject of Blackstone’s questionable value as an authority in the areas occupied by equity. Pomeroy (see his footnote, 1 Pomeroy’s Equity Jurisprudence [5th ed, Symons], §54, p 70), having noted that “Blackstone, being *162purely a common-law lawyer, had little knowledge of equity, and his authority concerning its principles and jurisdiction was never great,” wrote this into his text (same section and page):
“Sir William Blackstone, citing these and some other instances in which the court of chancery refrained from interfering with legal doctrines, and using them as the basis of his argument, goes to the extent of denying that equity has or ever had any power to correct the common law or to abate its rigor. This is one example among many of Blackstone’s utter inability to comprehend the real spirit and workings of the English law. That equity did to a large extent interfere with and prevent the practical operation of legal rules, and did thus furnish to suitors a corrective of the harshness and injustice of the common law, history and the very existing system incontestably show; and that the chancellors, from motives of policy or otherwise, refrained from exercising their reformatory function in certain instances, is not, in the face of the historical facts, any argument against the existence of the power. And even in the present condition of equity as an established department of the national jurisprudence, whenever a court determines the rights of parties by enforcing an equitable doctrine which differs from and perhaps conflicts with the legal rule applicable to the same facts, such court does still, in very truth, exercise a corrective function, and wield an authority by which it relieves the rigor and often the injustice of the common law. It is undoubtedly true that a court of equity no longer inaugurates new attacks upon legal doctrines, and confines itself to the application of principles already settled; but it is none the less true that a large part of the equity which is daily administered consists in doctrines which modify and contradict as well as supplement 'the rules of the law.”
Do Blackstone’s notions prevail in the enlightened courts of this country! One of the most noteworthy *163answers comes from the gifted pen of the late and revered Judge John J. Parker, of the 4th judicial circuit (nominee of President Hoover, in 1930, for appointment to the Federal supreme court). In Bowen v. Hockley, 71 F2d 781 (94 ALR 856), the court was confronted with contention that, no statutory provision having been made for payment, by receivers of an employer, of an award of workmen’s compensation made against the employer prior to receivership, a court of equity could not compel such payment. The court, speaking through Judge Parker, replied this way (p 786):
“One of the glories of equity jurisprudence is that it is not bound by the strict rules of the common law, but can mold its decrees to do justice amid all the vicissitudes and intricacies of life. The principles upon which it proceeds are eternal; but their application in a changing world will necessarily change to meet changed situations. If relief had been granted only where precedent could be found for it, this great system would never have been developed; and, if such a narrow view of equitable powers is adopted now, the result will be the return of the rigid and unyielding system which equity jurisprudence was designed to remedy. As was well said by Prof. Pomeroy (1 Equity Jurisprudence [4th ed], § 60): ‘The general language of some writers, and particularly of Blackstone, presents an erroneous theory as to the office of precedents in equity, and if followed, would check and abridge the beneficent operation of its jurisdiction. The true function of precedents is that of illustrating principles; they are examples of the manner and extent to which principles have been applied; they are the landmarks by which the court determines the course and direction in which principles have been carried. But with all this guiding, limiting, and restraining efficacy of prior decisions, the chancellor always has had, and always must have, a certain power and freedom of action, not possessed *164by the courts of law, of adapting the doctrines which he administers. He can extend those doctrines to new relations, and shape his remedies to new circumstances, if the relations and circumstances come within the principles of equity, where a court of law' in analogous cases would be powerless to give any relief. In fact, there is no limit to the various forms' and kinds of specific remedy which he may grant, adapted to novel conditions of right and obligation, which are constantly arising from the movements of society. While it must be admitted that the broad and fruitful principles of equity have been established, and cannot be changed by any judicial action, still it should never be forgotten that these principles, based as they are upon a Divine morality, possess an inherent vitality and a capacity of expansion, so as ever to meet the wants of a progressive civilization.’ ”*
Mr. Justice Kelly notes that I have “not commented” upon the majority opinion of Consumers and other like chanteys of equity’s 11th and — I respectfully suggest — least understood maxim (“Equity follows the law”). Now, having been challenged, I would advance initially the vigorous comment of another; the great juristic teacher of the present century. That which follows is read and accepted today as righteous gospel in most of the courts and law schools of our land. It is submitted again (as in Farr v. Nordman, supra, 274) vas follows:
*165“Equity follow’s the law’, but not slavishly nor always. Hedges v. Dixon County, 150 US 182, 192 (14 S Ct 71, 37 L ed 1044). If it did, there could never be occasion for the enforcement of equitable doctrine. 13 Iialsbury, Laws of England, p 68. * * *
“True, indeed, it is that accident and mistake will often be inadequate to supply a basis for the granting or withholding of equitable remedies where the consequences to be corrected might have been avoided if the victim of the misfortune had ordered his affairs with reasonable diligence. United States v. Ames, 99 US 35, 47 (25 L ed 295); Grymes v. Sanders, 93 US 55 (23 L ed 798); Noyes v. Clark, 7 Paige (NY) 179 (32 Am Dec 620). The restriction, however, is not obdurate, for always the gravity of the fault must be compared wfith the gravity of the hardship. Noyes v.Anderson, 124 NY 175 (26 NE 316, 21 Am St Rep 657); Lawrence v. American National Bank, 54 NY 432; Ball v. Shepard, 202 NY 247, 253 (95 NE 719), Let the hardship be strong enough and equity will find a way, though many a formula of inaction may seem to bar the path. Griswold v. Hazard, 141 US 260, 284 (11 S Ct 972, 999, 35 L ed 678).” (Cardozo, C. J., dissenting in Graf v. Hope Building Corp., 254 NY 1 [171 NE 884, 70 ALR 984]).
Pomeroy says, of the mentioned 11th maxim:
“The maxim is, in truth, operative only within a very narrow range; to raise it to the position of a general principle would be a palpable error. Throughout the great mags of its jurisprudence, equity, instead of following the law, either ignores or openly disregards and opposes the law.” (2 Pomeroy’s Equity Jurisprudence [5th ed, Symons], § 427, p 194),
My own invited — and, hence, not gratuitous— “comment” upon the majority opinion of Consumers, and the remaining equity cases gathered in Mr. Justice Kelly’s present opinion, is that each should be put through the reform school-of equity’s great doc*166trines, the better to graduate with Cardozo’s qualification that equity’s ordinary pursuit of the law is never slavish and that she ever stands ready to relieve the oppressed from the oppressor’s demand for possession or retention of an iniquitously exacted pound of material and sometimes personal flesh. Sure, in the ordinary case of error of assessment of property taxes, the remedy provided by hearing before the board of review is final and exclusive. But where, as rightfully found by the chancellor below, the “mistake (is) of such significance as to constitute * * * a constructive fraud,” equity’s door in all learned courts is firmly held open to the innocent, if careless, victim of such fraud. (To repeat Cardozo above: “Let the hardship be strong enough and equity will find a way, though many a formula of inaction may seem to bar the path.”) This does not mean that the purport hereof is one of general grant, to early or late protestants of property tax assessments, of an additional or alternative remedy over and above the one afforded, by statute, before the board of review. It is to say only that the known remedy provided by equity, in favor of those actually or constructively defrauded, is available now as before in every case — involving taxation or otherwise — where the presented facts are sufficient to shock the conscience of the chancellor.
To conclude: One is led to wonder whether any weight — any evidentiary persuasion whatever — of proven equity would move our distinguished Brethren to relieve an appealing taxpayer from the rigors of Consumers. Suppose, in Consumers, that the decimals had been carried yet farther to the right so that an even greater — much greater — overpayment had been innocently made. Or suppose (in the case before us) that these vacant lots, theretofore properly assessed at valuations ranging from $150 to $400, had been assessed for the year 1956 at, say, $55,000 *167each instead of $5,500 each (let no one say, onr opinions of Consumers Power Company v. County of Muskegon lying open before ns, that such things cannot happen). Would our Brothers — sorrowfully of course — continue in either circumstance their wire-drawn adherence to control by law over equity? The answer, probably, is affirmative. And so today’s controversy must wend its weary way onward, past this Oakland county tax case, toward the hope and— I predict — the assured light of the future.
The majority opinion of Consumers Power Company v. County of Muskegon, if left alive in our books, is bad for -Michigan from every standpoint. It does our Court no credit, and bids fair to interfere with the necessary processes of good-faith tax payment. Consider for a moment that Michigan’s major taxpayers (in other areas of levy) have been asked and doubtless will be asked to assist, by premature payment, in meeting the State’s now chronic financial crises. Necessarily these payments have been made and must be made on the basis of estimates and ahead-of-time calculations. Such practice, inherently, is fruitful of honest and before-the-fact error. Now, in this very year of urgent concern, our divided Court again leaves the Samaritans of Michigan in doubt upon the question whether they may receive relief, in the courts, in event they ultimately discover overpayment on their part. What would we do should Ford Motor or General Motors overpay, say, $500,000, followed by righteous appeal on their part for judicial relief? Ah, there is a piquant question. Would that it were here, for decision in a companion case.
Two eminent jurists of our State, Judge Smith of the 20th circuit and Judge Adams of the 6th circuit, the latter being a former distinguished member of this Court, have attested due support of the equitable doctrines found in Mr. Justice Smith’s opinion of *168Consumers. So have 2 present members of this Court. Surely, by this time, it should be evident that an inadvertent error of decision was made in Consumers, just as in Romalz, supra. Should we so decide by majority vote, it would become unnecessary to consider effect, retroactive or otherwise, of the pendente legislative enactment to which counsel refer in their brief (PA 1958, No 209, § 53a [CL 1948, § 211.53a (Stat Ann 1959 Cum Supp § 7.97[1])]), * by which the legislature since handing down of Consumers and entry of decree herein has provided (so far as concerns property taxes) what our majority in Consumers should have upheld, that is, the right of taxpayers to equitable relief from the unconscionable effect of crass mistakes of public officials in the field of taxation; mistakes gross enough to constitute fraud.
I vote to reverse and remand for entry of decree in accord with the expressed will of the chancellor, thus overruling Consumers Power Co. v. County of Muskegon, 346 Mich 243. No costs.
Smith, Edwards, Voelker, and Kavanagh, JJ., concur with Black, J.
See review of this case in 43 Cornell LQ, p 123.
Since this opinion was written Mr. Justice Kelly has deleted, from his opinion, his original quotations from Story and Pomeroy.
36 & 37 Vict, ch 66, and 38 & 39 Vict, ch 77. See the superb analysis of this act by the Honorable Willis B. Perkins, late of th17th judicial circuit of Michigan, in 12 Mich L Rev 277. For the present phrasing of the amendment providing that “the rules of equity shall prevail,” see 18 Halsbury’s Statutes of England [2d ed, Burrows], p 481.
No student, reading Pomeroy with view toward thoughtful understanding of equity’s purposes and boundless possibilities, ever would be misled with respect to Pomeroy’s position that the court of chancery, once it is shown that which is of siieh appealing foree as to quicken the conscience into action, does not necessarily follow the law. . .
This is Pomeroy’s most illustrious passage. It is one every chancellor should read, and reread from time to time, as he would the Beatitudes and Ten Commandments. See its employment in Ar-Tik Systems v. Lark Sales Co., 12 Ill App 2d 304, 336 (139 NE2d 308, 324). And for like declarations, see Union Pacific R. Co. v. Chicago, R. I. & P. R. Co., 163 US 564, 601 (16 S Ct 1173, 41 L ed 265); Vanderbilt v. Mitchell, 72 NJ Eq 910, 917 (67 A 97, 101, 102, 14 LRA NS 304); Columbian Athletic Club v. State, 143 Ind 98, 102 (40 NE 914, 915, 916, 28 LRA 727, 52 Am St Rep 407); Ball v. Victor Adding Machine Co. (CCA), 236 F2d 170, 174, 175; Pierce v. Proprietors of Swan Point Cemetery, 10 RI 227, 241 (14 Am Rep 667, 680).
The general rule is that a legislative enaetment will not be presumed as having retroactive effect (Harrison v. Metz, 17 Mich 377, 382; Bullinger v. Gremore, 343 Mich 516, 535). Nor application of such presumption to a statute providing reimbursement (of paid taxes) in favor of the defeated holder of a tax deed, see Shaw v. Morley, 89 Mich 313.

=== CASE 9741700 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:47.066074+00 ===

Kelly, J.
(dissenting). The chancellor found:
“Although plaintiff must be charged with constructive knowledge of the existence and amount of the 1956 assessment, it did not receive a tax statement from the new city in that year and, hence, did not have actual knowledge of the excessive assessment until April, 1957, when it attempted to pay the tax on one of the lots. It then offered to pay the tax to the *169comity treasurer under protest but that offer was refused. Obviously and it is conceded, the plaintiff neither appeared before the board of review nor made prior inquiry at the city offices in regard to the assessment.”
It is difficult to assume that plaintiffs, engaged in land transactions, did not know that the 1956 tax was due in July, 1956. Appellants cannot rely upon the fact that they did not receive a tax notice to excuse their failure to make any effort to pay the July, 1956, levied tax until March, 1957. The chancellor correctly found that under our tax laws “plaintiff must be charged with constructive knowledge of the existence and amount of the 1956 assessment.”
Appellants’ chancery action asks the chancellor to hold that the tax for 1956 be considered as paid under protest. Appellants never paid nor offered to pay the 1956 tax, but requested the county treasurer to accept the 1957 assessment in lieu of the 1956, contrary to the provisions of CL 1948, § 211.58 (Stat Ann 1950 Rev §7.102), which provides: “That
neither taxes nor special assessments which are delinquent may be paid under protest to the county treasurer.” Appellants appealed to the court because the county treasurer refused to violate the statute.
It is conceded that appellants did not appear before the board of review. The board of review was created by law to correct alleged erroneous assessments, and appellants were subject to the jurisdiction of said board. Nailing to take advantage of the relief the board was authorized by law to grant, appellants were estopped to seek relief in court, as established by the following decisions:
First National Bank of St. Joseph v. Township of St. Joseph, 46 Mich 526, 530:
“If a person does not see fit to have his assessment corrected and perfected, when it is in his power to do *170so, it must be assumed that a failure to complain is equivalent to an admission of correctness.”
Meade v. Haines, 81 Mich 261, 265:
“The plaintiff did not appear before this board, nor in any manner avail himself of its provisions, to correct the alleged erroneous assessment. This is a complete bar to his recovery here, even if he could otherwise maintain his suit.”
Fletcher Paper Co. v. City of Alpena, 172 Mich 35, 39:
“It is well settled by the repeated decisions of this Court, covering a period of more than 30 years, that the board of review is the constituted tribunal for the correction of unjust or unequal assessments, and that a taxpayer who is subject to the board’s jurisdiction, and fails to make his appeal to that tribunal, cannot later appeal to the courts for redress. The board of review is a tribunal provided by law in which the taxpayer may appear and contest an unequal or excessive assessment; and his failure to so appear estops him from assailing the assessment afterwards.”
The statutory provisions and previous decisions of this Court, which I believe applicable to this appeal, are not commented upon by Justice Black — evidently on the theory that they can be ignored by a chancellor applying equity.
In Sorrick v. Consolidated Telephone Company of Springport, 340 Mich 463, 469, we said:
“It must be admitted that the equities of the case are strongly in favor of defendant. However, we are unable to close our eyes to another fundamental rule of equity, i.e., that equity follows the law.”
In J. W. McCausey & Co. v. Gittleman, 201 Mich 8, 16, we said:
“We do not conceive that the plainly expressed provisions of the lien law are less imperative because *171by the statute a chancery court is made the forum in -wnich the attached liens may be enforced. While equity courts are said to be given special jurisdiction to deal with and correct that wherein the law is deficient because of its universality, they do not rise above or have power to change the law, either statute or common.”
In Consumers Power Company v. County of Muskegon, 346 Mich 243, 247, we stated:
“Contrary to the theory that we should apply the general equitable rules in a taxation case of this nature are the cases of Langford v. Auditor General, 325 Mich 585; and Bateson v. City of Detroit, 143 Mich 582. In the Langford Case we stated (pp 590, 591):
“ ‘Grovernmental powers of taxation are controlled by constitutional and statutory provisions. C. F. Smith Co. v. Fitzgerald, 270 Mich 659. Hence, it is not possible to adjudicate issues arising under taxation laws by the general application of equitable principles. This phase of the law seems to have been overlooked by plaintiffs who stress their right to relief in the instant case on equitable, rather than legal, grounds.
“ ‘ “The collection of duly levied taxes for governmental purposes is a governmental function and the collection officer cannot, by mistake or misinformation, work an estoppel, enforceable in a court of equity. The fact, and not the misinformation, controls.” Lovett v. City of Detroit, 286 Mich 159, 161, 162.’ ”
In Corkins v. Ritter, 326 Mich 563, 568, we said:
“If plaintiff could not have a new trial, it follows he could not bring a separate action in equity, as equity will not allow indirectly what may not be done directly.”
In his opinion Justice Black asks this Court to overrule Consumers Power Company v. County of Muskegon, supra. In that case we held:
*172“Governmental powers of taxation are controlled by constitutional and statutory provisions.”
“Issues arising under taxation laws may not be adjudicated by the general application of equitable principles.”
“The equitable principles of ‘windfall’ and ‘unjust enrichment’ cannot be applied in an action at law to recover taxes not paid under protest.”
“The obligation to pay taxes is purely a statutory creation, and taxes can be levied, assessed and collected only in the method pointed out by express statute, hence, refunds or a credit of taxes, even though erroneously paid, may not be made or even voluntarily refunded in the absence of statutory authority so to do.” (Syllabi.)
Subsequent to our decision in Consumers Power Company v. County of Muskegon, supra, the legislature enacted PA 1958, No 209 (approved by the governor May 5, 1958), section 53a thereof providing:
“Any taxpayer who is assessed and pays taxes in excess of the correct and lawful amount due because of a clerical error or mutual mistake of fact made by the assessing officer and the taxpayer may recover the excess so paid, without interest, if suit is commenced within 3 years from the date of payment, notwithstanding that the payment was not made under protest.” CL 1948, § 211.53a (Stat Ann 1959 Cum Supp § 7.97 [1]).
I agree with my Brother that this provision is pendente legislative enactment and cannot be given retroactive effect, and add thereto that the amendment only affects taxpayers who are assessed and pay taxes in excess — which does not apply to appellants, who failed or refused to pay the tax.
I disagree with his statement that “the legislature since handing down of Consumers and entry of de*173cree herein has provided what our majority in Consumers should have upheld, that is, the right of a taxpayer to recover the amount of mistakenly levied and unconscionably collected property taxes.”*
: This Court does not create the law governing taxation. To grant relief to taxpayers who failed to pay taxes within the prescribed time and who failed to appeal to the statutory created board of review, will necessitate legislative enactment to that effect.
This decision will not be confined to the appellants in this appeal, but will establish tax principles applicable to the huge number of property owners who constitute the taxpayers of our State. In regard to Justice Black’s recommendation that the Consumers Power Company Case, supra, be overruled, I call attention that the adoption of his contention will constitute not only an overruling of Consumers but of numerous decisions of this Court (as referred to above), holding that: (1) Governmental powers of taxation are controlled by constitutional and statutory provisions, hence it is not possible to adjudicate issues arising under taxation laws by the general application of equitable provisions; (2) The collection of duly levied taxes for governmental purposes is a governmental function, and the collection officer cannot by mistake or misinformation work an estoppel enforceable in a court of equity; (3) The board of review is the constituted tribunal for the correction of unjust or unequal assessments, and a taxpayer who fails to make his appeal to that tribunal cannot later appeal to the courts for redress; (4) Delinquent taxes cannot under protest be paid to the county treasurer.
The adoption of the opinion to which I dissent would constitute a declaration on our part that while *174we realize that the tax laws clearly, unequivocally and definitely notify property owners that they should not bring" tax problems to the courts without first appealing to the board of review, we have, by this decision, decided not to follow this position in certain instances where the courts decide the tax collection would constitute unjust enrichment. If adopted, the quéstions naturally arise: What overtax constitutes unjust enrichment? Is not the overtax of $1 unjust enrichment to that amount? How long can the taxpayer wait after the time allowed him to appeal to the board of review before he commences his action in equity?
We are not dealing with a case where tax officials fraudulently conspired to overtax. A mistake was made. It clearly appears that the mistake could have been rectified by appellants had they requested relief from the board of review. If they had sought relief from the board and been denied, this Court would have granted relief.
To write exceptions to the tax laws eliminating the requirement that the taxpayer first seek relief from the board of review would create problems in our courts and with tax-collection officials which we refuse to create.
The decree should be affirmed. No costs, a public question being involved.
Dethmers, C. J., and Carr, J., concurred with. Kelly, J.
This quotation appeared in Justice Black’s original opinion. The matter has been changed in the second and third revisions of his opinion.

=== CASE 9741701 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:48.347811+00 ===

Dell, Chief Justice.
This is an action for personal injuries arising out of a collision between plaintiff’s automobile and defendant’s truck. Plaintiff was traveling south on U. S. Highway 65 in Owatonna and intended to turn left .onto North Street. She began signaling with her automatic turn signals about 150 feet from the intersection and, at the same time, began decreasing her speed. She stopped at the entrance to the intersection in order to yield the right-of-way to oncoming traffic. While so stopped she was struck from behind by defendant’s tractor-trailer truck which, prior to the accident, had been traveling behind her at less than the 500 feet prescribed by M. S. A. 169.18, subd. 8(b).1 Although plaintiff had her foot on the brakes of her car at the time of the collision, it was thrown forward and came to rest 192 feet from the point of impact. Her injuries resulted in a “twenty-five to thirty per cent permanent disability” in the “use of the back and the neck” which prevents her from lifting heavy objects; from doing her housework as before; and from performing any of the chores which she formerly handled on her husband’s farm.
At the close of plaintiff’s case, defendant introduced some medical testimony and then rested. Plaintiff’s motion for a directed verdict on the issue of liability was granted, and only the question of damages was submitted to the jury, which returned a verdict for plaintiff in the sum of $7,800. Defendant appeals from an order of the district court denying his motion for a new trial.
On appeal it is defendant’s position that the trial court committed reversible error (1) by directing a verdict in favor of plaintiff, (2) by admitting in evidence certain medical testimony and a medical report prepared for plaintiff’s attorneys, (3) by permitting plaintiff’s coun*127sel to make what is claimed were improper and prejudicial comments in his closing argument, and (4) by instructing the jury that plaintiff might recover for impairment of her future earning capacity. We shall consider these issues in their order.
Not every case presents a conflict in the facts which must be resolved by a jury. In the instant case the facts are undisputed and, in fact, defendant presented evidence at all on the issue of liability. He argues instead that solely by virtue of plaintiff’s failure to signal that she was slowing down, she could have been contributorily negligent and that this was1 an issue for the jury. We cannot agree. Even when the evidence is viewed in the light most favorable to him, it is clear that the negligence here was all on the part of the defendant. By following so closely behind plaintiff’s car he was clearly in violation of the statute. In so doing he was prima facie negligent.2 It also appears that the negligence was the proximate cause of the accident, and no evidence to the contrary having been introduced, the directed verdict was entirely proper.3 Plaintiff’s conduct in the operation of her vehicle was in accord with the rules of the road. In anticipation of the impending turn she had begun signaling 150 feet from the intersection.4 She also decreased her speed and then stopped to yield the right-of-way to the oncoming vehicle as she was required to do.5 These actions should have given defendant sufficient notice of plaintiff’s intention and if his vehicle had been under proper control he would have had no trouble in avoiding this accident.
Three objections are raised to the medical evidence in this case. The first relates to allowing Dr. Kenneth G. Henry, plaintiff’s personal *128physician, to state an opinion based on his knowledge of this case; the second objection is that he was allowed to testify that he did not change his opinion after he received a report about plaintiff from an orthopedic surgeon; and the final objection relates to the admission in evidence of a medical report letter prepared for plaintiff’s attorneys.
There was no error in permitting Dr. Henry to give his opinion. “ [Questions calling for the opinion of an expert witness must be based upon facts previously testified to by him, or facts testified to by others, or upon an agreed state of facts, or facts assumed hypothetically as true.”6 In the instant case plaintiff’s attorney chose the first method; namely, to obtain an opinion based upon the doctor’s own personal knowledge and observations gained during the course of his treatments and examinations. The record supports this approach. Dr. Henry had attended plaintiff over a period of years. He treated her for the injuries out of which this action arose; in fact, he saw her in the hospital within 15 to 20 minutes after the accident. He continued to see her and examined her again shortly before the trial. He testified that there were, to his knowledge, no intervening factors which could have affected her condition. His opinion was entirely proper.
Nor do we think it was reversible error to permit Dr. Henry to testify that he did not alter his opinion after receiving the report of the orthopedic surgeon. In Riley v. Luedloff, 253 Minn. 447, 92 N. W. (2d) 806, we recognized that opinions based on information obtained out of court from third parties other than the patient are hearsay and inadmissible, but that no prejudicial error results from their admission when they pertain to facts which are also corroborated by other competent testimony. In the instant case, in view of the independent testimony both by plaintiff and Dr. Henry, permitting him to testify that he did not alter his opinion after receiving the surgeon’s report was not prejudicial.
The medical report letter to plaintiff’s attorneys was first used by defense counsel in cross-examining Dr. Henry. On redirect examination plaintiff’s counsel attempted to show that opposing counsel had *129used a portion of the letter out of context and sought to introduce the entire letter, not to corroborate any prior testimony of the doctor, but to clarify exactly what he had written. The best evidence of what the letter contained was the letter itself and to that end it was admissible.7
We find no merit in the claim that plaintiffs counsel made improper and prejudicial comments in his closing argument. Granting a new trial for misconduct of counsel rests almost wholly in the discretion of the trial court which is in a better position to assess its impact upon the jury.8 It is only when there has been a clear abuse of discretion that we will reverse on appeal. To do otherwise would penalize a party for his counsel’s misconduct and we have consistently refrained from so doing.9 Two instances of misconduct are set forth, one a statement by plaintiff’s counsel that had the orthopedic surgeon been called to testify his testimony would not have affected the case,10 and the other a comment by plaintiff’s counsel about evidence which had been properly excluded and which counsel for defendant claims was made in an attempt to place the defense in a bad light.11 The amount of the verdict indicates that it was not rendered under the influence of passion and prejudice and, while these statements were improper, we do not think the trial court abused its discretion in not granting a new trial.
The last assignment of error relates to the trial court’s instruction to the jury that it might include as an element of plaintiff’s damages the loss of or impairment to her future earning capacity. Defendant’s position is that under this court’s. recent opinion in Person v. Sears, Roebuck & Co. 252 Minn. 110, 89 N. W. (2d) 694, it was error to submit this issue to the jury when there was no evidence in the record of the value of plaintiff’s earning capacity. The opinion in the Person case was by a divided court. Although the opinion is a fairly *130recent one, it has already been the subject of criticism, not only on the part of lawyers,12 but also in law review articles.13 Accordingly, we have decided to reexamine the soundness of that opinion.
In Connolly v. Pre-Mixed Concrete Co. 49 Cal. (2d) 483, 489, 319 P. (2d) 343, 346, the court said:
“Loss of earning power is an element of general damages which can be inferred from the nature of the injury, without proof of actual earnings or income either before or after the injury, and damages in this respect are awarded for the loss of ability thereafter to earn money.”
The preceding statement clearly represents the general rule of law which applies in other jurisdictions14 and was apparently applied in Minnesota — at least prior to the Person case. In Ahlstrom v. Minneapolis, St. P. & S. S. M. R. Co. 244 Minn. 1, 27, 68 N. W. (2d) 873, 889, for instance, we held that an ordinary laborer was not required to introduce proof of specific pecuniary loss in order to- recover for impairment of his earning capacity. If loss or diminution of earning capacity were to be measured on the basis of prior wages then the ordinary worker with a previous history of earnings would have the necessary data available. But he is not required to introduce it in evidence. In Johnson v. Howard, 45 Wash. (2d) 433, 450, 275 P. (2d) 736, 746, the Supreme Court of Washington stated:
“Johnson [the plaintiff] appeared on the witness stand and testified as to his age and the nature of his injuries. He further testified *131that he was unable to work as before the accident, and that after each work day he suffered from extreme fatigue. This evidence is sufficient to sustain a jury finding of diminished earning power.”
If evidence of prior earnings, even though readily available, is unnecessary in the case of a workingman whose ability and capacity to earn in the future has been impaired, then in cases involving persons who have no previous record of earnings or whose past record would unnecessarily distort their future prospects, such evidence is even less important or necessary. To illustrate, the prior earnings of a retired person could have little, if any, relation to his future earning capacity. The past earnings of a college student from assorted jobs — many of which would be entirely unrelated to his future work — might have no bearing at all upon his earning capacity after graduation. The same is true of the prospective earning capacity of other persons who pursue courses of training or study in preparation for vocations or occupations which differ from the ones in which they are engaged at the time of injury and which are likely to produce greater income.15 Perhaps the case of a housewife, which is essentially the one under consideration in the instant case, most clearly illustrates the point. In Florida Greyhound Lines, Inc. v. Jones (Fla.) 60 So. (2d) 396, 398, the court said:
“* * * [W]e are not primarily concerned with loss of earnings but with loss of power to earn. * * *
“* * * [I]t might well happen that a woman who has never earned a cent but has faithfully and successfully discharged her duties as a wife and mother would suddenly be faced, by the loss or disability of her mate, with the necessity to earn money to continue maintaining her home and rearing her brood. At any given time before such an emergency she might be wholly unable to prove she had produced a dime, though she might be qualified to expertness in some field or other. The lack of ability to ‘carry on’ because of some injury would immediately become a very real loss.
“* * * [T]he capability of a housewife that has been destroyed or impaired by the negligent act of another may not be ignored in *132assaying the damage, simply because she had not gathered money in some other activity. The measuring of the loss cannot be put off until another day. If she has been incapacitated, the time would never come for her to demonstrate what she could earn; and after all, there is but one trial — and that is now. We are convinced that the matter should be submitted to the jury as a phase of the damage, as difficult of appraisal as it may be.”
We think that the distinction drawn by the Florida court is correct and proper. It is the distinction between a loss of earnings and the impairment of future earning capacity. Loss of earnings is an item of special damages. As such, the loss must be specifically pleaded and proved.16 On the other hand impairment of earning capacity is an item of general damages. It permits recovery for a loss or diminution of the power to earn in the future and is based upon such factors as the plaintiffs age, life expectancy, health, habits, occupation, talents, skill, experience, training, and industry.17 It is within the province of the jury to weigh all these elements and, guided by experience and common sense, to arrive at the proper monetary value of plaintiff’s loss without recourse to his past earnings.
A careful reading of our prior opinions clearly discloses that where evidence of past earnings has been introduced, it has been done to establish a claim for special damages for loss of earnings rather than as proof of general damages occasioned by impairment of earning capacity.18 Thus, in LeMay v. Minneapolis St. Ry. Co. 245 Minn. 192, 199, 71 N. W. (2d) 826, 831, where plaintiff, at the time of her injury, “was employed as a cosmetics salesgirl in a department store at approximately $200 per month” and was able to show a loss of eam-*133ings from the date of the accident to a time approximately 27 months later when she became pregnant and would have been required to discontinue working, we held:
“It was proper to show the wages plaintiff was reasonably certain of receiving from October 13, 1948, to January 1951 as an element for consideration in awarding lost earnings. * * * In addition, plaintiff may recover for loss of future earning capacity, even though presently she is performing only household duties and does not intend to resume gainful employment.”
In the LeMay case we did not hold that plaintiff was required to introduce evidence of past earnings in order to' recover for impairment of future earning capacity, and it appears clear that but for the Person case the plaintiff in the instant case would be entitled to recover for that impairment. In Rodgers v. Boynton, 315 Mass. 279, 281, 52 N. E. (2d) 576, 577, 151 A. L. R. 475, the court said:
“* * * Her ability to work belonged to her; and if her capacity to work was lessened by her injury, then she alone was entitled to recover the value of that part of her capacity to earn of which she was deprived. Her time was her own. She had a right to' work and her earnings belonged to her. * * * She was entitled to have considered in the assessment of her damages her inability, due to the injury, to perform her household duties, just as she would be entitled to have considered any other restriction, due to the injury, of her activities.”
In the Person case plaintiff (252 Minn. 113, 89 N. W. [2d] 696) “prior to the accident and for some time thereafter, operated a room-inghouse,” and there was evidence of her ability to do general housework. By a divided court we held that she might not recover for loss of future earning capacity in the absence of evidence pertaining to the value of her services as a roominghouse operator or a general house-worker. In so holding we are now satisfied that we were in error. The Person case should be and now is expressly overruled.
Affirmed.
This was not a business or residence district as defined by M. S. A. 169.01, subds. 39, 40, and both parties so acknowledged.
§ 169.96.
Cf. Tschida v. Dorle, 235 Minn. 461, 51 N. W. (2d) 561.
See, § 169.19, subds. 5, 7. In Teas v. Minneapolis St. Ry. Co. 244 Minn. 427, 70 N. W. (2d) 358, and Martini v. Johnson, 204 Minn. 556, 284 N. W. 433, cited by appellant, there were fact questions as to whether the signals had been given soon enough. No such question is presented here.
See, §§ 169.14, subd. 3, and 169.20, subd. 2. Conflicting evidence about the suddenness of the stops in Ryan v. Griffin, 241 Minn. 91, 62 N. W. (2d) 504, and Fredhom v. Smith, 193 Minn. 569, 259 N. W. 80, was for the jury. Here again, however, the evidence is clear and the facts are undisputed.
Webb v. Minneapolis St. Ry. Co. 107 Minn. 282, 285, 119 N. W. 955, 956.
Davidson v. St. Paul, M. & M. Ry. Co. 34 Minn. 51, 24 N. W. 324.
Fenton v. Minneapolis St. Ry. Co. 252 Minn. 75, 89 N. W. (2d) 404.
Nelson v. Twin City Motor Bus Co. 239 Minn. 276, 58 N. W. (2d) 561; Harris v. Breezy Point Lodge, Inc. 238 Minn. 322, 56 N. W. (2d) 655.
Cf. Floen v. Sund, 255 Minn. 211, 96 N. W. (2d) 563.
See, Minneapolis-St. Paul Sanitary Dist. v. Fitzpatrick, 201 Minn. 442, 277 N. W. 394, 124 A. L. R. 897.
In addition to the instant case, see Zaikaner v. Small, 256 Minn. 275, 98 N. W. (2d) 247.
See, 45 Va. L. Rev. 288 (recent case comment); and see, 43 Minn. L. Rev. 142.
See, Yates v. Dann (D. Del.) 124 F. Supp. 125, modified on other grounds (3 Cir.) 223 F. (2d) 64, reaffirmed on issue of damages (D. Del.) 167 F. Supp. 174; Florida Greyhound Lines, Inc. v. Jones (Fla.) 60 So. (2d) 396; Rodgers v. Boynton, 315 Mass. 279, 52 N. E. (2d) 576, 151 A. L. R. 475; Rice v. Philadelphia Transp. Co. 394 Pa. 454, 147 A. (2d) 627; Bochar v. J. B. Martin Motors, Inc. 374 Pa. 240, 97 A. (2d) 813; Triangle Cab Co. v. Taylor (Tex. Civ. App.) 190 S. W. (2d) 755, affirmed, 144 Tex. 568, 192 S. W. (2d) 143; Johnson v. Howard, 45 Wash. (2d) 433, 275 P. (2d) 736; Kincannon v. National Ind. Co. 5 Wis. (2d) 231, 92 N. W. (2d) 884.
See, Annotation, 15 A. L. R. (2d) 418.
Rule 9.07 of Rules of Civil Procedure; cf. Dallas Consol. Elec. St. Ry. Co. v. Motwiller, 51 Tex. Civ. App. 432, 112 S. W. 794.
Ahlstrom v. Minneapolis, St. P. & S. S. M. R. Co. 244 Minn. 1, 27, 68 N. W. (2d) 873, 889; and see, Person v. Sears, Roebuck & Co. 252 Minn. 110, 116, 89 N. W. (2d) 694, 698 (dissenting opinion).
See, Fredhom v. Smith, 193 Minn. 569, 259 N. W. 80; Carlson v. Naddy, 181 Minn. 180, 232 N. W. 3; Stenshoel v. G. N. Ry. Co. 142 Minn. 14, 170 N. W. 695; Anderson v. Young, 98 Minn. 355, 108 N. W. 298; Dahlberg v. Minneapolis St. Ry. Co. 32 Minn. 404, 21 N. W. 545.

=== CASE 9741703 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:49.718128+00 ===

OPINION
SHARPNACK, Chief Judge
Jeffrey S. Cahoon, M.D. and the co-executors of the estate of Robert W. Kohne, M.D. (“Kohne”) (collectively “Appellants”) appeal the judgment in favor of Glessie Joan Cummings (“Wife”) in her action for the wrongful death of her husband, William T. Cummings.1 Appellants raise several issues for our review, which we consolidate and restate as:
1)whether the trial court’s wrongful death instruction was erroneous;
2) whether the trial court erroneously instructed the jury that Wife could recover under a “pure loss of chance” theory in a survival action;
3) whether the trial court erred in not requiring Wife to elect between a wrongful death claim and a survival action prior to trial;
4) whether the trial court erroneously admitted evidence that Kohne made additions to Cummings’s medical records and whether the trial court appropriately instructed the jury on this evidence; and
5) whether the trial court erroneously awarded prejudgment interest with respect to the judgment against Dr. Ca-hoon.
In addition, Wife raises one issue on cross-appeal which we restate as whether the trial court erred in denying her motion for prejudgment interest with respect to Dr. Kohne. We reverse and remand for a new trial.
The facts most favorable to the judgment follow. In 1991, William Cummings sought treatment for heartburn from Dr. Kohne, his family physician. Dr. Kohne ordered x-rays of his esophagus, stomach and small bowel. The x-rays were evaluated by Dr. Cahoon, a radiologist, who diagnosed Cummings with a hiatal hernia and reflux esophagitis. Dr. Ca-hoon also noted that there was an area of mucosal irregularity within the esophagus. After receiving Cahoon’s report, Dr. Kohne failed to recommend an endoscopy and tissue biopsy. Dr. Kohne told Cummings that he had a hiatal hernia with reflux and suggested that Cummings lose weight, sleep sitting up, and avoid greasy foods. Dr. Kohne also told Cummings to return to his office after losing weight.
From December of 1991 to July of 1992, Cummings dieted in an attempt to lose weight. In July of 1992, Cummings returned to Dr. Kohne’s office and Dr. Kohne ar*5ranged for Cummings to acquire his x-rays and obtain further consultation at the V.A. Hospital in Danville, Illinois. However, before Cummings reported to the hospital, his esophagus perforated and hemorrhaged. An emergency endoscopy revealed a large malignancy in the esophagus and Cummings was subsequently diagnosed with- esophageal cancer.
In March of 1993, Cummings filed a complaint with the Department of Insurance against Dr. Cahoon, which Wife later amended adding Dr. Kohne. The Medical Review Panel concluded that both doctors had failed to comply with the appropriate standard of care but that such conduct was not a factor in the resultant damages.
Cummings died on August 15, 1993. In February of 1995, Wife filed a complaint against Appellants asserting a claim for damages resulting from their failure to diagnose Cummings’s cancer. In her complaint, Wife alleged that, as a result of the negligence of the Appellants, Cummings had incurred medical expenses, lost income, lost a substantial chance of survival, and died. In addition, she alleged that she had lost the services and consortium of her husband since the date of the negligence, would suffer future loss of services and consortium, and had incurred her own medical expenses and lost income.
In March of 1996, Dr. Kohne died and his estate was substituted as a party defendant. A few days prior to trial, both Cahoon and Kohne amended their answers admitting that they breached the duty of care in their treatment of Cummings, but continued to deny that their conduct was the proximate cause of the alleged damages. A jury trial was conducted in September and October of 1997. The jury returned a verdict against Dr. Kohne in the amount of $194,000 and against Dr. Cahoon in the amount of $75,000.
Thereafter, Wife filed a motion for prejudgment interest. The trial court denied the motion for prejudgment interest with respect to Dr. Kohne and awarded $18,443.84 in prejudgment interest with respect to Dr. Cahoon.
I.
We first address Appellants’ argument that the trial court’s wrongful death instruction was a misstatement of Indiana law. The Appellants challenge this instruction on several bases. They assert that the instruction misstates the standard for proximate cause required to support a wrongful death action, that there is insufficient evidence to support the instruction, and that it erroneously permits the jury to award full wrongful death damages. We will address each of these contentions in turn.
The substance of a jury instruction must be supported by the evidence and must be a correct statement of the law. Hardsaw v. Courtney, 665 N.E.2d 603, 608 (Ind.1996), reh’g denied. We will assume that an erroneous instruction influenced the verdict and will reverse for such error unless it appears from the evidence that the verdict could not have differed even with a proper instruction. Vergara v. Doan, 593 N.E.2d 185, 187 (Ind.1992). The wrongful death instruction given by the trial court follows:
“In this case you must first determine if the Defendant’s negligence increased the risk of harm to Ted Cummings, and whether the increased risk was a substantial factor in his death on August 15, 1993. If you so find, the Plaintiff is entitled to recover full wrongful death damages. In computing wrongful death damages, you may consider: 1) the value of Mr. Cummings lost earnings; 2) the value of his services; 3) the value of love and affection; and 4) medical, funeral and burial expenses related to his death.”
Record, pp. 2266-2267.
Appellants first contend that this instruction erroneously states the requirement for proximate cause because it imposes liability if the jury finds only that the wrongful act increased the risk of harm and that such increased risk was a substantial factor in Cummings’s death. Rather, Appellants assert that the language of the wrongful death act requires that the jury find that the wrongful act of the Appellants was more likely than not the cause of Cummings’s death. The version of the wrongful death statute applicable to this case is found at *6Ind.Code § 34-1-1-22 and provides, in relevant part:
“When the death of one is caused by the wrongful act or omission of another, the personal representative of the former may maintain an action therefor against the latter, if the former might have maintained an action had he or she, as the ease may be, lived, against the latter for an injury for the same act or omission.... ”
(emphasis added). Appellants maintain that the statute, by its plain language, requires traditional proximate cause to be proved before liability may be imposed upon a defendant. We disagree.
This appeal raises the question of whether a plaintiff in a medical malpractice action can recover damages for death where it cannot be proved that the negligence of the doctor was the cause of death as opposed to the underlying disease or injury. This particular circumstance has been described as follows:
“Where a patient’s illness or injury already results in a probability of dying greater than 50 percent, an obvious problem appears. No matter how negligent the doctor’s performance, it can never be the proximate cause of the patient’s death. Since the evidence establishes that it is more likely than not that the medical problem will kill the patient, the disease or injury would always be the eause-in-fact. The plaintiff must ordinarily prove that proper diagnosis and treatment would have prevented the patient’s injury or death.”
Mayhue v. Sparkman, 653 N.E.2d 1384, 1387 (Ind.1995). There are obvious policy reasons for allowing recovery in these eases. One significant justification is that it would be untenable to
“bar any recovery in tort on behalf of the survivors of many potentially terminal patients, no matter how blatant the health care provider’s negligence. Through negligence, a physician or other health care provider could reduce a patient’s chances of survival from as high as fifty percent to, for example, ten percent, and yet remain unanswerable in the law of tort.”
Perez v. Las Vegas Medical Center, 107 Nev. 1, 805 P.2d 589, 591 (1991).
The desire to provide a patient a means of recovery in these situations has prompted the evolution of two general approaches. One approach is generally referred to as the “loss of chance” doctrine where a plaintiff is allowed to recover not for the death itself, but for the value of the decreased chance of survival or recovery caused by the malpractice. See Perez, 107 Nev. 1, 805 P.2d 589, 592; DeBurkarte v. Louvar, 393 N.W.2d 131, 137 (Iowa 1986). Another approach allows a plaintiff to recover for death by applying the causation standard found in § 323 of the Restatement of Torts (Second). See Thompson v. Sun City Community Hospital, Inc., 141 Ariz. 597, 688 P.2d 605, 616 (1984); Jones v. Montefiore Hospital, 494 Pa. 410, 431 A.2d 920, 925 (1981). Section 323 provides in pertinent part:
“One who undertakes, gratuitously or for consideration, to render services which he should recognize as necessary for the protection of the other’s person ..., is subject to liability to the other for physical harm resulting from his failure to exercise reasonable care to perform his undertaking, if (a) his failure to exercise such care increases the risk of such harm....”
Thus, a plaintiff may recover for a harm (i.e.death) where it can be proved that the negligent act of the defendant (i.e.doctor) increased the risk of that harm to the patient. However, we emphasize here .that § 323 only has application in situations where the defendant has undertaken to provide “services which he should recognize as necessary for the protection of the other’s person.... ” Restatement of Torts (Second) § 323.
As between the loss of chance theory of recovery and the § 323 approach, the Indiana Supreme Court adopted § 323 for Indiana in Mayhue v. Sparkman, 653 N.E.2d 1384, 1389 (Ind.1995). Mayhue involved a medical malpractice suit in which the plaintiff-husband claimed loss of consortium resulting from the death of his wife. The defendant-doctor had filed a motion for sum*7mary judgment asserting that any negligence on the part of the doctor was not the proximate cause of death because the decedent’s chance of survival notwithstanding the negligence was less that 50 percent. The trial court denied the motion for summary judgment and the court of appeals affirmed adopting a loss of chance theory of recovery. Mayhue v. Sparkman, 627 N.E.2d 1354, 1359 (Ind.Ct.App.1994), vacated 653 N.E.2d 1384 (Ind.1995). In vacating the court of appeals decision, the supreme court rejected the loss of chance doctrine and adopted the § 323 approach as “most consistent with Indiana law.” Mayhue, 653 N.E.2d at 1389. Thus, in medical malpractice actions where a negligent health care provider claims that the recovery of damages is not warranted because the patient would have suffered injury or death anyway, a plaintiff may still be successful if it can be demonstrated that the defendant was negligent, the negligent act increased the risk of harm, and that the increased risk was a substantial factor in causing the harm suffered by the plaintiff. Id. at 1388.
Despite the supreme court’s holding in Mayhue, Appellants contend that Mayhue was not a wrongful death action and, therefore, is inapplicable to this case. Furthermore, they contend that because the legislature did not expressly incorporate § 323, the supreme court cannot engraft this relaxed proximate cause standard onto the statute. They maintain that the phrase “the death of one is caused by the ■wrongful act or omission of another” in the statute requires the application of traditional proximate cause and proof that the negligent act more likely than not caused the death. I.C. § 34-1-1-2. We decline to interpret the statute so narrowly.
The goal of statutory construction is to determine, give effect to, and implement the intent of the legislature. Collier v. Collier, 702 N.E.2d 351, 354 (Ind.1998). The statute is examined as a whole, and while the language itself is analyzed, this Court refrains from overemphasizing a strict literal or selective reading of individual words. Id. We believe the intent of the wrongful death statute was to allow an action to be brought by the decedent’s personal representative against a defendant who may be held legally liable for the death, regardless of the mechanism, of liability. For example, just as the mechanism for determining liability in a products liability action is determined by statute, the mechanism for determining liability in a medical malpractice action is governed by case law.3 See I.C. § 34-20-2-1 (containing the rule of strict liability in products liability actions); Watson v. Medical Emergency Services, 532 N.E.2d 1191, 1193 (Ind.Ct.App.1989) (setting out the elements that must be proved in a medical malpractice ease), reh’g denied, trans. denied. In Mayhue, the supreme court adopted the § 323 standard as the standard for liability for medical malpractice cases where a doctor has increased the risk of harm to a patient who has a chance of survival less than 50 percent. Therefore, we hold that a medical malpractice action based upon the § 323 standard may be brought under the 'wrongful death statute where the harm is death and where the defendant has increased the risk of death.
As we have concluded that such an action may be brought, we must next determine whether the trial court’s wrongful death instruction correctly reflected the § 323 standard. As we noted above, a plaintiff must show that the defendant, who has undertaken to provide services to the plaintiff, 1) was negligent, 2) that the negligent act increased the risk of harm, and 3) that the increased risk was a substantial factor in causing the harm. Mayhue, 653 N.E.2d at 1388. The trial court’s instruction required the jury to determine “if the Defendant’s negligence increased the risk of harm to Ted Cummings, and whether the increased risk was a substantial factor in his death on August 15, 1993.” Record, p. 2266 (emphasis added). We conclude that this instruction mirrors the required standard as set out in Mayhue and, therefore, is a correct statement of the law.
*8The Appellants also assert that there was insufficient evidence to support a wrongful death instruction because Cummings could not show that the negligence more likely than not caused Cummings’s death. However, we have already determined that such evidence is not required to support a wrongful death action under the facts of this case. Wife presented evidence that Cummings’s chance of survival was approximately 25-30 percent at the time that a diagnosis should have been made by the defendants and that the delay in diagnosis decreased Cummings’s short term survival and increased the risk of metastasis. We conclude that this evidence is sufficient to support the wrongful death instruction under a § 323 standard for causation.
The final contention raised with respect to the wrongful death instruction involves the instruction that the jury may award full wrongful death damages. Appellants correctly point out that Mayhue, while adopting the § 323 standard, did not address how damages would be measured in such a case. Appellants assert that because May-hue adopted the reasoning of other courts that allow for an adjustment of damages to an amount less than full damages, Wife should not be allowed to recover full damages resulting from Cummings’s death. See McKellips v. Saint Francis Hospital, Inc., 741 P.2d 467, 476-477 (Okla.1987).4 They further contend that because traditional proximate cause is not required to impose liability, it is unfair to allow a plaintiff to recover full wrongful death damages. They suggest that because the injury is effectively a reduction in the chance of survival, the amount of damages available should be adjusted proportionally.
We do not agree that the fact that the supreme court did not describe a method for calculation of damages means that the supreme court intended to adopt a calculation method such as the one set out in McKellips. We think it more likely that the supreme court intended to allow for full recovery. First, the proportional damage scheme set out in McKellips is complicated and would require extensive further discussion by our supreme court had they intended to adopt such a scheme. Second, the basic difference between the loss of chance doctrine and the § 323 approach is that with the first, the recoverable injury is the lost chance of survival; with § 323, the recoverable injury is death. In recovering for a lost chance of survival, it is logical to allow a proportional recovery for the percent chance actually lost by the patient. Such a recovery is directly related to the injury sustained. However, under § 323, the compensable injury is death. The language of § 323 plainly states that one is “liable for the harm” rather than that portion of the risk which was increased. See Thompson, 688 P.2d at 615 (stating that “[t]he defendant is not, under Section 323 ... liable merely for having increased the risk of death, but the evidence of the increased risk of death is ... for the jury’s consideration on the factual issue whether the death was caused by defendant’s failure to use reasonable care.”).
Finally, while Appellants believe it unfair to impose full wrongful death damages ab*9sent proof that the patient would most likely have survived absent the negligence, we prefer to view such a recovery as a means of protecting patients facing treatment for a potentially terminal illness. As we stated in our decision in Mayhue:
“Certainly, tort law is as much about influencing conduct by civil sanctions as it is about compensating injured persons.... We cannot condone the notion that reasonable medical care is only due those who have a probability of recovery and denied those who have only a substantial chance of recovery.”
Mayhue, 627 N.E.2d at 1360. To allow full recovery of damages encourages doctors treating patients with ten percent chance of survival to use the same level of care as when treating patients with a thirty percent chance of survival.
Furthermore, the application of § 323, as specified by Mayhue, has a built-in protection for what may be an otherwise unfair recovery. Even after the plaintiff proves that there was a negligent act and that the negligence increased the risk of death, the plaintiff must still prove and the jury must find by a preponderance of the evidence that the increased risk of death was a substantial factor in the death. This would protect doctors against awards where the negligence played an insignificant role in the patient’s death. Although what constitutes a substantial factor may seem elusive, as noted by the supreme court in Mayhue, we have “strong faith in the ability of the jury to decide such complex questions.” Mayhue, 653 N.E.2d at 1389.
In sum, we hold that § 323 as adopted by the supreme court in Mayhue applies to medical malpractice actions where the injury is death and the action is brought via the wrongful death statute. As a result, we conclude that the wrongful death instruction giv-' en by the trial court in this case was a correct statement of the law with respect to both the standard of proximate cause and the damages that may be awarded. We further conclude that the giving of this instruction was supported by the evidence presented at trial.
II.
The next issue raised by Appellants is whether the trial court erroneously instructed the jury that Wife could recover under a pure loss of chance theory in a survival action. Following the wrongful death instruction discussed above, the trial court instructed the jury, in relevant part, as follows:
“If you determine that the Defendant’s negligence was not a substantial factor in Mr. Cummings’s death, but the Defendant’s negligence increased the risk of harm to Mr. Cummings by reducing his opportunity for a better result, and that increased risk was a substantial factor in that harm, then you should award damages as will fairly compensate the Plaintiff for the harm sustained. Harm may be the loss of opportunity for cure, decreased short-term survival, unnecessary physical pain and mental suffering. Mrs. Cummings is also entitled to be compensated for her loss of consortium....”
Record, pp. 2266-2267. Appellants assert that the portion of this instruction that defines the recoverable harm as “the loss of opportunity for cure” and “decreased short term survival” is, in effect, a loss of chance instruction and contrary to Indiana law. We agree.
We first note that this instruction again correctly states the § 323 standard of proximate causation. However, this instruction erroneously defines the “harm” as the loss of a chance of survival. This instruction effectively combines the loss of chance doctrine and the § 323 standard. However, these options are alternative and incompatible approaches for imposing liability in cases such as this. The supreme court in Mayhue clearly adopted the § 323 approach in this class of cases while rejecting the loss of chance doctrine. See Mayhue 653 N.E.2d at 1389. As such, the loss of a chance of survival, whether stated as a “loss of opportunity for cure” or “decreased short term survival” is not recoverable in Indiana under Mayhue. Therefore, we conclude that this particular portion of the instruction misstated the law with respect to the type of harm for which recovery may be had.
*10However, the remaining portion of the instruction that permits the jury to award damages for pain and mental suffering and loss of consortium is not erroneous. First, damages for any pain and mental suffering incurred by Cummings during his life as a result of the negligent misdiagnosis are injuries that he could have pursued before his death. See Marks v. Gaskill, 546 N.E.2d 1245, 1249 (Ind.Ct.App.1989) (noting the rule that juries may consider pain and suffering and mental anguish), aff'd 563 N.E.2d 1284; see also Crawford v. Wells, 168 Ind.App. 615, 618, 344 N.E.2d 869, 871 (1976); Chicago & Calumet Dist. Transit Co. v. Stravatzakes, 129 Ind.App. 337, 354, 156 N.E.2d 902, 910 (1959). Therefore, such damages may be sought by Wife as his personal representative through operation of the statute providing for survival of actions after death, I.C. § 34 — 1—1—l.5
In addition, Wife may recover, in her own capacity, for loss of consortium resulting from the negligence of the defendant doctors in an action independent from the wrongful death claim. Warrick Hospital, Inc. v. Wallace, 435 N.E.2d 263, 269, (Ind.Ct.App.1982) (holding that widow had individual action for loss of her husband’s consortium between onset of his illness and death separate from that available under wrongful death statute), overruled on other grounds, Community Hospital v. McKnight, 493 N.E.2d 775, 777 (Ind.1986), reh’g denied; see also Dearing v. Perry, 499 N.E.2d 268, 272 (Ind.Ct.App.1986) (holding that a loss of consortium is separate and independent from the primary action). However, this loss of consortium claim is derived from Cummings’s claim for pain and suffering. See Kolkman v. Falstaff Brewing Corp., 511 N.E.2d 478, 480 (Ind.Ct.App.1987) (holding that absent an actionable injury to one spouse, the other spouse cannot recover for loss of consortium), reh’g denied, trans. denied.
Therefore, we conclude that, as to recovery for pain and mental suffering and loss of consortium, the instruction is a correct statement of the law. However, in light of the erroneous instruction on the loss of chance recovery, we cannot conclude that the verdict would have been the same absent the giving of this instruction. Therefore, we reverse and remand this case for a new trial. See Vergara, 593 N.E.2d at 187.
III.
Although we have determined that the erroneous instruction allowing recovery in a survival action for loss of chance necessitates a remand for a new trial, there are several remaining issues that may recur in a subsequent trial. The first of these issues is whether the trial court erroneously permitted Wife to pursue simultaneously both a wrongful death action under I.C. § 34-1-1-2 and a survival action pursuant to I.C. § 34-1 — 1—1.6 Appellants assert that these theories are inconsistent and mutually exclusive and, therefore, Wife was required to elect which action she wished to pursue prior to trial. Appellants base their argument on the doctrine of election of remedies.
The election of remedies doctrine is an equitable principle that bars a party from seeking recovery under one theory where he has already elected to prosecute the action to a conclusion under another inconsistent theory. Farmers State Bank of Wyatt v. Clark Equipment Co., 582 N.E.2d 452, 454 (Ind.Ct.App.1991). In other words, “where a party has two coexisting but inconsistent remedies and elects to prosecute one such remedy to a conclusion, he may not thereafter sue on the other remedy.” Id.
The application of this doctrine turns primarily upon the determination of whether the two theories or remedies in question are “inconsistent.” For the purposes of the doctrine, this term has been defined as follows:
“The test of such inconsistency of remedies has its basis in the factual background which constitutes the cause of action. If the assertion of one cause of action involves the repudiation of another, then the modes of redress are inconsistent. If the *11one cause of action admits a statement of facts, and the other denies the same facts, the remedies sought by such actions are inconsistent. It follows therefore that where the remedies are not inconsistent, the party may prosecute both actions to a judgment, although only one satisfaction can be had.”
Kimmel v. Captain, 107 Ind.App. 621, 626, 24 N.E.2d 435, 437 (1940).
Appellants assert that the wrongful death statute and the survival action statute provide for inconsistent actions and, therefore, may not be pursued together. The statute governing survival of actions provides, in relevant part, as follows:
“(a) All causes of action survive, and may be brought, notwithstanding the death of the individual who is entitled or liable in such an action, by or against the representative of the deceased party except actions for libel, slander, malicious prosecution, false imprisonment, invasion of privacy, and personal injuries to the deceased party, which shall survive only to the extent provided herein. An action under this section may be brought, or the court, on motion, may allow the action to be continued, by or against the legal representatives or successors in interest of the deceased. Such an action is considered as a continued action, and accrues to the representatives or successors at the time it would have accrued to the deceased if the deceased had survived.
(d) If a person receives personal injuries caused by the wrongful act or omission of another and subsequently dies from causes other than those personal injuries, the personal representative of the decedent who was injured may maintain an action against the wrongdoer to recover all damages resulting before the date of death from those injuries that the decedent would have been entitled to recover had the decedent lived. These damages inure to the exclusive benefit of the decedent’s estate.”
I.C. § 34-1-1-1 (emphasis added). The wrongful death statute provides, in relevant part, as follows:
“When the death of one is caused by the wrongful act or omission of another, the personal representative of the former may maintain an action therefor against the latter, if the former might have maintained an action had he or she, as the case may be, lived, against the latter for an injury for the same act or omission.... ”
I.C. § 34-1-1-2 (emphasis added).
We agree with Appellants that the actions authorized by these two statutes are inconsistent as one requires proof that the wrongful act sued upon caused the death of the plaintiff and the other requires proof that the plaintiff died from causes other than the wrongful act. Thus, it initially appears that the doctrine of election of remedies is applicable to the case before us.
However, the traditional application of the doctrine bars subsequent prosecution of an inconsistent action where a plaintiff has elected one remedy and prosecuted it to a conclusion. See Parke v. First Nat. Bank of Elkhart, 571 N.E.2d 1317, 1319 (Ind.Ct.App.1991) (“The doctrine of election of remedies applies only where a party has chosen one remedy and later pursues another remedy which is repugnant to or inconsistent with the remedy selected.” (emphasis added)), reh’g denied, trans. denied; see also Farmers State Bank, 582 N.E.2d at 454 (stating that the doctrine of election of remedies “does not apply unless there are two or more coexistent remedies available to the litigant at the time of the election, from which a choice may be made, and one of which is chosen by the litigant.” (quoting Indiana Law Encyclopedia, Election of Remedies § 1, p. 344 (1958))). In essence, the doctrine operates as a form of estoppel or waiver once such an election is made. In fact, there are many cases that focus specifically on whether an election was in fact made by a litigant. See e.g. Parke, 571 N.E.2d at 1320 (holding that a party’s intent to elect is controlling in determining if an election has been made and a party cannot be deemed to elect a remedy if the party was not aware of the additional cause of action). Here, we have the absence *12of an election because Wife intentionally sought to pursue both actions. Therefore, Appellants assert not that Wife has made an election between the two theories of recovery barring her ability to pursue the other, but that she is required to make such an election. The application of the doctrine of election of remedies in this nontraditional context is one that requires further discussion.
Our research reveals little case law that addresses the specific question of whether an election is required prior to trial. We first turn to the cases cited by Appellants in support of their position that Wife was required to elect. The first case is American International Adjustment Co. v. Galvin, 86 F.3d 1455 (7th Cir.1996), reh’g denied. The Seventh Circuit’s holding in this case, which involved a legal malpractice action, is not directly relevant to the facts before us. However, Appellants point out that Galvin stated the rule that an estate cannot recover damages under both the wrongful death statute and the survival statute. We do not disagree with this statement. As we stated above, a plaintiff cannot recover under both statutes as they provide for inconsistent actions. However, Galvin does not specifically address whether a party may pursue actions under both statutes at trial and allow the jury to determine which action is viable. In Galvin, the cause of the decedent’s death was not in dispute, unlike the ease before us. More importantly, the Seventh Circuit recognized that it may be up to the jury to decide whether there is a wrongful death action or a survival action “assuming [there was] available evidence for each of the two possibilities....” Id. at 1461. We find that this language supports Wife’s position that given the difficulty of proving proximate cause in this case, she should be allowed to pursue both actions and allow the jury, as fact finder, to determine which cause of action the evidence ultimately supports. We find additional support of this position in other states. For example, the Court of Appeals of South Carolina has held that “[wjhere a plaintiff presents two causes of action because he is uncertain of which he will be able to prove, but seeks a single recovery, he will not be required to elect.” Adams v. Grant, 292 S.C. 581, 358 S.E.2d 142, 144 (1986).
Appellants also cite the district court decision of Kohn v. Norfolk & Western Railway Co., 966 F.Supp. 789 (N.D.Ind.1997) in support of their position. In Kohn, the plaintiff set forth in the complaint counts under both the Indiana survival statute and the wrongful death statute. The district court held that the survival action for personal injuries was foreclosed. Id. at 792. However, as in Gal-vin, the basis of the court’s decision was that there was no dispute that the wrongful act of the defendant was the cause of the decedent’s death. Under those circumstances, it was appropriate for the district court to dismiss the plaintiffs claim under the survival statute because there was no evidence to support it.
Appellants also cite Osborne v. Wenger, 572 N.E.2d 1343 (Ind.Ct.App.1991). Osborne, however, merely held that pursuant to former I.C. § 34-4-30-2 a plaintiff may not recover both treble and punitive damages. Id. at 1346. In other words, a plaintiff under the statute is specifically required to elect the measure of damages to prevent double recovery. As Osborne ⅛ holding was limited to a direct application of a statutory provision regarding recoverable damages, we do not find it instructive here.7
In resolving the issue before us, we find the Seventh Circuit’s analysis in Olympia Hotels Corp. v. Johnson Wax Dev. Corp., 908 F.2d 1363, 1371 (7th Cir.1990), reh’g denied, to be the most cogent. In Olympia, the court addressed the doctrine of election of remedies as having both a procedural and a substantive component.
“The procedural aspect derives from the overriding goal of common law pleading, which was by successive rounds of plead*13ing to narrow the issues until there was just one for trial. It was essential to the attainment of this goal that a party be forbidden to plead in the alternative, for that would generate two or more issues for trial.”
Id. (citations omitted). This practice, referred to as “theory pleading,” requires a party to adopt a specific legal theory of recovery which is adhered to throughout the case. Palacios v. Kline, 566 N.E.2d 573, 576 (Ind.Ct.App.1991). However, the adoption of Indiana Trial Rule 8(A) changed the pleading practice in Indiana from theory pleading to notice pleading. Notice pleading merely requires a party to plead the operative facts so as to place the defendant on notice as to the evidence to be presented at trial. Palacios, 566 N.E.2d at 576; see also Binninger v. Hendricks County Bd. of Zoning Com’rs, 668 N.E.2d 269, 272 (Ind.Ct.App.1996) (“Under Indiana’s ‘notice’ pleading system, a pleading need not adopt a specific legal theory of recovery to be adhered to throughout the case.”), trans. denied. Furthermore, Trial Rule 8(E) allows a party to set forth not only alternative theories but inconsistent theories of recovery, providing as follows:
“(E) All pleadings to be concise and direct — Consistency.
(1) Each averment of a pleading shall be simple, concise, and direct. No technical forms of pleading or motions are required. All fictions in pleading are abolished.
(2) A pleading may set forth two [2] or more statements of a claim or defense alternatively or hypothetically, either in one [1] count or defense or in separate counts or defenses. When two [2] or more statements are made in the alternative and one [1] of them if made independently would be sufficient, the pleading is not made insufficient by the insufficiency of one or more of the alternative statements. A pleading may also state as many separate claims or defenses as the pleader has regardless of consistency and whether based on legal or equitable grounds. All statements shall be made subject to the obligations set forth in Rule 11.”
(emphasis added). This court has commented on the significance of this rule as follows:
“Trial Rule 8(A) changed the traditional pleading practice in Indiana from ‘theory pleading’ to ‘notice pleading.’ Theory pleading requires pleading to adopt a specific legal theory of recovery which is adhered to throughout the case. However, notice pleading merely requires pleading the operative facts so as to place the defendant on notice as to the evidence to be presented at trial.
⅜ ⅜ ⅜ ⅜ ⅜
Nor does TR 15(A) [Amended and supplemental pleadings] restrict pleading of inconsistent theories. Pursuant to TR 15(A), a trial court can amend pleadings before or during trial regardless of whether a change in the cause of action might result. There is no limitation on the court’s discretion in permitting amendments merely because the cause of action or the theory of the complaint is changed.”
Palacios, 566 N.E.2d at 576 (citations omitted). As the current rules of pleading in Indiana have abolished the requirement of election of inconsistent remedies at the pleading stage, we conclude that Wife was authorized to plead both theories of recovery. See T.R. 8(E)(2).
We are still left with the question of whether at some point after pleading, but before trial, a party is procedurally required to elect between inconsistent remedies. Although our research reveals no case directly on point in Indiana, we find a few cases that require discussion and distinction. The first of these cases is Sickels v. Aetna Securities Co., 220 Ind. 347, 41 N.E.2d 947 (1942). In Sickels, the plaintiffs initially sought rescission of a real estate purchase agreement and return of the purchase price. At trial, they attempted to amend their pleading to include a claim for damages resulting from fraud in the inducement of the contract. In affirming the trial court’s requirement that the plaintiff elect between the two theories, our supreme court stated:
“When a contract has been induced by fraud, the injured party may pursue one of *14two remedies. He may affirm the contract and sue for damages occasioned by the fraud or he may disaffirm the contract and sue to recover the compensation paid. He cannot maintain both of these actions simultaneously in the same paragraph of complaint. Under our code it is necessary fen' a pleader to adopt and conform to some definite theory. If doubt exists as to what the theory is, the court will determine it from the general scope and tenor of the pleading. These rules are too well known to justify the citation of authorities. In the case at bar the appellants sought to maintain both of these conflicting theories in the same paragraph of their amended complaint. By forced election they chose to proceed upon the theory of a rescission of.the contracts. Their subsequent attempt to amend their election was a second effort to assert inconsistent theories. No reversible error was committed in requiring the appellants to make their election or in holding them to their choice.”
Id. at 351, 41 N.E.2d at 948 (emphasis added). Although Sickels holds that a plaintiff may be forced to elect, the decision was based upon the procedural requirement that a plaintiff adopt a definite theory under the previous practice of theory pleading. As we noted earlier, this method of pleading has been i-eplaced by T.R. 8, which allows a party to plead inconsistent theories. ‘ As such, we conclude that Sickels is not applicable to the case before us.
Our research also reveals a case decided by this court specifically stating that “when the remedies available to a prospective litigant are inconsistent or mutually exclusive ... the election of one remedy will operate aé a bar to the concurrent or subsequent pursuit of other remedies.” City of Hammond v. Beiriger, 164 Ind.App. 275, 280, 328 N.E.2d 466, 469 (1975) (emphasis added). While this case would appear to require a party to elect prior to trial, the court in Beiriger did not find it necessary to apply-the rule because it concluded that the two remedies pursued in that case were not inconsistent. Id.; see also Citizens Bank & Trust Co. of Washington v. Gibson, 463 N.E.2d 276, 282 (Ind.Ct.App.1984) (citing the rule from Beiriger but finding no need to apply it because, as in Beiriger, the remedies were found to be consistent), aff'd in part, rev’d in part, 490 N.E.2d 728 (Ind.1986). We do not find Beiriger instructive for two reasons. First, the argument in Beiriger was that a party had, in fact, made a binding election by instituting a prior proceeding, unlike the case here. Second, the court in Beiriger cites no prior authority and we are unable to trace any development of, the rule adopted. Without the benefit of analogous facts or an opportunity to see how the Beiri-ger court would have applied the rule here, we find this case to be neither applicable nor instructive to the facts before us.
In our final consideration of the procedural aspect of the doctrine of election of remedies, we focus on the underlying purpose of the doctrine. Our supreme court has stated that its purpose is “to prevent excessive and repetitive litigation.” Hoover v. Hearth & Home Design Center, Inc., 654 N.E.2d 744, 745 (Ind.1995). Additionally, the Seventh Circuit in Olympia noted that the point of the doctrine is “not that an election is required but that once made it may be final either by operation of res judicata or because a change of ground would create unreasonable surprise or unduly complicate or delay the litigation.” Olympia, 908 F.2d at 1371. Although Appellants assert that they were prejudiced by having to defend against inconsistent positions on causation in this case, the prejudice would be greater to Wife if she was required to choose between theories of recovery. To illustrate this point, we once again turn to the Seventh Circuit’s decision in Olympia:
“It would be unreasonable to make [plaintiff] choose between two forms of damages before trial and verdict. Suppose [plaintiffs] contract damages were $10,000 and its fraud damages $20,000. The jury might find that [plaintiff] had a good claim for breach but not fraud, and in that event [plaintiff) would be entitled to $10,000. If [plaintiff] had been forced to elect before trial, and had elected to drop the contract count, [plaintiff] would get nothing. Alternatively the jury might find that [plaintiff] had a good claim for fraud but not breach of contract, and then [plaintiff] would be *15entitled to $20,000. If it had elected its contract remedy and dropped the fraud remedy, [plaintiff] would again get nothing. Both results are unsound and they are prevented by confining the doctrine of election of remedies to the limited office of preventing duplicative damages awards, and thus of placing a ceiling of $20,000 on [plaintiffs] damages in our hypothetical case.”
Olympia, 908 F.2d at 1371-1372. We conclude that allowing the simultaneous pursuit of two inconsistent remedies or actions is not repugnant to the purposes underlying the doctrine of election of remedies. It does not necessarily produce excessive and repetitive litigation. See Hoover, 654 N.E.2d at 745. Furthermore, to require a plaintiff to elect prior to trial could, in some cases, operate as a bar to a legitimate recovery for an injury. See Olympia, 908 F.2d at 1371-1372.
Having considered the available case law, the authority cited by the parties, the changes in pleading practices, and the purposes underlying the doctrine of election of remedies, we conclude that there is no procedural bar to pursuing inconsistent theories or remedies at trial. As such, we next address whether an election is required under the substantive law of remedies. In addressing this aspect of the doctrine of election of remedies under the federal rules civil procedure, the Seventh Circuit in Olympia stated:
“In its substantive aspect ... the doctrine of election of remedies is not affected by the federal rules of civil procedure. In that aspect the doctrine is a part of the law of remedies rather than of procedural law. It seeks to prevent double recovery.
⅜ ⅜ ⅜ ⅝ ⅜
That is all there is to the doctrine of election of remedies, viewed as a doctrine of the law of remedies rather than a pleading doctrine.”
Olympia, 908 F.2d at 1371 (citations omitted). We agree that with no procedural bar to the pursuit of inconsistent remedies at trial, the only remaining prohibition left to be applied is that which prevents a plaintiff from receiving more than one recovery for the same injury. Such double recovery was prevented in this case by the trial court’s instructions to the jury. Here, the trial court specified that Wife may recover via the survival action only if the jury were to find that Wife was not entitled to recover in the wrongful death action.
In conclusion, we hold that where a party has two or more inconsistent theories each supported by evidence or where a critical fact is legitimately in dispute, the trial court is not required to force the party to elect between them prior to trial.8 However, there must be some means of preventing the party proceeding under alternative theories from obtaining a double recovery for the injury.
IV.
The next issue we must address is whether the trial court erroneously allowed Wife to present evidence that Dr. Kohne made additional entries to Cummings’s medical records after he had provided copies of the records to Cummings for the purposes of this litigation. In addition, we must address whether the trial court erroneously instructed the jury that it could presume that this alteration of the records “would have been unfavorable to Dr. Kohne on the issue of proximate cause.” Record, p. 2269. Wife contended that Dr. Kohne altered his medical records in three ways:
“10. Defendant Robert W. Kohne, M.D. fraudulently and intentionally added the words ‘Axid samples’ to his 7/10/92 office notes on Ted Cummings after he sent copies of his records to Plaintiff in January, 1993.
11. Defendant Robert W. Kohne, M.D. fraudulently and intentionally added the words ‘Cline scope’ to his copy of the 12/3/91 endoscopy report to document his *16alleged recommendation to Ted to have a ‘scope’ in January, 1992, after he sent copies of Ted’s medical chart.
12. Defendant Robert W. Kohne negligently and carelessly added the name of a Physician’s Insurance Company of Indiana adjuster, Gene Reiss, to Ted’s medical chart at the same time he made the other alterations to Ted’s chart.”
Record, p. 1013. Wife contended that Kohne altered his medical records to conceal his negligence because he knew the delay in diagnosis and treatment caused harm to Cummings.
As conceded by Kohne, Indiana does recognize a spoliation rule which permits an adverse inference to be drawn against a party who destroys or suppresses evidence. “In Indiana, the exclusive possession of facts or evidence by a party, coupled with the suppression of the facts or evidence by that party, may result in an inference that the production of the evidence would be against the interest of the party which suppresses it.” Porter v. Irvin’s Interstate Brick & Block Co., Inc., 691 N.E.2d 1363, 1364-1365 (Ind.Ct.App.1998). However, we find no authority in Indiana for the applicability of this rule to the particular facts before us. Here, there has been no destruction or suppression of evidence that would require a presumption to cure its unavailability. The additions made to Cummings’s records did not in any way obscure or destroy the record. As such, the facts before us do not invoke the spoliation rule to the extent that it has been applied in Indiana. We conclude that the issue presented to us here is best resolved under the general evidence rules regarding relevance.
The rule that allows an unfavorable presumption with respect to destroyed or suppressed evidence logically stems from the unavailability of the evidence. In other words, because the trier of fact cannot know the substance of the evidence, there must be a presumption as to its substance. It also logically follows that the presumption will be adverse to the guilty party. However, where the evidence has not been destroyed and is otherwise available, as it is here, the presumption as to its contents is no longer necessary. The remaining presumption that naturally flows from Dr. Kohne’s additions to the record is that he believed he had failed to provide Cummings with adequate care. If the issue of breach of duty were a remaining issue in this trial, the evidence and any related presumptions would be relevant and admissible. Such evidence would also be relevant to Dr. Kohne’s credibility had he continued to maintain that he told Cummings to have an endoscopy. However, we disagree with the trial court’s determination that the evidence was admissible to show that Kohne believed the case was weak or that it was specifically weak on the proximate cause issue.
First, a presumption as to the case generally is irrelevant as the only remaining element to be proved by Wife was proximate cause.9 Second, despite the trial court’s determination that “[a] reasonable inference [could be made] that Dr. Kohne was conscious that he increased the risk of harm to Mr. Cummings giving rise to the falsification. of his testimony and records,” the additions to the record are not relevant to the issue of proximate cause. Record, pp. 1154-1155. The fact that Dr. Kohne may have added an entry to the record that he had told Cummings to have and endoscopy does not yield an inference that Dr. Kohne believed that his failure to do so was the proximate cause of Cummings’s death or other injury.10
*17The trial court stated in its order denying the motion in limine that “Dr. Kohne was a medical doctor with knowledge of the stages of cancer and the increased risks to the patient when cancer is not timely diagnosed and treated.” Record, pp. 1154-1155. In effect, the trial court has made an expert witness of Dr. Kohne on the issue of proximate cause. “It is well settled that in a medical negligence claim, the plaintiff must prove by expert testimony not only that the defendant was negligent, but also that the defendant’s negligence proximately caused the plaintiffs injury.” Schaffer v. Roberts, 650 N.E.2d 341, 342 (Ind.Ct.App.1995). As Wife was required to prove causation through expert testimony, we think it was inappropriate for the trial court to allow the jury to presume proximate causation from a few words added to Cummings’s medical records. Even presumptions that are allowed due to spoliation or destruction of evidence will not relieve a party of the burden of proving her case. Porter, 691 N.E.2d at 1365. The alteration of these records in no way prevented Wife from presenting evidence on the issue of proximate cause. Therefore, we conclude that it was erroneous for the trial court to allow evidence of these alterations to be admitted as they had no relevance to any issue at trial. Consequently, we conclude that the instruction permitting the jury to infer proximate cause from this evidence was also erroneous. As proximate cause was the sole issue at trial, this error, alone, necessitates reversal and remand for a new trial.
Y.
The next issue we must address is whether the trial court erroneously awarded prejudgment interest with respect to the judgment against Dr. Cahoon. Cahoon asserts that the award was erroneous because Wife did not comply with the conditions set out in the statute governing award of prejudgment interest in civil actions arising out of tortious conduct. The relevant statutory provision in effect at the time of the award provided as follows:
“This chapter [allowing prejudgment interest] does not apply if:
(1) within one (1) year after a claim is filed in the court, or any longer period determined by the court to be necessary upon a showing of good cause, the party who filed the claim fails to make a written offer of settlement to the party or parties against whom the claim is filed;
(2) the terms of the offer fail to provide for payment of the settlement offer within sixty (60) days after the offer is accepted; or
(3) the amount of the offer exceeds one and one-third (1 1/3) of the amount of the judgment awarded.”
I.C. § 34-4-37-8.11 Cahoon specifically asserts that while Wife made several offers of settlement to Cahoon and Kohne together, each of the offers failed to comply with the statutory requirement that the terms of the offer must provide for payment of the settlement within sixty days of acceptance of the offer. Our review of the record confirms this omission in each of the offers. As this statutory prerequisite was not met, we conclude that the trial court erroneously awarded Wife prejudgment interest with respect to Dr. Cahoon. See Indiana Dept. of Human Services v. Firth, 590 N.E.2d 154, 157 (Ind.Ct.App.1992) (holding that we must give effect to the plain and ordinary meaning of a statute’s language), trans. denied.
However, for the same reasons, we must affirm the trial court’s denial of prejudgment interest with respect to the judgment against Dr. Kohne. Wife asserts on cross-appeal that the tidal court’s refusal to award prejudgment interest against Kohne was erroneous. The basis of her contention is that the trial court erroneously concluded that the Recovery Limitation Section of the Medical Malpractice Act12 precluded prejudgment in*18terest in this case because it limits a health care provider’s malpractice liability to $100,-000. However, because we have concluded that Wife is precluded from receiving prejudgment interest for failure to comply with the statutory preconditions to such an award, we need not decide the issue she raises.
In conclusion, we hold that while the trial court’s wrongful death instruction was a correct statement of the law, the error in the survival action instruction and the erroneous admission and instruction regarding evidence of the alteration of Cummings’s medical record requires reversal and remand for a new trial.
Reversed and remanded.
HOFFMAN, Sr. J. concurs
SULLIVAN, J. concurs in part and dissents in part with separate opinion
. Wife asserted three separate claims in her action including: wrongful death, which Wife pursued as Cummings’s personal representative (See former Ind.Code § 34-1-1-2); a survival action, which Wife also pursued as Cummings's personal representative (See former I.C. § 34-1-1-1); and a loss of consortium claim which she pursued on her own behalf (See Warrick Hospital, Inc. v. Wallace, 435 N.E.2d 263, 269, (Ind.Ct.App.1982), overruled on other grounds). Our references to Wife in our discussion of the wrongful death and survival actions will be to Wife in her respective capacity.
. The current version of this statute is found underl.C. § 34-23-1-1.
. To interpret the language of the wrongful death statute as literally as suggested by the Appellants would mean that a party would be precluded from bringing a product liability action under the wrongful death act as no “wrongful” act is required to impose liability in a product liability action. See I.C. § 34-20-2-1.
. McKellips set out a procedure for calculation damages explained as follows:
"The amount of damages recoverable is equal to the percent of chance lost multiplied by the total amount of damages which are ordinarily allowed in a wrongful death action. After consideration of the statistical evidence of the original and diminished chance of survival presented by both sides as well as other factors which are peculiar to the individual decedent, the juiy should select from the figures presented or choose appropriate figures to find the percentage of original chance of survival in absence of negligence and the percentage of diminished chance resulting from the defendant's negligence in order to determine the net reduced figure. The percentages and net reduced figure should be found and added by the jury through a general verdict. The trial court should then multiply the total amount of damages by the net reduced figure to determine the final damage award.
To illustrate the method in a case where the jury determines from the statistical findings combined with the specific facts relevant to the patient the patient originally had a 40% chance of cure and the physician’s negligence reduced the chance of cure to 25%, (40% — 25%) 15% represents the patient's loss of survival. If the total amount of damages proved by the evidence is $500,000, the damages caused by defendant is 15% x $500,000 or $75,000."
McKellips, 741 P.2d at 476-477 (citations and footnotes omitted).
. The current version of this statute is found under I.C. § 34-9-3-4.
. The current versions of these statutes are now found under I.C. § 34-23-1-1 (wrongful death) and I.C. § 34-9-3-4 (survival action).
. Appellants also cite Vera Cruz v. Chesapeake & Ohio Railway Co., 192 F.Supp. 958 (N.D.Ind.1961) and refer to the district court’s statement that actions under the wrongful death statute and a statute allowing recovery for loss of services of a child are not “optionally alternative remedies [or] actions that can be pursued together." Id. at 958. Although this conclusion does generally support their position, Appellants do not explain, nor do we understand, how this case instructs us in our resolution of the particular issue before us.
. We note that there are sufficient procedural mechanisms, in the form of motions for judgment on the pleadings, summary judgment, or judgment on the evidence to prevent a plaintiff from presenting an inconsistent action that has no evidentiary support. But where the evidence supporting both actions or theories is in dispute, as it was here, it is appropriate for the plaintiff to pursue both simultaneously.
. Wife asserts that the alterations were also relevant to the issue of contributory negligence and points to an instruction given by the trial court on this issue. However, this instruction referred only to whether Cummings was contributorily negligent for failing to return to the doctor if he had continued problems, not whether Cummings failed to have an endoscopy at Kohne's instruction. Thus, we do not agree that the alteration of the record indicating that Kohne told Cummings to have an endoscopy is relevant to the issue of whether Cummings failed to seek follow-up care.
. We agree with Kohne that the addition of the words "Axid samples” and the reference to a representative of his insurer was not relevant to the issues in this case. Wife refers only to the addition of “Cline scope" in her response to this issue and offers no explanation as to how the other additions are relevant. As the relevance of these two additions is not apparent to us, we *17conclude, without further discussion, that it was erroneous to admit evidence of these alterations at trial.
. This section of the prejudgment interest statute has been recodified at I.C. § 34-51-4-6.
. See former I.C. § 27-12-14-3. This section has since been revised and recodified as I.C. § 34-18-14-3.

=== CASE 9741704 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:49.7252+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Judge,
concurring in part and dissenting in part
The majority observes, correctly I believe, that the Indiana Supreme Court in Mayhue v. Sparkman (1995) Ind., 653 N.E.2d 1384 held the following: (1) That Indiana adopts Restatement (Second) of ToRts § 323 with regard to medical malpractice claims; (2) That in such instances, we no longer look to traditional proximate cause analysis requiring denial of recovery unless the injury or harm claimed would not have occurred “but for” the defendant’s negligence; (3) That given a pre-existing condition which more probably than not would have caused the resultant harm, e.g. death, a claimant may nevertheless recover if the defendant’s negligence was a “substantial factor in producing the harm.” 653 N.E.2d at 1388 (citing McKellips v. St. Francis Hospital, Inc. (1987) Okl. 741 P.2d 467, 475);13 and (4) That a plaintiff may i-ecover even if the chances of survival or recovery, absent defendant’s negligence, were less than 50%.14
What Mayhue v. Sparkman, supra, did not hold, however, is that a medical malpractice defendant is liable for the total value of the lost life even though the natural preexisting cancerous condition was the ultimate causative factor, and even though the medical malpractice merely increased the risk of the ultimate occurrence or decreased the chances of recovery or survival. Further, it did not hold that a damage recovery in such situation must be an all-or-nothing recovery.
In stating that acceptance of “the § 323 approach does not require a separate loss of chance doctrine,” 653 N.E.2d at 1389 (emphasis in original), the court did not reject the concept that a plaintiffs recovery reflects the increased risk element. It did not say that loss of chance is to be disregarded. Rather, the Mayhue court seems to have been saying, as did McKellips, supra, that the doctrines of § 323 and pure loss of chance are alternatives to accomplish the same policy purpose as to the hurdle of traditional proximate cause; that it is not an either/or situation with respect to liability, but also that utilization of § 323 analysis does not depend upon creation of a separate free-standing loss of chance doctrine. In other words, the § 323 approach may stand upon its own base in that it embraces and includes the loss of chance or increased risk concepts.
Although the pure loss of chance doctrine does reason that the “harm” is not the death, but rather is the “reduction in the probability that the patient would recover or obtain better results if the defendant had not been negligent,” Mayhue v. Sparkman, supra, 653 N.E.2d at 1387, § 323 should not, in an effort to afford some recovery, treat the negligent physician as if his negligence were the sole *19cause of death. The facts at issue remain the same under either the loss of chance theory or the § 323 theory, and it is difficult to understand why the recoveries should be so dramatically different depending upon which doctrine is applied.15
McKellips v. St. Francis Hospital, Inc., supra, resolved the matter in a very logical and common sense manner. It adopted § 323 as “the preferable and most rational theory” (741 P.2d at 474) in the context of the proximate cause problem, but it also incorporated the loss of chance doctrine in its analysis of the recoverable damages.16 I see no procedural or substantive impediment to such reasoning.
Our Supreme Court, although it vacated the Court of Appeals opinion in granting transfer, did not in Mayhue, cast any negative implications upon the statement that:
“As to valuation, the chance of survival or of successful treatment, no matter how small, is a compensable interest for which the negligent defendant is liable. Damages for the lost chance are measured by the ‘percentage probability by which the defendant’s tortious conduct diminished the likelihood of achieving some more favorable result.’” Mayhue v. Sparkman (1994) Ind.App., 627 N.E.2d 1354, 1359 (citations omitted).
The Supreme Court did not state that such valuation, even if valid as to application of pure lost chance, would not be acceptable in the setting of a § 323 analysis.
The validity of apportionment is also acknowledged by Professors Prosser and Kee-ton as deduced in the following comment from Andel, Medical Malpractice: The Right to Recover for the Loss of a Chance of Survival, 12 Pepperdine Law Rev. 973, 988-989 (1985):
“According to Prosser and Keeton, the ‘substantial factor’ rule replaces the ‘but for’ rule in traditional proximate cause analysis and is a much better rule where multiple causation has played an important part in producing the harm. In such cases, responsibility should be imposed upon all causes of the harm_” (emphasis supplied).
In any event, the McKellips, supra, approach to apportionment of damages is preferable to the all or nothing approach adopted by the majority in the case before us.
The Mayhue court, itself acknowledged, at least by inference, that there is no impediment to having our juries apportion damages in multiple causation cases. Although proximate cause complications are sought to be resolved by application of § 323, the court gave our fact-finding system credit for having the ability to meet the task of apportionment. The Court stated that adoption of the § 323 analysis “ is most consistent with Indiana law, particularly our strong faith in the ability of the jury to decide such complex questions.” 653 N.E.2d at 1389.
This confidence is expressed by other scholarly treatments of the subject. In Shoenberger, Medical Malpractice InjuryCausation and Valuation of the Loss of Chance to Survive, 6 Journal of Legal Medicine 51, 82-83 (1985), Professor Shoenberger notes:
“If we are willing to trust juries to attempt to allocate responsibility in a comparative negligence state according to percentages, it appears anomalous to have difficulty *20with permitting the jury to perform exactly that same function in a value of a [§ 323] case.”
In summation, I concur that under § 323, a plaintiff may recover damages from a negligent physician, whose negligence is a substantial factor in increasing the risk of death, even though the patient would have died of natural causes without any negligence on the part of the defendant. I further concur that such recovery may lie even though the patient’s chances of recovery or survival were as little as 10%, absent negligence on the part of the physician, so long as the plaintiff establishes by the evidence that the defendant’s negligence was a substantial factor in increasing the risk. I do not, however, concur in the holding that if the jury finds
liability, they must award full damages against the physician as if there had been no contributing cause. Rather, I would hold that the jury should be instructed to apportion any damages for the malpractice liability based upon the McKellips formula or some similar formula, so long as the defendant has produced expert evidence with respect to the percentages involved, i.e. the percentage of increased risk or diminished chance of survival.17
. In McKellips, the court held that the jury must determine “whether the increase in risk under the circumstances was more likely than not a substantial factor in causing the harm.” 741 P.2d at 475 (emphasis supplied).
. Although the majority did not explicitly acknowledge it as a holding of Mayhue, it is clear from a reading of § 323 itself, that the focus of the Restatement rule is the increased risk of harm rather than whether the defendant's negligence was the proximate cause of the ultimate harm. In this regard, one may note that from case to case, the proximate cause analysis may differ in that some cases refer to the proximate cause thereby seeming to disregard the concept that there be multiple causes, all or some of which may be proximate causes. Other cases utilize the usual view that liability may result if the tortfeasor’s negligence is a proximate cause of the injury.
. It must be noted that the complaint of Cummings in the case before us included not only a claim for loss of consortium, as in Mayhue, and a survival action pursued as decedent’s personal representative but also a wrongful death action. Mayhue did not involve a wrongful death claim. It may well be that as to a wrongful death claim, the harm alleged is truly the death itself, as opposed to a claim under § 323 for an increased risk which was a substantial factor in the harm, i.e. the death. Therefore, as to the wrongful death aspect of this appeal, the majority is perhaps correct in holding that the harm is the death and that if plaintiff is to recover it must be for the death itself. Nevertheless, I do not perceive that isolation of the death from the increased risk element of § 323, precludes a valuation for purposes of recoverable damages of less than the full measure of damages that would be awarded were the defendant’s negligence the sole proximate cause of the death.
. The majority opinion here sets forth the procedure for calculation of damages as envisioned by McKellips v. Saint Francis Hospital, Inc., supra. 741 P.2d at 471, n. 4. See generally: King, Causation, Valuation, and Chance in Personal Injury Torts Involving Preexisting Conditions and Future Consequences, 90 Yale L.J. 1353 (1981).
. If death has not occurred, I venture no opinion as to the apportionability of percentages attributable to a lessening or increase of pain and suffering, medical expenses, quality of life etc. vis-a-vis a continuation of the pre-existing condition. Furthermore, I express no view with reference to die burden of proof as to apportionability, except to state that it may be appropriate to hold the defendant responsible for all damages except those which he can prove arose from the disease or condition. Scafidi v. Seiler (1990) 119 N.J. 93, 574 A.2d 398.

=== CASE 2228472 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:02.593529+00 ===

715 N.E.2d 647 (1999)
306 Ill. App. 3d 294
239 Ill. Dec. 893
The PEOPLE of the State of Illinois, Petitioner-Appellee,
v.
Steve DINWIDDIE, Respondent-Appellant.
No. 5-98-0310.
Appellate Court of Illinois, Fifth District.
Rule 23 Order Filed May 20, 1999.
Motion to Publish Granted July 8, 1999.
Opinion Filed July 8, 1999.
*650 Michael D. McHaney, Vernon, for Appellant.
Gary Duncan, State's Attorney, Mt. Vernon, Norbert J. Goetten, Director, Stephen E. Norris, Deputy Director, Kevin Sweeney, Staff Attorney, Office of the State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor, Mt. Vernon, for Appellee.
Justice CHAPMAN delivered the opinion of the court:
On July 22, 1997, the State filed a petition alleging that the respondent, Steve Dinwiddie, was a sexually dangerous person pursuant to the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act (725 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq. (West 1996)). A jury found respondent to be a sexually dangerous person, and the trial court ordered respondent committed. Respondent's appeal alleges that (1) the trial court erred on certain evidentiary rulings, (2) he was not proved a sexually dangerous person beyond a reasonable doubt, and (3) he was denied the effective assistance of counsel. For the following reasons, we affirm.
Respondent first asserts that the trial court erred in applying the hearsay exceptions found in section 115-10 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Code) (725 ILCS 5/115-10 (West 1996)) to a proceeding under the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act (the Act). The State called respondent's former wife, Karen Warfield, to testify to statements made to her by her daughter, C.M., about respondent's sexual abuse of C.M. The trial court allowed the testimony over respondent's objection.
Section 115-10 of the Code provides hearsay exceptions for sexual acts performed on a child under the age of 13. 725 ILCS 5/115-10 (West 1996). Respondent contends that recognizing the hearsay exception in this case was error because section 115-10 does not specifically list a prosecution under the Act as one of the prosecutions to which it applies. A plain reading of section 115-10 reveals that the hearsay exception it provides is not limited to the offenses it lists.
Proceedings under the Act are civil in nature. 725 ILCS 205/3.01 (West 1996). However, at the trial that determines whether the person who is the subject of a petition under the Act is a sexually dangerous person, all rules of evidence in criminal actions apply. All constitutional rights available to a defendant in a criminal proceeding are available to the person. People v. Bailey, 265 Ill.App.3d 758, 761-62, 639 N.E.2d 1313, 1315-16, 203 Ill. Dec. 494 (1994).
In an initial commitment proceeding, the underlying criminal charge is an element in the determination of dangerousness. People v. Galba, 273 Ill.App.3d 95, 100, 209 Ill. Dec. 860, 652 N.E.2d 400, 404 (1995). The underlying charge against respondent in this case was for predatory criminal sexual assault (720 ILCS 5/12-14.1 (West Supp.1997)). A violation of section 12-14.1 is listed in section 115-10 as a violation to which the hearsay exception would apply. Therefore, if the State would have proceeded criminally against respondent, the evidence respondent complains of would have been properly admitted. Affording respondent the same protections that would be available to him in a criminal prosecution, we see no reason why the testimony should not be admissible in the civil commitment case arising out of that charge. The trial court did not err by allowing Karen Warfield to testify as to C.M.'s out-of-court statements.
However, section 115-10 is not the only vehicle for the admission of Warfield's testimony. Section 8-2601 of the Code of Civil Procedure allows the admission of such evidence in any civil proceeding in which the sexual abuse of a child under the age of 13 is at issue when the court conducts a hearing outside the presence of the jury and finds the statement to be reliable and the child either testifies at the proceeding or is unavailable as a witness. 735 ILCS 5/8-2601 (West 1996). In this case, the trial court conducted a hearing outside the presence of the jury, it determined the child's statement to be reliable, and the child testified at the proceeding. *651 Therefore, the evidence was properly admitted under section 8-2601.
Additionally, even assuming that the admission of such evidence was error, we hold that it was harmless as a matter of law. The victim herself testified to the abuse and was subject to cross-examination. Her testimony was corroborated by medical testimony confirming sexual abuse, and respondent's identity was not an issue. See People v. Mitchell, 215 Ill.App.3d 849, 858, 159 Ill. Dec. 409, 576 N.E.2d 78, 84-85 (1991).
Respondent also contends that the trial court's exclusion of all persons except the media during C.M.'s testimony constituted reversible error. At trial, the State requested a rule on witnesses pursuant to section 115-11 of the Code (725 ILCS 5/115-11 (West 1996)). That section provides that in certain criminal prosecutions, while a minor victim of sexual abuse is testifying, the trial court may exclude all persons, except the media, who do not have a direct interest in the case. 725 ILCS 5/115-11 (West 1996).
As stated before, even though a proceeding under the Act is civil in nature, a respondent must be accorded the essential protections available in a criminal trial, due to the potential loss of liberty attendant to proceedings under the Act. People v. Bailey, 265 Ill.App.3d 758, 761, 203 Ill. Dec. 494, 639 N.E.2d 1313, 1316 (1994). Again, had the State decided to proceed against respondent criminally, the trial court could have properly excluded all persons who, in its opinion, did not have a direct interest in the case, except the media. The underlying criminal case is explicitly listed as a prosecution in which the court may exclude persons not directly interested in the proceedings. 725 ILCS 5/115-11 (West 1996). We, therefore, hold that the trial court did not err in excluding all noninterested parties, except the media, during the testimony of the minor witness. To hold otherwise would lead to absurd results.
The purpose of the Act is, in part, to give the respondent an opportunity to receive care and treatment designed to effect recovery for his propensity to commit sexual offenses. People v. Galba, 273 Ill.App.3d 95, 100, 209 Ill. Dec. 860, 652 N.E.2d 400, 404 (1995). If the State is forced to proceed under the Act with no protections afforded its witnesses, the State will be more likely to proceed with a criminal action. The Act was passed because the legislature recognized that sexually dangerous persons need treatment, not jail time. Sending persons in need of treatment to the Department of Corrections would serve neither the interests of the State nor the interests of the sexually dangerous person.
Respondent's last evidentiary issue is that the trial court erroneously refused a jury instruction, Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 3.11 (3d ed.1992), regarding impeachment of a witness. Respondent has completely failed to demonstrate how this ruling constituted error, beyond the bald assertion that a witness was impeached by a prior inconsistent statement. A point raised but not argued or supported by citation to relevant authority fails to meet the requisites of Supreme Court Rule 341(e)(7) (155 Ill.2d R. 341(e)(7)) and, therefore, is deemed waived. In re Marriage of Auriemma, 271 Ill.App.3d 68, 71, 207 Ill. Dec. 662, 648 N.E.2d 118, 121 (1994). The appellate court is not a depository into which the appellant may dump the burden of argument and research. In re Estate of Thorp, 282 Ill.App.3d 612, 616, 218 Ill. Dec. 416, 669 N.E.2d 359, 362 (1996). By failing to cite any relevant authority, respondent has waived this issue.
Respondent also asserts that he was not proved a sexually dangerous person beyond a reasonable doubt. A jury's finding that a respondent is a sexually dangerous person will be upheld on appeal unless the evidence is so improbable as to raise a reasonable doubt. People v. Allen, 107 Ill. 2d 91, 105, 89 Ill. Dec. 847, 481 N.E.2d 690, 697, aff'd, 478 U.S. 364, 106 S. Ct. 2988, 92 L. Ed. 2d 296 (1986). Respondent contends that he could not have been found sexually dangerous beyond a reasonable doubt because Dr. Larry Davis, a psychiatrist, testified that respondent was not a "dedicated pedophile" and in his opinion the Act only applies to "dedicated pedophiles." Further, respondent asserts that the testimony of the *652 other psychiatrist, Dr. Parwatikar, was biased because he had concluded that respondent was a sexually dangerous person 10 years earlier.
We reject both of these arguments. First, as acknowledged by respondent, the jury was free to believe one psychiatrist over the other. People v. Antoine, 286 Ill.App.3d 920, 926, 222 Ill. Dec. 170, 676 N.E.2d 1374, 1378 (1997). Second, the Act does not apply only to "dedicated pedophiles", but it applies to "All persons suffering from a mental disorder[ ] which * * * has existed for a period of not less than one year * * *, and who have demonstrated propensities toward acts of sexual assault or acts of sexual molestation of children * * *". 725 ILCS 205/1.01 (West 1996). In light of the fact that Dr. Davis admitted that he had no data concerning respondent's past acts of sexual abuse other than what respondent told him, and the fact that Dr. Davis confined his ultimate opinion to the narrow definition of a "dedicated pedophile," the jury had sufficient reason to find that Dr. Parwatikar's testimony was more reliable. Respondent in no way demonstrated that Dr. Parwatikar was partial or unfair.
Additionally, the evidence presented to the jury showed that in 1979, respondent pled guilty to a charge of contributing to the sexual delinquency of a minor. In 1985, respondent was convicted of felony cruelty to a child, R.W. Testimony of R.W. in this case revealed that when she was 14, respondent grabbed her, fondled her breast, and choked her in an effort to force her down on a bed. In 1986, respondent sexually molested R.W.'s 10-year-old sister, P.L. In 1988, respondent was convicted of the aggravated criminal sexual abuse of L.T. and L.T.T., sisters aged nine and six, respectively. In 1996, respondent was charged with predatory criminal sexual assault on eight-year-old C.M., the underlying charge for the proceeding sub judice. C.M. testified that respondent had touched her in her private area with his fingers on four occasions.
A thorough review of the record, including the testimony of L.T., P.L., R.W., C.M., and Dr. Parwatikar, establishes that there was sufficient evidence to find that respondent is a sexually dangerous person beyond a reasonable doubt.
Finally, respondent argues that he was denied the effective assistance of counsel. Specifically, respondent argues that he was denied the effective assistance of counsel because (1) his attorney referred to him as "defendant" on six separate occasions and misspoke on another occasion, (2) his attorney did not obtain the exclusion of the testimony of Dr. Parwatikar, and (3) his attorney failed to subpoena Officer Greenwood.
In a proceeding under the Act, a respondent is entitled to the effective assistance of counsel under the same standard as in criminal cases. People v. Bailey, 265 Ill. App. 3d 758, 763, 203 Ill. Dec. 494, 639 N.E.2d 1313, 1317 (1994). In order for respondent to prevail on a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, his attorney's performance must have been deficient or below an objective standard of reasonableness and there must be a reasonable probability that the result of the proceeding would have been different but for the attorney's errors. Bailey, 265 Ill. App.3d at 763, 203 Ill. Dec. 494, 639 N.E.2d at 1317. On review, we must evaluate counsel's performance considering all of the circumstances that occurred during counsel's representation. Bailey, 265 Ill.App.3d at 763, 203 Ill. Dec. 494, 639 N.E.2d at 1317.
Respondent claims that counsel's use of the word "defendant" as opposed to "respondent" and a misspoken question to a defense witness, in which counsel asked a doctor if he was licensed to practice law, demonstrates that counsel was just going through the motions. We do not find a reasonable probability that there would have been a different outcome absent these mistakes. First, Dr. Davis immediately corrected counsel's error in his answer. Second, the jury was informed that respondent had four previous felony convictions. We find any distinction between the terms "respondent" and "defendant" insignificant in the context of this case.
Respondent alleges that his attorney was ineffective for allowing the appointment of Dr. Parwatikar. The record shows that defense counsel recognized that Dr. Parwatikar *653 often testified for the State, and counsel requested a continuance so he could choose the second psychiatrist. Defense counsel found Dr. Davis and was able to get him appointed to attempt to refute Dr. Parwatikar's diagnosis. Respondent has failed to show how his counsel's strategic maneuvering of psychiatric experts prejudiced him. We find that defense counsel's performance was not deficient.
Respondent also claims that defense counsel was ineffective for failing to bar Dr. Parwatikar's testimony about an examination he performed on respondent 10 years earlier. The record shows that defense counsel objected to the line of questioning and that the objection was argued outside the presence of the jury. We find no prejudice here because the evidence was properly admitted. In a proceeding under the Act, the State must show that respondent has a mental disorder that has existed for a period not less than one year. 725 ILCS 205/1.01 (West 1996). Evidence that Dr. Parwatikar diagnosed respondent as a sexually dangerous person 10 years earlier, that respondent has failed to seek treatment, and that Dr. Parwatikar still believes that respondent has been, and still is, sexually dangerous is directly relevant to an ultimate issue in the commitment proceeding. Defense counsel was not ineffective for failing to obtain the exclusion of this testimony.
Finally, respondent contends that his counsel was ineffective for failing to subpoena Officer Greenwood, who took the written statement of C.M.'s mother, Karen Warfield. This argument must also fail. Defense counsel stated that he attempted to but could not locate Officer Greenwood, as he was no longer on the police force and had moved. Additionally, there is nothing in the record to show that Officer Greenwood would have testified favorably for the defense. See People v. Greer, 79 Ill. 2d 103, 123, 37 Ill. Dec. 313, 402 N.E.2d 203, 212-13 (1980).
We conclude that respondent did not receive ineffective assistance at his trial. Respondent has failed to show that counsel's performance was deficient and that he was prejudiced by his attorney's acts or omissions. We, therefore, affirm the committal of respondent.
Affirmed.
HOPKINS, and GOLDENHERSH, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741705 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:53.966397+00 ===

CHRISTENSEN, Circuit Judge.
This is an appeal from a judgment of the Seventh Judicial Circuit Court “filed . on the 4th day of October, 1977, and from the whole of the record in said action.” We affirm.
Appellant, Jeffrey Glenn Culton, a minor, was charged on March 23, 1977, in a petition alleging two counts: Count 1, assault with intent to commit a felony-rape; and Count 2, rape. He was advised of his constitutional and statutory rights in juvenile court on March 24, 1977. The state filed a motion to transfer appellant to the adult side of the court. Counsel for appellant, who appeared at the initial hearing in juvenile court, withdrew on March 28,1977, and the court appointed present counsel from the Public Defender’s Office. Thereafter, various motions for production; discovery and inspection; physical and , psychiatric evaluation; and lineup were granted by the court. Appellant was represented by counsel throughout the proceedings.
A transfer hearing was held on May 11, 12, and 13, 1977, at which time the state called nine witnesses and appellant called two witnesses. Findings of fact and conclusions of law and the certification of transfer to the adult criminal court were thereafter entered. On arraignment in adult court, appellant demurred to the information, which demurrer was overruled by the court. On September 14, 1977, appellant withdrew his plea of not guilty and entered a plea of guilty. The court determined that the plea was knowingly and voluntarily made and that a factual basis existed for the plea. A presentence investigation was waived but appellant requested a mitigation hearing, which was granted. On October 3, 1977, appellant was sentenced.
Appellant alleges that the trial court’s decision to transfer was against the best interest of appellant and was not based upon substantial evidence. In support of this allegation, appellant states that the trial court erred in preeminently emphasizing the nature of the offense and the fact that it could not retain jurisdiction of appellant until age twenty one. Appellant further claims that the trial court did not give adequate consideration to the testimony of Dr. Burnap concerning the level of appellant’s maturity, home life, school activities, emotional attitude, pattern of living, and proper treatment needed for rehabilitation.
People in Interest of L. V. A., S.D., 248 N.W.2d 864 (1976) and People in Interest of D.M.L., S.D., 254 N.W.2d 457 (1977) set *202forth the two basic areas of consideration in transferring a juvenile to adult court: the circumstances of the crime and the amenability of the juvenile to treatment. No claim is raised by appellant that he was not afforded substantive or procedural due process. SDCL 26-11-4 was amended by the legislature in 1977 to include specifically enumerated factors which the court should consider in a transfer hearing. These specifications became law after the transfer hearing in question here; therefore, the considerations to be followed are those set forth in L. V. A., supra.
Appellant argues that the trial court placed too much emphasis on the seriousness of the offense charged. The court, in L. V. A., supra, stated that “[although the seriousness of the offense alone does not warrant transfer, when considered with the other criteria, it may become the deciding factor in making a transfer.” 248 N.W.2d at 869. It does appear from the record that the juvenile court did consider the seriousness of the alleged offense in deciding to transfer. The record, however, does not suggest that this was the only factor which the court considered. The court considered also the premeditation, plan or scheme by which the offense was committed; the manner in which the offense was committed; and the subject of the alleged offense.
The finding that appellant is not amenable to the rehabilitative treatment available within the juvenile system is supported by substantial evidence. Appellant’s previous history indicates that the attempts at rehabilitation have done little, if anything, toward the rehabilitation of appellant. Appellant’s record contains numerous convictions, including some very serious crimes.
At the time of the alleged offense, appellant was nearly seventeen years of age. The trial court stated in its findings that the jurisdiction of the juvenile court would terminate “before 21.” Immediately following this statement, however, the court stated that there was potential that this appellant would require detention “beyond the age of 21.” Appellant contends that by this statement, the juvenile court based its findings on the erroneous assumption that the court would retain jurisdiction over appellant for only one more year, that is, until he reached the age of eighteen. Keeping the entire statement in mind, however, it is clear that the trial court knew that it could retain jurisdiction over appellant for purposes of detention until he reached the age of twenty one but was of the opinion that there was a possibility that more than four years within the juvenile system would be required. Furthermore, appellant’s record in the juvenile rehabilitation system indicated that the services available there had been a dismal failure. The record further indicates that the facilities available in the juvenile system would not provide sufficient security for the continuing protection of the public.
The decision of the trial court to transfer is amply supported by substantial evidence, but we do not affirm solely upon this basis.
This court has adopted the general rule that a guilty plea, if voluntarily and understandably made, is conclusive as to a defendant’s guilt, admitting all the facts charged and waiving all nonjurisdictional defects in the prior proceedings against him. State ex rel. Condon v. Erickson, 85 S.D. 302, 307, 182 N.W.2d 304, 306-7 (1970); State v. Jordan, S.D., 261 N.W.2d 126(1978); Parrott v. Brewer, 421 F.2d 1386 (C.A. 8 Cir., 1970). The United States Supreme Court has set forth a standard to determine whether a guilty plea has barred or waived the right to claim a certain defect in prior proceedings. Whenever it is found that the result of the right asserted would prevent the trial from taking place because of constitutional infirmities, a guilty plea would not waive that right. Menna v. New York, 423 U.S. 61, 63, 96 S.Ct. 241, 242, 46 L.Ed.2d 195 (1975). See footnote 2, at 423 U.S. at 62, 96 S.Ct. 242, 46 L.Ed.2d at 197.
It is to be noted that the general rule as set forth above waives all nonjuris-dictional defects in the prior proceedings against appellant. The rule therefore requires an examination of the claim that the circuit court was without jurisdiction of the offense charged.
Various statutes within our code have been amended since the revision of our *203juvenile law in 1968. Section 10, Chapter 130 of the Session Laws of 1973, abolished, among other courts, the county district court, which previously had jurisdiction over juvenile matters. Section 2 of Chapter 130 vested this jurisdiction in the circuit court. SDCL 26-7-1 states in part that the circuit court shall have original jurisdiction in all proceedings coming within the terms of that chapter, which covers juveniles, and chapter 26-8. Accordingly, the claim that the court was without jurisdiction is rejected.
The case before the court is nearly on all “fours” in its fact situation with the facts set forth in Claunch v. Page, 427 F.2d 841 (C.A. 10 Cir., 1970), where the court stated:
We believe that there were no defects in the juvenile proceedings but, if there were any, they were effectively waived. At all stages, . . . the appellant was represented by counsel whose competence and ability are not questioned. No claim is made that the guilty plea was not entered voluntarily and understandingly. . . . His voluntary plea of guilty waived all right to question whatever defects there might have been in the antecedent procedures. 427 F.2d at 843.
We agree with the position taken by the Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit in the Page case, and we hold that appellant’s guilty plea effectively waived any defects in the transfer proceedings. Accordingly, the judgment appealed from is affirmed.
WOLLMAN, C. J., and DUNN, J., concur.
PORTER and MORGAN, JJ., concur specially.
CHRISTENSEN, Circuit Judge, sitting for ZASTROW, J., disqualified.

=== CASE 2228482 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:02.942199+00 ===

87 Mich. App. 321 (1978)
273 N.W.2d 925
PEOPLE
v.
BRAGER
Docket No. 29113.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided November 28, 1978.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, William L. Cahalan, Prosecuting Attorney, Edward R. Wilson, Principal Attorney, Appeals, and Anne B. Wetherholt, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
*323 Alvin C. Sallen, for defendant on appeal.
Before: D.E. HOLBROOK, P.J., and V.J. BRENNAN and M.F. CAVANAGH, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Defendant was charged in a one-count information with the offense of breaking and entering an occupied dwelling with the intent to commit a larceny therein, contrary to MCL 750.110; MSA 28.305.
Carlton Clayburn testified that he resides at 17621 Meyers, Detroit, Michigan, and that on November 6, 1975, he left for work after having secured his home. He further testified that he identified certain of his personal property at the 12th Police Precinct subsequent to the breaking and entering and stated the said property was in his dwelling at the time he left for work.
There was evidence that a police officer viewed the defendant entering the rear door of complainant's home and later placing various objects on the rear seat of a car parked in the alley. Defendant was arrested after a high-speed automobile chase.
Defendant was convicted of the offense charged in a jury trial and was sentenced to a term of from 10 to 15 years in prison and now appeals as of right.
The trial court charged the jury on the charged offense and also on the charge of entering without breaking an occupied dwelling with the intent to commit larceny therein. The defendant claims error in the trial court's refusal to instruct the jury on the charge of breaking and entering an unoccupied dwelling (building) with the intent to commit larceny therein, and the further charge of larceny from a building.
We first deal with the failure of the trial court to instruct on the offense of breaking and entering *324 of an unoccupied dwelling (building) with intent to commit a larceny therein.
In People v Ora Jones, 395 Mich. 379, 390; 236 NW2d 461 (1975), our Supreme Court defined the term "necessarily included offenses" as follows:
"The duty of the trial judge to instruct on lesser included offenses is determined by the evidence. People v Phillips, 385 Mich. 30; 187 NW2d 211 (1971). If evidence has been presented which would support a conviction of a lesser included offense, refusal to give a requested instruction is reversible error. Id. at 36, People v Hamilton, 76 Mich. 212; 42 N.W. 1131 (1889).
"If the lesser offense is one that is necessarily included within the greater, the evidence will always support the lesser if it supports the greater."
In order for the offense of breaking and entering an unoccupied dwelling to be a lesser offense necessarily included within the offense of breaking and entering an occupied dwelling, then, the evidence adduced at trial must support a conviction of the defendant for the former offense. Defendant contends that the two offenses are identical except that conviction of the latter requires proof of an additional element: occupation. This is not the case, however.
The two offenses codified by MCL 750.110; MSA 28.305 are of separate and independent origin. Common-law burglary was the antecedent of the statutory offense of breaking and entering an occupied dwelling: as such that offense is clearly an offense against habitation. People v Winhoven, 65 Mich. App. 522, 526-527; 237 NW2d 540 (1975), 12 CJS, Burglary, § 16, p 678. Breaking and entering an unoccupied dwelling is a similar but clearly distinct offense, clearly an offense against property. *325 As noted in 12 CJS, Burglary, § 23, pp 683-684:
"Where there are statutes punishing burglary of a dwelling house, and also other provisions punishing as a separate offense the breaking and entry of a store or other building `not adjoining to or occupied with a dwelling-house,' it is a necessary element of the latter offense that the building broken into should not adjoin, nor be occupied as, a dwelling house." (Footnote omitted.)
The Michigan Supreme Court has adopted this approach in interpreting the statutory forerunners of MCL 750.110. In Koster v People, 8 Mich. 431, 432-433 (1860), the Court said:
"It is a plain principle of law, that where the statutes enumerate several elements as combining to create a crime, the crime can not properly be described without including all these elements. An entry into a shop or warehouse in the night, with intent to commit a felony, is not a crime under this statute, unless it also appears that the shop or warehouse is neither adjoining to nor occupied with a dwelling. Burglary, at common law, must be committed in such a place as is within the definition of a dwelling, which term has received an enlarged signification. Entering other buildings was not regarded in the same light. In making a new crime, the legislature have seen fit to select a peculiar class of buildings, and it can not be enlarged or varied."
In People v Levey, 206 Mich. 129, 133; 172 N.W. 427 (1919), the Court, in applying 3 Comp Laws 1915, § 15292, the predecessor of MCL 750.110, stated that:
"There was no testimony in the case that the store which was broken into was not adjoining to or occupied with a dwelling house. This is a necessary element of *326 the offense (3 Comp. Laws 1915, § 15292) and should be proved." (Emphasis added.)
We adopt the same approach in the construction of MCL 750.110. In order for breaking and entering an unoccupied dwelling to be a necessarily included lesser offense in the instant case, it would be necessary that the facts show the additional element of an unoccupied dwelling. On the contrary, however, the facts indicate that the subject dwelling was occupied. This demonstrates that the statutory offenses were intended and constructed so as to be mutually exclusive. Each requires proof of an element which would necessarily preclude conviction under the other.
Breaking and entering an unoccupied dwelling is thus not a lesser included offense in the subject case under the test adopted in Ora Jones, supra. Furthermore, the opinion in Ora Jones states at 390 that:
"In the area of `cognate' lesser offenses, the evidence in each case adduced at the particular trial must be examined to determine whether that evidence would support a conviction of the lesser offense."
Thus, in the case at bar, considering the evidence adduced at trial, breaking and entering an unoccupied dwelling was also not a "cognate" lesser offense of the crime charged.
In reference to the failure of the trial court to have charged the jury on the separate and distinct offense of larceny in a building, we find that the same is not a necessarily included offense nor is it a "cognate" lesser offense under the law in Michigan of breaking and entering an occupied dwelling with intent to commit larceny therein. People v Page, 73 Mich. App. 667, 670; 252 NW2d 239 (1977), *327 People v Robert Brown, 72 Mich. App. 749, 750; 250 NW2d 522 (1976), People v Huffman, 315 Mich. 134; 23 NW2d 236 (1946).
In this regard we rule that the trial court's refusal to charge as to larceny in a building was proper.
Affirmed.
M.F. CAVANAGH, J., concurs in the result only.

=== CASE 9741707 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:56.750944+00 ===

On Remand
Bronson, J.
We agree with Judge Simon’s disposition of the case as to Mr. Kailimai. The fact that he did not produce documentation for his estimates concerning the value of the truck, lost wages, and lost investment goes to the weight of the evidence, not its admissibility. Since the testimony was properly admitted, 1 there was no legally recognized reason given by the trial court for overturning the jury verdict and granting a new trial. Kailimai v The Firestone Tire & Rubber Co, 398 Mich 230; 247 NW2d 295 (1976). The new trial order for Mr. Kailimai’s claim was improper and the jury verdict must be reinstated.
We disagree with Judge Simon, however, on his disposition of Mrs. Kailimai’s loss of consortium claim. Loss of consortium includes "loss of society, companionship, service, and all other incidents of the marriage relationship”. Washington v Jones, 386 Mich 466, 472; 192 NW2d 234 (1972).
Mrs. Kailimai testified that her husband was confined to the hospital for two weeks after the accident. She further testified that for several months after arriving home, her husband could no longer sleep in bed but had to sleep in a reclining chair because of the pain. Neither she nor the children could touch him or get near him. Furthermore, he was unable to do any work around the house or take care of the children.
This testimony clearly shows that after the acci*149dent Mrs. Kailimai was deprived of the companionship and services of her husband which she had previously enjoyed. Since she had established a claim for loss of consortium, the amount of damages suffered is a fact question to be determined by the jury and will not be set aside unless it is so excessive as to shock the judicial conscience. See Pippen v Denison Division of Abex Corp, 66 Mich App 664; 239 NW2d 704 (1976), lv den, 399 Mich 823 (1977). Since our review of the record demonstrates that the award was " 'within the limits of what reasonable minds might deem just compensation’ ”,2 the trial court abused its discretion in ordering a remittitur.
The trial court’s judgment is reversed and the jury verdict is reinstated. Costs to plaintiffs.
Bashara, P.J., concurred.
Because we have concluded that the evidence was properly admitted, we have no need to address the directed verdict issue raised in the dissenting and concurring opinion.
Stevens v Edward C Levy Co, 376 Mich 1, 5; 135 NW2d 414 (1965), quoting 6 Callaghan’s Michigan Pleading & Practice (2d ed), § 41.13, p 378.

=== CASE 9741708 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:56.754961+00 ===

C. W. Simon, J.
(concurring in part, dissenting in part). Plaintiffs appeal from an interlocutory order of the Wayne County Circuit Court granting defendant’s motion for a new trial as to Mr. Kaili-mai, and as to Mrs. Kailimai unless she accepted a remittitur of all her judgment in excess of $1,000. The jury in this products liability action had awarded Mr. Kailimai $48,000 on his claim for personal and consequential injuries and Mrs. Kail-imai $12,000 for loss of consortium. Defendant’s motion was brought pursuant to GCR 1963, 527.1(4) and 527.1(7).
Plaintiff Mr. Kailimai had been the operator of a service station located in Dearborn Heights, which he had leased from the Mobil Oil Company since 1965. During that year he purchased a *150heavy-duty Dodge truck to use for towing in connection with his business. The truck was built to his specifications, including a set of 9.00-16 tube-type Firestone tires, and delivered in December.
Upon receipt of the truck and discovery that the tires were out of round, Mr. Kailimai complained to both the truck dealer and the tire manufacturer, defendant Firestone Tire & Rubber Company. Defendant agreed to replace the tires. However, because all available tires were being diverted to use by the armed forces, Mr. Kailimai’s were not replaced until August 25, 1966. During the interim Mr. Kailimai was able to conduct his towing operations with the original tires.
The day after replacement, August 26, 1966, Mr. Kailimai was involved in an accident while towing a customer’s car west on 1-96 near Howell. The truck’s right rear tire allegedly suffered a blowout, caused the truck to roll over, and thereby injured Mr. Kailimai. Following the accident he was no longer able to operate his business, and Mobil closed the station.
On August 7, 1969, plaintiffs’ actions were brought alleging that defendant was negligent in its design of, and breached its warranty with regard to, the replacement tire. The cause was tried in the Wayne County Circuit Court and resulted in the aforementioned jury awards.
Defendant moved for a new trial on the grounds that both awards were excessive, GCR 1963, 527.1(4), and that error was committed when, over its objection, Mr. Kailimai was allowed to testify as to the value of his lost truck and the amount of his earnings prior to the accident, and, even absent objection, the amount of his investment in the business, GCR 1963, 527.1(7). Since defendant’s motion arguably related to damages only, plaintiffs *151requested that any new trial, if granted, be limited to the issue of damages. Upon consideration of these arguments, the trial court set aside the jury’s verdict and granted a complete new trial as to both plaintiffs, although as to Mrs. Kailimai such was conditioned upon her refusal to accept the remittitur. This decision forms the basis of plaintiffs’ appeal.1
In deciding whether an order granting a new trial should be upheld on appeal this Court must determine whether the reasons assigned by the trial judge are legally recognized and supported by a reasonable interpretation of the record. Kailimai v The Firestone Tire & Rubber Co, 398 Mich 230; 247 NW2d 295 (1976). Here, the trial judge assigned basically three grounds for her ruling, none of which withstands careful scrutiny.
First, the trial judge assigned error to the introduction of evidence with regard to damages that had not been included in the pretrial statement. However, while the pretrial statement is designed to control the course of the proceedings, plaintiffs did not offer proof of any damage that was not claimed in their original complaint and, unless expressly waived at the pretrial conference, their right to present competent proof in support of these issues cannot be denied. GCR 1963, 301.3. Butler v Raupp, 65 Mich App 20; 236 NW2d 748 (1975). Since there is nothing to indicate that plaintiffs had expressly waived these issues, the admission of evidence in support of them cannot *152be considered grounds for a new trial. In fact, it would have been error to rule otherwise.
Second, the trial judge attributed error to the admission of Mr. Kailimai’s testimony with regard to the value of his truck, the amount of his earnings prior to the accident, and the sum of his investment in the service station. However, none of this proffered testimony was improper.
In nearly all jurisdictions, including Michigan, the owner of a chattel is competent to testify as to its value. Kavanagh v St Paul Fire & Marine Ins Co, 244 Mich 391; 221 NW 119 (1928); Duma v Janni, 26 Mich App 445; 182 NW2d 596 (1970). See Anno: Admissibility of opinion of nonexpert owner as to value of chattel, 37 ALR2d 967. And, this is especially true where, as here, the owner is engaged in the business which makes use of such chattel. Mason v Partrick, 100 Mich 577; 59 NW 239 (1894). Indeed, Mr. Kailimai was an experienced mechanic and, as was pointed out by the trial judge, arguably qualified as an expert in the area. While his testimony may have been self-serving, that is a matter for the jury to consider in determining the weight to be accorded it and does not relate to admissibility.
Similarly, there is no legal restriction which precludes a party from testifying as to the amount of his earnings prior to the accident. Pawlicki v Detroit United R Co, 191 Mich 536; 158 NW 162 (1916), Duma v Janni, supra. 22 Am Jur 2d, Damages, § 315, pp 413-414. While documentation of his past earnings may have proved more cogent, the existence of better evidence in this instance does not render the proferred testimony incredible. The evidence is relevant and admissible. Again, the weight to be accorded it is a determination solely within the province of the jury.
*153With regard to the testimony of Mr. Kailimai concerning his $2,000 investment in the service station defendant failed to object. Therefore, the issue is not preserved for appeal. Marietta v Cliffs Ridge, Inc, 385 Mich 364; 189 NW2d 208 (1971). Moreover, this evidence was based upon the personal knowledge of the witness, Mr. Kailimai, a consideration of utmost importance in our system of evidential preferences. See MRE 602. Since Mr. Kailimai had direct personal knowledge he was competent to testify. That the expenditures were not documented is immaterial to admissibility.
Third, neither the $48,000 award to Mr. Kaili-mai nor the $12,000 award to Mrs. Kailimai was excessive. Cf. Pippen v Denison Division of Abex Corp, 66 Mich App 664; 239 NW2d 704 (1976), lv den, 399 Mich 823 (1977).
" ' "As long as the amount awarded is within the range of the evidence, and within the limits of what reasonable minds might deem just compensation for such imponderable items as personal injuries sustained and pain and suffering, the verdict rendered should not be set aside.” ’ ” Pippen v Denison Division of Abex Corp, supra at 675, quoting Stevens v Edward C Levy Co, 376 Mich 1, 5; 135 NW2d 414 (1965).
To this we would add loss of consortium. Loss of consortium includes such intangibles as comfort, society, aid, companionship, and normal conjugal affection, Montgomery v Stephan, 359 Mich 33; 101 NW2d 227 (1960), which are similarly not subject to exact measure. That "another jury might find differently” is irrelevant.
Indeed, unlike the trial court, we are not persuaded that the jury’s verdict was "more or less based on the fact that we have * * * a very collectable defendant”. There is no evidence what*154soever of a verdict influenced by passion or prejudice.
Finally, however, the trial judge was correct in pointing out the legal insufficiency of plaintiffs’ proofs with regard to loss of consortium and damage to the truck. Plaintiffs offered only evidence of the extent of Mr. Kailimai’s injuries in support of loss of consortium, and only evidence of the value of the truck when purchased nine months prior to the accident in support of property damage.
With regard to the loss of consortium claim, unless testimony is introduced concerning the state of the marital relationship before as well as after the accident, the evidence is legally insufficient. Washington v Jones, 386 Mich 466; 192 NW2d 234 (1971). Where there is no evidence to guide the jury, either directed verdict or judgment notwithstanding the verdict is proper. Since the trial court granted neither, we reverse.
However, with regard to the claim of property damage, defendant never moved for directed verdict. Thus, judgment notwithstanding the verdict is unavailable. GCR 1963, 515.2. Whether or not evidence of the price paid nine months prior to destruction is legally sufficient, by such failure in the court below, defendant waived objection as to the legal sufficiency of plaintiffs’ proof in that respect.
Moreover, while evidence of market value is not legally sufficient where it is not confined to a reasonable time before destruction, 22 Am Jur 2d, Damages, § 325, p 426, evidence of the price paid nine months prior to the accident certainly is some evidence of market value, Kendrick v Beard, 90 Mich 589; 51 NW 645 (1892), Colorado Kenworth Corp v Whitworth, 144 Colo 541; 357 P2d 626; 97 ALR2d 990 (1960). In fact, while Kendrick *155would appear to place an affirmative duty on defendant to proceed with evidence of depreciation, defendant has neither discredited this evidence of original value through cross-examination nor rebutted it through evidence aliunde.
By moving for directed verdict at the close of plaintiffs’ proofs defendant could have tested their legal sufficiency and still preserved its opportunity to present evidence of depreciation on rebuttal. However, by failing to present the error in a timely fashion so that a ruling could be had and the insufficiently proved element of damages removed from jury consideration, defendant has unfairly hedged its bet by allowing the jury’s general verdict to be tainted by a possible error of only slight magnitude in comparison to the total award. Thus, where, as here, some evidence of market value is presented and the defect, if any, could have been readily cured, we feel defendant waives all objection to legal insufficiency by failing to move for directed verdict. Defendant should no more be entitled to a new trial than judgment notwithstanding the verdict.
We do not hold that defendant be required to prove plaintiffs’ case, but only point out that here, by neither effectively cross-examining Mr. Kaili-mai nor introducing rebuttal evidence, defendant has contributed to the error. Assuming that a directed verdict had been moved for, its decision whether to present evidence of depreciation would be based upon the ruling of the trial judge with regard to whether market value had been established within a reasonable time prior to destruction. If defendant felt that the trial judge erroneously ruled the evidence sufficient, it would still be free to refrain from submitting evidence of depreciation so as to avoid rendering the error *156harmless under GCR 1963, 529.1. By failing to move for a directed verdict defendant has only compounded the problem. Now, any error could only be corrected by granting a new trial as to all damages. Any erroneous portion cannot be extracted from the general verdict.
I would reverse and remand to the trial court with instructions to affirm the jury award in favor of Mr. Kailimai and grant judgment for defendant notwithstanding the verdict for Mrs. Kailimai.
In an order dated March 17, 1975, this Court, under GCR 1963, 806.7, peremptorily remanded to the circuit court for a partial new trial as to both plaintiffs "limited to damages only”. However, such order was made without the benefit of the lower court record which had been twice requested but never received. Therefore, the Supreme Court reversed and remanded the case here as if on leave granted. Kailimai v The Firestone Tire & Rubber Co, 398 Mich 230; 247 NW2d 295 (1976).

=== CASE 9741709 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:57.332746+00 ===

PORTER, Justice.
CASE SUMMARY
Defendant was arrested after a search by Vermillion Police and Clay County Sheriff’s Deputies found a large amount of controlled substances in his automobile. He moved to suppress the fruits of the search, and the trial court granted the motion. The state has brought this intermediate appeal. We hold that the affidavit before the magistrate was insufficient to raise probable cause, because it did not disclose sufficient underlying facts and circumstances from which the magistrate could find that contraband was probably contained in the searched automobile. We also hold that the search cannot be justified under the movable vehicle exception to the search warrant requirement. We therefore affirm the trial court’s order suppressing the fruits of the search, and remand the case for further proceedings.
FACTS
On November 22,1978, an informant told the Vermillion Chief of Police that an automobile parked in downtown Vermillion had been used to transport approximately forty pounds of marijuana from Rapid City to Vermillion. The informant also told the Chief of Police that the informant had personally seen some “pound bags” in this car that same afternoon. The source of this information has never been disclosed. Nothing in the affidavit indicates that the informant ever told the Chief of Police what was in the “pound bags.”
After receiving the information, the Chief of Police directed one of his officers to drive to the location where the informant said the car would be parked. There was an automobile fitting the description given by the informant at that location. It had Pennington County license plates. The officer copied the license number and the Chief of Police found, through this number, that the vehicle belonged to defendant. The Chief then called the Rapid City Police Department and some unidentified person in that Department related that defendant had a “community reputation in the Rapid City area as being heavily involved in the drug traffic in that area.”
This information was recorded in an affidavit, sworn to by the Chief of Police, and a law-trained magistrate issued a warrant to search the automobile. When the police returned to the place where the automobile had been, it was gone. Acting on information from the same informant, the police proceeded to a farm near Meckling where they found the automobile. Defendant came out of the farmhouse, was shown the warrant, and went back into the house to get the keys. The trunk was, however, open, and the officers searched it. A large amount of controlled substances and $7,420.00 in cash were found.
Defendant was charged, and he moved to suppress the fruits of the search. The trial court granted the motion. The State has brought this intermediate appeal.
*734ISSUES
Issue One: Was there probable cause to support the issuance of the search warrant?
Issue Two: Was the search proper under the movable vehicle exception to the search warrant requirement?
DECISION
Issue One:
We conclude that there was no probable cause to support the issuance of the search warrant.
The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution1 and Article VI, Section 11 of the South Dakota Constitution 2 protect against unreasonable searches and seizures, and require warrants for most searches. Such warrants can issue only upon a showing of probable cause, and must be issued by a neutral and detached magistrate, Coolidge v. New Hampshire, 403 U.S. 443, 91 S.Ct. 2022, 29 L.Ed.2d 564 (1971).
When the informant is not identified and not himself before the magistrate, the magistrate must be informed of some of the underlying facts and circumstances from which the informant concluded that contraband was where he said it was, and of some of the underlying facts and circumstances from which the police concluded that the informant was credible. Aguilar v. Texas, 378 U.S. 108, 114, 84 S.Ct. 1509, 1514, 12 L.Ed.2d 723, 729 (1964). See also Franks v. Delaware, -U.S.-, 98 S.Ct. 2674, 57 L.Ed.2d 667 (1978); United States v. Harris, 403 U.S. 573, 91 S.Ct. 2075, 29 L.Ed.2d 723 (1971); Spinelli v. United States, 393 U.S. 410, 89 S.Ct. 584, 21 L.Ed.2d 637 (1969); State v. Kissner, S.D., 252 N.W.2d 330 (1977); State v. Glidden, S.D., 246 N.W.2d 779 (1976); State v. Gerber, S.D., 241 N.W.2d 720 (1976); State v. Haron, 88 S.D. 397, 220 N.W.2d 829 (1974). The informant in this case was not named, and he was not before the magistrate. The affidavit in support of the search warrant did not allege that he was a citizen informant or a victim, or that he had any means for obtaining inside knowledge. His information must thus be evaluated under the two-pronged Aguilar-Spinelli test, since he can be described as “[a] disembodied wraith, arising in the magistrate’s visualization only from the words of the affidavit, . . . ” State v. Roth, S.D., 269 N.W.2d 808, 811 (1978).
The only underlying fact or circumstance revealed in the affidavit from which the magistrate could have concluded that contraband was in the searched vehicle is that the informant personally saw some “pound bags” in the car. Personal observation will satisfy the first Aguilar-Spinelli prong. State v. Glidden, supra. We entertain considerable doubt, however, whether seeing “pound bags” is the equivalent of seeing contraband itself. The magistrate apparently iraerpreted “pound bags” to mean a package with about one pound of marijuana in it. Without more, however, it is equally probable that the packages contained some harmless substance. The affidavit contains no mention of marijuana or any vegetable material. The magistrate testified that he based his determination of probable cause on the affidavit alone. We conclude that further information should have been sought on the reason why the informant believed there was contraband in the car.
We need not, however, rest our holding solely on the failure to include sufficient facts indicating criminal activity. We also believe that the second prong of the Aguilar-Spinelli test is not satisfied. Under this *735prong, the affiant must disclose some underlying facts and circumstances indicating that the informant is credible, or that the police have independently verified some of the details of his story, which verification indicates that the story can be believed. See State v. Kissner, supra. The informant can be shown credible by showing that he is a “citizen informant,” State v. Gerber, supra, or by showing that he has a record of giving reliable information in the past, State v. Kissner, supra. There were no such facts or circumstances in this ease.
The second prong may also be satisfied by independent police corroboration of the informant’s story. State v. Kissner, supra. Suspicious details of the suspect’s actions consistent with the informant’s story are sufficient. Harris and Kissner also hold that a suspect’s reputation may be considered in the determination of probable cause. It is, in itself, insufficient, Nathanson v. United States, 290 U.S. 41, 54 S.Ct. 11, 78 L.Ed. 159 (1933). The issue before us is, then: What information is required to elevate reputation to probable cause? The State contends that reputation, according to these cases, is sufficient for probable cause if combined with innocent activity that corroborates the informant’s story. We are guided by the facts and holdings in the prior cases. In Kissner, supra, no evidence of the suspect’s reputation was before a magistrate. In Harris, supra, reputation was bolstered by declarations of an informant against the informant’s penal interests. This was also the case in State v. Roth, supra. In Harris there were also specific facts from which the magistrate could infer the suspect’s reputation. The affiant-officer also had personal knowledge of the suspect’s reputation. In none of these eases was entirely innocent-seeming activity combined with mere allegations of a bad reputation to produce probable cause. We believe that the affidavit in this case bears a striking resemblance to that in Spi-nelli v. United States, supra. There as here, bald accusations of a bad reputation were combined with innocent-seeming activity. The affidavit was held insufficient, and the result of that case was approved by at least five justices in Harris, supra. All of these cases indicate that for a bad reputation to ripen into probable cause for a warrant, more is required than an anonymous informant’s tip that is consistent with some of the suspect’s innocent-seeming activity.
We also have serious doubts as to whether defendant’s supposed reputation in this case is entitled to great weight. In Harris, supra, and United States v. Regan, 525 F.2d 1151 (8th Cir. 1975), underlying facts and circumstances that led the police to conclude that the suspect had a bad reputation were set out in the affidavit. The Harris affidavit stated that the suspect had been caught with contraband at least one other time. In these eases, the reputation alleged was also within the personal knowledge of the affiant-officer. The affiants had previously investigated the suspects whom they were accusing of having bad reputations. None of these factors are present here. The assertion that someone in the Rapid City Police Department said that defendant had a bad reputation does not give sufficient reason to suspect that he was engaged in criminal activity at the time in issue. Since the affiant had no knowledge of the suspect’s reputation, the magistrate had no opportunity to question him about the reasons for the reputation. The magistrate was thus given no opportunity to find out what information the police relied on in forming their opinion of defendant’s reputation.
We conclude, therefore, that the affidavit did not establish probable cause to issue a warrant. The evidence was thus not properly seized under this warrant.
Issue Two:
We also conclude that the search was not proper under the movable vehicle exception to the warrant requirement.
In order to justify a warrantless search of an automobile, there must be probable cause to search and there must be exigent circumstances justifying dispensing with the warrant. Chambers v. Maroney, *736399 U.S. 42, 90 S.Ct. 1975, 26 L.Ed.2d 419 (1970); Carroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 132, 45 S.Ct. 280, 69 L.Ed. 543 (1925); State v. Powless, S.D., 265 N.W.2d 143 (1978). The probable cause required is at least as great as that required for a magistrate to issue a search warrant, Whiteley v. Warden of Wyoming Penitentiary, 401 U.S. 560, 91 S.Ct. 1031, 28 L.Ed.2d 306 (1971).
Since we found in Issue One above that there was not probable cause to issue a warrant, there can be no probable cause for the warrantless search unless more information was in the hands of the police than was before the magistrate. The State argues that the fact that its informant was able to lead the police to the Meckling farm provides additional corroboration. We conclude, however, that this is only additional innocent-seeming activity. It provides no further corroboration for the suspicious aspects of the informant’s story. The information is thus equally insufficient under the Aguilar-Spineili probable cause standards.
CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated, we hold that the search of defendant’s automobile violated the . prohibitions against unreasonable search and seizure of the United States Constitution, Amendment Four and the South Dakota Constitution, Article Six, Section Eleven. The evidentiary fruits of the search must, therefore, be suppressed. The trial court’s order granting suppression is affirmed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings.
ZASTROW and MORGAN, JJ., concur.
WOLLMAN, C. J., and DUNN, J., dissent.
. United States Constitution, Amendment 4:
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated; and no Warrants shall issue but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
. South Dakota Constitution, Article VI, § 11:
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not be violated, and no warrant shall issue but upon probable cause supported by affidavit, particularly describing the place to be searched and the person or thing to be seized.

=== CASE 2228545 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:05.175504+00 ===

715 N.E.2d 1285 (1999)
Anthony LECHNER, Appellant-Defendant,
v.
STATE of Indiana, Appellee-Plaintiff.
No. 49A02-9809-CR-741.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
September 20, 1999.
*1286 Kevin C.C. Wild, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorney for Appellant.
Jeffrey A. Modisett, Attorney General of Indiana, James B. Martin, Deputy Attorney General, Indianapolis, Indiana, Attorneys for Appellee.
OPINION
MATTINGLY, Judge.
Anthony Lechner appeals his conviction, after a jury trial, of child molesting, a Class B felony.[1] He raises one issue on appeal, which we restate as whether the trial court improperly declined to give an instruction Lechner tendered concerning the defense of mistake of fact.
We reverse.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On an evening during the summer of 1997, Lechner, who was 17 years old, had sexual relations with a girl who was 12 years old. The girl had been introduced to Lechner by his 14-year-old sister. Before Lechner and the girl had sexual relations Lechner asked the girl her age and she told Lechner she was 14 years old. At trial, Lechner tendered a pattern jury instruction on the mistake of fact defense, noting that it is not a crime under Indiana law for a 17-year-old to have sex with a 14-year-old.
The trial judge refused to so instruct the jury. During its deliberations, the jury sought clarification of that element of the crime with which Lechner was charged, asking the court "[d]oes the defendant have to know that [the victim] was under the age of fourteen (14)." R. at 205. The judge responded that the jury was to "please reread the instructions and continue to discuss." Id.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
When reviewing the refusal of a tendered instruction, we must determine whether the instruction correctly states the law, whether the evidence supports giving the instruction, and whether the substance of the instruction is covered by the other instructions given. Miller v. Ryan, 706 N.E.2d 244, 248 (Ind.Ct.App.1999). It is error to refuse an instruction if there is evidence in the record to support the theory set forth in the instruction; however, the trial court has considerable discretion in determining which issues have been raised by the trial evidence and in determining the form in which instructions will be given. Id. In reviewing whether the evidence was such as to require a mistake of fact instruction, we consider whether the evidence relevant to that defense could, if believed by the jury, have created a reasonable doubt in the jury's mind that the accused had acted with the requisite mental state. Stoner v. State, 442 N.E.2d 983, 985 (Ind.1982).
Ind.Code § 35-41-3-7 sets forth a generally-applicable mistake of fact defense: "[i]t is a defense that the person who engaged in the prohibited conduct was reasonably mistaken about a matter of fact, if the mistake negates the culpability required for commission of the offense." Ind.Code § 35-42-4-3(c) provides *1287 for such a defense to a charge of child molesting in particular: "It is a defense that the accused person reasonably believed that the child was sixteen (16) years of age or older at the time of the conduct." Because that section addresses only the actor's belief that the victim is at least 16 years old, the State argues, the mistake of fact defense was unavailable to Lechner because he offered no evidence that he thought the victim was 16 or older. We find the statutory defense does not so limit Lechner, and the refusal of his mistake of fact instruction was thus error.
At one time, mistake of fact was not recognized as a defense to a charge of child molesting:
If appellant had sexual intercourse with the witness at a time when she was under 14 years of age, the offense was complete, since under the law she was incapable of consenting to such an act.... The girl's appearance and misrepresentation of her age and his good faith and belief that she was above the age of consent could have no weight upon the question of guilt or innocence.... The law absolutely forbids carnal intercourse with a child under 14 years of age, and no belief respecting the age of the girl, however well founded, will excuse the transgressor if at the time of the sexual act she is in fact within the prohibited age.
Heath v. State, 173 Ind. 296, 302, 90 N.E. 310, 312 (1910) (addressing the crime of statutory rape). And see Toliver v. State, 267 Ind. 575, 577, 372 N.E.2d 452, 453 (1978) (erroneous belief as to the age of the victim, however well-founded, is not a defense to statutory rape).
However, child molesting is no longer a "strict liability" offense. Over twenty years ago our legislature amended the statute to divide sexual offenses against children into two categoriesoffenses against children under 12 years of age and offenses against children between 12 and 16 years of age. That revised statute provided a "reasonable belief" defense that was absolute so long as the defendant reasonably believed the child was 16 years old or older. As noted in the comment to Ind.Code Ann. § 35-42-4-3 (West 1978), "[t]his defense changes the strict liability found in the prior statutes ... at least with respect to the twelve (12) through fifteen (15) year old cases. Nothing in subsection (e) prohibits the defense in cases involving children less than twelve (12); however, it will undoubtedly be a rare case where the facts would show that a belief that an eleven (11) year old was sixteen (16) or older was a `reasonable' belief." See Neblett v. State, 396 N.E.2d 930, 932 (Ind.Ct.App. 1979) (noting that under the revised statute a reasonable belief defense is available to a child molesting defendant and that the crime is no longer a strict liability offense).
In 1994, the legislature again amended the statute, eliminating the subsections addressing offenses against children between 12 and 16 years of age, and criminalizing sexual activity by persons of any age involving persons under 14 years of age. See P.L. 79-1994 § 12. However, in amending the statute the legislature failed to amend the subsection establishing as a defense the actor's reasonable belief that the victim was 16 years of age or older. So, in its current form the statute appears to retain a "reasonable belief" defense predicated upon a category of offensesexual activity involving children aged 12 to 16which no longer exists.[2]
We must conclude the legislature's failure to modify the age at which the defense becomes available to a defendant was *1288 in the nature of an oversight or scrivener's error and could not be reflective of a legislative intent to permit the defense only when the actor believes the victim is 16 or older, when the statute itself does not prohibit the activity with a child aged 14 to 16. We thus decline to limit the availability of the statutory mistake of fact defense to those defendants whose reasonable belief was that the victim was at least 16 years old and hold that the defense is available to any defendant who reasonably believes the victim to be of such an age that the activity engaged in was not criminally prohibited. See State v. Keihn, 542 N.E.2d 963, 967 (Ind.1989) (noting the presumption that a culpable mental state is an intended element in criminal offenses for which culpability is not specified by statute).
The jury had before it evidence that the victim told Lechner she was at least 14 years old; that Lechner's sister represented to Lechner that the victim was at least 14 years old; and that Lechner was aware that the victim's friends were 13 and 14 years old. This evidence, if believed by the jury, would allow the jury to reasonably doubt that Lechner acted with the mental state which would have made his conduct a crime (i.e., the belief that the victim might have been less than 14 years old). The refusal of Lechner's proffered mistake of fact instruction thus was error.
Reversed.
RILEY, J., and SULLIVAN, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Ind.Code § 35-42-4-3.
[2]  We note that P.L. 79-1994 also established a new offense of sexual misconduct with a minor. That section, codified as Ind.Code § 35-42-4-9, applied to persons over 18 who engage in certain activities with persons at least 14 years old but less than 16 years old. That new section included the defense that the accused person reasonably believed the child was at least 16 years old at the time of the conduct.
We further note that a number of other states have, by statute, recognized a "mistake of age" defense to offenses involving sexual activities with children. However, counsel have not directed us to, nor has our independent survey of those statutes revealed, any statutes similar to the Indiana statute where the age which determines the availability of the defense is different from the age at which the charged activity is deemed to be criminal. See, e.g., Alaska Stat. § 11.41.445(b) (when provision of law defining an offense depends upon a victim being under a certain age, it is an affirmative defense that the defendant reasonably believed the victim to be that age or older, unless the victim is under 13); Ariz.Rev.Stat. Ann. § 13-1407 (it is a defense to prosecution for crimes where a child's lack of consent is based on incapacity to consent because the victim was 14, 15, 16, or 17 years old if the defendant did not know and could not have reasonably known the age of the victim); Ark. Code Ann. § 5-14-102 (when criminality of conduct depends upon a child being under age 14, it is no defense that the actor believed the child to be 14 or older, but when criminality of conduct depends upon a child being below a critical age older than 14, it is a defense that the actor reasonably believed the child to be the critical age or older); 38 Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. ¶ 12-17(b) (defense to certain crimes involving victims younger than 17 years old that the accused reasonably believed the victim to be 17 or older); Ky.Rev.Stat. Ann. § 510.020 (in prosecution where victim's lack of consent is based on incapacity because the victim is under age 16 or for certain other reasons, it is a defense that the defendant did not know of the facts or conditions responsible for such incapacity); Mont.Code Ann. § 45-5-511(1) (when criminality depends upon the victim being under age 16, it is a defense for the offender to prove he reasonably believed the child to be above that agehowever, the belief is deemed not reasonable if the child is younger than 14); and Wash. Rev.Code Ann. § 9A.44.030(2) (when an offense or the degree of an offense depends upon victim's age, it is a defense that defendant reasonably believed, based upon the victim's own declarations, that the victim was above the age required for culpability).
The Arkansas and Montana statutes, like the Indiana statute, do limit the applicability of a mistake of fact defense to situations where the victim is above a certain age. However, in both of those statutes, the age below which the offense becomes one of strict liability and where the mistake of fact defense is thus unavailable is consistent with the age at which the activity itself becomes criminali.e., the so-called "critical age." In Arkansas, the legislature has identified a category of strict liability sexual offenses those where the "criminality of conduct" depends on the victim being under 14and there, mistake of age is no defense. When the criminality of conduct depends on the victim being below any age older than 14, the mistake of age defense is available where the actor had a reasonable belief the child was that age or older. Similarly, in Montana, the legislature has in effect made any activity involving a child under 14 a strict liability offense. But where the criminality of conduct depends on the child being any age between 14 and 16, the mistake of age defense applies so that defense is available where the actor reasonably believes the child to be above that age.
The Indiana statute, by contrast, appears to condition the availability of a mistake of age defense on an actor's reasonable belief that the victim was at least two years older than the "critical age" of 14 years below which the activity becomes a crime. Unlike those of Arkansas and Montana, our legislature has created no statutory age category where sex crimes are strict liability offenses. For that reason, and because the Indiana Code provides generally for a mistake of fact defense and our decisions indicate child molesting in particular is no longer a strict liability offense, the Indiana statute cannot be construed in the same manner as the Arkansas and Montana statutes. The Indiana statutory requirement of a reasonable belief the victim was at least two years older than the "critical age" cannot be reconciled with the statutory mistake of fact defense which refers to a reasonable mistake which "negates the culpability required for commission of the offense." Ind.Code § 35-41-3-7.

=== CASE 3784490 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:13.28261+00 ===

Elizabeth Stanko is the widow and the administratrix of the estate of her deceased husband, Stephen Stanko. This is an action to recover damages resulting from his wrongful death, alleged to have been caused by the negligence of the plaintiff in error, Dr. Washington L. Jones. The death of one Alexander Thompson, a neighbor of Stanko, was caused by black smallpox. Dr. Jones was the sole attending physician. He was called on Tuesday and saw the patient, Thompson, every day, and sometimes oftener than once a day, until Saturday of the same week, upon which day the patient died. It is alleged, and the evidence tends to sustain the allegation, that Mr. Stanko inquired of Dr. Jones whether Mr. Thompson was suffering from any contagious disease, and Dr. Jones assured him that Thompson was not suffering from any contagious disease and that he (Stanko) took no risk from contagion by waiting upon Mr. Thompson in *Page 149
his illness. By reason of these assurances from Dr. Jones, Mr. Stanko not only waited upon Thompson prior to his death, but performed certain services with reference to his preparation for burial after death. The neighbors were in and out, doing what little they could in a friendly way to relieve the suffering of Mr. Thompson, and none of them were conscious of the fact that he was suffering from a disease that was extremely contagious, as well as infectious, to wit, black smallpox. There is no doubt that Thompson had black smallpox, and that he died as a result of that disease. It is not at all in dispute that Dr. Jones failed entirely to announce to any one during the period mentioned that Thompson was suffering from black smallpox or any other contagious disease. It is admitted in the record that Dr. Jones failed entirely to notify the health authorities, as required by statute, of the fact that he was then treating Mr. Thompson for a contagious disease.
Mrs. Stanko brought the action for damages, alleging in detail the facts here briefly stated. As a result of that trial, the jury brought in a verdict in favor of the defendant, Dr. Jones. Mrs. Stanko prosecuted error to the Court of Appeals, and assigned, among other errors, the refusal of the trial court to give special requests Nos. 11, 12, and 15 to the jury before argument, when so presented by counsel for Mrs. Stanko. The Court of Appeals reversed the judgment of the trial court solely on the refusal to give these three requests. Dr. Jones prosecutes error here.
Request No. 11 embraced Section 4427 of the General *Page 150
Code, which requires a practicing physician, when treating a disease dangerous to the public health or required by the board of health to be reported, to report to the health officer, within whose jurisdiction the person is so found, the name, age, sex, and color of the patient, and the house and place in which such person may be found. This request in part was as follows:
"And if you also find from the preponderance of the evidence in this case that said defendant, Washington L. Jones, was the sole physician treating said Alexander Thompson during the sickness from March 17, 1925, to March 21, 1925, inclusive, and that the fact that the said Alexander Thompson was then and there suffering from the disease of smallpox would have been known to a physician possessing the requisite qualifications and applying his skill and judgment with ordinary care and diligence to the diagnosis of the said disease, it was made under such facts, if so found by you, by the provisions of the statute, just quoted, the duty of the physician in charge of said Alexander Thompson to report said disease to the health officer within whose jurisdiction such person is found, and, if you further find that said defendant failed to comply with said provisions of said statute and that such failure to comply with said provisions of the statute was the proximate cause of the death of the decedent, Stephen Stanko, as by plaintiff alleged in her second amended petition herein, your verdict must be for the plaintiff."
Requests Nos. 12 and 15 relate to the duty of the doctor to discover and to make known the character *Page 151
of disease that his patient was suffering from. Each of these two requests embraced the same statement in reference to the necessary qualifications of Dr. Jones that appears in request No. 11; that is to say:
"And if you also find from the preponderance of the evidence in this case that said defendant, Washington L. Jones, was the sole physician treating said Alexander Thompson during his sickness from March 17, 1925, to March 21, 1925, inclusive, and that the fact that the said Alexander Thompson was then and there suffering from the disease of smallpox would have been known to a physician possessing the requisite qualifications and applying his skill and judgment with ordinary care and diligence to the diagnosis of the said disease."
It is unnecessary to copy here these requests. The contention of plaintiff in error is that these requests were wrong in speaking of the qualifications of the attending physician in the terms "a physician possessing the requisite qualifications," etc.
It is said that the court should have instructed the jury, in view of the evidence in the case, that Dr. Jones was only required to have the ordinary skill possessed by general practitioners in medicine in the locality of his home, and that he was not required to possess the "requisite qualifications" to diagnose and discover a case of black smallpox such as that with which Thompson died.
There was evidence in the case tending to show that black smallpox can exist and at the same time not furnish very clear manifestations of its existence, and that it might easily be mistaken by a physician *Page 152
of ordinary skill only for some other form of disease, not contagious. There was one witness in the case, conceded to be an expert, who possessed wide experience in smallpox cases, who testified that, if he had not had the experience that he had, he might, and probably would, have diagnosed Mr. Thompson's case as something other than black smallpox; but that, with the experience that he had, and notwithstanding the absence in this case of many of the usual manifestations of black smallpox, he still, by reason of other facts that are not in dispute that did attend this case, would have readily diagnosed it as a case of black smallpox.
The only thing in dispute here is whether Dr. Jones was negligent in not discovering that this was a case of black smallpox, and in failing to give notice thereof to the public health officials and to those who were coming into the presence of Thompson and in contact with him.
We cannot sustain the construction placed by counsel for Dr. Jones upon the requests to charge. The language was not intended to say, and did not say, that Dr. Jones must possess expert skill in diagnosing beyond that possessed by other doctors in general practice in that locality, or such degree of skill as insured accuracy in all cases. Counsel for Dr. Jones claim that this, in effect at least, is what these requests did say, and hence the trial court was correct in refusing to give them.
We think the language used in the requests only referred to the knowledge and skill possessed by physicians in general practice, as distinguished from the knowledge and statements of laymen present, who might venture opinions on the subject with *Page 153
respect to which no one would be entitled to rely for his own safety. The instruction to the jury was that, in order to find Dr. Jones liable, they must find that he was one holding himself out as a general practitioner of medicine.
The law requires a man who engages in the general practice of the medical profession to be one who has educated himself to take care of the matters incident to such practice, and one of the things that he must be held to know is whether he is dealing with a disease which is dangerously contagious. If it were a defense for such practicing physician, who had failed to discover and give due notice of the presence of such a disease, to say that he had not theretofore treated a disease of that kind, and had not observed symptoms such as the patient involved manifested, the escape from the provisions of the statute would surely be marvelously easy.
It will be noted that in each one of the requests, after speaking of a physician "possessing the requisite qualifications," the request gives the degree of care that must be exercised, by stating that it must be ordinary care and skill. A physician is not the insurer of his patient, but his patient has the right to believe that one holding himself out as qualified to practice medicine has the requisite skill to deal with that subject, and, when so dealing, he must exercise ordinary skill and care relative to the matter in hand. It is that, and no more, that is required by these requests Nos. 11, 12, and 15, and we quite agree with the Court of Appeals that this language does not present reversible error in this case. Aside from the feature of the requests mentioned — a physician possessing the requisite qualifications *Page 154
— it is not seriously contended that these requests are erroneous. The requests as presented should have been given, and the failure to give them was clearly error prejudicial to the plaintiff in the trial court. The judgment of the Court of Appeals will be affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
MARSHALL, C.J., DAY, ALLEN, ROBINSON, JONES and MATTHIAS, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 3784491 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2016-07-06 07:34:13.326879+00 ===

The question presented in this case is: Where one promoted to sergeant of police in a city was detailed to the detective bureau of such city for a number of years and, pursuant to an ordinance of the city, was paid a salary greater than that of lieutenant of police not so detailed, is a duty enjoined by law upon the director of public safety to appoint such sergeant as lieutenant of police when the city council eliminates such a differential in salary and provides, in effect, that no sergeant wherever detailed or stationed shall receive a salary greater than that of a lieutenant?
Section 486-17b, General Code, provides, among other things, that "when a position above the rank of patrolman in the police department * * * is abolished and the incumbent has been permanently appointed in accordance with the provisions of this act, he shall be demoted to the next lower rank * * *."
The relator contends that a "sergeant detailed to the detective bureau" constituted a distinct rank of service and by virtue of the salary attached was a rank above that of lieutenant not so detailed, and that since he was a "sergeant detailed to the detective bureau" and received a salary in excess of the salary of a lieutenant not so detailed, when the position of "sergeant detailed to the detective bureau" was abolished by ordinance in 1942, be was automatically demoted to the next lower rank which he claims was that of lieutenant at a lower salary than he was receiving as sergeant detailed to the detective bureau. He claims that his contention has legal support in that portion of Section 486-15a, General Code, which provides that "for the purpose of this section, an increase *Page 334
in the salary or other compensation of anyone holding a position in a police or fire department, beyond that fixed for the grade or rank in which such position is classified, shall be deemed a promotion."
The respondents claim that the highest rank ever enjoyed by the relator was that of sergeant of police; that the grade or rank of lieutenant has always been next above that of sergeant and next below that of captain; that there never was a grade or rank of "sergeant detailed to the detective bureau"; and that the relator gave recognition to this situation when he, as a sergeant, entered a competitive examination for promotion to the grade or rank of lieutenant in 1938 and again in 1946.
The city ordinance, in 1937, when relator became a sergeant, provided for the composition of the police department and for 128 sergeants, "any of whom may be detailed to the detective bureau." A companion salary-ordinance then in effect prescribed a differential in salary, greater than the norm, for any patrolman or officer of the rank of sergeant, lieutenant or captain, who might be so specially detailed. Clearly, in the passage of that ordinance, there was exhibited no intention or plan to create any additional grade or rank for any sergeant, lieutenant or captain, who might be detailed to the dectective bureau, even though there was additional salary provided in the case of such detail. When the detail to the detective bureau was withdrawn, as it could be at any time, these officials still remained within their respective grades or ranks.
Clearly, the relator was not promoted to a new rank when detailed to the detective bureau. Section 486-15a, General Code, dealing with civil service promotions, provides that "no position above the grade or rank of patrolman or regular fireman in the police or fire department shall be filled by original appointment"; *Page 335
and that "no position above the grade or rank of patrolman or regular fireman in a police or fire department shall be filled by any person unless he shall have first passed a competitivepromotional examination." (Italics supplied.) The relator does not claim that he was promoted to a grade or rank of "sergeant detailed to the detective bureau" by promotional examination, which was the only method of attaining a promotion. Not having been promoted to any rank or grade above sergeant, he could not be demoted to lieutenant as he claims.
The respondents claim also that a writ of mandamus should be denied on the ground of laches, since the relator delayed his action three full years after his alleged cause of action accrued, during which time 37 sergeants were promoted to lieutenant as a result of competitive examinations and whose promotions would be adversely affected if a writ should be allowed in favor of the relator. Having found that relator has no clear legal right to the writ on other grounds, it will be unnecessary for the court to pass upon the issue of laches.
The relator, not having shown any clear legal duty upon the part of respondents to grant his demand to be appointed a lieutenant in the police department, the writ of mandamus is denied.
Writ denied.
WEYGANDT, C.J., MATTHIAS, ZIMMERMAN, STEWART, TURNER and TAFT, JJ., concur. *Page 336

=== CASE 9741710 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:57.337271+00 ===

DUNN, Justice
(dissenting).
I dissent from the majority opinion. I would hold that the affidavit did establish the requisite probable cause for the issuance of a search warrant.
In reviewing the affidavit, we should not invalidate the search warrant by interpreting the affidavit in a hypertechnical manner. State v. Kaseman, 1978, S.D., 273 N.W.2d 716 (opinion filed December 22, 1978). The affidavit states that information was received that a specifically described automobile which was to be found at a specific location in Vermillion had been used to bring a load of about 40 pounds of marijuana to Vermillion from Rapid City and was owned by David Nollsch. The affidavit further stated that the informant had personally seen some pound bags in the automobile. The description and location of the automobile was verified by Vermillion police officers. The Rapid City origin of the automobile was verified by the Pennington County license plates on the automobile. The name of the registered owner, David Nollsch, was verified by a license check. The information that marijuana had been brought to Vermillion from Rapid City was corroborated by a telephone call to the Rapid City police department which revealed that Nollsch had a community reputation as being heavily involved in the drug traffic in the Rapid City area.
A realistic and common sense interpretation of the affidavit can only result in a finding of probable cause for the issuance of a search warrant. There need not be a showing of probative evidence rising to the nature of that admissible in a trial for conviction of a criminal defendant but, rather, a showing of probability of criminal activity. Such a probability was shown on the affidavit before the magistrate.
The trial court admitted that the affidavit produced a “close question” on the probable cause for the search of the Nollsch automobile and that its decision to suppress the evidence obtained from the search borders on hypertechnical interpretation of the affidavit. Resolution of marginal cases should be largely determined by the preference accorded to warrants, and every reasonable inference possible should be drawn to support the determination of probable cause by the magistrate. State v. Kaseman, supra.
I would reverse the order of the trial court suppressing the evidence obtained in *737the search of the Nollsch automobile and remand the case to the trial court for a trial on the merits.
I am authorized to state that Chief Justice WOLLMAN joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9741711 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:59.437915+00 ===

D. E. Holbrook, Jr., P.J.
Appellant, an inmate at the Ionia Reformatory, claims he was sexually at*791tacked by other inmates, resulting in physical and emotional injury. Suit was filed against the Department of Corrections and Dale Fontz alleging that plaintiffs injuries were the result of defendants’ negligence. The Department of Corrections filed its answer but did not raise the defense of governmental immunity. Such defense was raised by means of a motion for accelerated judgment approximately four months later. Thereafter plaintiff attempted to amend his complaint to include an allegation that the case fell within the public building exception to governmental immunity, MCL 691.1406; MSA 3.996(106). The motion to amend was never granted although the claims therein contained were examined by the trial court. Thereafter defendant’s motion for accelerated judgment was granted. Plaintiff appeals as of right.
Plaintiff claims that failure to raise the defense of governmental immunity in the first responsive pleading constitutes waiver. We disagree.
GCR 1963, 111.3 provides that defenses not asserted in the responsive pleading are waived, while GCR 1963, 118.1 permits amendment of pleadings by leave of the court. Affirmative defenses may be raised by amendment, even if not raised in the initial answer. Ben P. Fyke & Sons v Gunter Co, 390 Mich 649; 213 NW2d 134 (1973). Clearly, the affirmative defense of governmental immunity can only be waived when not asserted.
Defendant raised governmental immunity as a defense through a motion for accelerated judgment. Said motion not being brought within the time set by GCR 1963, 108.2, it must be considered a motion out of time. GCR 1963, 108.7(2) grants the trial court discretion to hear motions out of time. Guastello v Citizens Mutual Ins Co, 11 Mich *792App 120; 160 NW2d 725 (1968). This discretion applies to motions for accelerated judgment made out of time as well as other motions. Manufacturers Construction Co v Covenant Investment Co, 43 Mich App 123; 204 NW2d 54 (1972). While appellee should have proceeded by means of amendment to its answer with a hearing on the merits of the claim, as prescribed by GCR 1963, 116.3, similar results would have occurred since a defense raised by responsive pleading is treated as if raised by a motion for accelerated judgment. The trial court did not err in hearing the motion for accelerated judgment or in its determination that governmental immunity had not been waived.
Appellant contends this case falls within the defective condition exception to governmental immunity. MCL 691.1406; MSA 3.996(106). We reject this argument. The fact that an injury occurred in a public building does not in and of itself bring that injury within the defective condition exception. Cody v Southfield-Lathrup School Dist, 25 Mich App 33; 181 NW2d 81 (1970). Plaintiffs injuries were caused by inmates rather than the physical building. His allegation of defective condition is in effect a claim that the physical structure was so designed that inmates could not be adequately supervised. Plaintiff cannot invoke the defective condition exception for failure to provide adequate supervision since the thrust of the exception is to provide redress for injuries caused by structural fault or failure to properly maintain a building. Lockaby v Wayne County, 63 Mich App 185; 234 NW2d 444 (1975). Such was hot the case here.
Plaintiffs contention that the governmental immunity statute is unconstitutional is without merit. White v Detroit, 74 Mich App 545; 254 *793NW2d 572 (1977). See Thomas v Dept of State Highways, 398 Mich 1; 247 NW2d 530 (1976).
With respect to plaintiffs nuisance claim it is based upon maintaining and operating the Ionia Reformatory in a fashion hazardous to the inmates. This claim fails even in light of the Michigan Supreme Court’s decision in Gerzeski v Dept of State Highways, 403 Mich 149; 268 NW2d 525 (1978). Gerzeski held that the nuisance exception to governmental immunity applies to intentional but not negligent nuisances. The claim in the instant case was predicated upon negligently maintaining a nuisance.
Affirmed. No costs, interpretation of a statute involved.
W. Van Valkenburg, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9741712 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:59.441873+00 ===

T. M. Burns, J.
(dissenting). I cannot agree that the claims raised in plaintiff’s complaint are subject to summary dismissal by the court on the basis of governmental immunity and, therefore, dissent.
In Count III of his amended complaint, plaintiff alleged that the "facility was designed, constructed, maintained and operated in a dangerous and defective condition in that it did not provide for constant and unobstructed observation of all areas by the supervisory personnel” and that the facility "was dangerous in that it physically separated the plaintiff and potentially dangerous inmates from observation and supervision by the correctional facility staff”.
In two recent opinions, a five-member majority1 *794of our present Supreme Court has rejected the former narrow construction placed on the so-called public buildings exception to governmental immunity contained in MCL 691.1406; MSA 3.996(106) by this Court. Pichette v Manistique Public Schools, 403 Mich 268; 269 NW2d 143 (1978), Tilford v Wayne County General Hospital, 403 Mich 293; 269 NW2d 153 (1978). Instead, the Court stated the statute placed "upon governmental agencies the duty to maintain safe public places”. Pichette, at 285. A correctional facility is a public building and an inmate is a member of the public for purposes of this statute. See, Green v Dep’t of Corrections, 386 Mich 459, 464; 192 NW2d 491 (1971).
Plaintiff has pled facts which bring his complaint within the statutory exception as interpreted by the Supreme Court. He is claiming a defect in the building, not mere negligence in the supervision of the inmates in the building. Whether he can prove that a correctional facility which does not provide for constant observation is a defective building, or whether, if shown to be defective, the building was the cause of his injuries is something to be shown at trial. See, Lockaby v Wayne County, 63 Mich App 185, 191; 234 NW2d 444 (1975) (N. J. Kaufman, J., dissenting in part), lv gtd, 400 Mich 814 (1977). The Court of Claims, by summarily dismissing the complaint, and the majority, by affirming that dismissal, are confusing the legal and fact-finding roles of the Court of Claims. Plaintiff is entitled to trial on the merits of the defective building allegations.
Similarly, I disagree with the majority’s analysis of plaintiff’s claim of nuisance in Count IV of the complaint. There may be a variance between what plaintiff has alleged and what he can prove, but *795plaintiff has alleged facts concerning a "dangerous condition” "intentionally created” even if those precise words are not used. Under the opinions2 in Rosario v City of Lansing, 403 Mich 124; 268 NW2d 230 (1978), and Gerzeski v Dep’t of State Highways, 403 Mich 149; 268 NW2d 525 (1978), further proceedings should be held in the Court of Claims. Whether there was a nuisance in fact and whether that nuisance was intentionally created are questions of fact for the trier of fact and not questions of law for a court.
I would reverse and remand for further proceedings in the Court of Claims.
The point in question is discussed in § IIB of Justice Fitzgerald’s opinion in Pichette v Manistique Public Schools. The Chief Justice and Justice Levin signed the opinion authored by Justice Fitzgerald. Justices Moody and Williams joined in this part of Justice Fitzgerald’s opinion in their own separate opinions.
Since there was no majority opinion in either of the cited cases, the applicable rule to be drawn from them is unclear. See, Affiliated FM Ins Co v Department of State Highways, 86 Mich App 203; — NW2d — (1978). At the very least, governmental immunity is no bar to an intentionally created nuisance in fact, the position set forth by Justices Moody and Williams.

=== CASE 9741713 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:00:59.728991+00 ===

Blair Moody, Jr., J.
Richard Lee Helzer was
charged in Alpena County with committing two acts of gross indecency with another male, contrary to MCL 750.338; MSA 28.570.1 In the same two-count information, he was further charged with being a sexually delinquent person at the time of the offenses. See, also, MCL 750.338; MSA 28.570.2 Conviction of gross indecency carries a maximum penalty of five years imprisonment.3 However, the additional penalty provided upon a finding of sexual delinquency allows an alternate confinement of one day to life imprisonment.4
Defendant Helzer was convicted by jury on the principal two charges of gross indecency.5 Subsequently, he was separately convicted by the same jury of being a sexually delinquent person at the *415time the acts occurred.6 As a result of the convictions, he was sentenced concurrently to from ten years to life on each count.
Defendant appealed to the Court of Appeals, alleging that, as regards the bifurcated gross indecency and sexually delinquent person charges, he was charged with but a single statutory offense carrying a possible life sentence and therefore was entitled to 20 peremptory jury challenges. At trial, he had been allowed only the five challenges required by the possible penalty available for a gross indecency prosecution. The Court of Appeals reversed7 on the basis of this claim, ordering a new trial as to all charges. We granted leave to appeal. 399 Mich 824 (1977).
The question we will address on this appeal is whether in a gross indecency prosecution, where defendant is also charged with sexual delinquency, reversible error occurs when the court refuses defendant’s request for 20 peremptory jury challenges, even though the separate charge of sexual delinquency carries a possible penalty of life imprisonment. We reverse the Court of Appeals order for a totally new trial. We find defendant’s trial on the principal charges of gross indecency without error. However, we do find error in the trial court’s denial of defendant’s request for 20 peremptory jury challenges incident to his prosecu*416tion as a sexually delinquent person and so remand for hearing before a jury separately empaneled to decide this question.
I
Defendant was convicted of two offenses involving gross indecency. The statute relating to gross indecency defines the offense in the following way:
"Any male person who, in public or in private, commits or is a party to the commission of or procures or attempts to procure the commission by any male person of any act of gross indecency with another male person shall be guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment in the state prison for not more than 5 years, or by a fine of not more than $2,500.00.” MCL 750.338; MSA 28.570.
Additionally, the statute provides that defendant may be declared a sexually delinquent person at the time the offense8 occurred:
"[I]f such person was at the time of the said offense a sexually delinquent person, [then he] may be [punished] by imprisonment in the state prison for an indeterminate term, the minimum of which shall be 1 day and the maximum of which shall be life.” MCL 750.338; MSA 28.570.
Similar sexual delinquency provisions exist in several other criminal statutes. See MCL 750.158; MSA 28.355 (sodomy); MCL 750.335a; MSA 28.567(1) (indecent exposure); MCL 750.338a; MSA *41728.570(1) (gross indecency, females); MCL 750.338b; MSA 28.570(2) (gross indecency, male-female).
In order to convict defendant as a sexual delinquent, evidence9 of delinquency, as defined by MCL 750.10a; MSA 28.200(1), must be established beyond a reasonable doubt:
"The term 'sexually delinquent person’ when used in this act shall mean any person whose sexual behavior is characterized by repetitive or compulsive acts which indicate a disregard of consequences or the recognized rights of others, or by the use of force upon another person in attempting sex relations of either a heterosexual or homosexual nature, or by the commission of sexual aggressions against children under the age of 16.”
Conviction of sexual delinquency can be obtained only in conjunction with conviction on the principal charge.10 Yet, sexual delinquency is a matter of sentencing, unrelated to proof of the principal charge. No additional element of "sexual delinquency” need be proven in order to convict on the principal charge.
Accordingly, what activates the sexual delinquency provision is proof of guilt of a principal criminal offense. However, coupled with this fact, the sexual delinquency hearing itself must prove that defendant has committed "repetitive or compulsive acts which indicate a disregard of conse*418quences or the recognized rights of others”, or acts of force used "upon another person in attempting sex relations of either a heterosexual or homosexual nature”, or acts of sexual aggression committed "against children under the age of 16.” MCL 750.10a; MSA 28.200(1). (Emphasis added.)
It is also clear that proof of the sexual delinquency charge may involve more than simple ministerial considerations.11 Very broad substantive factors come into play when the court or jury decide this question. MCL 767.61a; MSA 28.1001(1)12 provides for a separate hearing and *419record,13 involving psychiatric and expert testimony on the question.14 Even where defendant pleads guilty, the court is ordered to separately investigate the charge of sexual delinquency.15 Language in this statute specifically characterizes sexual delinquency as "an alternate sentence to imprisonment”. See MCL 767.61a; MSA 28.1001(1). (Emphasis added.) In short, this particular provision reflects legislative intent to construe sexual delinquency as a separate, alternate form of sentencing.
Consequently, we are led to an interpretation different than that adopted by the Court of Appeals. That Court’s opinion found sexual delinquency to be entirely self-contained in MCL 750.338; MSA 28.570, and thus simply a penalty enhancement provision related to the principal gross indecency charge.16 To the contrary, we find sexual delinquency to be an alternate sentencing provision tied to a larger statutory scheme. Further, we find the nature of the sexual delinquency hearing itself inconsistent with a simple penalty enhancement rationale. We also find the role of the fact finder highly discretionary in deciding the *420delinquency question. Finally, Vre note the risk of extreme punishment involved with a finding of sexual delinquency. All of these considerations require us to reject the approach taken by the Court of Appeals.
II
A close examination of the legislative history of sexual delinquency demonstrates a sound basis for an alternate sentencing interpretation. At the time the concept became part of Michigan law, related statutory provisions were enacted17 which clearly indicate sexual delinquency was conceived as possible mental illness precluding a fixed sentence. The concept of sexual delinquency was included in the then-existing mental health code18 and Department of Corrections Act,19 which specifically provided for treatment and early release upon satisfactory review by the parole board. The intended result entailed a more flexible and less determinate sentencing framework than set terms of imprisonment. This flexible form of incarceration was meant to entirely replace the more structured and limited sentence provided upon conviction of the principal charge.
Further, this alternate context for handling sexually delinquent persons was explicitly tied to other criminal provisions20 and, by analogy, even *421to legislation dealing with civil commitment.21 In sum, sexual delinquency was part of a much broader scheme of rehabilitation involving a sentence adjusted to defendant’s treatment and recovery from possible mental illness. Thus the sentence for being sexually delinquent was not primarily penal. Punishment within a specific limited period for the principal offense was reserved for those whose psychiatric histories, considered after conviction on the principal charge, reflected no serious tendency toward pathologically repetitive, compulsive, forceful or aggressive acts. So conceived, the sexually delinquent person concept was clearly intended to entail a more flexible, alternate form of sentencing.
Since the legislation was originally enacted, numerous changes have occurred not only in statutes which specifically included the sexual delinquency concept, but also in legislation related to other forms of sexual conduct considered criminal. The wording in the then-existing mental health code, including sexual delinquency in the definition of mental illness, was deleted.22 Further, the Mental Health Code was completely revised four years ago.23 Authority now exists for a finding of "guilty but mentally ill” in criminal prosecutions, which might parallel the sexual delinquency concept as included in the old mental health code.24 Provision *422for treatment and early release of sexual delinquents, which was included in the Department of Corrections Act, was amended out of that statute.25 Similarly, references to sexual delinquency originally found in other legislation have been deleted as new or revised law has appeared.26 In short, sexual delinquency is now limited to five specific criminal provisions, three of which arise from the same criminal conduct.27 Thus constituted, sexual delinquency is a seldom-used category of alternate sentencing, now less explicitly rehabilitative. Provision for treatment is now confined to the normal facilities available to all prison inmates.28
Ill
We conclude that in order to fairly proceed against a defendant under this modified statutory scheme, the alternate nature of the sentence requires a hearing and record before a separate jury in cases where defendant does not waive jury trial. The substantial function and discretion of the jury *423in hearing the sexual delinquency charge,29 the high potential for automatic conviction were the original jury to hear the delinquency charge and the penalty of life imprisonment possible upon finding sexual delinquency all inform our order for separate jury consideration.30 Within the special context of the sexual delinquency hearing, we find that these circumstances distinguish this proceeding from any analogy to habitual offender proceedings. See People v Stratton, 13 Mich App 350; 164 NW2d 555 (1968).
The trial court cannot predict at the outset whether a defendant will actually be prejudiced by having the same jury decide both the principal charge and the sexual delinquency charge. However, the potential for prejudice is inescapable, given the broad function and wide discretion necessarily accorded the jury in the sexual delinquency hearing. Much more is involved than simply determining whether this defendant is the person convicted of specific prior offenses.31 Indeed, acts not necessarily resulting in criminal convictions may be considered under the statute. See MCL 750.10a; MSA 28.200(1). Furthermore, the definition of a sexually delinquent person allows, and in fact must depend upon, consideration of the prior principal sexual offense. Consequently, we find the possibility too real that a jury which only shortly before had found defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt on the principal sexual offense might without responsible deliberation conclude he was also a sexually delinquent person. In short, *424the likelihood of an automatic conviction in this subsequent proceeding requires us to order a separate jury.
Additionally, in view of the potential life sentence under the sexual delinquency charge, if the same jury hears both charges a defendant is entitled to 20 peremptory challenges in the empaneling the original jury. However, if the need for a second jury is left to the discretion of the trial court and the court finds a different jury necessary to avoid prejudice in trying the sexual delinquency charge, then the time and expense in proceeding with 20 peremptory challenges at the beginning of the trial is wasted. We find this situation incongruous.
As a result, we conclude that the decision to empanel a separate jury should not be left to the discretion of the trial judge. Unless waived by the defendant, we shall require that a second jury be provided in every case to decide the sexual delinquency charge. The second jury should be empaneled before the same trial judge immediately after conviction on the principal charge.
Further, because defendant is separately tried on the charge of sexual delinquency, which carries a possible sentence of life in prison, he is entitled to 20 peremptory challenges in the empaneling of this jury. On the other hand, at the time the initial jury is empaneled on the principal charge, defendant should be allowed only the number of peremptory challenges appropriate to the possible sentence on that charge.
Moreover, though defendant is separately tried by two different juries, the charge against him for sexual delinquency must be brought before trial on the principal charge begins. The statute mandates that result by including the word "shall” in the *425relevant language of MCL 767.61a; MSA 28.1001(1):
"In any prosecution for an offense committed by a sexually delinquent person for which may be imposed an alternate sentence to imprisonment for an indeterminate term, the minimum of which is 1 day and the maximum of which is life, the indictment shall charge the offense and may also charge that the defendant was, at the time said offense was committed, a sexually delinquent person.” (Emphasis added.)
Thus, if brought at all, a charge of sexual delinquency must be included in the original indictment. The word "may” in the statute refers to the option available to the prosecutor, indicating the sexual delinquency charge may or may not be included. This language does not allow a subsequent information to be filed after the principal charge is tried.
We would contrast this provision with the habitual offender statute.32 In the case of sexual delinquency, ascertaining whether a prosecutor knew or should have known of circumstances which would lead him to add sexual delinquency to the information would be more difficult to establish with certainty. Consequently, determining the prosecutor’s good faith discovery of prior convictions in habitual offender cases is not reasoning which can be transposed to the sexual delinquency context.
After the trial begins, the prosecutor will have waived the opportunity to bring a sexual delinquency charge. By imposing this time limit, we avoid late charges which would prejudice defend*426ant. The substantive character of the sexual delinquency hearing and the extreme penalty possible weigh in our decision. Ideally, the original indictment should include both principal charges and the charge of sexual delinquency. However, we find no impropriety in allowing amendments of the indictment or information prior to trial. Thus, if the prosecutor decides during the period of trial preparation that a charge of sexual delinquency is appropriate, he should be permitted to modify the information. Beyond this point, he waives any right to bring such prosecution.
Furthermore, we hold that no reference to the sexual delinquency charge should be made to the jury trying the principal charge.33 Given the provision for separate juries, absolutely no need remains to acquaint the jury hearing the principal charge with the possible subsequent conviction of defendant as a sexually delinquent person. Discovery during trial of the principal charge that the jury hearing that case has learned of the sexual delinquency charge will henceforth be grounds for mistrial on the principal charge or reversible error on appeal. The two charges must be tried separately. Basic fairness to defendant requires this holding.
IV
Considering defendant’s position in the present case, we find that the trial held on the principal charge was procedurally acceptable. He was charged in the original two-count information with both the principal crime of gross indecency and sexual delinquency. Defendant was provided with *427only five peremptory challenges during voir dire on the principal charge. The charge of sexual delinquency was not placed before the jury during trial or deliberations on the principal charge. Only after the verdict of guilty on the principal charge did the court acquaint the jury with the charge of sexual delinquency. We thus find no error in the proceeding to this point and so affirm defendant’s conviction of the principal offenses of gross indecency.
What we find objectionable is the trial court’s decision to allow the same jury hearing the principal charge to decide the subsequent matter of sexual delinquency and, further, to deny defendant the right to 20 peremptory jury challenges on that charge. We thus affirm the Court of Appeals on this basic point; but reverse their order for an entirely new trial. We remand only for hearing before a separately empaneled jury should the prosecutor decide to pursue the sexual delinquency charge. Defendant should be accorded the full 20 peremptory challenges appropriate to the possible life sentence. Should the prosecutor choose not to proceed upon the sexual delinquency charge, or should the defendant be found not guilty, defendant will be resentenced by the trial court only on the principal charge.
Given our ruling of procedural error in the sexual delinquency proceeding, we will not now consider the larger constitutional claim first alleged by defendant in his cross-appeal to this Court. Should defendant be found sexually delinquent on proper hearing below, then appeal on constitutional grounds may be brought and fairly considered in the correct order.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part and remanded to the trial court for further proceedings.
*428Williams, Levin, Coleman, Ryan, and Fitzgerald, JJ., concurred with Blair Moody, Jr., J.
Gross indecency has been designated under three separate provisions of the criminal code. See MCL 750.338; MSA 28.570 (gross indecency, males); MCL 750.338a; MSA 28.570(1) (gross indecency, females); MCL 750.338b; MSA 28.570(2) (gross indecency, male-female). Each proscribes identical behavior, distinguished only by the sex of the parties involved.
Sexual delinquency was simply engrafted upon the existing principal categories of gross indecency. Most legislative provisions relative to sexual delinquency became effective September 18, 1952. A broad interrelated scheme was evidently intended in dealing with the problem of sexual delinquency.
The statute provides penalties of fine or imprisonment:
"punishable by imprisonment in the state prison for not more than 5 years, or by a fine of not more than $2,500.00.” MCL 750.338; MSA 28.570.
Michigan decisions have viewed this sentence as indeterminate. See People v Winford, ante, 404 Mich 400; 273 NW2d 54 (1978).
Trial proceeded on the principal charge without reference to the additional charge of sexual delinquency.
Defendant presented virtually no defense to the charge of sexual delinquency. The prosecutor introduced (1) a certified order of probation of March 5,1965, indicating prior conviction in Alpena County of accosting and soliciting a minor child, and (2) a Macomb County Court disposition sheet showing defendant’s conviction of indecent liberties with a minor child on March 18, 1968. In response, defendant merely argued that the convictions were old enough to cast doubt on any finding of sexual delinquency under the statute. After the verdict, the judge made a separate finding, as a matter of law, that defendant was a sexually delinquent person.
The Court of Appeals decision is reported at 70 Mich App 683; 247 NW2d 328 (1976).
This language fixes the relevant time to decide whether defendant was sexually delinquent at the point when the principal offense was committed. Further, sexual delinquency was intended to depend upon conviction and subsequent consideration of the principal criminal charge and surrounding psychiatric history. Only where the principal charge is prosecuted to conclusion and defendant found guilty can sexual delinquency be tried.
MCL 750.10a; MSA 28.200(1) does not directly specify "elements” of proof. However, the language qualifying the designated acts conforms to a determinable structure of proof. As noted, proof of these acts must be established beyond a reasonable doubt.
The Court of Appeals has correctly determined that charges of sexual delinquency may be brought only where the principal criminal statute explicitly so specifies. See People v Seaman, 75 Mich App 546; 255 NW2d 680 (1977), where supplementation of third-degree criminal sexual conduct prosecution with sexual delinquency charge was rejected because explicit provision for charging sexual delinquency is nowhere contained within the criminal sexual conduct statute.
In this particular case, defendant’s prior conviction constituted the basis for the jury’s sexual delinquency verdict. This case thus parallels the normal habitual offender prosecution where the offense is totally defined and limited by the existence of prior convictions. However, sexual delinquency is not explicitly dependent upon any prior conviction except the principal charge. Hence, though the sexual delinquency prosecution must be defined in terms of a contemporaneous conviction on the principal charge, the court or jury is not limited to record convictions in their deliberations. The only limitation is that they must weigh the acts specified in MCL 750.10a; MSA 28.200(1). Defendant is not punished for prior offenses. He is prosecuted in order to determine whether special circumstances surrounding the principal charge make an alternate sentence appropriate.
This provision constitutes the major procedural pronouncement regarding the sexual delinquency hearing and reads as follows:
"In any prosecution for an offense committed by a sexually delinquent person for which may be imposed an alternate sentence to imprisonment for an indeterminate term, the minimum of which is 1 day and the maximum of which is life, the indictment shall charge the offense and may also charge that the defendant was, at the time said offense was committed, a sexually delinquent person. In every such prosecution the people may produce expert testimony and the court shall provide expert testimony for any indigent accused at his request. In the event the accused shall plead guilty to both charges in such indictment, the court * * * before sentencing the accused, shall conduct an examination of witnesses relative to the sexual delinquency of such person and may call on psychiatric and expert testimony. All testimony taken at such examination shall be taken in open court and a typewritten transcript or copy thereof, certified by the court reporter taking the same, shall be placed in the file of the case in the office of the county clerk. Upon a verdict of guilty to the first charge or to both charges or upon a plea of guilty to the first charge or to both charges the court may impose any punishment provided by law for such offense.” MCL 767.61a; MSA 28.1001(1).
Though not explicitly stated, we find a separate hearing and record directed by clear implication.
By particularly isolating both psychiatric and expert testimony for consideration, the statute must be construed to authorize any competent medical, sociological or psychological testimony which might aid in the determination of defendant’s mental and physical condition at the time the principal offense occurred.
Defendant will be entitled to a jury trial on the delinquency charge, even where he enters a guilty plea to the principal charge. If defendant enters a plea to both charges, still the court’s examination should be conducted under a procedure equivalent to that used where a jury decides the sexual delinquency question. The same kinds of evidence will be admissible in deciding the appropriate sentence.
See the Court of Appeals opinion in People v Helzer, supra. See, also, People v Saunders, 42 Mich App 246, 248; 201 NW2d 671 (1972), lv den 389 Mich 753 (1972); People v Winford, 59 Mich App 404, 407; 229 NW2d 474 (1975), lv granted 395 Mich 824 (1976).
Sexual delinquency was included within the definition of mental illness under the Hospital Act for Mentally Diseased Persons by 1952 PA 148. At the same session, the Michigan Corrections Act was amended to encompass sexually delinquent persons. See 1952 PA 72, § 74a. Provision appeared for psychiatric treatment and authorization for early release by the parole board. See 1952 PA 72, § 74b.
MCL 330.54; MSA 14.844.
MCL 791.33a et seq.; MSA 28.2173(1) et seq.
See the indecent liberties statute, MCL 750.336; MSA 28.568, the rape statute, MCL 750.520; MSA 28.788, the assault with intent to commit rape statute, MCL 750.85; MSA 28.280, the incest statute, *421MCL 750.333; MSA 28.565, the indecent exposure statute, MCL 750.335a; MSA 28.567(1), and the sodomy statute, MCL 750.158; MSA 28.355.
The provision for civil commitment was the Criminal Sexual Psychopath Act legislated in 1950, amended in 1952 and 1966, and later repealed in 1968. See 1950 (Ex Sess) PA 25; 1952 PA 58; 1966 PA 267; 1968 PA 143; MCL 780.501-780.507; MSA 28.967(l)-28.967(7). See also, People v Griffes, 13 Mich App 299; 164 NW2d 426 (1968).
All references to sexual delinquency were deleted in enacting the new Michigan Mental Health Code in 1974.
See MCL 330.1001 et seq.; MSA 14.800(1) et seq.
See MCL 768.36; MSA 28.1059. We have granted leave to appeal *422in a matter which would consider this particular provision. See People v McLeod, Docket No. 60368.
See 1953 PA 232, repealing MCL 791.33a et seq.; MSA 28.2173(1) et seq. Provisions as modified can be found in MCL 791.201 et seq.; MSA 28.2271 et seq.
Several statutes included identical language. See the indecent liberties statute, MCL 750.336; MSA 28.568, repealed by 1974 PA 266; the rape statute, MCL 750.520; MSA 28.788, repealed by 1974 PA 266; the assault with intent to commit rape statute, MCL 750.85; MSA 28.280, repealed by 1974 PA 266; the incest statute, MCL 750.333; MSA 28.565, repealed by 1974 PA 266.
See MCL 750.158; MSA 28.355 (sodomy); MCL 750.338; MSA 28.570 (gross indecency, males); MCL 750.338a; MSA 28.570(1) (gross indecency, females); MCL 750.338b; MSA 28.570(2) (gross indecency, male-female).
We recognize defendant’s question concerning the treatment accorded persons who might be sentenced to life imprisonment. However, this question is not directly before us on this appeal. Nonetheless, because one of the intended purposes for an alternate sentence is treatment and possible rehabilitation, we do consider this a significant problem.
See footnote 14, supra, and accompanying text.
We reject the reasoning and conclusion applied by the Court of Appeals in People v Saunders, supra. The Court found there that the same jury could consider both a principal charge and the sexual delinquency charge. Id. at 248.
See footnote 14, supra, and accompanying text.
See Judge, now Justice, Levin’s discussion of this problem in habitual offender prosecutions. People v Stratton, 13 Mich App 350, 356; 164 NW2d 555 (1968).
We find the same principal and reasoning applies to the sexual delinquency proceeding as obtains for habitual offender prosecutions. See Id. at 357-358.

=== CASE 9741715 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:01.198287+00 ===

Coleman, J.
We agree that the convictions of Willie and Lindsay Pearson should be affirmed. We also concur in the result that the convictions of Willie Wynn and John J. Schwartz should be reversed. In Schwartz, reversal is required because the prosecutor failed to exercise sufficient diligence in his attempts to produce Don Cager (one of two on-the-scene witnesses), regardless of the "good faith” on the part of the prosecution. Reversal in Wynn is predicated upon the prosecution’s lack of diligence in attempting to produce Moore and its apparent disregard for its responsibility to present to the judge and jury the "whole transaction” of the alleged crime.
A separate opinion is necessary, however, to set forth the points of departure from Justice Levin’s opinion. We do not agree that in all cases where there has been a hearing during the course of trial concerning the prosecution’s obligation to produce a given res gestae witness and its diligence in the attempt, the defendant should be able to raise missing res gestae witness issues on appeal without first presenting them to the trial judge in a Robinson (post-trial) hearing.1 As Justice Levin notes: "The purpose of a Robinson hearing, however, is twofold. It is not only to determine the *715reason for a failure to indorse or a failure to produce but also to determine whether the defendant has been prejudiced by non-production of the witness.”
In cases where the trial judge has determined that the prosecution failed to exercise due diligence when attempting to produce a missing res gestae witness (e.g., Wynn), the issues of the existence of prejudice (if any) and the appropriate remedy remain to be resolved. These issues should be raised in a post-trial hearing in order to perfect them for appeal. In cases where the trial court has ruled that a missing witness is not a res gestae witness or that the prosecution was sufficiently diligent in its efforts to produce (e.g., Schwartz), a Robinson hearing would be superfluous and is not required prior to an appeal.
Furthermore, we are unable to accept our brother’s standards for determining whether a defendant has been prejudiced by the prosecution’s lack of due diligence.2 While we agree that the defendant should be presumed prejudiced unless and until the prosecution overcomes this presumption, utilization of the standard "possible” (i.e., the witness could not "possibly” have been produced or his testimony would have been of no "possible” assistance to defendant) makes rebuttal of the presumption virtually impossible. Also, it could be read as eliminating the "cumulative evidence” and "harmless error” exceptions to the res gestae rule. Therefore, in Wynn and Schwartz, post-remand *716hearings and Robinson hearings, the determination of the existence of prejudice to the defendant as a result of a violation of the prosecution’s obligation to indorse, produce and call all known res gestae witnesses should be in accordance with the standards delineated infra.
I
John J. Schwartz was convicted of delivery of heroin. MCL 335.341(l)(a); MSA 18.1070(41)(l)(a). The testimony establishes that the defendant delivered heroin to a police officer who had been introduced to the defendant by Don Cager, an informant. Cager was present during the transaction, but was not produced at trial. Consequently, Cager was clearly a missing res gestae witness. He was indorsed on the information. The defense was entrapment.
During the course of the trial, the defendant raised the issue of non-production. The prosecution recalled the police officer who had worked with Cager. The officer testified that the last time he had seen Cager was about six months prior to trial. In the interim, and particularly over the five weeks preceding trial, he had made several unsuccessful (vaguely described) attempts to find Cager regarding other matters. In preparation for the Schwartz trial (which was to begin the next day), the officer went to Cager’s residence in Algonac, Michigan, spoke to several people on the street in Cager’s age group, and spoke to a local police officer. He was unsuccessful in locating Cager. On the morning that he was recalled to the witness stand, the same officer had been sent out in search of Cager armed with a subpoena. The officer returned to Algonac and checked Cager’s residence, a boathouse, a firehouse, a pool hall, two bars and *717two restaurants. The court ruled that these efforts constituted a "good faith” attempt to locate and produce Cager.
The Court of Appeals reversed on the grounds that the trial judge used the wrong standard (good faith versus due diligence) and that the prosecution did not exercise sufficient diligence in its attempts to produce Cager. 62 Mich App 188; 233 NW2d 517 (1975). We agree.
It is clear that the standard is one of due diligence and not good faith.3 We also believe that the standard of due diligence was not met. Prior to trial there was no attempt to subpoena Cager, nor did anyone keep track of his whereabouts between defendant’s arrest and trial. It was clear that Cager was a res gestae witness who would have to be produced. Consequently, a diligent attempt would have included serious pretrial efforts to locate and subpoena Cager.
We must agree with Justice Levin’s assessment of the police officer’s efforts during the two trips to Algonac. A thoughtful, serious attempt, even at that late date, would have included prior telephone inquiries (particularly in the evening) to Cager’s residence, his parents, the local police, an inquiry of neighbors, etc. Of particular concern to this Court, however, is that no serious effort was made sufficiently in advance of trial to allow for the difficulties which occurred. Therefore, we agree that the defendant’s conviction be vacated, but subject to the prosecution’s right to seek relief in a post-remand hearing consistent with the procedures and standards set forth infra.
*718II
Willie Wynn was convicted of assault with intent to do great bodily harm less than murder. MCL 750.84; MSA 28.279. The testimony establishes that Earl Berry had beaten Wynn’s ex-girlfriend and threatened Wynn. James Moore (the girlfriend’s brother), Wynn and an unknown third person went to the Berry family’s home in an alleged attempt to straighten out matters and pacify Earl Berry. A rifle was brought along.
Moore entered the Berry house first. Earl Berry was not home so Moore spoke to Floyd and Arm-stead "Rudy” Berry (Earl’s brothers) in a back bedroom. A few minutes later Wynn ran in the house with the rifle and a shot was fired, narrowly missing Rudy Berry.
Wynn was charged with assault with intent to commit murder. The key element of the proofs was Wynn’s intent. Wynn testified that he entered the house with the rifle, that he saw Rudy Berry coming toward him, that he ordered Rudy to halt while raising the rifle and that the rifle accidently discharged. The prosecution’s witnesses testified that Wynn aimed and ñred at Rudy. All parties agree that Moore was an eyewitness to the incident.
We cannot agree, however, with Justice Levin’s characterization of the importance of Moore’s testimony. It is stated:
"Moore was standing about two feet in front of and to the side of the complainant when the shot was fired, and may have been the only person who had an unblocked view of the incident.”
Rudy Berry testified that Moore preceded him out of a back bedroom as Wynn ran in the front *719door with a rifle in his hands. Rudy Berry said that when he and Wynn saw each other they both stopped still and Wynn then aimed at him from a distance of 7 or 8 feet. Berry then said:
”Q. What happened then?
"A. He pulled the trigger, you know, and as he fired, you know, I ducked, you know, I seen he fired and I ducked the bullet, and after he ñred it, I grabbed James Moore.
"Q. Okay, where was James Moore standing?
”A. He was standing about two feet in front of me to the left, next to the wall, so all I had to do was jump out and grab him, so I grabbed him, because if he shot again I wanted him to hit James Moore instead of me since they were together.” (Emphasis added.)
We understand this and other testimony to place Moore to one side of Rudy Berry when the shot was fired. Because the defendant’s intent was the key issue, his actions before the shot were of paramount importance. Further, the evidence establishes that Floyd Berry and Doris Smith also had unobstructed views of the entire transaction. Floyd Berry, Doris Smith and Rudy Berry were produced and called by the prosecution.
Thus, we do not believe it is fair to depict Moore as the crucial eyewitness. However, given that the only witnesses produced by the prosecution were friends or relatives of the Berrys, it is fair to conclude that Moore may have provided a different picture of the event.
Moore was not indorsed prior to trial, but in response to a defense motion the court ordered. Moore indorsed and produced during trial. The police located Moore and he said he would appear. No attempt to serve a subpoena was ever made. Moore did not come to court and the prosecution *720made no further efforts to produce him. The court found that this constituted a lack of due diligence and instructed the jury that it could infer Moore’s testimony would have been unfavorable to the prosecution.
The Court of Appeals reversed. 60 Mich App 636; 231 NW2d 269 (1975). We agree that there was a lack of due diligence. Of particular concern is the fact that an obvious res gestae witness was not indorsed, no pretrial efforts to subpoena him were made and no serious attempt to comply with the prosecution’s obligations in this regard was ever established. Consequently, the defendant’s conviction should be vacated, subject to the prosecution’s right to seek relief in a post-remand hearing consistent with the procedures and standards set forth later in this opinion.
We do not read the record to suggest that Moore’s testimony was intentionally withheld. Although the prosecutor may have appeared recalcitrant and less than diligent in his efforts to produce Moore, we still find an insufficient basis to infer "that the prosecution’s lack of due diligence was purposeful”. To the contrary, there is no record support for the assumption that Moore’s testimony would have been detrimental to the prosecution’s case beyond the fact that Moore probably was not favorably disposed toward the Berry family. Indeed, the defense was not interested in helping to locate Moore on the basis that he would testify against Wynn.
Therefore, we would not grant the defense the many depositions and other discovery aids provided by Justice Levin. Discovery is always available through traditional means.
Ill
Central to the judicious and efficient administra*721tion of criminal justice are procedures allowing the trial court to decide all the issues necessary to dispose of a case prior to appeal, whenever possible. Moreover, factual questions should be resolved while the testimony is fresh and available, not after the delays of the appellate process leave only a stale record and failing memories to be assessed by the trier of fact. Whether a defendant has been prejudiced by the prosecution’s failure to exercise due diligence is a factual issue which should be resolved by the trial court. Whether due diligence was employed and whether a person, in fact, is a res gestae witness are similar factual issues.
It is our opinion that the following procedures provide a fair and effective resolution of these problems without repeatedly traveling up and down the judicial ladder.
If the question of a missing res gestae witness is raised during the course of trial, it is our opinion that the court should hold a hearing and decide first whether the witness is in fact a res gestae witness.4 5If it is determined that the person is a res gestae witness, the court should order the prosecution to produce him or her.5 If the witness is not produced, then the court should hold a hearing on the issue of whether the prosecution was duly diligent in its attempts to produce the witness.6
*722Assuming the trial judge decides that there was a lack of due diligence, as in Wynn, then the judge should instruct the jury that it may infer that the missing "witness’s testimony would have been unfavorable to the prosecutor’s case”. CJI 5:2:14(3). However, determination of the existence of prejudice to the defendant and possible remedies must await the verdict. Assuming a verdict of guilty, the defendant must raise the issue of prejudice and seek a remedy in a Robinson-type procedure or be foreclosed from raising these issues on appeal. If the defendant is dissatisfied with the results of the Robinson hearing, review may be sought in the defendant’s appeal as of right.
In cases like Schwartz, where the missing person is determined to be a res gestae witness but the court finds the attempts to produce sufficiently diligent, there is no purpose in forcing the defendant first to seek a remedy in a Robinson proceeding. The defendant may seek a review of the court’s ruling on the due diligence issue in an appeal without first bringing a post-trial motion. Identical procedures should be followed when the issue of a missing witness is raised at trial, but the court determines the person is not a res gestae witness.
The third type of case is the typical Robinson scenario. There, the issue of a possible missing res gestae witness is not raised during the course of *723trial. We would still require the issues to be raised in a Robinson hearing in order to perfect them for appeal. However, we would refine the procedure to require that the trial court reach all the issues necessary to dispose of the case. In summary, and consistent with our earlier analysis, the order of inquiry should be as follows:
1. The court shall ascertain whether the claimed missing person is a res gestae witness;
2. If so, the prosecutor shall produce the witness or explain why the witness cannot be produced and why the witness was not indorsed and produced at trial;
3. If the witness is not produced, the court shall determine whether the prosecution was duly diligent in its attempts to produce the witness;
4. If a lack of due diligence is found or if the witness is produced, the court shall ascertain whether the defendant has been prejudiced by the failure to produce the witness at trial;
5. If the defendant is found to be prejudiced the court shall fashion an appropriate remedy.
Except in cases where the court finds in favor of the prosecution on the issues of whether a person is a missing res gestae witness or whether due diligence was exercised, these procedures will make it more likely that the missing witness ultimately will be produced and result in a maximum of one appeal, removing the need for a remand and continuing appellate jurisdiction. In the Schwartz type of case, if the defendant is successful on appeal a new trial should be conditioned upon the prosecutor’s right to establish a lack of prejudice. Consequently, we would hold that in Wynn, Schwartz, and future similar cases the prosecutor shall have 30 days to seek a hearing to determine the existence of prejudice. The *724Court of Appeals shall be deemed to have retained jurisdiction to review the hearing record upon application of either party within 30 days of the entry of the judge’s order. Should the prosecutor fail to seek a post-remand hearing, within 30 days, the conviction shall be deemed vacated and the prosecutor may proceed with a new trial.
IV
A new trial is not automatically warranted simply because the prosecution has failed to exercise due diligence in the production of a missing res gestae witness. The key issue in determining the proper remedy for the defendant when the prosecution has failed to fulfill its responsibilities is whether the defendant is prejudiced. Our area of disagreement with Justice Levin primarily resides in the standards for determining the existence of prejudice.
In effect, his approach rebuttably presumes that the defendant was prejudiced upon a finding of a lack of due diligence. This presumption could be rebutted only "[i]f the prosecutor establishes that the witness could not possibly have been produced at the trial or his testimony would have been of no possible assistance to the defendant * * * .” (Emphasis added.) Moreover, it is stated that: "If the witness cannot be produced for a post-remand hearing (unless the prosecutor establishes further that the witness could not possibly have been produced at the trial), the conviction must be reversed because there is no way of knowing whether at the trial he might possibly have given testimony of assistance to the defendant.” The motivation for fashioning such restrictive standards appears to be that they will discourage *725prosecutorial failure to employ due diligence. Unfortunately, these standards will also result in many unnecessary new trials.
Such an approach confuses two concepts. New trials should be awarded because of prejudicial error, whereas professional misconduct should be remedied by the Attorney Grievance Commission (e.g., deliberate withholding of res gestae testimony favorable to the defendant).
At either a post-remand hearing or a Robinson hearing, we would have the trial court assess whether the defendant actually suffered any prejudice and fashion appropriate remedies. The burden should be on the prosecution to establish that its failure to exercise due diligence in the production of a res gestae witness did not adversely affect the defendant’s right to a fair trial (i.e., the defendant is presumed prejudiced until the contrary is established). If the prosecution can establish that the missing testimony would have been of no assistance to the defendant, that it merely constitutes cumulative evidence,7 that its absence constitutes harmless error8 or that the witness could not have been produced at trial, then this burden has been met and the conviction should be affirmed. A *726failure to meet this burden should result in a new trial.
V
In summary, the procedures delineated in Part III of this opinion provide a means for judiciously and efficiently disposing of missing res gestae witness issues. Emphasis is placed upon disposition of issues prior to appeal in order to avoid post-remand hearings and continuing appellate jurisdiction.
We prefer a less extreme standard than that chosen by Justice Levin for determining whether a defendant has been prejudiced by the prosecution’s lack of due diligence in attempting to produce res gestae witnesses.
If it appears to the judge that there has been professional misconduct but that defendant’s right to a fair trial has not been adversely affected, then the sanctions should rest upon the individual prosecutor rather than upon society. If professional misconduct also results in prejudice, the defendant should have his remedy and the code violation should be referred to the Grievance Commission for appropriate action.9
However, it is worth noting that although the state is ultimately responsible for the lack of due diligence in the production of res gestae witnesses, not all such failures are the result of prosecutorial negligence or misconduct. For example, it is arguable that the failure to produce Cager in Schwartz is more a result of the lack of diligence of the police officer than the prosecutor. There are many *727possible fact situations which would amount to a lack of due diligence and yet not rise to the level of professional misconduct proscribed by the Code of Professional Responsibility. The preferred course, however, would be for the trial judge to refer a proper case to the Grievance Commission for investigation.
We affirm in Pearson. In Wynn and Schwartz, we reverse subject to the prosecution’s right to seek a post-remand hearing, concerning the existence of prejudice, within 30 days from the issuance of this opinion. Should the prosecutor seek such a hearing in either case, within 30 days from the entry of the judge’s order either party may seek review of the hearing from the Court of Appeals. The Court of Appeals shall be deemed to have continuing jurisdiction for the purpose of reviewing such hearings. If the prosecutor does not seek a post-remand hearing within 30 days, then the conviction(s) shall be deemed vacated and the prosecutor may commence a new trial.
Fitzgerald, Ryan, and Blair Moody, Jr., JJ., concurred with Coleman, J.
People v Robinson, 390 Mich 629; 213 NW2d 106 (1973).
Justice Levin focuses on the standard a prosecutor would have to meet to rebut a presumption of prejudice. He says:
"If the prosecutor establishes at such a post-remand hearing that the defendant was not so prejudiced because the witness could not possibly have been produced or because his testimony would have been of no possible assistance to the defendant, upon the trial judge’s •entry of an order so finding the defendant’s conviction shall be deemed affirmed.” (Emphasis added.)
The good faith or bad faith of the prosecution is simply irrelevant when deciding whether the prosecution has fulfilled its obligation to present the "whole transaction” of an alleged crime. Due diligence is the standard. Good faith-bad faith becomes relevant when prejudice and professional misconduct are considered.
To prevent a repetition of evidence, this hearing should be held at the close of the prosecution’s proofs in most cases. However, the exact point during trial when this hearing and the hearing on due diligence (if necessary) are to be held should be within the trial court’s discretion.
The court may want to consider a continuance to allow the prosecution time to produce the witness, particularly when the witness was unknown to the prosecution prior to trial. Clearly, it is preferable that this testimony be presented to the jury whenever possible.
Footnote 6 on next page.
For discussion of the cumulative evidence rule see, e.g., People v Raider, 256 Mich 131, 134; 239 NW 387 (1931), People v Bartlett, 312 Mich 648, 654-655; 20 NW2d 758 (1945), People v Cooper, 326 Mich 514, 523; 40 NW2d 708 (1950), People v Reynold, 20 Mich App 397, 399; 174 NW2d 25 (1969), People v Harrison, 44 Mich App 578, 588-590; 205 NW2d 900 (1973), People v Sims, 62 Mich App 550, 554-555; 233 NW2d 645 (1975), People v Saunders, 68 Mich App 546; 243 NW2d 679 (1976).
For discussion of the harmless error rule see, e.g., Chapman v California, 386 US 18; 87 S Ct 824; 17 L Ed 2d 705 (1967), People v Shirk, 383 Mich 180, 195-197; 174 NW2d 772 (1970), People v Robinson, 386 Mich 551, 560-564; 194 NW2d 709 (1972), People v Mobley, 390 Mich 57, 65-66; 210 NW2d 327 (1973), People v Wichman, 15 Mich App 110; 166 NW2d 298 (1968), People v Swan, 56 Mich App 22, 30-35; 223 NW2d 346 (1974), People v Hadley, 67 Mich App 688; 242 NW2d 32 (1976). See, generally, Saltzburg, The Harm of Harmless Error, 59 Va L Rev 988 (1973).
It is clear that the Disciplinary Rules encompass and proscribe prosecutorial misconduct. E.g., Code of Professional Responsibility, DR 7-103; DR 7-109, subds (A), (B); DR 7-106, subds (A), (C)(7); DR 7-102, subds (A)(1), (A)(3), (A)(6)-(A)(8); DR 1-102.
Standard Criminal Jury Instruction 5:2:14 allows the judge to submit the issue of due diligence to the jury. We believe that this procedure should not be utilized. Such a determination is essential to resolve cases where the missing witness is a res gestae witness and there is a guilty verdict. Because the jury would not ordinarily disclose its decision on the issue, we believe that the court must hold the hearing, make a record and state its determination of the issue so that the parties and the court may know whether due diligence was exercised and the reasons for this finding.

=== CASE 9741716 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:01.205892+00 ===

Levin, J.
(dissenting). It was claimed by the defense at trial in each of these consolidated cases that the prosecution had failed to produce a res gestae witness.
We agree, in each case, with the Court of Appeals: in Pearson the prosecution was not obliged to produce the witness, and in Wynn and Schwartz it was so obliged and did not exert sufficient efforts to produce him.
In Pearson there are other issues which we address in Part VII, infra. We affirm the Pearsons’ convictions.
The Court of Appeals reversed the convictions of Wynn and Schwartz and remanded for new trials. *728The principal issue presented is whether there must be a post-trial hearing, such as was required in People v Robinson, 390 Mich 629; 213 NW2d 106 (1973), in cases such as Wynn and Schwartz where, in the course of the trial, there was á hearing regarding the prosecution’s failure to produce the witness and a finding, at trial or on appeal, that the efforts to produce him were insufficient.
We agree with the Court of Appeals that where there has been such a hearing and finding a defendant may appeal without first seeking a Robinson hearing. We would hold, however, that if the Court of Appeals concludes that a witness should have been produced and the prosecutor’s efforts were insufficient, the order for a new trial shall be deemed conditioned by a right of the prosecutor to seek, within 30 days, a hearing to determine whether the defendant was prejudiced at trial by non-production of the witness. If the prosecutor establishes at such a post-remand hearing that the defendant was not so prejudiced because the witness could not possibly have been produced or because his testimony would have been of no possible assistance to the defendant, upon the trial judge’s entry of an order so finding the defendant’s conviction shall be deemed affirmed. Otherwise, upon expiration of the 30 days without the prosecutor seeking such a hearing or upon entry of an order following such a hearing that the defendant was prejudiced, the conviction shall be deemed vacated and the prosecutor may proceed with a new trial. The Court of Appeals should be deemed to have retained jurisdiction for the purpose of reviewing a post-remand hearing record, which shall include a statement by the judge of his findings and reasons for his decision, upon applica*729tion by the prosecutor or defendant within 30 days of the entry of the judge’s order.
We do not address the question, suggested in our consideration of Wynn and Schwartz but not briefed or argued, of whether a prosecutor’s failure to produce a witness may, in some circumstances, require or justify dismissal of the prosecution.
I
The prosecution contends that "[t]he res gestae rule, couched in modern due process, compulsory process, discovery and pre-trial motions and depositions, has merged and no reason calls for its continuance and expensive redundancy”.
It appears from an early Michigan case that the rule is derived from the English practice.1 The rule took legislative form in 1859;2 the statute now provides: *730The relevant language has remained unchanged since first enacted.3 The statute has been consistently construed by this Court to require the prosecutor to indorse on the information, produce in court and call all known res gestae witnesses.4
*729"All informations shall be filed in the court having jurisdiction of the offense specified therein, after the proper return is filed by the examining magistrate, by the prosecuting attorney of the county as informant; he shall indorse thereon the names of the witnesses known to him at the time of Sling the same. The information shall be subscribed by the prosecuting attorney or in his name by an assistant prosecuting attorney. Names of additional witnesses may be indorsed before or during the trial by leave of the court and upon such conditions as the court shall determine.” MCL 767.40; MSA 28.980 (emphasis supplied).
*730The underlying rationale is that the prosecutor’s obligation is to present the "whole transaction”:
"But the prosecution can never, in a criminal case, properly claim a conviction upon evidence which, expressly or by implication, shows but a part of the res gestae, or whole transaction, if it appear that the evidence of the rest of the transaction is attainable. This would be to deprive the defendant of the benefit of the presumption of innocence, and to throw upon him the burden of proving his innocence. It is the res gestae, or whole transaction, the burden of proving which rests upon the prosecution (so far at least as the evidence is attainable). It is that which constitutes the prosecutor’s case, and as to which, the defendant has the right of cross-examination; it is that, which the jury are entitled to have before them, and, 'until this is shown, it is difficult to see how any legitimate inference of guilt, or of the degree of the offense, can be drawn.’ ” Hurd v People, 25 Mich 405, 415 (1872).5
*731"Its roots are in this Court’s historic concern that when the full investigative and prosecutorial power of the state is arrayed against an accused in a criminal case, the people’s duty is not met where only such evidence as points toward guilt is produced when there exists other evidence which may suggest innocence. It is a product of judicial policy that the prosecutor may not pick and choose which witnesses will fairly present the whole picture, but requires the production of all witnesses to an alleged crime, leaving it to the trier of fact to decide whether in the totality guilt is proven.” State Bar Grievance Administrator v Jaques, 401 Mich 516, 533-534; 258 NW2d 443 (1977).
The list of witnesses indorsed on the information is the only discovery available to the defendant as a matter of right. While the people argue that "[m]odern practice in Michigan is one of wide discovery”, discovery is discretionary* *6 and discovery orders are the exception, not the rule.
The people are in a better position than a defendant to identify and secure the production of witnesses. Few defendants have a staff of investigators to assist them. The police generally receive cooperation from citizens and also have the sup*732port of other law enforcement agencies in identifying and locating witnesses. A police investigation may continue to the time of trial. A thorough investigation may develop the identity of witnesses otherwise unknown to the defendant.
Police officers serve and enforce process for the prosecutor.7 A witness who might not respond to a subpoena delivered by a private process server may appear when a uniformed officer serves the process; service by an officer is a reminder of the authority of the law and strongly conveys to the witness the obligation to appear and that there may be adverse consequences if he does not.
If the prosecution were relieved of the obligation to produce res gestae witnesses, defendants would call upon the court for assistance. They would, if indigent, and most defendants are, seek investigators and other assistance to identify and locate witnesses and to serve and enforce process. Adjournments of trials would be sought because of real and fancied difficulties in obtaining the attendance of witnesses. Trials and justice would be delayed and additional costs would be incurred in providing indigent defendants with alternative and duplicative assistance in investigating the crime, and in identifying and locating witnesses and securing their attendance. Post-conviction claims that the prosecution withheld evidence, relatively rare in Michigan, would surely multiply, as would post-conviction Robinson hearings to determine what the undisclosed witness might have said had he been produced.
Allocation to the prosecution of the burden of investigation and production of witnesses has
*733served the people of this state well for more than a century.8 The efficient and fair administration of the criminal justice system is advanced by requiring the prosecution to present all the witnesses, those whose evidence tends to support the theory of the prosecution, and, as well, those who may give evidence tending to exculpate the defendant or raise a reasonable doubt.9
*734II
Willie Pearson and Lindsay Pearson were convicted of first-degree murder.10
Willie Pearson and James Kidd, the victim, lived in the same motel. Kidd was shot in the lobby of the motel. There was testimony that shortly before he was shot the Pearsons and a third man confronted him in his room. Lindsay took jewelry and Willie took money from him. The three men, all armed, then marched Kidd and his girlfriend down the stairs into the lobby. Kidd attempted to have the desk clerk call the police and was shot.
The defense claimed that the killing was not in the perpetration of a robbery. The articles taken from Kidd had previously been stolen from Willie Pearson; they were merely retrieving his property. Kidd gave them the money and said that the remaining property was at another location. The group started for that location. While they were crossing the lobby of the motel, another man ran in from the street, tussled with Kidd and shot him.
Raymond Collins, allegedly the third man in *735Kidd’s room, was arrested and charged with first-degree murder. At Collins’ preliminary examination, Kidd’s girlfriend identified him as the third man and he was bound over. The charge was subsequently dismissed because further investigation convinced the authorities that Collins could not have been at the scene of the crime.
At the trial, the Pearsons moved that Collins be indorsed as a res gestae witness and the prosecution required to produce him. An officer responded that three other persons who were also in Kidd’s room said that Collins was not present, and that further investigation had confirmed that he was at Selfridge Air Force Base. The judge ruled that Collins was not a res gestae witness.
The Pearsons contend that the prosecution was obliged to produce Collins because one of the prosecution’s principal witnesses said he was there. The prosecution responds that the judge correctly determined the disputed question of whether Collins was the third man and, moreover, the third man was an accomplice and, for that reason, not required to be produced.11 The Pearsons reply that the "accomplice exception” cannot be invoked because the prosecutor, in effect, determined that Collins was not an accomplice when he dismissed the charge.
We agree with the Pearsons that the judge erred in resolving the question whether the arrested *736Raymond Collins12 was at the scene on the hearsay assertions of the officer.
It appears, however, that whether the third man was the arrested Raymond Collins, another man named Raymond Collins, or a man with a different name, he was there as an accomplice. The testimony was that the third man in Kidd’s motel room was holding a gun and had participated in the offenses claimed to have been there committed. There was no affirmative evidence that the third man was a mere observer or bystander.
There being no affirmative evidence that Collins, if there at all, was there other than as the third man who participated in the commission of the offenses, the only conclusion justified by the record is that if he was there he was an accomplice.
Accordingly, the judge’s conclusion that the prosecutor was not obliged to produce Collins is sustained.
Ill
In the case of Willie Wynn, Earl Berry (complainant’s brother) had, it appears, beaten his former girlfriend, Jeanette Riley. Wynn, James Moore (Riley’s brother), and another person went to the Berry home. Moore entered first. A short time later Wynn entered with a rifle which discharged.
Wynn was charged with assault with intent to commit murder13 and convicted of assault with intent to do great bodily harm less than murder.14
*737At Wynn’s trial, the judge ordered the prosecutor to produce Moore, but he was not produced.
Earl Berry had lived with Riley for five years. She had complained that Earl had beaten her and, earlier in the day the alleged assault by Wynn occurred, there was a court hearing regarding the alleged beating.
Wynn testified that he had been friends with Riley for ten years preceding the incident and had been seeing her after Earl Berry moved out of her home, but they did not have a romantic relationship. Earl Berry, who learned that Wynn was seeing Riley, told her he was going "to get” Wynn. The purpose of the visit to the Berry home was to inform Earl that Wynn and Riley were not romantically involved.
The prosecutor produced five eyewitnesses: the complainant, other members of his family, and his girlfriend. The tendency of their testimony was that Moore entered the Berry home and asked to speak to one of the Berrys. Earl Barry was not at home.15 Two of the Berrys and Moore talked in a bedroom. Wynn ran into the home and, as the three were leaving the bedroom, ordered the complainant to halt, then aimed and fired at him.
Wynn testified that it was Moore who suggested that he go to the Berry home to "straighten things out” and take a rifle with him. He agreed to go but asked that Moore enter first. Moore and Earl Berry were friends and it was decided that it would be better if Moore spoke first to Earl. When they reached the Berry home, Wynn and the third man remained in the car and Moore entered. A few minutes later, Wynn heard screams and the third man said "they are jumping” Moore. Wynn *738grabbed the rifle and ran into the home. He saw the two Berrys and Moore. He ran toward them, raising the gun, and told them to halt. In the process the gun accidentally discharged. The third man subsequently entered the home.
When the judge granted the motion of Wynn’s counsel during the trial to indorse Moore and ordered the prosecutor to produce him, the police located him and asked him to appear; the prosecutor said that the officers said that Moore said he would appear. A subpoena was not served and the prosecutor made no further efforts to produce him.16 The judge found that the prosecutor had failed to show due diligence to produce Moore and other witnesses, including the third man, whose production the judge had also ordered.17 He adjourned the case until the next morning so that the prosecutor could produce them or show due diligence. The prosecutor did not make any further effort to produce Moore and rested his case. He argued, nevertheless, in closing that Moore had conspired with Wynn to kill Earl Berry:
"Now James Moore went to that house to create a diversion, ladies and gentlemen. He went there to point out Earl or to get the family involved so that the defendant could go into the house and kill Earl. They were together.”
The judge instructed the jury that it was "at liberty” to draw the inference that if Moore had *739been produced his testimony would have been "unfavorable” to the people.
Manifestly, Moore and the third man were res gestae witnesses and the prosecutor was obliged to exert due diligence to produce them.
There was no substantial difference between the testimony of the people’s witnesses and Wynn. The only issue was whether the shot was intentional or accidental. The people’s witnesses were four Berrys and an intimate of one of them. There was "bad blood” between the Berrys and Wynn because of Jeanette Riley.
Moore and the third man who accompanied Wynn to the Berry home could have provided evidence regarding the purpose of the visit and Wynn’s expressed intent.18 Moore was standing about two feet in front of and to the side of the complainant when the shot was fired, and may have been the only person who had an unblocked view of the incident.
The failure to produce Moore cannot be justified on the ground that he was an accomplice if for no other reason than because when the issue of his non-production was raised the prosecutor did not claim that he was an accomplice. The prosecutor’s failure to advance that claim is consistent with Wynn’s testimony and the actions of the officers called to the scene who arrested Wynn and released Moore upon statements from the Berrys that he was not involved.19
*740Moore could have been produced and the trial judge correctly found that there was no justification for the failure to do so.
It was not open to the prosecutor, in lieu of complying with the rule requiring production of res gestae witnesses, to accept an instruction that the jury may infer that the missing witness would testify unfavorably to the people. A jury instruction on a permissible inference is not an adequate substitute for a live witness. Indeed, the instruction is intended for the case where, despite due diligence, the witness cannot be produced.20 A prosecutor does not have the option of calling a res gestae witness or of accepting an adverse jury instruction regarding a permissible inference.
In the instant case the prosecution had presented a strong case through the testimony of members of the complainant’s family. Wynn alone had testified in support of his theory of accidental discharge of the gun. The prosecutor had nothing to gain by producing Moore. This, coupled with his willful refusal to produce him and his jury argument, renders his position in this case suspect.
The order of the Court of Appeals reversing Wynn’s conviction and remanding for a new trial is sustained. We would hold that because there is reason to believe that the prosecution’s lack of due *741diligence was purposeful, before a post-remand hearing or a new trial, Wynn should have an opportunity to depose all officers and prosecutors who may have questioned Moore, and there shall be produced any statements made by Moore and the records of such interviews. The prosecutor should exert his best efforts to produce Moore; Wynn should be afforded an opportunity to depose him.
IV
John J. Schwartz was convicted of delivery of heroin.21
A Michigan State Police officer testified that he purchased heroin from Schwartz, to whom he had been introduced by an informant, Don "Igor” Cager. Cager was present throughout the transaction. Schwartz claimed entrapment.
Cager was indorsed on the information but not produced at trial. The trooper said that he had last seen Cager about six months before trial.22 On the day before trial, he began looking for him for the instant case. On the day he testified he made a second trip to Cager’s last known address in Algonac, Michigan. No one was at home. He spoke to a police officer and several young people on the street. He went to two restaurants, two bars, a pool hall and a fire station. The judge ruled that a "good faith” effort had been made to locate Cager.
The Court of Appeals reversed, saying that the record "fails to show that the prosecution seriously sought to discover the witness’s present
*742whereabouts”.23 A dissenting judge would have affirmed because, under the circumstances, the judge had not abused "his discretion” in excusing the failure to produce Cager.24
The people contend that while the officer "could have done more”, because he had no specific leads and the sources he checked provided no leads "his efforts were diligent”.
It is "the duty of the prosecutor to have subpoenas issued” for indorsed witnesses and "use such other means at hand to have them present at trial”.25 "[T]he positive burden to produce all res gestae witnesses is imposed upon the people to protect the defendant from false accusations and preserve his presumption of innocence. [People v] Eugene Harris, [43 Mich App 531; 204 NW2d 549 (1972)]; People v Kayne, 268 Mich 186; 255 NW 758 (1934). In essence, the obligation of res gestae witness production is derivative of a defendant’s constitutional right to a fair trial and his right to demand prosecutorial proof of his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. For these reasons 'diligence’ means literally what Webster’s dictionary says it means: devoted and painstaking application to accomplish an undertaking.”26 Similarly, see Hurd v People, supra.
The officer was thus obliged to inquire of persons who might know Cager’s whereabouts. He did not do so; he did not attempt to locate him by inquiring of his parents, other family members, neighbors, male or female friends, former employers or governmental authorities.
*743Although the officer had last seen Cager about six months before the scheduled trial date and the last known address was at least 50 miles from the place of trial, he waited until the day before trial to begin efforts to produce him. He went to that address, apparently the home of Cager’s parents. No one was at home. He said he thought Cager’s parents worked, but made no effort to locate them or attempt to telephone later. He did not check with neighbors. Inquiry of Cager’s parents or neighbors was far more likely to produce information regarding his whereabouts than inquiry at two restaurants, two bars, a pool hall, or a fire station. The reasons are limitless why Cager was not at particular establishments on the day and time the officer entered and leads did not develop from inquiry at such establishments,27 and why a police officer casually encountered on a street28 or a few random youths would have no knowledge of his whereabouts. Although Cager was a narcotics informant, the officer did not check drug centers, hospitals, jails or courts.
We agree with the Court of Appeals that the judge erred in focusing on the officer’s good faith. The question is whether the prosecution exerted due diligence. The Court of Appeals correctly concluded that this was not a doubtful case that was resolved by the trial judge’s exercise of discretion. The failure to make timely inquiry, and any inquiry of other persons living at the address, Cager’s parents, neighbors, or friends and of authorities who might have information about his whereabouts, supports its conclusion that the prosecution’s efforts were inadequate.
*744V
We turn to the question whether there must be a post-trial hearing, such as was required in People v Robinson, supra, in cases such as Wynn and Schwartz where, in the course of the trial, there was a hearing regarding the prosecution’s failure to produce the witness and a finding, at trial or on appeal, that the efforts were insufficient.
In Robinson, supra, p 634, this Court declared:
"In appeals filed after this opinion is published, a defendant desiring reversal or a new trial because of a failure to produce an unindorsed or an indorsed witness shall, before filing his brief on appeal, move the trial court for a new trial. The prosecutor shall produce or explain why he cannot produce the witness or, as the case may be, why he did not indorse and produce him at the trial. If the witness is produced at the hearing, he shall be examined regarding his knowledge of the crime. If a new trial be denied, the judge shall state his reasons.”
The Court of Appeals in both Wynn and Schwartz declared Robinson inapplicable because, in contrast with that case, there had been a hearing during trial in the instant cases:
"[S]ince the trial court has already heard the prosecution’s explanations and found them wanting, a remand for an evidentiary hearing would serve no useful purpose.” People v Wynn, 60 Mich App 636, 641; 231 NW2d 269 (1975).
"Since an evidentiary hearing would be futile and would engender needless delay, it is not ordered.” People v Schwartz, 62 Mich App 188, 194; 233 NW2d 517 (1975).
We agree with the Court of Appeals that where *745the issue of due diligence has been explored at the trial, Robinson does not require a motion for a new trial and a hearing as a condition precedent to raising the issue on appeal. It would unduly burden and delay the appellate process to require such a post-trial hearing in cases where the trial judge has, after a hearing on the question of due diligence, already ruled, a ruling which more often than not will be affirmed on appeal.
The purpose of a Robinson hearing, however, is two-fold. It is not only to determine the reason for a failure to indorse or a failure to produce but also to determine whether the defendant has been prejudiced by non-production of the witness.
Heretofore, reversal and remand for a new trial was automatic whenever an appellate court found that the prosecution did not exert due diligence in discharge of its obligation to produce a res gestae witness.29 The prosecutor was not given the opportunity of showing that the missing witness’s testimony would, for example, have been inculpatory, or that he could not possibly have been produced because, for example, he was dead.
In Robinson, the issue concerning the alleged failure to produce a res gestae witness had not been preserved at the trial and appeared to have been an afterthought, the proverbial appellate parachute. To separate substantial post-conviction res gestae claims from those which are mere appellate stalking horses we required that thereafter *746a post-trial motion be filed in such a case before the issue may be assigned on appeal.
While we are persuaded that the prosecutor should have an opportunity, even in a case where the issue was preserved by objection at the trial, to show that the defendant was not prejudiced by the failure to produce, the witness, there is a significant difference, in terms of securing prosecutorial compliance with the res gestae rule, between a case where the issue is duly preserved at the trial level and one where it is raised for the first time on appeal. Therefore, to avoid undermining the long-established rule requiring indorsement and due diligence in the production of res gestae witnesses, we would carefully circumscribe the nature of the inquiry in such a post-remand hearing.
Where the issue of non-production is raised at the trial and it is determined at trial or on appeal that the prosecution did not exert due diligence, the question at a post-remand hearing should be whether the defendant suffered prejudice at the trial, not whether the missing witness’s testimony may at a subsequent trial bring about a different result. To frame the question in terms of whether there may be a different verdict or finding at a new trial would mean that if the witness could not be produced there would be no new trial, and would thus reward the prosecution for its lack of diligence, and would create a positive incentive not to locate and produce the witness for a post-remand hearing or new trial. If the question was whether there may be a different result at a new trial, a prosecutor might seek a post-remand hearing with a view to prevailing simply on an officer’s recital of his unsuccessful efforts to locate and produce the witness. Prosecutorial authorities who do not exert due diligence before the trial are not *747likely to exert greater efforts on remand unless there is some advantage to them — avoiding a new trial — in doing so.
If the prosecutor establishes that the witness could not possibly have been produced at the trial or his testimony would have been of no possible assistance to the defendant, then the defendant was not prejudiced at the trial and a new trial is not required.30
In assessing whether the witness’s testimony might possibly have assisted the defendant, it should be borne in mind that the defendant was entitled to jury appraisal, not a judge’s appraisal, of the worthiness of the witness’s testimony. It is again pertinent that the witness’s non-appearance at the trial is attributable to the prosecution’s failure to discharge its obligation to produce the witness.
The question whether the evidence adduced by the witness at the post-remand hearing might possibly have assisted the defendant at the trial will generally depend on an appraisal of whether his evidence might possibly have contributed to a result more favorable to the defendant. The witness’s testimony must consequently be considered in light of the other evidence adduced at the trial by the prosecution and defense. The focus of the inquiry, however, should be primarily on the pertinency of the witness’s testimony adduced at the post-remand hearing. To avoid invading the jury’s province of determining the credibility of witnesses and the weight of the evidence, the consideration of the other evidence adduced by the prose*748cution or defense at trial should be limited to the nature of such other evidence and should not extend to consideration of its quality or weight in relation or comparison to the witness’s testimony.
If the witness cannot be produced for a post-remand hearing (unless the prosecutor establishes further that the witness could not possibly have been produced at the trial), the conviction must be reversed because there is no way of knowing whether at the trial he might possibly have given testimony of assistance to the defendant. Requiring a new trial in such a case will encourage prosecutors to locate witnesses like Moore (Wynn) and Cager (Schwartz) and to produce them at a post-remand hearing which may avoid a new trial.
While the argument can be made that there is no point to a new trial where the witness cannot be produced — the testimony at the second trial will duplicate the first31 — we are persuaded that there is no other satisfactory means of securing compliance by the prosecution with its obligation to produce all res gestae witnesses. Retrial of the relatively few cases where an appellate court reverses because of a failure to exert due diligence is the price of securing compliance by the prosecution with the res gestae rule in the thousands of other cases where the fair and speedy administration of justice depends on compliance with that rule.
We add nothing to the burden of the prosecution by our dispositions and rulings in these cases; it is worth repeating that reversal and remand for a *749new trial has been the automatic remedy in the past for failure to produce the witness without opportunity for a post-remand hearing to show that the defendant was not prejudiced at the trial.
VI
In Robinson, supra, p 634, the Court also declared:
"The final disposition of this cause is held in abeyance. If the trial judge finds that a new trial is required, this Court will enter an order consistent with that determination. If not, the transcript, findings of the trial court and the supplemental briefs of the parties will be considered by this Court and a final disposition of the entire matter thereafter will be made.”
A similar procedure shall be followed, in effect, whenever an appellate court reverses a defendant’s conviction and orders a new trial on the ground that the prosecution failed to discharge its obligation to produce a witness. If the prosecutor seeks a post-remand hearing, either party is entitled to appellate review of an adverse determination. Within 30 days of the trial court’s order, the aggrieved party may seek such review by filing a statement to that effect with the appellate court. The transcript, judge’s statement of findings and reasons, order of the trial court, and supplemental briefs shall be forwarded promptly, within the time directed by the appellate court, to that court for its review and disposition of the matter.
We concur in the affirmance of the decision of the Court of Appeals in Wynn and Schwartz, and remand for a new trial, subject to the prosecutor’s right to seek, within 30 days, a hearing on *750whether the defendant was prejudiced by the failure to produce the witness.
VII
We address the remaining issues in Pearson.
The Pearsons contend that the judge should have granted a motion for a mistrial because of the prosecutor’s actions in charging Willie Pearson’s girlfriend with perjury and subpoenaing two persons who were in Kidd’s room and placing them under bond to appear as witnesses at her trial on that charge. We conclude that it does not appear that the Pearsons were thereby deprived of a fair trial. The girlfriend adhered at the trial to her preliminary examination testimony corroborating Lindsay Pearson’s testimony that a stranger burst into the lobby and shot Kidd; she did not change her exculpatory testimony. Since the two witnesses were not subpoenaed or placed under bond until after they had testified at the Pearsons’ trial, there is no reason to believe that their testimony was influenced by the prosecutor’s decisions to charge the girlfriend or to subpoena or place them under bond. Nor is there any reason to believe that but for those decisions Kidd’s girlfriend would have changed her damaging preliminary examination testimony.
The Pearsons further contend that the innuendo of the prosecutor’s questioning of Pearson’s girlfriend was that she had earlier given inconsistent testimony which he improperly reinforced by suggestively flipping through sheets of paper as he propounded questions. While the judge might have earlier stopped the prosecutor from pursuing this form of inquiry, the questions and answers dealt with a subsidiary issue and the Pearsons were not thereby prejudiced.
*751Nor do we find merit in the contention that the prosecutor departed from the record in his summation. Defense counsel had stated in closing argument that Raymond Collins was bound over for trial and that the officer in charge of the case had then moved to dismiss those charges. He argued that since Kidd’s girlfriend had testified under oath that Collins was the third man the jury could infer that the prosecution did not believe her and that, by its verdict, it should say to the prosecution "why do you expect us to?” In those circumstances, the prosecutor was within the bounds of permissible argumentative response in asking the jury to infer, rather, that "the police and the prosecution know that he wasn’t the man”. We hasten to add that if the same argument had been advanced in terms of a defendant’s guilt, i.e., "you may infer that the police and the prosecutor know that the defendant is guilty”, a different question would be presented.32
The judge instructed the jury on the defense’s theory. It was not until after he completed his instructions that he was asked to instruct that if the jurors concluded that the killing in the lobby was not a "continuation” of a robbery in Kidd’s room they could not convict the Pearsons of first-degree murder. When this instruction was requested, the judge said that if it were to be given it would be necessary to instruct on lesser degrees of murder, which would be inconsistent with de*752fense counsel’s request that the jury be instructed to convict of first-degree murder or acquit. There was no error.
The jury was instructed that the presumption of innocence attaches until "each and every one of you are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt of each defendant’s guilt”. After the jury brought in its verdicts of guilty, experienced and able defense counsel responded in the negative when asked whether there was anything further, and thus the jury was not polled. The Pearsons were not deprived of a fair trial by the judge’s failure to instruct that the verdict must be unanimous.
Finally, while People v Jenkins, 395 Mich 440; 236 NW2d 503 (1975), requires an instruction on second-degree murder in a first-degree murder case without regard to whether the instruction is requested or declined, by its terms the rule of that case applies only to cases tried after January 1, 1976. The trial in the instant case concluded February 25, 1974.
The convictions of the Pearsons are affirmed.
The cases of Wynn and Schwartz are remanded for new trials.
The Court of Appeals is affirmed in all three cases.
Kavanagh, C.J., and Williams, J., concurred with Levin, J.
Hurd v People, 25 Mich 405, 416 (1872).
1859 PA 138, § 2; 1871 CL 7938; How Stat 9549; 1897 CL 11934; 1915 CL 15761.
1859 PA 138 authorizes criminal prosecution upon an information the same as upon indictment.
The indictment statute has a similar requirement of indorsement. MCL 767.25; MSA 28.965. See, also, Hill v People, 26 Mich 496 (1873).
Other portions of the statute have been amended. 1927 PA 175, ch VII, § 40; 1929 PA 24, ch VII, § 40; 1955 PA 184, § 1; 1961 PA 11, § 1.
See, e.g., Maher v People, 10 Mich 212, 225-226 (1862); Hurd v People, 25 Mich 405 (1872); Wellar v People, 30 Mich 16, 22-24 (1874); People v Price, 74 Mich 37, 41; 41 NW 853 (1889); People v Swetland, 77 Mich 53, 57-59; 43 NW 779 (1889); People v Howes, 81 Mich 396, 400-401; 45 NW 961 (1890); People v Deitz, 86 Mich 419, 427-432; 49 NW 296 (1891); People v Germaine, 101 Mich 485, 486-488; 60 NW 44 (1894); People v Vick, 235 Mich 475, 480; 209 NW 584 (1926); People v Raider, 256 Mich 131, 134-137; 239 NW 387 (1931); People v Kayne, 268 Mich 186, 189-195; 255 NW 758 (1934); People v Zabijak, 285 Mich 164, 169-173; 280 NW 149 (1938); People v Connor, 295 Mich 1, 5; 294 NW 74 (1940); People v Serra, 301 Mich 124, 129-131; 3 NW2d 35 (1942); People v Bartlett, 312 Mich 648, 654-655; 20 NW2d 758 (1945); People v Tann, 326 Mich 361, 366-367; 40 NW2d 184 (1949).
Only res gestae witnesses are required to be indorsed, produced and called. If a non-res gestae witness is indorsed, the prosecutor is obliged to have him in court, but there is no duty to call him. See People v Grant, 111 Mich 346; 69 NW 647 (1896); People v Lummis, 260 Mich 170; 244 NW 438 (1932); People v Zabijak, supra.
See, also, Maher v People, supra; Patten v People, 18 Mich 314 *731(1869); Wellar v People, supra; People v Deitz, supra; People v Raider, supra; People v Tann, supra.
Discovery is discretionary with the trial judge. See People v Johnson, 356 Mich 619; 97 NW2d 739 (1959); People v McIntosh, 400 Mich 1; 252 NW2d 779 (1977); see, also, RCR 2Í. Changing the res gestae rule would leave defendants who draw a judge who does not generally grant discovery with virtually no discovery.
The prosecutor states: "Under Recorder’s Court Rule 21.2 a defendant may discover virtually anything material to the defense.” The rule states:
"Upon motion of a defendant at any time after the filing of the information and upon a showing that the items sought may be material to the preparation of his defense and that the request is reasonable, the court may order the prosecution to permit the defendant to inspect and copy or photograph designated papers, documents, transcriptions, recordings or tangible objects in the possession of the prosecution or the police and not intended to be introduced or used by the prosecution at the trial.” RCR 21, § 2 (emphasis supplied).
RCR 22 provides that "service of witness subpoenas” shall be "made by the Detroit Police Department on behalf of indigent defendants.” (Emphasis supplied.) There is no comparable general court rule.
The people point out that the rule has been criticized and abrogated in other jurisdictions. See 7 Wigmore on Evidence (Chadbourn rev), §§ 2079-2080, p 536 et seq. The criticism is not recent:
"The rule that the prosecution must indorse and call all the eyewitnesses to a crime of violence who are available, * * * although rejected or materially modified in most or all other American jurisdictions (16 Ann Cas 918, note; 16 CJ, p 846; 2 Michie on Homicide, p 1362), is too well established in this State to need the citation of authorities.” People v Raider, supra, pp 134-135 (1931).
Perhaps in response to the criticism, the Legislature enacted 1941 PA 336; MCL 767.40a; MSA 28.980(1), which provides:
"Witnesses whom the people are obliged by law to call as res gestae witnesses may be impeached the same as though such witnesses had been called by the respondent.”
Compare Wellar v People, supra, pp 23-24, where the Court said:
"The fact that he is compelled to call these witnesses, when he may not always find them disposed to frankness, entitles him, when it appears necessary, to press them with searching questions: Regina v Ball, 8 C & P 745 [1839]; Regina v Chapman, 8 C & P 558 [1838], By this means, and by laying all the facts before the jury, they are quite as likely to get at the truth as if he were allowed to impeach the witnesses who disappoint him. Any intelligent jury will readily discover whether a witness whom the prosecutor has been compelled to call is fair or adverse, and can make all proper allowance for bias, or any other influence which may affect his credit. If there is but a single eyewitness, he could not be impeached, and yet the danger of falsehood is quite as great, and the chances of its correction much less than where there are two, and both are called. And if such a witness need not be called by the prosecution, the defense cannot impeach him, and must either call him, and run the risk of finding him against them, or, if they fail to call him, be prejudiced by the argument that they have omitted to prove what was in their power, and must have done so because they dared not call out the facts. There is no fairness in such a practice, and a prosecutor should not be permitted to resort to it. He is not responsible for the shortcomings of his witnesses, and he is responsible for any obstacle thrown in the way of eliciting all the facts.”
Similarly, see People v Deitz, supra; cf. People v Connor, supra.
The Court declared in People v Blazenzitz, 212 Mich 675, 678-679; 180 NW 370 (1920):
"The important question of fact on the trial was the identity of the *734murderers. By the failure of the prosecution to indorse the names of Eugene Vincent and Operhall as witnesses and to produce them at the trial, this being a case of homicide, a serious question is presented, for upon this record the fact remains that Eugene Vincent and Operhall saw men leaving the bank following the shooting. These men were the only known persons who saw the alleged murderers leave the bank building, they were the first to see them after the shooting, they observed them at a different time and place than did the witness Bert R. Vincent. And Eugene Vincent had an opportunity to observe one of the alleged murders at arm’s length. The failure to indorse and produce these witnesses is not a mere irregularity. It is a positive invasion of a substantial right of the defendant under the law. Such invasions might not be very harmful in cases where defendants have the means to employ counsel to discover the facts, and to prepare a defense, but it would be otherwise with the unfortunate and the helpless poor accused of crime, if subjected to the whim of officers, to the suppression of evidence, to conviction on less than the truth.” (Citations omitted.)
MCL 750.316; MSA 28.548.
The well-established rule is that the people are not required to indorse or produce res gestae witnesses who are accomplices. See People v McCullough, 81 Mich 25, 34; 45 NW 515 (1890); People v Resh, 107 Mich 251; 65 NW 99 (1895); People v Baker, 112 Mich 211; 70 NW 431 (1897); People v Raider, supra; People v Knoll, 258 Mich 89; 242 NW 222 (1932); People v Kennan, 275 Mich 452; 266 NW 468 (1936); People v Stewart (On Rehearing), 400 Mich 540, 553; 256 NW2d 31 (1977); People v White, 401 Mich 482, 508-509; 257 NW2d 912 (1977).
It appears that there may have been more than one Raymond Collins. A Raymond Collins may have been in the room and the police may have arrested the wrong Raymond Collins. Be that as it may, the testimony that placed Collins at the scene placed him there as the third armed man.
MCL 750.83; MSA 28.278.
MCL 750.84; MSA 28.279.
Wynn was not acquainted with the Berrys, and would not have known Earl Berry at sight.
The duty to produce a res gestae witness is imposed on the prosecution, not the judge. It therefore is of no importance whether the judge issued a bench warrant as the prosecutor suggested he might in an apparently heated exchange.
The Court of Appeals concluded that a new trial was not justified on account of the failure to produce the other witnesses. No issue in that regard is presented on the appeal to this Court.
"The circumstances which, in fact, led to the assault were a part of the res gestae, which the jury were entitled to have before them, to show what was the real nature of the act, the quo animo, state of mind and intention, with which it was done.” Maher v People, supra, p 225 (emphasis in original).
The prosecutor also asserts that Wynn did not cooperate in the production of Moore. Under the circumstance that the police had located him, the asserted non-cooperation and following argumentative exchange between counsel is not germane.
A note to the proposed standard criminal jury instruction, "Failure to Produce Res Gestae Witnesses” (CJI 5:2:14), states:
“If the evidence is insufficient to establish due diligence, then this instruction will not cure the error. The issue should be submitted to the jury only when there are sufficient facts establishing due diligence to warrant the jury’s being able to establish due diligence, as an alternative to the judge’s making the decision.” 1 Michigan Criminal Jury Instructions (Ann Arbor: Institute of Continuing Legal Education), p 5-67.
See People v Gibson, 253 Mich 476; 235 NW 225 (1931), and People v Serra, supra, where the Court found that the people had exercised due diligence and found no error in giving a similar jury instruction in that situation.
MCL 335.341(l)(a); MSA 18.1070(41)(l)(a).
The officer was asked whether he had done "anything” in the five weeks after Cager was indorsed as a witness. He said "yes”, that he "saw” "people I dealing dope with [sic]”. The prosecutor, on appeal, infers that he spoke to other informants in an effort to locate Cager.
People v Schwartz, 62 Mich App 188, 193; 233 NW2d 517 (1975).
Id., p 195.
See People v Van Vorce, 240 Mich 75, 78-79; 215 NW 5 (1927); see, also, People v Zabijak, supra; People v McIntosh, 389 Mich 82; 204 NW2d 135 (1973).
People v Johnson, 51 Mich App 224, 230-231; 214 NW2d 713 (1974).
The record does not indicate the nature or scope of inquiry at the establishments.
The record indicates that the officer so encountered was asked only whether Cager was in jail.
See, e.g., People v Germaine, supra; People v Van Vorce, supra; People v Zabijak, supra; People v O’Dell, 10 Mich App 87; 158 NW2d 805 (1968).
In Maher v People, supra; Hurd v People, supra; People v Kayne, supra and People v Tann, supra, the issue was whether the omitted testimony was part of the res gestae. This Court found that it was, and reversed and remanded for a new trial.
In Wellar v People, supra, and People v Deitz, supra, the issue was whether the prosecutor was obliged to call the witness. This Court found that he was, and reversed and remanded for a new trial.
This test is to be applied only at a post-remand hearing after there has been a finding by a trial or appellate court that the prosecutor failed to exercise due diligence. Whether the prosecutor has exerted adequate efforts to produce a res gestae witness at trial shall continue to be determined under the due diligence standard.
Where a new trial is granted on the ground that the verdict is contrary to the great weight of the evidence, the testimony at a second trial may duplicate the testimony at the first. That has never been' thought to negate the judge’s power to grant a new trial on that ground, nor is he authorized on that account to, in effect, direct a verdict. Cf. People v Johnson, 397 Mich 686; 246 NW2d 836 (1976).
The prosecution’s theory was not buttressed, the defense was not deprecated by the argumentative response that the police and prosecutor knew that Collins was not the third man in Kidd’s room. If the Pearsons had named the third man who allegedly entered the lobby and shot Kidd and a similar argument had been made, e.g., you may infer that the police and prosecution know that the man named by the Pearsons did not enter the lobby and shoot Kidd, a different question would also be presented. See ABA Standards for Criminal Justice Relating to the Prosecution Function (Approved Draft, 1971), § 5.8(b); Code of Professional Responsibility, DR 7-106(0(3).

=== CASE 9741717 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:01.88515+00 ===

N. J. Kaufman, J.
Defendant was convicted by a jury of conspiracy to break and enter a business place with intent to commit larceny, in violation of MCL 750.157a; MSA 28.354(1) and MCL 750.110; MSA 28.305, and of receiving and concealing stolen property over the value of $100, in violation of MCL 750.535; MSA 28.803. Defendant was sentenced to a term of from six to ten years imprisonment on the first charge and from three to five years imprisonment on the second charge. Defendant appeals as of right, raising numerous issues.
Defendant had originally been charged with having conspired with Gregory Teeter, the chief prosecution witness, to break and enter the Fairway Jewelry Store in East Detroit with intent to commit larceny therein. Defendant was also *630charged with receiving and concealing the stolen property from the break-in, in an amount over $100.
Defendant’s major contention on appeal is that a tape-recorded conversation between defendant and Gregory Teeter, which contained inculpatory statements, was erroneously admitted into evidence during the prosecution’s rebuttal.
The prosecution originally tried to introduce a portion of the recording at issue in its case in chief to prove the existence of the conspiracy between defendant and Teeter with respect to the burglary of the Fairway Jewelry Store and, further, to show that defendant had purchased from Teeter stolen goods from that burglary. The tape recording was marked as Exhibit 13 and was played to the jury without objection for approximately five minutes. After that time, the prosecutor withdrew the tape as a proposed exhibit because of the largely unintelligible nature of the recording. The prosecutor explained to the trial court that "obviously, it is too bad for us to get any entry value out of it, so I withdraw the tape even as a proposed exhibit”.
On rebuttal, the prosecution again decided to play the tape for the jury. Defense counsel objected to the playing of the tape recording during rebuttal, arguing that it would be allowing the prosecutor to renew his case in chief. Defense counsel further argued that the tape did not provide a clear and direct contradiction of the defense witnesses’ testimony. The trial court overruled the objection and allowed the prosecution to play the tape recording.
After the tape was played, the prosecution called two rebuttal witnesses and then moved for the admission of the tape recording. Defense counsel’s primary objection was that because of the great *631amount of interference in the tape recording, it was incomprehensible. In response the trial court stated:
"Well, the Court admitted the entire tape even though part of it was incapable of being understood. And it was admitted in the form that it was in the original taping. There is no question about it that there was a lot of interference. But I am going to admit the entire tape.”
The prosecutor mentioned the tape recording during rebuttal argument:
"Corroboration is also in the tape and discussions on the tape, particularly the last portion of the last side of what is possible to be heard.
"Perhaps one of the greatest amounts of the value on the tape is the fact that the two were together and talking. And whether it was a heated discussion or somewhat friendly discussion or a business discussion. The fact that there was discussion of costs and values and amounts and per centages [sic] and what is the markup on a Timex, I think is certainly relevant.” (Emphasis added.)
We empathize with the dilemma faced by the trial court in this case. It is a problem which confronts trial courts when part of a deposition is destroyed. The trial court must balance competing interests. Here, on the one hand, the tape contained at least arguably relevant evidence. On the other hand, at least part of the tape was incomprehensible. The trial court did try to make the requisite weighing of the interests. However, we must observe that the trial court failed to utilize the applicable standards of law while so doing. *632Accordingly, we are constrained to reverse and remand this case for a new trial.1
Problems of audibility of tape recordings were considered by this Court in People v Taylor, 18 Mich App 381; 171 NW2d 219 (1969). This Court set forth what constitutes a proper foundation:
”(1) a showing that the recording device was capable of taking testimony, (2) a showing that the operator of the device was competent, (3) establishment of the authenticity and correctness of the recording, (4) a showing that changes, additions, or deletions have not been made, (5) a showing of the manner of the preservation of the recording, (6) identification of the speakers, and (7) a showing that the testimony elicited was voluntarily made without any kind of inducement.” 18 Mich App at 383-384.
Accord: People v Frison, 25 Mich App 146, 148; 181 NW2d 75 (1970), noting further:
" 'The fact that a recording may not reproduce an entire conversation, or may be indistinct or inaudible in part, has usually been held not to require its exclusion; however, the recording may be rejected if it is so inaudible and indistinct that the jury must speculate as to what was said. It has been held that unless the unintelligible portions of a tape recording are so substantial as to render the recording as a whole untrustworthy, the recording is admissible and the decision whether to admit it should be left to the sound discretion of the trial judge,’ 29 Am Jur 2d, Evidence, § 436, p 495.”
Although the prosecution did offer some foundation testimony through Detective Smith, we con-*633elude that it was insufficient to meet the TaylorFrison requirements.
Our resolution of this issue makes it unnecessary to rule on defendant’s contention that the tape recording constituted improper rebuttal evidence. However, it is clear that the tape is merely corroborative of the prosecution’s case in chief in a general way and does not provide a clear and direct contradiction of the proffered testimony of the defense witnesses. Additionally, we disapprove of saving a tape recording until rebuttal merely for use as a final mechanical arbiter solving the credibility question between two conflicting stories. Trial courts should not admit that type of evidence on rebuttal where it is argued that the evidence is merely cumulative in nature.
Defendant also contends that the trial court committed reversible error when it allowed as rebuttal evidence Detective Smith’s testimony because the testimony concerned a collateral matter raised by the prosecution on cross-examination of a defense witness.
Over defense Counsel’s objection, the prosecutor was allowed on cross-examination to ask defendant’s wife whether there were 17 sets of used golf clubs and golf bags in the basement and garage of their home. The trial court allowed the answer to test the credibility of the witness. She testified that at the time the search warrant was executed there were only two sets.
On rebuttal, Detective Smith testified over defense counsel’s objection that he had personally observed approximately 17 sets of various brand names of golf bags and clubs at the time the search warrant was executed. In response to defense counsel’s objection, the trial court ruled that this was the proper subject of rebuttal because *634there had been testimony about the presence of certain equipment.
This issue is controlled by a recent decision of this Court, People v Roeder, 79 Mich App 595; 262 NW2d 872 (1977). There:
"Defendant testified at trial, and during cross-examination was asked by the prosecutor whether she had shown Mrs. Wenzel, who was her landlady, a scrapbook containing a newspaper article about the fire in her parent’s home. Defendant denied having done so. Over the objection of defendant, the prosecutor was permitted to recall Mrs. Wenzel to the stand to testify in rebuttal that defendant had, in fact, shown her a scrapbook containing such an article.” 79 Mich App at 601.
Quoting People v Bennett, 393 Mich 445; 224 NW2d 840 (1975), this Court noted:
"Rebuttal is limited to the refutation of relevant and material evidence — hence evidence bearing on an issue properly raised in a case.
"The device of eliciting a denial of some statement not properly in the case at the time of denial will not serve to inject an issue.
"Both the statement and the veracity of the witness are then collateral matters and the cross-examiner is bound by the response. People v Hillhouse, 80 Mich 580; 45 NW 484 (1890).” 79 Mich App at 602.
This Court then concluded:
"In the case at bar, no evidence about the scrapbook was presented either in the prosecutor’s case in chief or in the defendant’s case. The entire issue of the fire at the home of defendant’s parents was a collateral matter. Defendant was being tried on charges arising out of the fire which occurred at her mobile home, not the *635earlier fire at her parents’ house. Whether or not defendant kept a clipping about the earlier fire has no probative value on the question whether defendant intentionally burned her trailer home. As a collateral matter, the subject of the scrapbook concerning the earlier fire is appropriate neither for substantive rebuttal nor for extrinsic impeachment of defendant’s testimony. People v Bennett, supra, People v McGillen #1, 392 Mich 251; 220 NW2d 677 (1974).” 79 Mich App at 602-603.
We do not suggest that the rebuttal testimony offered in this case might never be admissible. However, on the facts of this case — with the evidence offered only to test the credibility of the witness — it must be held that the testimony went to a collateral matter. Thus, Roeder being dispositive, it was error to permit extrinsic impeachment of the witness’s testimony. We specifically decline to rule whether the error was harmless. See the rules set forth in People v Swan, 59 Mich App 409; 229 NW2d 476 (1975).
Defendant also claims that the trial court committed reversible error by admitting the tape recording because it contained inculpatory statements made by defendant to a prosecution witness (who was equipped with a body transmitter placed there by police authorities) and no Miranda2 warnings were given. The United States Supreme Court decided this question adversely to defendant’s position in Hoffa v United States, 385 US 293; 87 S Ct 408; 17 L Ed 2d 374 (1966).
Defendant further argues that the examining magistrate who bound him over for trial after his first preliminary examination should have disqualified himself from presiding over the second pre*636liminary examination.3 Defendant has failed to show bias or prejudice in fact on the part of the examining magistrate, as is his burden under GCR 1963, 405.1(3); therefore, his claim is without merit. People v Tillman, 59 Mich App 768; 229 NW2d 922 (1975).
Defendant also contends that the trial court showed bias and prejudice to the jury by the manner in which he questioned chief prosecution witness Teeter about defendant’s occupation.4 A similar contention was raised in People v John Moore, 78 Mich App 150; 259 NW2d 403 (1977). There, this Court responded:
"A careful review of the entire record shows that the trial court’s questions had the apparent intent and effect of resolving ambiguities and bringing out additional relevant testimony that potentially could have aided either the prosecution or the defense. The record does not show any interjection of the trial court’s personal views or bias. The trial court’s questions did not have the effect of unfairly influencing the jury’s verdict against the defendant and therefore there was no error. People v Redfern, 71 Mich App 452, 456; 248 NW2d 582 (1976). People v Gray, 57 Mich App 289, 295; 225 NW2d 733 (1975).” 78 Mich App at 155.
*637Moore is controlling here. The questioning was not lengthy. There was no suggestion from the trial court that it thought defendant’s occupation to be anything but legal. Defendant’s claim is without merit.
Defendant further argues that the prosecutor’s closing argument was reversibly erroneous because he was permitted to explain to the jury the immunity situation pertaining to the chief prosecution witness. The prosecutor’s argument was made in direct response to defense counsel’s closing argument and was not prejudicially inflammatory. There was no error. People v Pomranky, 62 Mich App 304; 233 NW2d 263 (1975), lv den 397 Mich 823 (1976).
Defendant also claims that the prosecutor failed to fulfill his obligation to reveal to the jury the full extent of the deal that the prosecutor had made with the chief prosecution witness in exchange for his testimony. The claim is wholly without merit. Throughout the trial there was a continuing effort to keep the jury aware of the fact that the chief prosecution witness had been granted immunity in exchange for his testimony.
Next, defendant contends that there was insufficient evidence to support a conviction of conspiracy to break and enter with intent to commit larceny. The jury could reasonably find that there was an agreement between defendant and the chief prosecution witness to commit the crime of breaking and entering with intent to commit larceny on the basis of the evidence presented. The overt acts taken by defendant in furtherance of that crime,5 coupled with his knowledge that the crime was to be committed are sufficient to form *638the basis of an inference of intent. See People v Atley, 392 Mich 298, 310-311; 220 NW2d 465 (1974).
Finally, defendant contends that the trial court committed reversible error in its conspiracy instructions. Defendant’s trial counsel did not request any jury instructions regarding the conspiracy charge. Neither did he indicate any objections to the trial court prior to the jury retiring for deliberations. In the absence of objection to the charge, this Court will reverse the defendant’s conviction only upon a demonstration that manifest injustice has occurred. People v Embree, 70 Mich App 382; 246 NW2d 6 (1976). There was no manifest injustice.
Reversed and remanded.
R. M. Maher, P.J., concurred.
The combination of the fact that an improper foundation was used to admit the tape, regarding its inaudibility, and the fact that the tape only corroborated Detective Smith’s testimony prompts our decision in this matter.
Miranda v Arizona, 384 US 436; 86 S Ct 1602; 16 L Ed 2d 694; 10 ALR3d 974 (1966).
The second preliminary examination was ordered by Wayne County Circuit Judge John R. Kirwan because defendant was not represented by retained counsel of his choice at the first proceeding.
The particular questions assigned as error are as follows:
"THE COURT: And do you know what his occupation is?
"THE WITNESS: Yes, I know.
"THE COURT: What is his occupation?
"THE WITNESS: Well, I knew he was involved in illegal things. I don’t know exactly what he did.
"MR. BOGGS [Defense counsel]: Your Honor, I am going to object.
"THE COURT: What did he do for a living that you knew? Is he a doctor? A dentist? A jeweler? Or what is he?
"THE WITNESS: Oh, I knew from his kid’s mouth before that.
"THE COURT: You don’t know exactly?
"THE WITNESS: No, just from his kids.
"THE COURT: All right.”
Defendant supplied the money for the purchase of tools at K-Mart to use in a first aborted attempt. Defendant also gave the chief *638prosecution witness’s brother some tools to use in the second successful break-in after the K-Mart tools had been abandoned during the first attempt.

=== CASE 9741718 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:01.88966+00 ===

V. J. Brennan, J.
(dissenting). I must dissent from that portion of the majority’s opinion dealing with the use of the tape recording and the introduction of Detective Smith’s testimony regarding the 17 sets of golf clubs.
The majority’s determination that the introduction of the tape recording constituted reversible error was based on three factors; (1) no proper foundation was laid, (2) the recording was so inaudible that it was rendered untrustworthy as a whole, and (3) the recording was not proper rebuttal evidence. Initially it must be noted that not only were factors one and two above not preserved by objections at trial, but they were not raised in any of the defendant’s arguments on appeal. Al*639though this Court has limited power to raise questions sua sponte, the present case does not constitute a proper subject for such action. See Vermeylen v Knight Investment Corp, 73 Mich App 632, 642; 252 NW2d 574 (1977). As to the admissibility of the tape recording I would address only that argument raised in the briefs, to wit: whether the recording constituted improper rebuttal evidence.
Rebuttal testimony is proper where it is limited to the refutation or impeachment of relevant and material evidence properly raised by the opposing party. People v Bennett, 393 Mich 445, 449; 224 NW2d 840 (1975); People v Ebejer, 66 Mich App 333, 340; 239 NW2d 604 (1976). In the present case the defendant’s daughter testified that she and Gregory Teeter planned to "set up” the defendant and placed a paper bag containing some watches in a closet of the defendant’s home. Later defendant’s wife found the bag but did not call the police since she said it did not occur to her that the contents were stolen. This testimony, taking into account the reasonable inferences flowing therefrom, would tend to negate a finding that the defendant had knowledge of the stolen merchandise. The recording indicates defendant’s knowledge of certain jewelry store burglaries and shows the defendant’s participation in receiving the stolen goods. Thus the recording refutes the testimony of two defense witnesses pertaining to the defendant’s lack of guilty knowledge and constituted proper rebuttal.
I agree with the majority that Detective Smith’s testimony relating to the 17 sets of golf clubs was erroneously admitted as it goes to a collateral, nonmaterial issue. Impeachment by the use of extrinsic evidence on a collateral matter is improper. However, in light of the overwhelming *640evidence against the defendant1 I would hold the error harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. MCL 769.26; MSA 28.1096. See People v Sherman Hall, 77 Mich App 456, 461-462; 258 NW2d 517 (1977).
I would affirm the defendant’s conviction.
At trial Gregory Teeter testified that he burglarized Weinstein’s Jewelry Store and after apprising defendant of the burglary, sold the stolen merchandise to defendant. Teeter then discussed with defendant a forthcoming burglary at the Fairway Jewelry Store and the defendant provided tools for the break-in. Upon successful completion of the Fairway burglary stolen merchandise was delivered to the defendant at his home. Teeter identified a watch taken from defendant’s wrist as one he had stolen from Weinstein’s. Various police officers testified as to their participation in the search of defendant’s home wherein certain items of jewelry were confiscated. These items were subsequently identified as stolen merchandise from the Weinstein and Fairway jewelry stores.

=== CASE 2228505 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:03.702814+00 ===

87 Mich. App. 109 (1978)
273 N.W.2d 501
PEOPLE
v.
ROBERTSON
Docket No. 78-66.
Michigan Court of Appeals.
Decided October 20, 1978.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, William L. Cahalan, Prosecuting Attorney, Edward R. Wilson, Principal Attorney, Appeals, and Timothy A. Baughman, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for plaintiff.
Edwards & Edwards, for defendant on appeal.
Before: N.J. KAUFMAN, P.J., and R.M. MAHER and D.C. RILEY, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Defendant appeals his jury conviction of two counts of second-degree murder, MCL 750.317; MSA 28.549, claiming three errors that deprived him of a fair trial.
First he contends that the court erred in denying his motion for mistrial. We do not agree. The grant or denial of a mistrial motion rests in the sound discretion of the trial judge and relief is merited only after a finding of abuse of that discretion. People v Mitchell, 61 Mich. App. 153, 165; 232 NW2d 340 (1975), People v Talaga, 37 Mich. App. 100, 102-103; 194 NW2d 462 (1971). To find reversible error, the trial court's denial of defendant's mistrial motion must have been so gross as to *112 have deprived him of a fair trial and to have resulted in a miscarriage of justice. People v Ritholz, 359 Mich. 539, 559; 103 NW2d 481 (1960), MCL 769.26; MSA 28.1096.
Here, in the course of recross-examination of the prosecution's key witness, defense counsel learned that he had once represented the witness in an unrelated matter. He promptly moved for a mistrial but set forth no reasons why his client had been prejudiced. After taking the motion under advisement and failing to receive any supporting brief from defense counsel, the court denied the motion. On this record we cannot say that the court abused its discretion, that the defendant was deprived of a fair trial resulting in a miscarriage of justice or, as defendant also charges, that he was deprived of effective assistance of counsel. Defendant claims that because of the revelation of counsel's prior brief representation of the prosecution's witness he was not able to perform at least as well as a lawyer of ordinary training and skill in criminal law in that he was unable to thoroughly cross-examine the witness. He argues that defense counsel was not able to represent him undeflected by conflicting considerations. The record indicates otherwise.
Defense counsel cross-examined the witness extensively before the inadvertent disclosure. Further, there is no showing of any conflict that affected the scope or depth of cross-examination or quality of representation.
Defendant next argues that the evidence adduced at trial was legally insufficient to convict him of second-degree murder.
The standard of review where the sufficiency of the evidence is questioned is whether the evidence presented by the prosecutor justifies a reasonable *113 person in concluding that all elements of the crime were established beyond a reasonable doubt. People v Johnson, 83 Mich. App. 1; 268 NW2d 259 (1978), People v Palmer, 392 Mich. 370; 220 NW2d 393 (1974). The standard argued by the defendant, that the prosecution must specifically disprove every reasonable theory consistent with innocence, has been challenged by this Court. In People v Edgar, 75 Mich. App. 467, 472; 255 NW2d 648 (1977), the Court pointed out the weakness in that standard:
"[T]he [Davenport] rule is defective to the extent that it treats circumstantial evidence differently than direct evidence and to the extent that it requires the prosecution to specifically disprove all innocent theories." People v Edgar, supra, at 473-474. Cited with approval in People v Johnson, supra, at 18.
The direct testimony of Arnold Coleman, if believed, established the aggregate elements necessary to find defendant guilty of second-degree murder.
Finally, defendant assigns as error the trial court's determination that he could not call a codefendant as a witness, and alternatively, that codefendant's testimony at an earlier guilty plea proceeding should have been admitted into evidence.
During trial, defense counsel sought to call Edward Minor, who pled guilty in a separate proceeding to the charge of second-degree murder arising out of the same incident for which defendant elected to stand trial. At the plea taking proceeding, codefendant Minor admitted the two killings for which defendant was charged. The court, on learning that Minor was appealing his plea and that he would assert his Fifth Amendment privilege, *114 refused to permit him to be called as a defense witness.
Defense counsel urges that in denying him his right to production of a witness on his behalf, the court denied him a full and fair trial. Further, defendant asserts that Michigan should adopt a rule which causes the privilege against self-incrimination to end once a guilty plea is entered. However, it is clear that the privilege against self-incrimination still applies where an appeal is pending after conviction on a charge to which the incriminating testimony would relate. People v Lindsay, 69 Mich. App. 720; 245 NW2d 343 (1976). The assertion that Michigan should carve out an exception to the self-incrimination privilege is not properly addressed to this Court. People v Ernest Edwards, 47 Mich. App. 307; 209 NW2d 527 (1973), rev'd on other grounds, 396 Mich. 551; 242 NW2d 739 (1976).
Alternatively, defendant contends that the lower court should have allowed the introduction of Minor's statement into evidence. The record reveals an attempt by counsel to introduce Minor's exculpatory declarations through the testimony of a police officer present at the Minor plea. Since we find no basis for the admissibility of Minor's hearsay assertions, the trial judge's refusal to allow the statements into evidence was not error. We note that these exonerating avouchments occurred after Minor pled guilty and after he was apprised of the court's intended sentence. They could not, therefore, be construed as a declaration against penal interest, People v Ernest Edwards, 396 Mich. 551; 242 NW2d 739 (1976). Nor do they qualify as prior reported testimony. At the time of the plea, Minor was not under oath and the prosecutor had no opportunity to advance defendant's involvement *115 through cross-examination. Inasmuch as the statements do not then fall within the hearsay exceptions, defendant's charge that an unfair trial resulted for failure to introduce Minor's testimony is without merit.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9741719 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:02.785124+00 ===

Danhof, C.J.
Defendant was convicted after a jury trial of first-degree felony murder under MCL 750.316; MSA 28.548, and sentenced to mandatory life imprisonment. Claiming several errors in the proceedings below, he appeals as of right.
Defendant mainly objects to the trial court’s instructions on mens rea. By our disposition of this issue, we eliminate the need to discuss other alleged grounds for reversal.
At trial, the prosecution claimed defendant had intentionally aided Ronald Wilson in the armed robbery of a store, and that Ronald Wilson, in committing that robbery, shot and killed Arretta Lou Ingraham. The people proceeded on a felony-murder theory that any killing committed in the course of a robbery is first-degree murder under MCL 750.316; MSA 28.548, and that an accomplice to the underlying felony is liable as a principal for the murder. Citing People v Fountain, 71 Mich App 491; 248 NW2d 589 (1976), defendant argues that MCL 750.316; MSA 28.548 is not a true felony-murder statute as it only applies after murder has been found, and then only to establish the degree of the offense. Under Michigan common *659law, malice is still an independent, necessary element of murder which may be inferred by the jury from the commission of an underlying felony, but may not be imputed by the court.
We agree with defendant and the panel in People v Fountain, supra, that there is no felony-murder doctrine in Michigan. The statutory and common law foundations for this ruling are well set out in the Fountain opinion. We add here that the ruling also is in line with the basic premise that a criminal state of mind is the essence of crime. See LaFave & Scott, Criminal Law, § 65, pp 515-17. In addition, by requiring an independent finding of malice, the rule does not substantially thwart the goal of deterring crime, as the punishment of negligent conduct only has a marginal deterrent effect, nor does it overburden the state in prosecuting criminals, as malice may often be inferred from the nature of the underlying felony and the circumstances surrounding its commission. People v Fountain, .supra.
From this view of felony murder it follows that an accomplice to robbery cannot be liable for a murder committed in the course of that robbery unless he acted with malice. While a majority of state courts hold an accomplice liable for all the foreseeable consequences of the criminal scheme he advances, LaFave & Scott, supra, we find that accomplice liability predicated on negligence, even when the crime involves a more serious state of mind, is as obnoxious as felony murder to the basic precepts and purposes of our criminal law. Logically, we cannot accept the former doctrine while rejecting the latter. Indeed, as Professors LaFave and Scott point out, the negligence standard for accomplice liability only makes sense in the context of felony murder — when a principal *660can be convicted for homicide without any showing of recklessness or intent, it is no less objectionable to hold the accomplice liable without showing he acted with a guilty mind. We find that it makes little sense to convict either the principal or accomplice under such circumstances.
Michigan case law also provides some support for this conclusion. Thus, the Michigan Supreme Court in People v Knapp, 26 Mich 112 (1872), broadly held that an accomplice is liable for any acts fairly within the common enterprise that might have been expected to happen. Later, it narrowed that decision in People v Foley, 59 Mich 553; 26 NW 699 (1886), by holding that an accomplice to an assault cannot be found liable for a robbery that was within the responsibility of all the assailants, but not shown as a matter of fact to be within the defendant’s specific intent. The inference is that foreseeability is a necessary but not a sufficient element of accomplice liability for unintended consequences. See also People v Koharski, 177 Mich 194; 142 NW 1097 (1913); People v Belton, 160 Mich 416; 125 NW 386 (1910); People v Cleveland, 107 Mich 367; 65 NW 216 (1895).
We hold, therefore, that to be liable for murder an accomplice to robbery must have acted with the intent to kill or in reckless disregard of a known and high degree of risk that death or serious bodily harm might occur.
In the instant case, the only instruction that indicated a need to find some mens rea beyond the intent to aid and abet robbery was the judge’s charge that the murder must have been found to be "fairly within the scope of a criminal enterprise and it might have been expected to happen in the course of committing this robbery with a pistol”. That charge does not satisfy the test we have laid *661out in this opinion as it fails to inform the jury that malice entails a more than foreseeable risk of death and is based on defendant’s subjective awareness of the risks and consequences of his acts. LaFave & Scott, supra, §71, p 554; CJI, 16:2:03 and commentary, pp 16-90-16-99. Although the record contains facts from which an inference of malice might have been drawn (i.e., aiding an armed robbery itself creates a risk of death), the issue must be retried and put before the jury. People v Fountain, supra.
Reversed and remanded for a new trial.
R. H. Campbell, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9741720 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:02.78926+00 ===

V. J. Brennan, J.
(dissenting). I must dissent from the majority’s opinion.
The controversy at bar focuses on the adequacy of the trial court’s instruction concerning the intent element of the crime of aiding and abetting felony murder. In regard to the aiding and abetting theory, the jury was told that if they found that defendant helped plan the robbery with intent to assist in the robbery, then they could find aiding and abetting. The trial court then went on to list the elements of the crime of aiding and abetting felony murder as: (1) defendant intended to commit robbery when he aided the principal, (2) defendant did in fact aid or abet or assist in the robbery, (3) murder occurred as a result of the robbery, (4) the murder was "fairly within the scope of [the] criminal enterprise and it might have been expected to happen in the course of committing this robbery with a pistol”. The trial court then explained that the jury was to distinguish between first- and second-degree murder and defined first-degree murder as "the killing occurred as a result of the crime of robbery and that *662the defendant was at the time engaged in aiding or abetting another, * * * in the commission of that crime”.
The majority holds that the instruction constitutes reversible error in that it eliminated the element of malice from the jury’s consideration.
The instruction when read as a whole indicates that if it is found that the killing occurred within the scope of the criminal enterprise of robbery with a pistol, and if the defendant aided or abetted in that criminal enterprise, then the defendant could be found guilty of felony murder. Although I agree that the existence of malice is a jury question, the element of malice sufficient to elevate the killing to felony murder is established by finding that the killing occurred in the perpetration of one of the enumerated felonies. People v Till, 80 Mich App 16, 28-29; 263 NW2d 586 (1977). In this regard I would hold the instructions in the present case not to be erroneous.
I believe that my position comports with the legislative policy underlying the felony murder rule which is "to discourage those who would commit, or attempt to commit, felonies inherently dangerous to human life by imposing a greater penalty than would otherwise obtain for deaths attributable to their acts in furtherance of the felonious purpose”. People v Till, supra, 36.
I would affirm the defendant’s conviction.

=== CASE 9741721 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:03.058477+00 ===

Ryan, J.
We are asked in this case to decide whether the operation of the Kalamazoo State Hospital constitutes the exercise or discharge of a governmental function for purposes of the statutory grant of immunity to the state from tort liability found in MCL 691.1407; MSA 3.996(107). We hold that it does and affirm the trial court’s grant of defendant’s motion for summary judgment.
I
James Herschel Perry was a resident of Kalamazoo State Hospital on November 14, 1972. On that day, a hospital attendant, in the course of performing his routine duties, found it necessary to restrain Mr. Perry. In so doing, the attendant rendered Mr. Perry unconscious. The attendant then laid Mr. Perry on his back which caused the aspiration of his stomach contents and resulted in his death.
Plaintiff, administratrix of the estate of James Herschel Perry, filed a complaint in the Court of *210Claims alleging that defendant breached its duty to provide for the care, treatment and custody of Mr. Perry.1
Defendant moved for summary judgment on the basis that it was immune from liability under the governmental immunity statute, MCL 691.1407; MSA 3.996(107).
Following argument, the trial court granted defendant’s motion for summary judgment. The Court of Appeals affirmed in a memorandum opinion.
We granted leave to appeal. 399 Mich 894 (1977). We affirm.
II
The governmental immunity statute provides:
"Except as in this act otherwise provided, all governmental agencies shall be immune from tort liability in all cases wherein the government agency is engaged in the exercise or discharge of a governmental function. Except as otherwise provided herein, this act shall not be construed as modifying or restricting the immunity of the state from tort liability as it existed heretofore, which immunity is affirmed.” MCL 691.1407; MSA 3.996(107).
The historical context in which this statute was *211enacted suggests that the Legislature’s intent in adopting this act was to codify the existing common-law or judge-made immunity of the state. Thomas v Dep’t of State Highways, 398 Mich 1, 10; 247 NW2d 530 (1976).
The phrase "governmental function” was a term of art at common law. It was used to both describe the nature and define the limits of the state’s immunity from tort liability. By utilizing that same term of art in creating statutory immunity, the Legislature has directed the courts to look to the common law for guidance when faced with determining whether the state may invoke the protection of the statute in any given case.
A review of the case law of governmental immunity that existed prior to the legislative affirmation of the state’s immunity provides guidance to this Court in two respects. First, the factual questions resolved in those decisions provide concrete examples of the specific activities contemplated by the Legislature when employing the term "governmental function”. Second, that case law provides a definition of the term "governmental function”.2
Reference to the pre-statutory immunity cases reveals that this Court has held that the operation of a public hospital to promote the general public health is a governmental function. Martinson v Alpena, 328 Mich 595; 44 NW2d 148 (1950).
Furthermore, the operation of a public hospital *212comes clearly within the frequently cited "common good of all” definition of governmental function.3
This leads to the conclusion, therefore, that the operation of a public hospital was a "governmental function” at common law in Michigan and consequently is a governmental function for purposes of the immunity statute. Defendant’s operation as a state mental hospital is generally within the statute’s immunity because its operation is in the "exercise or discharge of a governmental function”.4
Ill
The remaining question in our analysis is whether plaintiff has alleged tortious activity by defendant which falls within the scope of its immunity.
Plaintiff’s complaint alleges that defendant negligently breached its duty to provide for the care, treatment and custody of its patient, Mr. Perry. *213The facts as pled and explained in oral argument allege that this breach occurred when a hospital attendant improperly restrained Mr. Perry.
The care, treatment and custody of mental patients at a public hospital are activities intended to promote the general public health and are exercised for "the common good of all”. The restraint and control of certain patients in a mental ward is required at certain times in the exercise of the care, treatment and custody of those patients. Consequently, the alleged tortious activity of defendant is within the governmental function of operating a public mental hospital. The defendant is immune from liability for its negligence, if any, in performing that function, by reason of MCL 691.1407; MSA 3.996(107).
The trial court was correct in dismissing the action. GCR 1963, 117.2(1).
Affirmed. No costs, a public question being involved.
Williams and Coleman, JJ., concurred with Ryan, J.
Plaintiffs amended complaint sets forth the following allegations:
"5. That defendant hospital has a duty to provide for the care, treatment and custody of its patients.
"6. That defendant hospital breached its duty in that on or about the evening of November 14, 1972, an employee of defendant hospital caused the death of James Herschel Perry by applying such force to the deceased’s neck as to produce unconsciousness. Further, this force caused aspiration of the stomach contents and hemorrhages in the bronchial alveoli area thereby causing the death of James Herschel Perry.”
In Thomas v Dep’t of State Highways, 398 Mich 1; 247 NW2d 530 (1976), we recognized because past precedent is less than clear in many areas, we are effectively forced to decide on a case-by-case basis which activities may be classified as a governmental function and thus entitled to immunity. We invited the Legislature to relieve the uncertainty and potential for confusion in this area by enacting more specific guidelines. However, to this date the Legislature has not chosen to respond.
" 'The underlying test is whether the act is for the common good of all without the element of special corporate benefit or pecuniary profit. If it is, there is no liability, if it is not, there may be liability. That it may be undertaken voluntarily and not under compulsion of statute is not of consequence.’ ” Gunther v Cheboygan County Road Commissioners, 225 Mich 619, 621; 196 NW 386 (1923), citing Bolster v City of Lawrence, 225 Mass 387; 114 NE 722 (1917).
This conclusion gains further support in this case from Const 1963, art 4, § 51, which provides:
"The public health and general welfare of the people of the state are hereby declared to be matters of primary public concern. The legislature shall pass suitable laws for the protection and promotion of the public health.”, and from Const 1963, art 8, § 8, which provides:
"Institutions, programs and services for the care, treatment, education or rehabilitation of those inhabitants who are physically, mentally or otherwise seriously handicapped shall always be fostered and supported.”
The State Department of Mental Health controls and operates the Kalamazoo State Hospital pursuant to a statute enacted to effectuate these constitutional declarations of public policy. MCL 330.1116; MSA 14.800(116).

=== CASE 9741722 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:03.062735+00 ===

Blair Moody, Jr., J.
(concurring). I concur with Justice Ryan that the activities conducted by the Kalamazoo State Hospital, a public mental hospital, are governmental functions and, therefore, are immune from tort liability. The opposite conclusion was reached relative to general hospitals in Parker v Highland Park, ante, 404 Mich 183; 273 NW2d 413 (1978), also decided today. Accordingly, it may be gleaned that my rationale for retaining immunity in this case differs from my colleagues but is consistent with Parker.
Government plays a pervasive role in the area of mental health. This state’s annual budget includes a substantial appropriation in this field. See, e.g., *2141978 PA 407. Our Legislature has declared as public policy, "that services for the care, treatment, or rehabilitation of those who are seriously mentally handicapped shall always be fostered and supported”. MCL 330.1116; MSA 14.800(116). See also Const 1963, art 8, § 8.
Furthermore, to advance this public policy the Legislature has mandated the courts to provide for proper civil and criminal disposition of persons who have serious mental disease. See MCL 330.1400 et seq.; MSA 14.800(400) et seqMCL 330.2050; MSA 14.800(1050). Access to public mental hospitals is essential to effectively process probate and circuit court commitment proceedings. Clearly, the number of private mental hospitals available to the judiciary to deal with the substantial institutional needs Of the public is inadequate.
The day-to-day care by an attendant, physician or other employee on the staff of a mental hospital represents a governmental function furthering the public need to segregate, treat and rehabilitate citizens suffering from mental disease who cannot otherwise care for themselves and who often are committed voluntarily or involuntarily through governmental action.
Accordingly, as public mental hospitals perform an essentially unique activity mandated by legislative action, immunity must be extended as a governmental function under the statute. The proper planning and carrying out of this function can effectively be accomplished only by the government. The function is essentially governmental.
It is recognized that an analytical demarcation between general and mental hospitals is far from perfect in this imperfect world. However, the rationale is an attempt to evolve a just application of the term governmental function within the confines of the present statute.
*215The Legislature has left the interpretation of governmental function to the courts. Of necessity, until this term is definitively refined, it is our responsibility to come to grips with the issue on a case-by-case basis.
The Court of Appeals decision is aifirmed.
Kavanagh, C.J.
(for reversal). The issue here is whether the operation of a state mental hospital is a "governmental function”, rendering the state immune from tort liability under MCL 691.1407; MSA 3.996(107). For the reasons stated by Justice Fitzgerald in Parker v Highland Park, ante, 404 Mich 183; 273 NW2d 413 (1978), we hold that it is not.
The statute provides:
"Except as in this act otherwise provided, all governmental agencies shall be immune from tort liability in all cases wherein the government agency is engaged in the exercise or discharge of a governmental function. Except as otherwise provided herein, this act shall not be construed as modifying or restricting the immunity of the state from tort liability as it existed heretofore, which immunity is affirmed.” MCL 691.1407; MSA 3.996(107).
In order to constitute a "governmental function” under the statute, the activity must be "sui generis governmental — of essence to governing”. Parker, 193. Because the operation of a mental hospital is not an activity which can be done only by the government, it is not a "governmental function” and there is no statutory immunity from tort liability.
Levin and Fitzgerald, JJ., concurred with Kavanagh, C.J.

=== CASE 9741723 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:03.309072+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Donald Lewis Damaska was convicted following a bench trial of two counts of breaking and entering a building with intent to commit larceny. MCLA 750.110; MSA 28.305. The Court of Appeals reversed the convictions in an unpublished per curiam opinion. The prosecutor *393applies for leave to appeal from that decision and, under GCR 1963, 853.2(4), we reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals and reinstate the convictions.
The dispositive issue in this case is whether the arresting police officers had probable cause to seize an electronic calculator, which later proved to be stolen, from the back seat of the car defendant was driving.
During the late evening hours of March 11, 1975, two state police officers observed a car with its lights extinguished being driven across a parking lot from the vicinity of a Farm Bureau Insurance building. The lights were switched on as the car pulled onto the highway. This conduct, combined with the fact that the businesses were closed and the officers’ awareness that the Farm Bureau Insurance office had been the subject of two burglaries in recent weeks, prompted the officers to make an investigatory stop of the car. The defendant, "acting quite nervous”, was unable to produce a driver’s license and produced a vehicle registration that did not accurately reflect his name. The defendant stated that he had been drinking and had parked in the Farm Bureau parking lot to "sleep it off”; although the defendant did not have the appearance of having been drinking. One of the officers, using a flashlight, noticed what appeared to be a portion of a business machine protruding from beneath some clothing on the back seat and reached in and removed an electronic office calculator. The defendant explained that the calculator belonged to him; however, the calculator had a piece of plastic tape attached to it with the name "R. L. Luxmore” embossed on it. A radio check revealed that the calculator came from the Farm Bureau Insurance building and an *394investigation of that building, and a nearby building, revealed that both had been burglarized.
We believe the facts gave the officers probable cause to proceed as they did. The pertinent facts supporting this conclusion are: (1) the defendant emerged from a business parking lot late at night with his car lights extinguished; (2) the business was the subject of recent burglaries; (3) the defendant acted unusually nervous when stopped; (4) an office machine was observed partially hidden beneath some clothing on the back seat of the car; (5) the name taped on the calculator differed from the defendant’s. We held in People v Howell, 394 Mich 445; 231 NW2d 650 (1975), that the fact further investigation must be undertaken to establish that discovered property is stolen does not preclude a finding of probable cause for a search and seizure of the property when other factors combine to establish probable cause. The facts in the instant case form an equally compelling combination and require a similar finding.
Williams, Coleman, Fitzgerald, Ryan, and Blair Moody, Jr., JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 9741724 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:03.31343+00 ===

Levin, J.
(dissenting). Leave to appeal should be denied.
The memorandum opinion states as "pertinent fact” (5), supporting the conclusion that the officers had "probable cause to proceed as they did”,1 that "the name taped on the calculator differed from the defendant’s”. The name taped on the calculator was not determined until after the officer had searched the automobile and calculator by *395examining it. Therefore, the name taped on the calculator is not a pertinent fact, and cannot be considered in determining whether there was probable cause to search the automobile or the calculator.
Before the search of the automobile and calculator, the police did not have probable cause to believe that a crime had been committed and that the calculator was evidence of such crime. They may have been suspicious, they may even had reason to continue the investigation, but they could not do so by entering the automobile and searching it or the calculator by examining it without probable cause to believe that a crime had been committed and there was evidence of that crime there to be found.
The United States Supreme Court has authorized investigatory stops on less than probable cause. It has authorized protective searches for weapons as an incident of an investigatory stop. It has never authorized an investigatory search as part of an investigatory stop. Thus, although the police in the instant case may have had reason to continue their investigation, they were without authority to conduct an investigatory search simply because no officer at any time under any circumstances is authorized to do so.
The limits of police authority during an investigatory stop have been carefully circumscribed by the United States Supreme Court. In Sibron v New York, 392 US 40, 65-66; 88 S Ct 1889; 20 L Ed 2d 917 (1968), decided the same day as the seminal case of Terry v Ohio, 392 US 1; 88 S Ct 1868; 20 L Ed 2d 889 (1968), the Court held that, absent probable cause for an arrest or search, evidence obtained as a result of a search for articles other than weapons must be suppressed:
*396"Even assuming arguendo that there were adequate grounds to search Sibron for weapons, the nature and scope of the search conducted by Patrolman Martin were so clearly unrelated to that justification as to render the heroin inadmissible. The search for weapons approved in Terry consisted solely of a limited patting of the outer clothing of the suspect for concealed objects which might be used as instruments of assault. Only when he discovered such objects did the officer in Terry place his hands in the pockets of the men he searched. In this case, with no attempt at an initial limited exploration for arms, Patrolman Martin thrust his hand into Sibron’s pocket and took from him envelopes of heroin. His testimony shows that he was looking for narcotics, and he found them. The search was not reasonably limited in scope to the accomplishment of the only goal which might conceivably have justified its inception — the protection of the officer by disarming a potentially dangerous man. Such a search violates the guarantee of the Fourth Amendment, which protects the sanctity of the person against unreasonable intrusions on the part of all government agents.” (Emphasis changed.)
The search here was not a protective search of Damaska’s person for weapons. The police entered his automobile to look for evidence of crime and, thus, what they found is within the Sibron proscription.
In Adams v Williams, 407 US 143, 146; 92 S Ct 1921; 32 L Ed 2d 612 (1972), the Court said of protective searches as part of an investigatory stop:
"The purpose of this limited search is not to discover evidence of crime, but to allow the officer to pursue his investigation without fear of violence, and thus the frisk for weapons might be equally necessary and reasonable, whether or not carrying a concealed weapon violated any applicable state law. So long as the officer is entitled to make a forcible stop, and has reason to *397believe that the suspect is armed and dangerous, he may conduct a weapons search limited in scope to this protective purpose. ” (Emphasis supplied.)
The search here was not "limited in scope to [the] protective purpose”. It was an investigatory search and, therefore, probable cause to believe that a crime had been committed and evidence of that crime would be found was required before the search.
In United States v Brignoni-Ponce, 422 US 873, 881-882; 95 S Ct 2574; 45 L Ed 2d 607 (1975), where the Court dealt with investigatory stops by border patrol officers, the Court reaffirmed that investigatory detention or search must be based on probable cause, absent consent:
"The officer may question the driver and passengers about their citizenship and immigration status, and he may ask them to explain suspicious circumstances, but any further detention or search must be based on consent or probable cause.” (Emphasis supplied.)
In the companion case of United States v Ortiz, 422 US 891, 896; 95 S Ct 2585; 45 L Ed 2d 623 (1975), the Court said:
"A search, even of an automobile, is a substantial invasion of privacy. To protect that privacy from official arbitrariness, the Court always has regarded probable cause as the minimum requirement for a lawful search. ” (Emphasis supplied.)
The police did not, before the search, have probable cause to believe that the calculator partially concealed by a coat on the back seat had been stolen. Before the officers entered the automobile they had determined that the vehicle was not stolen. Although Damaska did not have a driver’s *398license on his person, it was determined that a valid operator’s license had been issued to him. Damaska had not been arrested before the police entered the vehicle.
Assuming that the police, either because of the hour or Damaska’s nervousness, had reason to be suspicious, that would not, even coupled with observation of a partially concealed calculator, provide a reasonable basis for concluding that Damaska had stolen the calculator and, therefore, they did not have a basis for concluding that the calculator was evidence of a crime that had been committed.2
To state it differently, unless the police had probable cause to arrest Damaska and charge him with theft of the calculator or possession of a stolen calculator before they entered and searched the automobile and calculator by examining it, they perforce did not have probable cause to conduct such a search. That is because unless the police had probable cause to believe that a crime had been committed — theft of the calculator — they did not have reason to search for evidence of that crime.
*399The police did not, before the search, have probable cause to believe that Damaska had stolen the calculator or to arrest him for that crime. They did not have probable cause to search the automobile for evidence of crime because they did not have probable cause to believe that a crime had been committed.
I would deny leave to appeal.
Kavanagh, C.J., concurred with Levin, J.
The statement that the police had probable cause to "proceed as they did” tends to obscure the factual and legal bases of the Court’s decision.
In People v Howell, 394 Mich 445, 446-447; 231 NW2d 650 (1975), the officer "observed, in plain sight, a small pouch-type bag in the car which he could see contained chains, watches and rings”. He observed one man in the vehicle pass something from the front seat to another man in the back. The officer returned to the automobile and asked what happened to the bag. The response was, "What bag?” We concluded that the officer had seen "a variety and quantity of jewelry more akin to the results of a theft than to property likely to be the personal belongings of an occupant of the automobile" and that, coupled with the facts that the bag was not of the kind that a jewelry salesman would normally use, the furtive behavior, and the response "[w]hat bag?”, constituted probable cause for a search and seizure.
One calculator, partially concealed or not, is likely to be the personal property of the occupant of an automobile. There is nothing inherently suspicious about possession of one calculator in an automobile; there is no implication that it was acquired by theft. It is commonplace to cover articles of value in an automobile to conceal their presence from thieves.

=== CASE 2228511 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:43:03.952752+00 ===

273 N.W.2d 669 (1979)
202 Neb. 63
Elaine M. WITT, Appellant,
v.
SCHOOL DISTRICT NO. 70, FRONTIER COUNTY, Nebraska, Appellee.
No. 41673.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
January 10, 1979.
*670 Crosby, Guenzel, Davis, Kessner & Kuester, Lincoln, for appellant.
McCarthy, McCarthy & Vyhnalek, North Platte, for appellee.
Heard before SPENCER, C. J., Pro Tem., BOSLAUGH, McCOWN, CLINTON, BRODKEY and WHITE, JJ., and KUNS, Retired District Judge.
SPENCER, Chief Judge, Pro Tem.
This is a declaratory judgment action to declare the termination of plaintiff's teaching contract void pursuant to section 84-1414, R.R.S.1943, for the failure of the school board to comply with the Public Meetings Act. The District Court held plaintiff had waived any defects in the notice; determined the school district had substantially complied with the statutory requirements; and dismissed the plaintiff's petition. We reverse and remand.
Plaintiff began her employment with the school district in 1968. For the first 3 years, she taught third grade students at the Curtis grade school. From 1971 until the termination of her contract in 1976, she was assigned to teach a special reading program for all grades at the elementary level. Her duties also included teaching a class in sixth grade English, and a class in sixth grade reading.
For the first half of each school year the special reading program was devoted to remedial reading. The second half of the school year involved a developmental reading program in which plaintiff instructed average or above average students. Both programs required that students be removed from the regular classrooms.
In 1975, the school district hired a resource teacher who was specially trained to instruct children with learning disabilities. This teacher was supplied by Educational Service Unit (ESU) No. 15. The testimony indicated that the instruction offered by the resource teacher overlapped with the program taught by plaintiff. In early 1976, the superintendent recommended to the school board that the special reading program be eliminated because of the duplication of effort and expense. The matter was discussed at the regular board meeting held on February 9, 1976, but the minutes of the meeting do not recite that any formal action was taken.
On February 13, 1976, the following letter, drafted by the superintendent and signed by the secretary of the school board, was mailed to plaintiff: "This letter is to inform you that the School Board of District # 70 will have a staff reduction for the 1976-77 school year involving Special Reading. The tentative plans are to not have the Special Reading position next year. With the increased service and expense involved with being in E.S.U. # 15 we feel this move is both financially and educationally sound. The Board feels that the current scope and anticipated growth of E.S.U. influence in District # 70 makes retention of the Special Reading position unnecessary.
*671 "State law requires that any person in the above position may have a hearing in front of the Board of Education if requested in writing to the Board Secretary within five days of the receipt of this letter. The situation, however, is not a dismissal of a teacher for lack of professional competence, but merely the elimination of a position."
Plaintiff testified that immediately after receiving the letter she telephoned the secretary of the school board and was informed that it meant she would not have a job the following year. Plaintiff thereupon submitted a written request for a hearing which read in part: "On February 13, 1976, I received your letter dated February 13, 1976, advising me that the Board of Education will consider termination of my teaching contract due to your stated intentions of a reduction in force of the staff at Curtis Public School for the 1976-1977 school year.
"Pursuant to Section 79-1254, I request a hearing before the Board of Education for the purpose of determining if just cause exists for termination." Plaintiff was notified that a hearing would be held February 23, 1976. No public notice was given.
Plaintiff appeared at the hearing with counsel and testified on her own behalf. Testimony supporting the elimination of the position was offered by the superintendent. There is no transcript of that hearing in the record.
The next regular board meeting was held on March 8, 1976. Plaintiff was in attendance. The minutes of the meeting contain the following: "A discussion on the continuation or suspension of the Special Reading program. Moved by Jorgensen to suspend the program, seconded by A. Peterson. Noting aye: A. Peterson, Jorgensen, Heathers, and Traster. Motion carried."
On March 9, 1976, the secretary of the school board mailed the following letter to plaintiff: "At the March 8th School Board meeting of District 70 it was voted 5-0 to eliminate the Special Reading position. The contract will be terminated as of May 24th, 1976."
The next day plaintiff mailed the following letter to the school board: "This is to let you know that I am still interested in a position on the Curtis Grade School faculty and would appreciate being given first consideration for any vacancy which may occur." Plaintiff was interviewed for the position of fourth grade teacher but the vacancy was filled by another applicant. For the 1976-77 school year the district also hired a replacement kindergarten teacher, a music teacher, and a fifth and sixth grade science teacher. This declaratory judgment action was filed June 18, 1976, more than 3 months after plaintiff was notified her contract was being terminated.
Section 84-1414, R.R.S.1943, provides that any motion or formal action taken by a public body in violation of any of the provisions of the Public Meetings Act shall be declared void by the District Court. Among the provisions of the act are the requirements that advance, publicized notice of each meeting be given, S. 84-1411, R.R.S.1943, and that minutes of each meeting be kept, S. 84-1413, R.R.S.1943. Neither of these requirements was met with regard to the school board meeting held on February 23, 1976.
No formal action was taken by the board at the February 23 meeting. The motion to suspend the special reading program was made and the vote was taken at the regular board meeting of March 8, 1976, at which plaintiff was present. The March meeting was held in full compliance with the statutory requirements. Thus, it would appear section 84-1414, R.R.S.1943, is inapplicable.
In any event, as the District Court determined, we have specifically held participation in the hearing required under section 79-1254, R.R.S.1943, is ordinarily a waiver of any defect in the notice of the hearing. Alexander v. School Dist. No. 17, 197 Neb. 251, 248 N.W.2d 335 (1976). Plaintiff and counsel participated in the hearing without raising any question about the public hearing notice.
Plaintiff, by participating in the hearing, waived any defect in the notice. *672 Alexander is controlling. We there said: "The defendants argue that the plaintiffs waived any right to object to the lack of public notice of the meeting by appearing at the hearing and participating in it. We think this argument has merit. Any person who has notice of a meeting and attends the meeting should be required to object specifically to the lack of public notice at the meeting, or be held to have waived his right to object on that ground at a later date. A timely objection will permit the public body to remedy its mistake promptly and defer formal action until the required public notice can be given. See Carter v. City of Nashau, 113 N.H. 407, 308 A.2d 847. Since the plaintiffs had personal notice of the hearing and appeared and participated in the hearing, but made no objection concerning a lack of public notice, they cannot now complain that the defendant failed to comply with the Public Meetings Act."
The right to collaterally attack orders made in contravention of the Public Meetings Act for a period of 1 year is specifically provided in section 84-1414, R.R.S.1943. In this action plaintiff is also raising a violation of section 79-1254, R.R.S.1943. The proceedings had did not foreclose plaintiff's rights under section 79-1254, R.R.S.1943. That section specifies the procedure to be followed in terminating the contract of a tenured teacher. It provides that a teacher's contract "shall be deemed renewed and shall remain in full force and effect until a majority of the members of the board vote on or before May 15 to amend or to terminate the contract for just cause at the close of the contract period." The section further provides: "The secretary of the board shall, not later than April 15, notify each * * * teacher in writing of any conditions of unsatisfactory performance or other conditions because of a reduction in staff members or change of leave of absence policies of the board of education which the board considers may be just cause to either terminate or amend the contract for the ensuing school year."
The notice given to Mrs. Witt advised her the board planned to discontinue the special reading program. It advised her that it was not a dismissal for lack of professional competence but merely the elimination of a position. While the secretary told Mrs. Witt she would be terminated, at no time does the record indicate that the board did other than terminate the particular program. It does not appear the board ever specifically voted to terminate plaintiff's contract. It does not appear this action was even contemplated. The inference is the board believed because it eliminated the program, it terminated the contract. It did not have that effect. Plaintiff was a tenured teacher and was entitled to continued employment unless just course existed for her removal, or there was a change in circumstances necessitating a reduction in the number of teachers to be employed by the board.
The record indicates Mrs. Witt was qualified to teach all elementary grades. Mrs. Witt was considered for a fourth grade position which became open, but a new teacher was hired. It cannot be said there was a reduction in force when a new fourth grade teacher was hired before the end of the term at which Mrs. Witt's contract was terminated. We hold a tenured teacher whose position has been abolished has a right to be retained to fill any vacancy for which she is qualified for the next school year which occurs after notice of the elimination of her position. In other words, no new teacher may be hired to fill a vacancy she is qualified to fill. To hold otherwise would simply allow a total emasculation of the tenured teacher act.
An imaginative school board could simply transfer a teacher into a position it knew it intended to abolish; abolish the position the following year; hold the hearing; and terminate the position and the teacher's contract, even if a vacancy should occur for which she was qualified. While this may not have been the intent herein, it does have that effect. The clear intent of the tenured teacher act is to guarantee a tenured teacher continued employment except for two justifiable circumstances: (1) Discharge for a cause; and (2) reduction in the *673 teaching force. Neither is present in this instance.
The judgment of the trial court is reversed and the cause is remanded to the trial court for an order declaring that Mrs. Witt's employment shall continue until the applicable provisions of law have been complied with.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.

=== CASE 9741725 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:05.868939+00 ===

DUNN, Justice
(on reassignment).
This is an appeal in a divorce action from an order of the Circuit Court of the Second Judicial Circuit which adjudged the defendant guilty of contempt, modified a property settlement adopted in the original decree, and required defendant to pay plaintiff’s attorney fees. Defendant appeals. We affirm in part and reverse and remand in part.
On December 5, 1973, a judgment and decree of divorce terminated the marriage *190of Leo and Marlys Hanisch and gave custody of their five children to plaintiff wife. The divorce decree adopted a property settlement agreement signed by the parties granting possession of the house to plaintiff and requiring her to be responsible for all mortgage, tax, insurance and repair payments. Defendant retained his one-half interest in the house which was to be sold no later than upon completion of high school by the youngest child, and the proceeds from said sale were to be divided. Either party making capital improvements in the interim were to be given credit for said improvements at the time of the division' of the proceeds. The decree also required defendant to pay child support in the amount of $100 per week and to pay certain medical expenses. The decree provided that as each of the first two children attained majority age the child support obligation would be reduced by $20 per week, and as the next two ■ children attained majority age, it would be reduced by $10 per week.
On July 1,1976, that decree was modified by the court upon plaintiff’s application. The modifications required defendant to pay an increased share of medical expenses, increased the child support to $105 per week, forbade defendant to enter the house without plaintiff’s permission, and directed him to make certain repairs or improvements to the house within thirty days.
In June of 1977, plaintiff again moved to modify the decree to provide more support. Plaintiff also requested a finding of contempt for defendant’s failure to comply with the July 1,1976 order. A hearing was held, and on December 14, 1977, the court entered findings of fact and conclusions of law and an order which, among other things: (1) adjudged defendant in contempt of court for entering the house without plaintiff’s permission, for failing to pay the child support in compliance with the July 1, 1976 order, and for failing to keep his portion of the medical expenses paid and current; (2) terminated defendant’s interest in the house and directed him to transfer all of his right, title and interest therein to plaintiff; and (3) ordered defendant to pay plaintiff’s attorney fees. It is from these three portions of the September 14, 1977 order that defendant appeals.
Defendant first contends that the court erred in adjudging him to be in contempt of court for failing to obey the July 1, 1976 order. We disagree. The evidence in the record of the defendant’s late and vexatious manner of making support payments, his deductions from support payments upon his own determination without further order of the court, his failure to pay medical bills promptly according to the order, and his invasion of the premises through one of the children in direct violation of the order provide sufficient evidence for the trial court’s finding of contempt. However, the trial court failed to recite the four elements of contempt in its findings, namely, (1) existence of an order, (2) knowledge of an order, (3) ability to comply with the order, and (4) wilful or contumacious disobedience. In view of our remand for other reasons, the trial court should make a direct finding of fact that the four elements of contempt are present here. Krueger v. Krueger, 1913, 32 S.D. 470, 143 N.W. 368; Hoffman v. Hoffman, 1910, 26 S.D. 34, 127 N.W. 478.
Defendant’s second contention on appeal is that the trial court erred in awarding plaintiff all right, title and interest in the house which was previously owned jointly by the parties and in directing defendant to execute a quit claim deed. The joint ownership was confirmed by the stipulated property agreement incorporated in the December 5, 1973 judgment and decree of divorce. We agree.
It is well settled in South Dakota that property rights of parties to a divorce as contained in the decree of divorce cannot be modified in the absence of fraud or other reason which would apply to any judgment. Holt v. Holt, 1970, 84 S.D. 671, 176 N.W.2d 51; Van Diepen v. Van Diepen, 1950, 73 S.D. 366, 43 N.W.2d 499.
It is undisputed in the present case that the defendant’s title and interest in the house are property rights, and it is also undisputed that said rights were determined in the decree of December 5, 1973. *191Property rights cannot be readjudicated in order to punish defendant for contempt. We find the trial court erred in readjudicat-ing the property rights of the parties, and that portion of the order awarding all right, title and interest in the house to plaintiff and directing defendant to execute a quit claim deed is hereby vacated.
Finally, defendant contends that the trial court erred in making him responsible for plaintiff’s attorney fees. The allowance of attorney fees rests in the sound discretion of the trial court and will not be interfered with by this court unless it appears there is error in the exercise thereof. Baron v. Baron, 1947, 71 S.D. 641, 28 N.W.2d 836. The amount awarded in this case was not excessive and cannot be said to be an abuse of discretion by the trial court. Certain portions of the order appealed from were not contested on appeal and remain valid modifications of the July 1,1976 order and the December 5,1973 decree. Further, success or failure on appeal is not sufficient to determine whether an award of attorney fees was error. Baron v. Baron, supra; Foss v. Foss, 1968, 83 S.D. 574, 163 N.W.2d 354; Kressly v. Kressly, 1958, 77 S.D. 143, 87 N.W.2d 601.
We affirm the trial court’s adjudication of contempt and its award of attorney fees to plaintiff. We remand the case with direction to the trial court to make a specific finding of fact as to the elements of contempt and to vacate that portion of the order which readjudicated property rights of the parties.
ZASTROW and PORTER, JJ., concur.
WOLLMAN, C. J., and MORGAN, J., dissent.

=== CASE 9741751 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:24.477331+00 ===

Ryan, J.
(dissenting). The majority has determined that although no provision of the Worker’s Disability Compensation Act of 1969 or apposite case law would afford Brenda Girlish relief from her failure to comply with the legislatively established notice requirements, the defendant may nevertheless not have the benefit of the applicable statute of limitations because it provided Ms. Girlish with sickness and accident benefits for a reported case of the flu.
I dissent.
I
The statutory scheme established in the compensation act1 requires an employee in plaintiff’s situ*385ation, one who has suffered an injury that is not an occupational disease,2 to provide his or her employer with notice of injury within three months of its happening and further to file a claim for compensation with respect to that injury within six months of its occurrence. The statute explicitly provides, inter alia, that the six-month period for filing the compensation claim is tolled during the period beginning with timely notice of the happening of the injury or the employer’s acquisition of knowledge of the happening of the accident and continuing until the employer files the required report of the injury with the bureau.
The appeal board’s finding in the case at bar was that Ms. Girlish was barred by failure to give notice.
The majority concedes that the compensation *386act is silent as to whether voluntary payment of sickness and accident benefits tolls the statutory period during which an employee is bound to provide notice of an injury or accident. I believe it is too plain to dispute that the statute, which explicitly provides for tolling of the claim period under prescribed circumstances, lends no support to the majority’s unprecedented decision.3
II
Moreover, I am convinced that an examination of the relevant case law should provide Ms. Girlish with no more comfort than the plain language of the statute does.
I believe the majority makes a fundamental error in losing the distinction between the notice and claim requirements.4 The obligations to give notice of an injury and to file claim for compensation are two entirely separate duties imposed on an injured employee.- Although compliance with both requirements may be accomplished simulta*387neously, it need not be.5 6The majority glosses over this distinction, obviating the analysis that would reveal that even under generally accepted legal principles outside of the compensation act, such as waiver and estoppel, there is no basis for relieving Ms. Girlish of her failure to give notice of injury.
The underlying rationale for tolling the statute of limitations is discussed by Professor Larson.
"When an employer voluntarily makes compensation payments, the period for filing a claim usually dates from the last payment. In many statutes, this rule is written into the claim period section itself; it may also be arrived at by the route of waiver or estoppel. The general idea is that an employee who has been receiving compensation for eleven months cannot reasonably be expected to have made claim during that period, and should not, upon cessation of voluntary payments at the end of the eleventh month, be allowed only one month in which to file his claim. [Emphasis supplied; footnotes omitted.]” 3 Larson, Workmen’s Compensation Law, § 78.43(a), pp 15-111, 15-113.
In other words, the purpose of the "other compensation” provisions as enacted in some statutes and the cases applying waiver or estoppel theory is to both protect employees and prevent employers from relying on the limitations period where the employer’s actions are designed to or could be expected to cause an employee to delay filing a claim.6
This logic does not extend to the requirement that notice of the injury be given.7
*388Since the Michigan notice and claim statute does not provide for tolling where "other compensation” is paid, Ms. Girlish must look to other legal principles. Estoppel and implied waiver have been argued.
The majority apparently declines to find the employer estopped from relying on the notice limitation. See footnote 9 of the majority opinion. Implied waiver is, instead, asserted.
Conduct that will constitute an implied waiver is described in Black’s Law Dictionary (4th ed), p 1752.
"A waiver is implied where one party has pursued such a course of conduct with reference to the other party as to evidence an intention to waive his rights or the advantage to which he may be entitled, or where the conduct pursued is inconsistent with any other honest intention than an intention of such waiver, provided that the other party concerned has been induced by such conduct to act upon the belief that there has been a waiver, and has incurred trouble or expense thereby.”
Waiver is defined as the intentional or voluntary relinquishment of a known right.
It is apparent that, as in the case of estoppel, waiver may be found where a party acts with some knowledge of the facts. There is no basis on the *389facts in the case at bar for finding a waiver.* *****8 To establish a rule tolling the notice period whenever an employer provides sickness and accident benefits is unsupportable.
The facts as found by the Worker’s Compensation Appeal Board are that Ms. Girlish simply did not give notice that she had suffered a back injury within the three-month notice period. Indeed, it was found that Ms. Girlish ceased working due to an attack of influenza, that she filed an insurance claim for sickness and accident benefits for her influenza condition and that she did not apprise the defendant of her back condition until after the sickness and accident benefits were terminated. It is absurd to suggest that the defendant waived receipt of notice of a back injury because it provided benefits to Ms. Girlish for her bout with the flu. An employer could not reasonably expect payment of sickness and accident benefits would cause an employee to refrain from filing a claim due to a back injury where it is unaware such a claim exists. The implied waiver theory cannot logically be applied where an employee fails to give notice of the injury for which compensation is claimed.9
It is unfortunate for Ms. Girlish that her claim for compensation is barred (notwithstanding the majority decision) by failure to comply with the notice provision of the compensation act. The apparent harshness of the notice and claim requirements has, however, been alleviated by numerous *390decisions of this Court.10 Ms. Girlish has simply not complied.
The majority is understandably sympathetic to an injured party who may have missed giving notice by a matter of days. The implications of its opinion, however, are quite disturbing. An employee could conceivably receive benefits for some injury or sickness for an extended period of time and, upon recovery from that condition, give notice and claim compensation for an accident far in the past. The possibility for prejudice is great.
The decision of the appeal board should be affirmed.
Coleman and Fitzgerald, JJ., concurred with Ryan, J.
MCLA 418.381; MSA 17.237(381) provides:
"(1) No proceedings for compensation for an injury under this act shall he maintained, unless a notice of the injury has been given to the employer within 3 months after the happening thereof and unless the claim for compensation with respect to the injury, which claim may be either oral or in writing, has been made within 6 months after the occurrence of the same; or in case of the death of the *385employee, within 12 months after death; or in the event of his physical or mental incapacity, within the first 6 months during which the injured employee is not physically or mentally incapacitated from making a claim. In a case in which the employer has been given notice of the injury, or has notice or knowledge of the same within 3 months after the happening thereof, but the actual injury, disability or incapacity does not develop or make itself apparent within 6 months after the happening of the injury, but does develop and make itself apparent at some date subsequent to 6 months after the happening of the same, claim for compensation may be made within 3 months after the actual injury, disability or incapacity develops or makes itself apparent to the injured employee, but no such claim shall be valid or effectual for any purpose unless made within 3 years from the date the personal injury was sustained. Any time during which an injured employee shall be prevented by reason of his physical or mental incapacity from making a claim shall not be construed to be any part of the 6 months’ limitation mentioned in this section. In a case in which the employer has been given notice of the happening of the injury or has notice or knowledge of the happening of the accident within 3 months after the happening of the same, and fails, neglects or refuses to report the injury to the bureau as required by the provisions of this act, the statute of limitations shall not run against the claim of the injured employee or his dependents, or in favor of the employer or his insurer, until a report of the injury has been filed with the bureau.”
The appeal board found that plaintiff’s disability resulted from a single event injury.
It is interesting to note, as the majority points out, that the relevant statutes in some states specifically provide for tolling when an employer voluntarily pays "compensation”. No case, however, is cited comparable to the case at bar, applying such a statutory tolling provision against an employer who is totally unaware of the nature of the injury for which the employee is seeking compensation. See Part II, infra.
"Notice of injury — the first step in compensation procedure — is normally given to the employer. The period is comparatively short; it may be 'forthwith’ or 'as soon as practicable,’ or a specified period of a few weeks or months. The purpose is dual: First, to enable the employer to provide immediate medical diagnosis' and treatment with a view to minimizing the seriousness of the injury; and second, to facilitate the earliest possible investigation of the facts surrounding the injury.
"The compensation claim itself, however, is normally filed with the administrative agency. The period is usually one or two years. The purpose is the same as that of any limitations statute: to protect the employer against claims too old to be successfully investigated and defended. [Footnotes omitted.]” 3 Larson, Workmen’s Compensation Law, § 78.20, pp 15-27, 15-28.
See, e.g., Norris v Chrysler Corp, 391 Mich 469; 216 NW2d 783 (1974).
I express no opinion on the applicability of waiver or estoppel theory to the compensation act under some other set of facts.
Indeed Professor Larson reports:
"Payment of compensation tolls the statute only as to the injury for which the payment is intended as compensation; it cannot toll the *388statute as to another injury received in a prior accident. [Footnote omitted.]” 3 Larson, supra, § 78.43(a), p 15-119.
And,
"The concept of medical benefits as payment of compensation does not extend to payment of medical bills understood by the parties to be unrelated to the employment or to medical treatment for a nonoccupational condition subsequent to an accident at work. [Footnotes omitted.]” 3 Larson, supra, § 78.43(b), p 15-130.
Cases cited include ones in which the employer is unaware of the nature of the injury for which compensation is claimed.
The majority suggests that an "unsophisticated employee, possibly on the advice of the employer or union representative, is usually operating on the justifiable belief that the alternative benefits received are the correct benefits”.
Nothing in the record in this case is relied on to suggest that Ms. Girlish was misled by the defendant.
The majority finds, that equity requires the rule announced because an unsophisticated employee may be misled "possibly on the advice of the employer”. I would add to that: "possibly based on the notice given by the employee”.
For example, it has been held that the period for giving notice of claim does not begin to run until the employee has or should have knowledge of the disability. Jordan v Michigan Malleable Iron Co, 363 Mich 256; 109 NW2d 832 (1961); Finch v Ford Motor Co, 321 Mich 469; 32 NW2d 712 (1948).
The requirements are further tempered by Lewis v Chrysler Corp, 394 Mich 360; 230 NW2d 538 (1975), in which we held that the period for giving notice will commence to run only if the employee has discovered or by reasonable diligence could discover that his disability may be work-related.
The appeal board found in the case at bar that the notice period commenced to run for Ms. Girlish on March 10, 1971, the date on which she first sought treatment for her back condition.

=== CASE 9741726 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:05.8728+00 ===

MORGAN, Justice
(dissenting).
I dissent from that portion of the majority opinion that affirms the judgment of contempt that is wholly unsupported by adequate findings.
Further, in reviewing the record I do not find sufficient acts on the part of the defendant that would in my opinion support a finding of willful or contumacious disobedience so as to constitute contempt, which I consider a serious offense.* The nonpayment of medical bills which were covered by insurance was explained. The reduction in support payments when one child left the plaintiff’s custody was in accord with the decreed provision. The fact that the defendant didn’t employ counsel to come into court and secure a “paper approval” appeared to be dictated more by finances than by contumacity or willfulness. Defendant was absolved of part of the charge of getting property out of the house and as to the other, it was so minor as to be frivolous. As to the alleged irregularity in the support payments which didn’t appear to me to be all that irregular, the trial court finally availed itself of the remedy of requiring payments to the clerk of courts, a remedy it could have exercised long before it did.
I would hold contempt punishment for far more important deviations.
I am authorized to state that Chief Justice WOLLMAN joins in this dissent.
Lacking the finding that the acts on the part of the defendant were willful or contumacious I do not feel constrained to follow the clearly erroneous rule under which we usually review the trial court’s findings.

=== CASE 9741727 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:06.124953+00 ===

*173WOLLMAN, Chief Justice.
Appellant appeals from a conviction of fourth degree burglary upon which he was sentenced to three years in the South Dakota Penitentiary. We reverse.
Upon returning to her home near Sturgis, South Dakota, in the early afternoon on September 23, 1977, Mrs. Debra Schwartz noticed an automobile parked in her driveway. She observed two men run from behind the house and enter the automobile. She did not recognize these men and followed the car for a distance, attempting unsuccessfully to read the license plates. She then notified the Sturgis Police Department that she had seen two men leaving her house and that the men had left in a dark green Mustang automobile that had front enu damage and carried Florida license plates. Upon returning to her home, Mrs. Schwartz discovered that the house had been broken into and ransacked. The next morning she reported that a 110 Instamatic camera, her husband’s wedding ring and some other items had been taken from the home.
Some forty minutes after Mrs. Schwartz reported the incident to the police appellant was arrested while driving towards Rapid City on Interstate 90 in his dark green Chevrolet Camero bearing Florida license plates. Appellant’s automobile showed front end damage. Appellant’s companion in the car was also arrested. A search warrant was issued and appellant’s car was searched. Found among the contents of the car was an Instamatic camera similar to the one reported missing by Mrs. Schwartz. Film taken from the camera found in appellant’s car was processed by a commercial film developing studio in Rapid City and produced pictures of the Schwartz home and family. These photographs were introduced as evidence of the identity, of the camera over strong objection by appellant.
Appellant learned the day before trial that his companion had left the jurisdiction, and on the morning of trial appellant informed his counsel that he wished to present evidence of an alibi to establish that he was not at the scene of the crime. The trial court ruled, pursuant to SDCL 23-37-5,1 that appellant could present no such evidence.
Appellant’s first contention is that SDCL 23-37-5, South Dakota’s alibi-notice statute, was improperly applied to deny him the opportunity to testify that it the time the crime occurred he was not in the vicinity of the crime scene. When appellant learned that his partner had jumped bail he concluded that the broken bonds of friendship no longer required him to cover up for his ex-friend. As pungently stated by appellant during a chambers conference: “Ten days ago I didn’t know the son-of-a-bitch was leaving, with all due respect.” According to his offer of proof, appellant would have testified that his partner had the car on the afternoon in question and that when the latter picked appellant up he indicated that he needed to get to Rapid City in a big hurry. Appellant also stated that he drove seventy to eighty miles per hour on the interstate and was subsequently stopped by the highway patrol. Appellant claimed to have two witnesses to back up his story.
It is clear that the statute in question forbids the testimony of these witnesses absent proper notice. It is much less clear that the statute forbids a defendant from testifying in his own behalf, absent his com*174pliance with the notice provisions, when he intends to say that he was not in the vicinity of the crime scene at the time the crime was committed.
As a general matter it has been held that such statutes are constitutional if they provide reciprocal discovery rights to a defendant concerning the state’s rebuttal case. In Williams v. Florida, 399 U.S. 78, 90 S.Ct. 1893, 26 L.Ed.2d 446; and in Wardius v. Oregon, 412 U.S. 470, 93 S.Ct. 2208, 37 L.Ed.2d 82, the United States Supreme Court held statutes of this type constitutional. Neither of these decisions answer the question now before this court. See also State v. Stump, 254 Iowa 1181, 119 N.W.2d 210; State ex rel. Simos v. Burke, 41 Wis.2d 129, 163 N.W.2d 177.
The problem arises because of an inherent conflict between the right of a criminal defendant to testify in his own behalf and the statutory requirement of prior notice before exercising this right when such testimony constitutes an alibi. Under the common law, a criminal defendant had no right to testify. Competency of the accused to testify was first declared in Maine in 1864, and has now been accomplished in all United States jurisdictions. This rule was not adopted in England until 1898. Hughes v. State, Alaska, 513 P.2d 1115.
The South Dakota Constitution, Article VI, Section 7, guarantees a criminal defendant the right to “defend in person and by counsel.” SDCL 23-44-1 provides that the person charged shall at his own request be a competent witness. A conflict occurs between the above-cited provisions and the language in SDCL 23-37-5 that conditions a defendant’s right to introduce alibi evidence upon his filing and serving written notice of his intention to introduce such evidence. A similar statutory conflict was addressed in People v. Rakiec, 289 N.Y. 306, 45 N.E.2d 812, and was decided by the New York Court of Appeals in favor of defendant’s right to testify. The New York statute, New York Code Cr. Proc. § 295-I, addressed itself to witnesses upon whom the defendant intended to rely to establish his alibi, and the New York court concluded that the term “witnesses” did not include a criminal defendant. In People v. Merritt, 396 Mich. 67, 238 N.W.2d 31, the Supreme Court of Michigan decided to follow the reasoning of the New York court and held that the statute in question did not apply to testimony by the defendant. It is instructive to note that the Michigan statute, M.C. L.A. § 768.21, addressed itself to evidence, as does SDCL 23-37-5.
The courts addressing this question do not, however, speak in a unanimous voice. In Simos v. Burke, supra, the Wisconsin Supreme Court, construing W.S.A. 955.07, a statute very similar to SDCL 23-37-5, concluded that in the absence of compliance with the alibi-notice statute all evidence, including defendant’s testimony, could be excluded. The court determined that defendant had a constitutionally protected right to testify truthfully and that the alibi-notice statute does not limit in any way the right of a defendant to so testify.
We conclude that the result reached in People v. Rakiec and People v. Merritt, supra, represents the better view, for as noted by the Iowa Supreme Court in State v. Stump, supra, the rationale for excluding testimony of witnesses other than defendant does not apply when addressed to defendant. Alibi evidence is particularly susceptible of fabrication; therefore, the state has a legitimate interest in not being surprised at trial with a parade of witnesses avowing that defendant was not at the scene of the crime. Williams v. Florida, supra. By being apprised of the names and addresses of these witnesses well in advance of trial the state has an opportunity to investigate the credibility of these witnesses and the reliability of their testimony. With respect to a defendant, however, the state already has the burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt that he was at the crime scene during the time in question. The optimistic defendant who hopes to convince the jury through his own unsupported testimony that he was not in the vicinity of the crime has sufficient credibility problems to offset any disadvantage to the state resulting from surprise. Accordingly, we con-*175elude that the trial court erred in denying appellant the opportunity to testify concerning his whereabouts at the time the crime occurred.
Because, no doubt, the same question will arise on retrial, appellant’s contention concerning alleged misstatements made in the affidavit in support of the search warrant will be discussed.
Appellant attacks the affidavit in support of the search warrant issued for a search of appellant’s automobile, contending that the affidavit contained misstatements. The affidavit, set forth in the margin,2 does contain inaccuracies. First, it indicates that Mrs. Schwartz identified the vehicle as a green Camero, whereas in fact she identified it as a Mustang. Second, it states that Mrs. Schwartz informed the law enforcement authorities that the vehicle was headed south on Interstate 90, whereas she in fact stated that the vehicle was headed towards Interstate 90. Finally, the affidavit states “[t]hat Debra Schwartz identified both young men as the men who had been leaving her home by the clothing they were wearing,” whereas Mrs. Schwartz could not identify the men but did identify *176some clothing that appellant and his partner had been wearing at the time of their arrest.
The United States Supreme Court has recently addressed the matter of allowing a criminal defendant to attack the veracity of an affidavit in support of a search warrant. In Franks v. Delaware, 438 U.S. 154, 98 S.Ct. 2674, 57 L.Ed.2d 667, decided June 26, 1978, the Court held:
[T]hat, where the defendant makes a substantial preliminary showing that a false statement knowingly and intentionally, or with reckless disregard for the truth, was included by the affiant in the warrant affidavit, and if the allegedly false statement is necessary to the finding of probable cause, the Fourth Amendment requires that a hearing be held at the defendant’s request. In the event that at that hearing the allegation of perjury or reckless disregard is established by the defendant by a preponderance of the evidence, and, with the affidavit’s false material set to one side, the affidavit’s remaining content is insufficient to establish probable cause, the search warrant must be voided and the fruits of the search excluded to the same extent as if probable cause was lacking on the face of the affidavit. 438 U.S. at 155, 156, 98 S.Ct. at 2676, 2677, 57 L. Ed.2d at 672.
Following the hearing on appellant’s motion to suppress the fruits of the search, the trial court stated from the bench that the affidavit absent the conflicting testimony provided a reasonable basis for issuing the search warrant. We agree.3 Accordingly, the trial court did not err in refusing to suppress evidence seized under the search warrant in question.
In view of the disposition of this case, appellant’s remaining contentions will not be addressed.
The judgment of conviction is reversed and the case is remanded for a new trial.
DUNN and PORTER, JJ., concur.
ZASTROW and MORGAN, JJ., concur in part and dissent in part.
. SDCL 23-37-5 provides:
If the defendant in a criminal action proposes to rely in any way on alibi evidence, he shall, not less than ten days before the trial of the case, file and serve upon the court and state’s attorney a written notice of his purpose to offer such evidence, which notice shall state specifically the place or places where the defendant claims to have been at the time or times of the alleged offense together with the name and residence or business address of each witness upon whom the defendant intends to rely for alibi evidence. If the defendant fails to file and serve such notice, he shall not be permitted to introduce alibi evidence at the trial of the case unless the court for good cause orders otherwise.
As used in this section, “alibi evidence” means evidence that the defendant in a criminal action was, at the time of commission of the alleged offense, at a place other than the place where such offense was committed.
.The affidavit in question provided the following information. (Italicized material alleged by appellant to be false).
Terry Rose, after first being duly sworn upon his oath, deposes and says:
That he is a law enforcement officer employed by the Meade County Sheriff s Office and that he is a Deputy Sheriff.
That on September 23, 1977, at approximately 2:00 o’clock p.m., the home of Mr. and Mrs. Lowell Schwartz was burglarized and the following items were found to be missing by Mr. and Mrs. Schwartz:
1. a pocket size camera with a brown case;
2. a checkbook with checks inside which are possibly personalized with the name of Lowell or Debbie Schwartz;
3. a man’s Black Hills gold ring;
4. a man’s silver wedding ring with three diamonds on the ring.
That on September 23, 1977, at approximately 2:00 o’clock, Debra Schwartz saw a vehicle parked outside of her home located at the Bluxberg Mountain Estates, one mile south of Sturgis, in Meade County, South Dakota, the vehicle is described as a green camero with damage to the front end with Florida plates. Moments after seeing this vehicle outside of her house she saw two men leave from the direction of her house, jump into the vehicle and leave. Debra Schwartz then contacted law enforcement ■ authorities and indicated to them that the vehicle was headed south on Interstate 90. Subsequently law enforcement authorities notified by radio other agencies in Meade and Pennington County and a description of the above vehicle was given. Approximately twenty (20) minutes after Debra Schwartz called in, a vehicle described as a green camero with damage to the front end and Florida plates was stopped near Rapid City at Exit 44 on Interstate 90 by Highway Patrolman John Horton. That the said Highway Patrolman arrested the driver of the vehicle for speeding and then brought them to the Pennington County Jail as possible suspects on the burglary of the home of Lowell and Debra Schwartz. The two men in the said vehicle were identified as Charles Young and Curtis Hibbard. That the said vehicle is registered to Curtis Hibbard.
That shortly after Charles Young and Curtis Hibbard were taken to the Pennington County Jail, Lowell and Debra Schwartz were transported to the Pennington County Jail to determine if they could identify the two young men as the persons that Debra Schwartz had seen leaving her home. That Debra Schwartz identified both young men as the men who had been leaving her home by the clothing they were wearing. That Debra Schwartz further identified the green camero with the damaged front end with Florida plates as the vehicle that she had seen parked next to her house and in which the two young men left in. That your Affiant examined the above described car and it is accurately described as a green camero with some damage to the front end with Florida license plate number 17-38813. The vehicle identification number is 124870N501679.
That Affiant has probable cause to believe that the items described above which were missing from the home of Lowell and Debra Schwartz are in the above described camero vehicle.
WHEREFORE, your Affiant requests that the Court issue a search warrant directing that a search be made of the green camero vehicle with some damage to the front end with Florida license plate number 17-38813, and vehicle identification number 124870N501679. Said search to take place in the daytime. Also said search to take place at the Pennington County Jail where the vehicle is presently impounded.
Dated this 27th day of September, 1977. Officer Rose testified at the suppression hearing that he did not know how the misstatements came to be in the affidavit, nor could he recall the source of much of the information in the document.
. The trial court directed that findings of fact and conclusions of law be drawn to reflect his ruling on the motion to suppress the evidence seized in the search; however, such findings, if drawn, were not included as part of the settled record in this Court.

=== CASE 9741728 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:06.129598+00 ===

MORGAN, Justice
(concurring in part, dissenting in part).
I concur in part and dissent in part.
I concur in the majority opinion up to the point of adopting Franks v. Delaware, 438 U.S. 154, 98 S.Ct. 2674, 57 L.Ed.2d 667 (1978), but on that point in the instant case I dissent. I prefer the more recent holding of the California Supreme Court in People v. Cook, 22 Cal .3d 67, 148 Cal.Rptr. 605, 583 P.2d 130, opinion filed September 8, 1978,1 which distinguished the case of deliberate falsehoods by the affiant. Applying the maxim “falsus in uno, falsus in unomibus” the California Supreme Court held that excision of deliberate falsehoods does not leave the remaining allegations unaffected because the court cannot presume the remainder to be true. The court went on to hold: “Lacking a reliable factual basis in the affidavit, the court has no alternative under settled constitutional principles but to quash the warrant and exclude the products of the search.” 148 Cal.Rptr. at 616, 583 P.2d at 141.
In this case, although the trial court excised the questioned portions as noted in the majority opinion, he did not indicate whether he considered the statements deliberate falsehoods or merely in reckless disregard for the truth. Considering the statements as detailed in the majority opinion, I would hold them to be deliberate falsehoods and direct the trial court upon remand to enter an order of suppression.
I am hereby authorized to state that Justice Zastrow joins in this concurrence in part and dissent in part.
. The California Court acknowledged Franks v. Delaware, supra, but held that it afforded less protection than is guaranteed under California Law.

=== CASE 9741729 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:01:06.375559+00 ===

OPINION
BROOK, Judge
Case Summary
Appellant-defendant Sears, Roebuck and Co. (“Sears”) appeals the trial court’s judgment of $1,400,000 in favor of appellee-plain-tiff Milan Manuilov (“Manuilov”) for his personal injury negligence claim. We reverse and remand for a new trial.
Issues
Sears raises three issues for review, which we restate as follows:
*972(1) whether the trial court erred in excluding Manuilov’s testimony regarding alleged acts of domestic violence that Sears intended to use to rebut the testimony of an expert witness and to impeach Manuilov’s credibility;
(2) whether the trial court erred in admitting the opinions of Dr. Jeffrey B. Quil-len (“Quillen”) and Dr. Martin Blinder (“Blinder”) as Manuilov’s expert scientific witnesses; and
(3) whether the judgment was excessive as a matter of law.
Facts and Procedural History
The facts most favorable to the judgment indicate that on January 27, 1988, Manuilov tripped and fell over a vacuum cleaner hose at a Sears store in Richmond, Indiana. He hit the back of his head on the concrete floor. An ambulance took Manuilov to Reid Memorial Hospital, where he was diagnosed by Quillen with a head contusion and released the same day. Manuilov returned to the hospital three days later, complaining of persistent dizziness and occasional severe headaches; he was examined by Dr. Reagan, who recorded a diagnosis of post-concussion dizziness. Manuilov’s headaches and dizziness persisted, for which he sought treatment from several doctors in the United States and in his native Bulgaria.
On January 25, 1990, Manuilov and his wife and daughter filed a complaint for damages in the Wayne County Superior Court, alleging that Sears’ negligence had proximately caused him to sustain “permanent and severe personal injuries” that resulted in the permanent impairment of his “ability to work and earn a living” as a high-wire circus performer. They also sought compensation for his wife’s loss of consortium, his daughter’s loss of his services, and his wife and daughter’s “permanently impaired” ability to “work and earn a living” as members of his performing group.1
A jury was unable to reach a unanimous verdict after a trial in March 1997, and a mistrial was ordered. The case was then venued to Shelby County Circuit Court.
On August 15,1997, Sears filed a motion in limine requesting that the trial court order Manuilov not to present any information concerning his “having a diagnosis of and suffering from post-concussion syndrome”;2 his “having sustained a permanent physical injury to his brain”; and his “symptoms of headaches and dizziness being caused by an organic physical defect sustained as a result of the alleged fall in question.” In its supporting brief, Sears argued that the prejudicial value of this evidence would greatly outweigh its minimal probative value under Ind. Evidence Rule 403; Sears also argued that the opinions offered by Manuilov’s expert witnesses should be excluded because the experts were not sufficiently qualified to testify about these issues and their opinions were not scientifically reliable under Ind. Evidence Rules 702 and 703.
Manuilov filed a brief in reply to Sears’ motion on September 12, 1997, claiming that his expert witnesses were indeed qualified to testify about these issues and that their opinions were based on sufficiently reliable scientific principles. The trial court held a hearing on Sears’ motion in limine on September 30, 1997, and denied the motion on October 14, 1997. There is no transcript of the hearing in the appellate record. The parties’ arguments with respect to the qualifications of Manuilov’s expert witnesses and the scientific reliability of their opinions surfaced repeatedly at trial and will be explored in greater detail below.
A second trial was held on October 20-24, 1997. On October 21, 1997, during Manui-lov’s direct examination of Quillen, a specialist in emergency and trauma medicine and the physician who first examined Manuilov on his admission to the emergency room, the issue of post-concussion syndrome was raised during the following exchange:
*973[MANUILOV’S COUNSEL]: Doctor, I would like for you to assume, obviously you were not here when Mr. Manuilov was testifying this morning, but I would like for you to assume that he has testified, as I’ll represent to you he indeed has, that uh ... now in October of 1997 he continues to have headaches and dizziness uh ... on a repeated basis and has had those symptoms and suffered from those conditions since January 27th, 1988. Given that information, doctor, I’d like to ask you if uh ... there are tests you could run, if you were to come over here and ... and examine Mr. Manuilov right this moment, are there tests that you could run, doctor, that would enable you to identify or to see headaches or dizziness in Mr. Manuilov?
[QUILLEN]: No. It’d be very very unlikely-
[MANUILOV’S COUNSEL]: And why is that?
[QUILLEN]: Simply because concussive syndrome or post-concussive syndrome is uh ... a ... It’s not that it ... it’s not an organic disease, but it tends to present itself with the symptoms that the patient presents with or feels, as opposed to something uh ... where a person can run a test and say, ah, yes, here it is. Same way ... Let me give you a comparison. A person can come in with chest pain and we would run an EKG or a heart tracing and it may come out normal. Now that doesn’t mean the patient’s not having chest pain or he’s not having a heart attack, it just means that we can’t see it on the EKG. And it’s very similar ... many of these tests that would likely to have been run on Mr. Man-uilov uh ... don’t give a specific reading that would ... you could hang a uh ... organic basis or a medical diagnosis based on the results of a test only. You have to go with the whole picture, and for that reason it would be very unlikely that I could run a test at this point that would show something. It would [not]3 be so black and white as, yeah, look here, that’s the reason that ... that we’re having continued symptoms.
Sears then objected to Quillen’s reference to post-concussion syndrome as follows:
Your Honor ... Your Honor, excuse me, I’m sorry. I need to interpose an objection to preserve my record here. I object to the reference ... the doctor’s reference to post-concussion syndrome for all the reasons expressed in my pre-trial motion [in limine] which the Court has reviewed and [ask] that that testimony be stricken.
The trial court overruled Sears’ objection but noted its request for a continuing objection with respect to Quillen’s testimony on the issue of post-concussion syndrome. Manui-lov’s counsel later asked Quillen if he had an opinion “based upon a reasonable degree of medical certainty” whether Manuilov suffered from post-concussion syndrome:
[QUILLEN]: Well, the fact that it has been this prolonged and the symptoms certainly fit in the category of post-concussive symptoms, I ... there’s no question in my mind that ... that he has symptoms related to post-concussive syndrome.
[SEARS’ COUNSEL]: Excuse ... excuse me, Your Honor. The question counsel asked was simply whether he had an opinion and then he went into giving an opinion, therefore, I move to strike the answer and request permission of the Court to pursuant to [Ind. Evidence Rule 104(a) ] to conduct a preliminary examination as to the scientifical liability [sic ] of that ... of that opinion.
The trial court granted Sears’ request to ask Quillen preliminary questions pursuant to Evid. R. 104(a) outside the presence of the jury.4 In his responses to the questions, *974Quillen drew a distinction between (1) a medical diagnosis, which he would render only after studying a person’s “past medical history, social history, physical exam, lab testing, etc.” or performing an examination “very closely and firsthandly [sic ]”; and (2) a medical opinion, which he would offer in the absence of “firsthand information.” Quillen admitted that he had not examined Manuilov since the day of the fall; that he had based his medical opinion that Manuilov suffered from post-concussion syndrome on “some secondhand information .... about what Mr. Manuilov’s symptoms are,” instead of making a diagnosis after a firsthand medical examination; that “headaches and dizziness can have a lot of different causes in medicine,” such as a migraine headache; and that a person can experience headaches and dizziness without suffering a blow to the head. At the conclusion of the preliminary questions, Sears’ counsel made the following objection:
Number one, we object that the witness’ testimony on this point is not helpful or relevant under [Ind. Evidence Rule 702(a) ], uh ... that he’s been provided insufficient facts for a reliable opinion and, thus, the opinion’s speculation. Unsupported expert opinion prohibited by case law interpreting Rule 702. Uh ... and that the opinion is not based on information cust ... customarily relied upon by uh ... persons in this doctor’s practice. That’s [Evid. R. 703]. And, finally, uh ... my final basis is that the uh ... whatever minimal probative value this testimony has is outweighed by the prejudicial effect of reliance on the expert’s stature rather than the ... the scientific soundness of the opinion. That’s [Evid. R. 403].
The trial court overruled Sears’ objections, and Quillen was permitted to testify about post-concussion syndrome and to give his medical opinion that Manuilov suffered from this syndrome; he further opined without objection from Sears that the cause of Man-uilov’s symptoms was the blow to the head he had received from his fall in the Sears store. During cross-examination, Quillen agreed that his opinion was based on his “medical education, background, training, credentials and experience, the medical records associated with the Reid Hospital treatment ... the information [he had been] supplied concerning Mr. Manuilov’s condition at the scene of the accident and Mr. Manuilov’s testimony concerning his present symptoms”; he also acknowledged that he had not seen any records indicating any “actual organic physical damage” to Manuilov’s brain. Finally, Quil-len acknowledged that he was “unaware of any information that medical science has been able to determine why Mr. Manuilov” had the symptoms of which he complained.
Blinder, a psychiatrist, was also called as an expert scientific witness by Manuilov on October 22, 1997. During direct examination, Blinder explained the term “post-concussion syndrome” to the jury:
Uh, it’s hard to do much damage to the skull, but, impact to the skull can be transmitted to the soft tissue within. And when that happens, if the brain receives a shock, that is if the skull gets a blow and transmits the trauma of that blow to the brain, causing a shock, we say the brain has been concussed. And, if you’re lucky, when you get a concussion, you’re dazed or you may be knocked out a little bit, and, over the next few weeks you don’t feel quite right. You have a lot of headaches, you’re dizzy, irritable, you may get depressed, it’s difficult concentrating, memory, in particularly [sic] memory of things that you just did twenty (20) minutes ago, seem[s] impaired. But, for most people, these fade away in time. If you’re not lucky, then you have persistent symptoms. You’re never quite back on your feet in the way you were. There’s always a little slowing of the thought processes, some memory difficulty, some dizziness, and persistent headaches you never had before. There may be an *975enduring personality change. Uh, these people seem to be more prone to anxiety. They’re more prone to depression. Uh, their energy levels are diminished. They lose some of their motivation, their judgment. Their sexual energy seems to fade away. They have problems with their ... their coworkers and their family because their personality has changed, and usually not for the better. Uh, they have particular difficulty learning new material, although, they may be able to do old tasks pretty close to their previous levels of function. Because these symptoms persist for weeks, months, sometimes for years, after the concussion, we call this post-concussion syndrome. Syndrome refers to a constellation of symptoms. Post means after. You can have pre and you can have post. So if you have these symptoms and they endure for any length of time after the blow to the brain, you have a post-concussion syndrome....
But, it’s interesting, it is very difficult to document this particular mental injury with the sort of diagnostic tools we have that are very useful in most other kinds of head injuries. Because a concussion is very subtle. It doesn’t kill the cells. It shocks them. It stuns them. And we don’t have fine enough tools to pick up that.
Blinder performed psychiatric assessments of Manuilov in July 1991 and in June 1995, after reviewing medical records given to him by Manuilov’s attorney. When asked whether he had arrived at a diagnosis after the first assessment, Blinder answered as follows:
Surely. I believe that he was suffering from an anxiety disorder with panic attacks. I believe that he was suffering from dysthymia, which is chronic and persistent low grade depression. I felt that, uh, many of these symptoms, in particular, dizziness and headaches, were consistent with post-concussion syndrome.
Sears objected to Blinder’s answer and moved to strike his reference to post-eoncussion syndrome “for all the reasons that we objected to Dr. Quillen and for all the reasons that we expressed in our pre-trial motion on that subject.... And we’d show a continuing objection on that point.” The trial court overruled Sears’ objection, and Blinder went on to state that his diagnosis of Manuilov after the. June 1995 assessment was essentially the same as his earlier diagnosis.
In response to a question from Manuilov’s counsel regarding the potential for persons to misrepresent their symptoms in cases with “subjective disabilities and symptoms that seem great compared to the injury that was suffered,” Blinder’s answer included the following:
So that’s ... sign number one, the malinger[er’s] symptoms don’t well fit an established clinical pattern. Number two, the degree of dishonestly [sic ], sociopathy necessary to conjure up a legal lawsuit, a fraudulent lawsuit, is usually apparent in these people’s lives in other áreas. Uh, they’re wife beaters. .They desert their children. They’re drunkards. Uh, they, uh, bounce from job to job to job. Uh, they often have, uh, criminal records, sometimes in some proportions, but at least a minor criminal record, four (4) or five (5) DUI’s. And you can see that they’re slippery critters long before they ever get the idea, ah, I’m gonna make some money in this lawsuit. Thirdly, and this is particularly the case in head injury situations, they flunk all the tests.... So, uh, certainly I ... I’m not, uh, I’m not omnipotent [sic] in these matters, but I am satisfied, more than satisfied, that Mr. Manuilov has a genuine disability and that he is not a malingerer.5
Blinder agreed with Manuilov’s counsel’s suggestion that his opinion regarding malingering had “been to a reasonable degree of medical and psychiatric certainty.”
Blinder further testified regarding Manui-lov’s prognosis that “even with optimum treatment, uh, we could, uh, insure that he could safely cross the high wire ninety-six (96), ninety-seven (97), out of a hundred (100) times.” Sears objected to and moved to *976strike this answer, claiming that Manuilov had failed to lay a proper foundation for it and that it was a lay opinion instead of an expert opinion. The trial court sustained Sears’ objection, but when Manuilov asked Blinder whether he understood “the [principles] involved in high wire performing, generally,” the following colloquy occurred after Sears made another objection:
[SEARS’ COUNSEL]: My response to that, your honor, is just because no one is qualified, or, according to counsel’s argument, there’s no one qualified, uh, to be an expert on the vocational aspects of high wire, is not justification for allowing someone who’s unqualified and for which a foundation of knowledge has not been laid to give these expert opinions.
COURT: I think he’s testified that, uh, ninety-six (96) to ninety-seven (97) times out of a hundred (100), uh, the plaintiff would have no problems or be able to do that, but he couldn’t assure that there would be a hundred (100) times. So, I’ll allow that and we’ll move on. [MANUILOV’S COUNSEL]: Okay.
[SEARS’ COUNSEL]: Is the objection overruled, your honor?
COURT: No, the objection is sustained. I’ll let that ... there was no objection to that question.
With respect to the issue of causation, Manuilov’s counsel asked the following question at the close of direct examination:
And, Doctor, uh, just ... just to wrap up, uh, uh, you use the term amalgam, uh, and, uh, uh, with regard to the various symptoms and conditions of ... I would simply ask you, in your opinion, to a reasonable degree of, uh, medical and psychiatric certainty and/or probability as to whether or not the causal connection, in your opinion, exists between' the fall of January 27,1988, the diagnosis of post-concussion syndrome, the diagnoses you have set forth with regard to his psychiatric condition and connecting those with your conclusions with regard to Mr. Manuilov’s prognosis-
Without objection from Sears, Blinder answered, “Yes. I think they are all causally related.”
During cross-examination, Blinder agreed with Sears’ statement that “it would be improper for anyone to say that [Manuilov’s] medical records prove that [he] has a physical injury in his brain.” Sears also revisited its objection to Blinder’s testimony regarding Manuilov’s possible success rate on the high wire and asked the trial court to exclude the testimony pursuant to Ind. Evidence Rule 702(b); the trial court duly noted Sears’ comments for the record but did not reverse its earlier ruling to admit Blinder’s testimony.
When Blinder was asked on re-direct to state his opinion whether Manuilov suffered brain damage as a result of his fall, Sears objected that Blinder was not qualified to answer this question; Sears noted that Blinder had stated earlier that he “must leave the question of a possible organic con-tributive to Mr. Manuilov’s complaints of dizziness to [his] colleagues in physical medicine.” The trial court ruled that Blinder would have to testify consistently with this opinion. Soon thereafter, Blinder stated,
With those qualifications, it is my opinion, to a reasonable degree of medical probability, based on the available evidence for all of its limitations, that this man took a hell of a hit to the head. That this hit to the head has disabled him for reasons that are combined, both physical and psychological factors. Uh, that there is some room for improvement down the road, uh, but that he will have a substantial disability, and that disability impacts upon his personal life and upon his capacity to return to his previous profession.
Sears moved to strike this testimony, arguing that Blinder had speculated that there was a physical component to Manuilov’s symptoms without laying a proper foundation for his opinion; the trial court denied Sears’ motion.
After Manuilov rested his case, Sears attempted to call him and his girlfriend Helen Kurihara (“Kurihara”) as witnesses on October 23, 1997. In a discussion outside the presence of the jury, Manuilov’s counsel requested an in camera session to determine the nature of Sears’ potentially “extremely prejudicial” questions. Sears’ counsel replied that he had received information via fax *977the previous day6 that concerned “Blinder’s opinion on malingering and the grounds for that opinion.” The trial court ordered Man-uilov and Kurihara out of the courtroom. After viewing the faxed documents and considering arguments from both parties, the trial court suggested that Sears make an offer to prove: “That’s the only way I know to go about it because the nature of the evidence is such that uh ... it would ... it could certainly be highly prejudicial and inflammatory and that might, in and of itself, outweigh any benefit to the Jury to determine any of the issues that ... that the Jury will decide.”
Trial counsel then made the following arguments:
[MANUILOV’S COUNSEL]: Judge, if I may make an observation. Obviously, I don’t know what’s there, but ... but it ... I think the Court has hit the key issue here which is whether or not the prejudicial impact of something that is obvious ... this is obviously prejudicial. Mr. Le-venhagen [Sears’ counsel] seems to be pulling one element from the malingering definition and I think Mr. Levenhagen just said there are thirty (30) things or something. Whether the prejudicial impact outweighs any probative value uh ... when put in front of the Jury that can poison uh ... the merits of this case.
[SEARS’ COUNSEL]: And, Judge, my response to that is there’s two kinds of prejudice. Unfair prejudice, that is, it ... it leads to confusion and giving the evidence more weight than it deserves, and there’s the other part of prejudice, which is the fact that it’s true and just hurts their case. Judge, I think I’ve showed you that I’ve got a good faith basis for the question, that the facts are true and that uh ... while that the only unfair prejudice that’s going to result here, Judge, is because Mr. Manuilov has not been truthful with his lawyer or with Dr. Blinder. And it’s not my fault that he hasn’t told his lawyer this.
THE COURT: Well, I still think under the circumstances that at least an offer to prove outside the presence of the Jury is appropriate so that I can determine, or at least try to determine whether or not the prejudice outweighs the relevance and ... and the assistance to the Jury to determine any fact [in] issue.
Referring to the faxed documents from Clark County, Nevada (without seeking to admit them into evidence),7 Sears asked Manuilov whether he had “violently attacked and beat” Kurihara on December 13, 1995; whether he had hit her “in the face or head”; whether he had also “pushed and shoved” her or pulled her hair; whether he had been arrested and put in jail; whether he had called and threatened to kill Kurihara after he had been put in jail; and whether he had “beat her up” on at least one prior occasion.8 Manuilov’s counsel then made the following statement:
Excuse me ... excuse me. Your Honor ... Your Honor, I have an idea here. Instead of him being questioned about all of this, he’s obviously reading from some court documents. I’m willing to stipulate into the record, for the purpose of this offer to prove, whatever is in those docu*978ments and then we can address the issue of whether or not the Jury should [hear] it.
The trial court then admitted the faxed documents “for purposes only of the issue raised on the offer to prove and the argument thereon concerning the admissibility of this evidence before the Jury.”9
Sears then argued that Manuilov’s testimony was both relevant and had probative value with respect to undermining Blinder’s opinion about malingering and determining the “huge” issue of Manuilov’s credibility in general, and that any prejudice resulting from the admission of the disputed testimony would not substantially outweigh its “incredible” relevance and probative value. Manui-lov’s counsel asserted that the prejudicial impact of the testimony would outweigh its probative value and would “destroy” the case and turn it into a criminal trial about “whether or not it’s okay to ... for a man to strike a woman and threaten to kill her.” The trial court replied,
Obviously, I’m ... I’m concerned, certainly the plaintiffs credibility is ... is an issue at this point because of the information that was divulged. The timing of the divulging of the information really strikes me as being interesting, but I don’t have any control over that except through my ... my deadlines and cut-off dates. The prejudicial impact of the Jury receiving this information would certainly be uh ... regardless of what kind of limiting instructions the Court gave or cautioned or so forth would far outweigh, in my opinion, the probative value.... [I]t’s my determination that ... and I think the offer to prove is sufficient for the record, that this ■information will not go to the Jury.
On October 23, 1997, the jury found in favor of Manuilov, but determined that he had been 20 percent at fault in contributing to the cause of his damages; consequently, the total damage award of $1,750,000 was reduced by 20 percent to $1,400,000.
Sears filed a motion to correct errors on November 21, 1997, which was denied by the trial court on February 10, 1998.
Discussion and Decision
Standard of Review
The admission or exclusion of evidence is a matter of discretion for the trial court. Zemco Mfg., Inc. v. Pecoraro, 703 N.E.2d 1064, 1069 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied (1999). This Court will reverse a trial court’s decision only if it abuses its discretion; “that is, only when the trial court’s action is clearly erroneous and against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances.” Id. The erroneous exclusion of evidence requires reversal “only if the error relates to a material matter or substantially affects the rights of the parties.” Id.; see also Ind. Evidence Rule 103(a). “Any error in the admission of evidence is harmless if the same or similar evidence is submitted without objection.” Homehealth, Inc. v. Northern Indiana Public Service Co., 600 N.E.2d 970, 974 (Ind.Ct.App.1992).
We further note that all relevant evidence is admissible, except as provided by statute or rule; evidence that is not relevant is inadmissible. Ind. Evidence Rule 402. “‘Relevant evidence’ means evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable *979than it would be without the evidence.” Ind. Evidence Rule 401. As a final consideration, otherwise relevant evidence “may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury....” Evid. R. 403 (emphasis supplied).
I. Admissibility of Manuilov’s testimony regarding alleged domestic violence
“In ruling on the relevancy of evidence, the trial court is accorded wide latitude to determine the probative value of evidence in contrast to its prejudicial impact.” Barnes v. Barnes, 603 N.E.2d 1337, 1343 (Ind.1992). “However, relevant evidence — that which logically tends to prove a material fact — is not inadmissible simply because of its prejudicial impact.” Id. “It is only when the evidence is merely marginally relevant that the trial court has discretion to exclude it by balancing the probative value against the prejudicial impact.” Id.10 Procedurally, Ind. Trial Rule 43(B) provides in relevant part that a party “may call an adverse party ... and interrogate him by leading questions and contradict and impeach him in all respects as if he had been called by the adverse party.” This precept is complemented by Ind. Evidence Rule 607, which states that “[t]he credibility of a witness may be attacked by any party, including the party calling the witness.”
From what we can discern from the record, Seal's planned to ask Manuilov whether he had ever abused Kurihara; if he denied any abuse, Sears was prepared to question him from the faxed Nevada court documents (without seeking to admit them into evidence) and call Kurihara as a witness to impeach Manuilov. Sears argued that his testimony would undermine Blinder’s opinion that he was not a malingerer and, more importantly, would undermine Manuilov’s credibility, which Sears contended was “massively at issue in this case.” Manuilov’s counsel argued that the testimony would address only one element of Blinder’s opinion regarding malingering; that Blinder was unavailable and could not immediately testify to the effect the testimony would have on his opinion; and that the prejudice inherent in Manuilov’s testimony would “destroy” the case. Sears followed the trial court’s suggestion to conduct an offer of proof; in an apparent attempt to expedite the procedure, Manuilov’s counsel offered to “stipulate into the record, for the purpose of [the] offer to prove, whatever is in those documents and then we can address the issue of whether or not the Jury should [hear] it.”
One obvious drawback to reviewing the trial court’s ruling on this issue is that the testimonial sequence and the relevant tactical considerations would undoubtedly develop much differently during a new trial: Manui-lov is now aware of the information contained in the faxed documents, and, if true, he can certainly apprise his medical experts of this potentially damaging evidence in an attempt to “pre-empt” a possible attack by Sears. On a similar note, Sears would not have to face the possibility of a continuance or even sanctions as a consequence of ambushing Manuilov with an eleventh-hour fax from Nevada. Nevertheless, we must confine our review to the propriety of the ruling that the lower court was forced to make amidst the tumult and the shouting of a jury trial.
Although the application of Ind. Evidence Rule 404(b) has been confined almost exclusively to criminal law, we find it helpful as a starting point in our analysis.11 See Ind. *980Evidence Rule 101(a) (rules of evidence “apply in all proceedings” except as otherwise required by constitution or rule). Evid. R. 404(b) reads in relevant part:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show action in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for other purposes, such as proof of motive, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or accident ...
With respect to criminal cases, our supreme court has held that Indiana’s standard for assessing the admissibility of Evid. R. 404(b) evidence is as follows:
(1) the court must determine that the evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is relevant to a matter at issue other than the defendant’s propensity to commit the charged act; and (2) the court must balance the probative value of the evidence against its prejudicial effect pursuant to Rule 403 [footnote omitted]. When inquiring into relevance, the court may consider any factor it would ordinarily consider under Rule 402.
Hicks v. State, 690 N.E.2d 215, 221 (Ind.1997). Our supreme court has further determined that the list of “other purposes” mentioned in the rule “is not exhaustive; extrinsic act evidence may be admitted for any purpose not specified in Rule 404(b) unless precluded by the first sentence of Rule 404(b) or any other Rule.” Thompson v. State, 690 N.E.2d 224, 233 (Ind.1997).
In his 12 Indiana PRACTICE § 404.233, 455-456 (2d ed.1995), Judge Robert Lowell Miller, Jr. notes that there is a split among the federal courts as to whether Federal Rule of Evidence 404(b) “touches upon the use of extrinsic act evidence for impeachment of a witness.[ ]12 Because Rule 404(a)(3) addresses the character of a witness, Rule 404(b) may not apply at all to impeachment of a non-party witness.”13 Judge Miller further observes, “It would seem that in light of the limited exclusionary effect of Rule 404(b), Rule 404(b) should not prohibit extrinsic act evidence offered for impeachment purposes,! 1 but other evidence rules may apply [footnote cross-references commentary on Ind. Evidence Rule 608(b) ].” Id. at 456. Evid. R. 608(b) reads as follows:
(b) Specific Instances of the Conduct of a Witness. For the purpose of attacking or supporting the witness’s credibility, other than conviction of a crime as provided in Rule 609, specific instances may not be inquired into or proven by extrinsic evidence. They may, however, in the discretion of the court, if probative of truthfulness or untruthfulness, be inquired into on cross-examination of the witness concerning the character for truthfulness or untruthfulness of another witness as to which character the witness being cross-examined has testified.
Referring to Indiana’s version of Evid. R. 608(b), Judge Miller states that “a party may not, with very limited exceptions,!] show a witness’s character, for impeachment purposes, by proof of or reference to specific acts of misconduct or immorality not resulting in a conviction, either on cross examination or by extrinsic proof.!]” 13 Indiana PRACTICE § 608.201,137 (2d ed.1995).
Indiana Rule 608(b) differs substantially from Federal Rule 608(b) insofar as the federal rule grants the trial court discretion to allow inquiry into specific acts, not amounting to a conviction, on cross examination of the impeachee.f] A party may not embark upon such an inquiry under the Indiana rule except when the door has been opened by other evidence, [] or, perhaps, as to prior false accusations by the victim in a sex offense prosecution. At least one commentator has spoken in favor of Indiana’s approach, describing the view taken in the federal rules as “simply a mistake.”! ]
*981Id. at 139 (emphasis supplied).14
Judge Miller notes that Evid. R. 608(b) “prohibits inquiry and extrinsic evidence alike. The prohibition against impeachment by specific acts offered to show conduct has been applied to bar evidence of or inquiry into prior arrests not amounting to conviction[ ] even if the prior conduct involved trial participants -” Id. at 138. However, Judge Miller mentions several exceptions to the inadmissibility of specific acts for impeachment purposes, including the following:
Generally, if a party touches incompletely on a subject in direct examination,[ ] leaving the trier of fact with a false or misleading impression of the facts related, the door may be opened15 to the cross examiner to explore the subject fully by bringing out otherwise inadmissible material.[ ] This doctrine is equally applicable when a party, through testimony introduced through the party or his witnesses, leaves the trier of fact with a false or misleading impression of the character of the party or his witnesses. If other evidence or testimony sufficiently corrects the misimpression, however, the trial court may decide to close the door and enforce traditional limitations on cross-examinationj ] In any event, the responding evidence must somehow relate to the evidence by which the door is claimed to have been opened.[]
Id. § 608.207 at 150-151.
Judge Miller cites numerous cases that illustrate Indiana’s application of this exception to the rule, all but one of which predate our adoption of the Indiana Rules of Evidence on January 1,1994.16 Nevertheless, in reviewing the various factual situations in which our appellate courts have invoked the exception and their stated rationale for doing so, we cannot find any persuasive reason to abolish this exception.
In Fahler v. Freeman, this Court upheld the trial court’s admission of evidence that a personal injury plaintiff had received worker’s compensation benefits to reimburse his medical expenses, when the plaintiff had left the obvious impression that he had paid the expenses himself:
In this cause, the questions were offered for purposes of impeachment of the plaintiffs prior testimony and, on these facts, properly so. The direct questioning of the plaintiff and his careful answers appeared to be clearly designed to leave the jury with a false impression. The direction of the plaintiffs testimony departed from the issue of the amount of damages he had allegedly sustained and then focused upon who had actually paid for them. Plaintiff entered this area at his peril.... Where evidence on a certain issue is introduced by one party, and it appears likely that the other party will be prejudiced unless he is permitted to introduce contradictory or explanatory evidence, such evidence should be permitted.
*982143 Ind.App. 493, 497-498, 241 N.E.2d 394, 396 (1968) (citations omitted).17
In Storey v. State, our supreme court found no error in the trial court’s admission of evidence that the defendant had been convicted of an assault in 1959, where defendant’s psychologist had reviewed his medical history dating back to 1968 and opined that an embolism suffered during that year had contributed to his “chronic organic brain disorder” and had “reduced his capacity to handle stressful situations, to make judgments, and to control his impulses, especially fear.” 552 N.E.2d 477, 481 (Ind.1990). While noting the general rule that only convictions for infamous crimes or crimes involving dishonesty or false statement may be used to impeach a witness,18 the supreme court made the following distinction:
In the present case, the State attempted to refute the opinion of the defendant’s psychologist by attacking the information upon which it was based as well as its conclusion. The evidence of the facts of the 1959 assault conviction tended to refute the psychologist’s opinion regarding the defendant’s reduced capacity to handle stress and fear following the 1968 brain embolism and resulting organic brain dis-' order. Evidence of pre-existing behavioral deficiencies is especially relevant in this case because the psychologist only reviewed the defendant’s medical history since 1968. In this regard, the evidence was not offered as proof of the defendant’s guilt of the murder and thus was not erroneously admitted for that reason....
The questioning of the defendant about information he provided the psychologist was also relevant to show the basis upon which the opinion was formed. The jury was entitled to know the basis upon which it was formed to assist them in assessing the weight it should be accorded [citation omitted]. The psychologist stated that he did consider the defendant’s assault conviction, although he discounted its importance in his decision-making. The defendant’s answers indicate that he may have provided the psychologist with an incomplete history of his violent acts, which indicated behavioral deficiencies. In essence, the State’s principal purpose was to attack the reliability of the psychologist’s opinion, not to impeach the defendant by improper means.
Id. at 482.
Several obvious factual parallels may be drawn between Storey and the instant case with respect to Blinder’s opinion on malingering, although we acknowledge that Sears also offered evidence of Manuilov’s alleged violent "acts for the purpose of impeaching the plaintiffs credibility (see footnote 18 above). With respect to plaintiffs attempting to “close” evidentiary doors that they have opened of their own accord, we reflect on Justice Dickson’s observation in Barnes:
Unlike the victim in a criminal case, the plaintiff in a civil damage action is “on *983trial” in the sense that he or she is an actual party seeking affirmative relief from another party. Such plaintiff is a voluntary participant, with strong financial incentive to shape the evidence that determines the outcome. It is antithetical to principles of fair trial that one party may seek recovery from another based on evidence it selects while precluding opposing relevant evidence on grounds of prejudice.
603 N.E.2d at 1342.
In City of Indianapolis v. Swanson, 448 N.E.2d 668, 670 (Ind.1983), our supreme court held that the trial court had erred in excluding evidence that the plaintiff in a personal-injury action had sold drugs to and made statements to an undercover police officer that he had purposely failed a physical “for the purposes of this trial”; that he did not suffer from seizures as a result of his accident; and that he had sold drugs before. The supreme court found that Swanson’s statements were relevant and “went to the very heart of his claim against the City” with respect to his alleged suffering from grand mal epilepsy and his inability to make a living. Id. at 671. Manuilov attempts to distinguish Swanson from the case at bar on a factual basis; however, we are convinced that because Manuilov’s chances for recovery depended substantially upon his credibility in describing his subjective injuries to both Blinder and the jury, the supreme court’s reasoning in Swanson still applies: “a trial court may not properly deny the cross-examination of a party concerning facts connected with that party’s own acts and statements relating to the ease which tend to impair that party’s credibility.” Id. at 671-672.
The same logic may be applied to Blinder’s expert scientific opinion concerning malingering. We fail to see how the eviden-tiary door could have been opened any more widely or how a more blatant false impression could have been created in this case: Manuilov’s counsel intentionally and specifically elicited Blinder’s opinion that Manuilov was not a malingerer; before Sears received the Nevada court documents, Blinder testified on cross-examination that he had discovered “no criminal history or anti-social behavior” in Manuilov’s background, having “specifically asked” Manuilov and his attorney. Manuilov offers no support for his assertion that the evidence of his alleged acts of domestic violence should be excluded simply because it contradicts only one factor that Blinder considered in formulating his opinion on malingering; nor does he mention that Blinder gave detailed testimony on far fewer than the approximately 30 factors included in his textbook.
As for Manuilov’s argument that Sears was required to call an expert (either Blinder or one of its own) to “contextualize” the meaning of the excluded testimony, we find that his reliance on Mankey v. Bennett, 38 F.3d 353 (7th Cir.1994) is misplaced; not only had the trial court in Mankey previously granted a motion in limine with respect to the excluded evidence of the plaintiffs history of drug and alcohol abuse, but the defendant sought to introduce this evidence through its own unlisted (and therefore ultimately excluded) expert witness solely for the purpose of showing its impact on the plaintiffs “life expectancy and future earning capacity.” Id. at 359-360. The fact that Blinder was not readily available to testify about the effect the excluded evidence might have on his opinion is of no moment here; Manuilov could have requested a continuance to obtain his testimony either in person or by other means. Moreover, Sears was not required to provide an expert witness to “contextualize” the effect of its evidence on Blinder’s opinion; Sears’ primary reason for offering the evidence was to undermine the factual basis for his expert opinion, not to advance an expert opinion of its own. Although the timing of Sears’ discovery of the contested evidence can best be described as curious, the trial court did not exclude it on the basis of unfair surprise, and we may not ponder this question on appeal.
Additionally, we note that the Evid. R. 608(b) exception with respect to a plaintiff “opening the door” to the admission of certain evidence is closely connected with Ind. Evidence Rule 611(b), which provides that cross-examination “should be limited to the subject matter of the direct examination and matters affecting the credibility of the witness. The court may, in the exercise of *984discretion, permit inquiry into additional matters as if on direct examination.” In Reeves v. Boyd & Sons, Inc., 654 N.E.2d 864, 872 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied (1996), the plaintiff in a personal-injury action and his mother were questioned about his previous conviction for driving while intoxicated, after his mother had implied that the plaintiff “did not partake of alcoholic beverages.” This Court held that under Evid. R. 611(b), the defendant was allowed to rebut this implication on cross-examination; citing Judge Miller, we further held that the defendant was entitled to present otherwise inadmissible evidence to contradict a false impression left by the plaintiff, who had “opened the door” on direct examination. Id., citing 13 Indiana PRACTICE § 611.204 at 201.
Having considered the admissibility of the contested testimony in the context of evidence rules governing impeachment and extrinsic evidence, we realize that it must also be reviewed contemporaneously with the relevance and probative value requirements of Evid. R. 401, 402, and 403. Clearly, any evidence tending to prove that Manuilov failed to “pass muster” with one of Blinder’s malingering factors would be more than marginally relevant with respect to both Manui-lov’s credibility and the soundness of Blinder’s opinion. Evidence of Manuilov’s alleged acts of domestic violence and his subsequent failure to disclose this information to either Blinder or his attorney, although inherently prejudicial, nevertheless contains sufficient probative value with respect to the relevance factors mentioned above as not to be substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.
Finally, we would be remiss if we did not address the significance of Ind. Evidence Rule 105 with respect to this issue: “When evidence which is admissible as to one party or for one purpose but not admissible as to another party or for another purpose is admitted, the court, upon request, shall restrict the evidence to its proper scope and admonish the jury accordingly.” Manuilov could have requested such an instruction, which would have strictly limited the jury’s consideration of the evidence to the soundness of Blinder’s opinion on malingering and Manui-lov’s credibility. The trial court was also permitted to give a limiting instruction of its own volition: “Rule 105 does not preclude trial courts from giving a limiting admonition or instruction sua sponte as a matter of discretion^ ] but by its plain terms imposes no affirmative duty to do so.[ ]” Humphrey v. State, 680 N.E.2d 836, 839 (Ind.1997), citing 12 Indiana PRACTICE § 105.103 at 106-08 (second citation omitted).
In conclusion, we hold that because Manui-lov’s testimony regarding his alleged acts of domestic violence (1) would not have violated the admissibility requirements of Evid. R. 404(b); (2) would be considered an exception to the admissibility requirements of Evid. R. 608(b); (3) was relevant under Evid. R. 401 and 402; (4) had probative value that was not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice under Evid. R. 403; and (5) substantially affected Sears’ right to correct a false impression created by Manuilov concerning the material issue of his credibility as well as the soundness of Blinder’s opinion on malingering, the trial court abused its discretion and committed reversible error in excluding this evidence from the jury. See Zemco Mfg., Inc., 703 N.E.2d at 1069.
II. Admissibility of expert scientific testimony
Because we reverse the trial court’s judgment on the basis of its erroneous exclusion of testimony regarding Manuilov’s alleged acts of domestic violence, we are not required to address the trial court’s decision to admit the opinions of Quillen and Blinder concerning post-concussion syndrome, the etiology of Manuilov’s symptoms, and other scientific matters. However, because of the likelihood that the issue of expert scientific testimony will resurface during a new trial, we find it prudent to address this issue on the merits.
In a negligence action, a reasonable connection must be established between the defendant’s conduct and the damages suffered by the plaintiff. Roberson v. Hicks, 694 N.E.2d 1161, 1163 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied. At a minimum, this reasonable connection requires causation in fact: “that the harm would not have occurred ‘but for’ the defendant’s conduct.” Id. “The plaintiffs burden may not be carried with *985evidence based merely upon supposition or speculation.” Id. When an injury is objective in nature, the plaintiff is competent to testify about the injury, “and such testimony may be sufficient for the jury to render a verdict without expert medical testimony.” Id.
In the instant case, although the actual blow to Manuilov’s head would be considered an objective injury, it would current-, ly be much more difficult, if not impossible, to determine the presence and extent of any concomitant physical injury to his brain. The resulting symptoms of which he complains — including recurrent headaches and dizziness — are purely subjective. More importantly, it is these symptoms that have prevented Manuilov from resuming his career as a high-wire artist, although we recognize that the symptoms and any physical brain injury from which they arose would be inextricably intertwined.
The only evidence that Manuilov himself would be able to offer about the causal connection between his fall at Sears and the onset of his symptoms is their close temporal relationship. “Such a blunt inference cannot provide a reasonably reliable explanation for complex, unseen physiological processes. While a temporal congruity may be some evidence of causation, it is insufficient evidence to move the merely possible to the reasonably probable.” Porter v. Whitehall Laboratories, Inc. (Porter I), 791 F.Supp. 1335, 1341-1342 (S.D.Ind.1992), aff'd 9 F.3d 607 (Porter II) (7th Cir.1993); see also Bradley v. Brown, 852 F.Supp. 690, 697 (N.D.Ind.1994), affd 42 F.3d 434 (7th Cir.1994) (quoting Porter I; plaintiffs could not prove causation of their multiple chemical sensitivities “merely by reliance upon the temporal congruity” of pesticide application and onset of their symptoms; expert scientific testimony was required); Daub v. Daub, 629 N.E.2d 873, 878 (Ind.Ct.App.1994), trans. denied (expert opinion required to confirm plaintiffs hypothesis that back ailment was caused by slip on patio; otherwise, plaintiff “has established nothing more than the facts which make up her allegation”).
We are therefore led to the conclusion that expert scientific testimony is re-
quired to establish and explain the complex causal relationship between Manuilov’s fall and his injuries. “When the issue of cause is not within the understanding of a lay person, testimony of an expert witness on the issue is necessary.” • Id. “An expert, who has the ability to apply principles of science to the facts, has the power to draw inferences from the facts which a lay witness or a jury would be incompetent to draw.” -Id. The admissibility of expert testimony is a matter within the sound discretion of the trial court. Lytle v. Ford Motor Co., 696 N.E.2d 465, 470 (Ind.Ct.App.1998). However, “[w]here incompetent evidence on a material point in favor of the party who introduces it is admitted, the presumption is that it is influential, and prejudice to the objecting party will be presumed.” Sierp v. Vogel, 592 N.E.2d 1253, 1255 (Ind.Ct.App.1992), trans. denied.
In reviewing the admissibility of expert scientific testimony, we first turn to the requirements of Evid. R. 702 and 703. The two rules read as follows:
Rule 702. Testimony by Experts
(a) If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise.
(b) Expert scientific testimony is admissible only if the court is satisfied that the scientific principles upon which the expert testimony rests are reliable.
Rule 703. Bases of Opinion Testimony by Experts
The facts or data in the particular case upon which an expert bases an opinion or inference may be those perceived by or made known to the expert at or before the hearing. Experts may testify to opinions based on inadmissible evidence, provided that it is of the type reasonably relied upon by experts in the field.
It is important to note that Evid. R. 702(b) does not have a counterpart in the Federal Rules of Evidence and was adopted before the U.S. Supreme Court’s landmark decision *986addressing the reliability of expert scientific testimony in Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 113 S.Ct. 2786, 125 L.Ed.2d 469 (1993).19 See McGrew v. State, 682 N.E.2d 1289, 1290 (Ind.1997). The Indiana Supreme Court has held that the reliability principles expressed in Dau-bert are “not binding upon the determination of state evidentiary law issues,” but are “helpful to the -bench and bar in applying [Evid. R. 702(b) ].” Steward v. State, 652 N.E.2d 490, 498 (Ind.1995).
Evid. R. 702 demands that the trial court serve as a “gatekeeper” to ensure that “an expert’s testimony both rests on a reliable foundation and is relevant to the task at hand.” Hottinger v. Trugreen Corp., 665 N.E.2d 593, 596 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), trans. denied. “When faced with a proffer of expert scientific testimony, the court must make a preliminary assessment of whether the reasoning or methodology underlying the testimony is scientifically valid and whether that reasoning or methodology properly can be applied to the facts in issue.”20 Id. Thus, before an expert scientific witness may testify, the trial court must obviously determine that she is sufficiently qualified “by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education” under Evid. R. 702(a). See Dorsett v. R.L. Carter, Inc., 702 N.E.2d 1126, 1128 (Ind.Ct.App.1998) (quoting [13] Indiana PRACTICE § 702.201, 392).21 The trial court must also ensure that any facts upon which an expert bases her opinion or inference be “of the type reasonably relied upon by experts in the field” under Evid. R. 703.
Although courts have identified various factors to determine reliability, “there is no specific ‘test’ or set of ‘prongs’ which must be considered” to satisfy Evid. R. 702(b). McGrew, 682 N.E.2d at 1292. Some factors of scientific validity listed in Daubert and considered by Indiana courts include whether the theory or technique at issue “can be (and has been) tested”; “whether the theory or technique has been subjected to peer review and publication”; and general acceptance of the theory or technique within a relevant scientific community. Daubert, 509 U.S. at 593-594, 113 S.Ct. at 2796-2797, 125 L.Ed.2d at 482-483; McGrew, 682 N.E.2d at 1292, n. 5; Hottinger, 665 N.E.2d at 596.
With respect to an opinion regarding medical causation, an additional reliability factor to be considered is whether the expert has successfully ruled out other possible causes of the injury for which the plaintiff seeks redress. See Tucker v. Nike, Inc., 919 F.Supp. 1192, 1196-1197 (N.D.Ind.1995), quoting Porter II, 9 F.3d at 613 (“most troubling aspect” of plaintiffs medical expert’s *987testimony “is his failure to consider other causes of the accident in forming his opinion”; expert “never acted to exclude these factors as possible causes in this case” and “never bothered to discover the facts concerning these other factors”; expert’s testimony “provides no scientific basis for excluding these other factors as potential causes for [plaintiff’s injury,” rendering his opinion “nothing more than ‘subjective belief and ‘unsupported speculation’ which is not the proper subject of expert testimony under Daubert”).
Finally, the trial court should consider the relevance and probative value requirements of Evid. R. 401, 402, and 403. In Hottinger, this Court approvingly noted the following language from Daubert:
The inquiry envisioned by Rule 702 is, we emphasize, a flexible one.[ ] Its overarching subject is the scientific validity — and thus the evidentiary relevance and reliability — of the principles that underlie a proposed submission. The focus, of course, must be solely on principles and methodology, not on the conclusions that they generate.
665 N.E.2d at 596-597, quoting Daubert, 509 U.S. at 594-595, 113 S.Ct. at 2797, 125 L.Ed.2d at 483-484 (emphasis added, footnote in original omitted).
Having explored the admissibility and reliability issues raised in Daubett, we particularly lament Sears’ failure to furnish this Court with a transcript of the trial court’s healing on its motions in limine. Presumably, the trial court did evaluate the qualifications of both Quillen and Blinder and the reliability of the scientific principles un-dergirding their opinions. Notwithstanding its motions in limine, however, Sears was required to make its record at trial concerning the admissibility of the opinions of Quil-len and Blinder. We therefore focus our review on the trial transcript to determine whether the trial court abused its discretion in admitting the testimony of Manuilov’s expert witnesses.22
IIA. Quillen’s opinion
At trial, Quillen was permitted to give his opinion that Manuilov suffers from post-concussion syndrome (manifested as persistent headaches and dizziness), and that the cause of these symptoms was the blow to the head he received from his fall in the Sears store. Quillen also testified that headaches and dizziness can have many different causes in medicine, such as a migraine, and *988that he was unaware of any information that medical science has been able to provide to establish why Manuilov has the symptoms of which he complains. Finally, Quillen drew his own distinction between a medical “opinion,” which he would offer in the absence of a firsthand examination of or “firsthand information” about the patient, and a medical “diagnosis,” which would presumably be based on such “firsthand information” and a “very [close firsthand]” examination of the patient.
Sears argues that the trial court should have excluded Quillen’s opinion because it “was not reached utilizing the scientific method usually relied upon in the practice of medicine”; because “the cause of symptoms associated with post-concussion syndrome is unknown and scientifically undetectable” and would therefore not be helpful in assisting the jury to determine the cause of Manuilov’s symptoms; and because the prejudicial effect of the syndrome evidence would greatly outweigh its probative value under Evid. R. 403. Manuilov responds that post-concussion syndrome is “by no means a recent discovery in the medical profession,” and that Quillen was sufficiently qualified as a scientific expert under Evid. R. 702 to give his medical opinion that Manuilov suffered from post-concussion syndrome and that his symptoms “were consistent with the fall he sustained and the existence of such condition.” 23
Even assuming, arguendo, that post-concussion syndrome is generally accepted as a valid clinical diagnosis within the medical community and has been subjected to proper scientific scrutiny through peer review and publication, the fact remains that Quillen was able to give his opinion that Manuilov’s symptoms were caused by his fall at the Sears store, while at the same time admitting that he could offer no scientific proof for the cause of Manuilov’s symptoms. On cross-examination, Quillen stated, “If you’re asking am I aware of any information that can ... that has been done that has a concrete objective answer as to the source of his continued problem, no, I do not know of any, nor would I expect any”; he also acknowledged that he was “unaware of any information that medical science has been able to determine why Mr. Manuilov has these symptoms.”
In light of this acknowledgment, it is obvious that Quillen should have attempted to eliminate other possible causes of Manuilov’s subjective symptoms in order to support his opinion with the degree of scientific reliability demanded by Evid. R. 702. Quillen did concede that there are many other possible causes of Manuilov’s symptoms, but failed to rule them out. In this context, we are particularly troubled by Quillen’s distinction between a medical “diagnosis” and a medical “opinion.” A “firsthand” pretrial examination of Manuilov may have enabled Quillen to eliminate some of the other possible causes of his symptoms; without this analysis, we are left with nothing more than a form of educated speculation, which does not fulfill the requirements of Evid. R. 702. See Tucker, 919 F.Supp. at 1196-1197.
In Porter I, Judge Tinder anticipated the Supreme Court’s holding in Dauberb and made the following observations about the perils of allowing scientific experts to speculate on the issue of legal causation:
The factual basis of a particular medical conclusion is composed of an application of particular scientific facts to particular data about the instant case. Admissible opinions relate instant facts to known relationships; an opinion relating instant facts to an unknown relationship (a hypothesis) does not further the trier of fact’s ability to determine a fact dependent upon that hypothetical relationship. Although experts may provide opinions in the form of a hypothetical fact situation, the scientific foundation or reasoning process may not be based on merely hypothetical causal relationships. Unsupported subjective opinion is unhelpful speculation and not admissible under Rule 702....
In a highly technical case like this, where a lay trier of fact cannot possibly determine *989the precise etiology of the injury without guidance from expert opinions, there is a risk that the jury would make an irrational finding of causation based upon the siren-like allure of opinions stated by highly qualified experts. Thus, an expert’s opinion must have some basis other than hypothesis before the opinion may have the privilege of being assailed by cross-examination. [ ]
791 F.Supp. at 1345.
Having admitted that medical science has been unable to determine the cause of Manuilov’s symptoms, and having failed to rule out other possible causes for them, Quil-len should not have been permitted to offer his opinion regarding post-concussion syndrome to the jury. Although a medical opinion that a patient suffers from the syndrome may provide a valid explanation of her symptoms for purposes of medical treatment, it does nothing to prove the cause-in-fact of a plaintiffs legal injuries. Consequently, an otherwise qualified medical expert who is allowed to offer her opinion that a plaintiff suffers from post-concussion syndrome would be doing nothing more than providing the jury with clinically sound but legally speculative and potentially misleading testimony as to the cause-in-fact of the plaintiffs injuries. Manuilov’s argument that cross-examination, presentation of contrary evidence, and proper jury instructions24 would somehow assist a jury in weighing the validity of post-concussion syndrome evidence fails to consider the “gatekeeping” purpose of Evid. R. 702 with respect to ensuring the reliability of the scientific principles that support a witness’s opinion and the legal axiom that evidence of causation may not consist solely of speculation or conjecture. See City of East Chicago v. Litera, 692 N.E.2d 898, 901 (Ind.Ct.App.1998), trans. denied (“an expert medical opinion which lacks reasonable certainty is not sufficient to support a judgment standing alone”).
We also agree with Sears that any probative value of Quillen’s opinion regarding post-concussion syndrome was substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice and the potential for misleading the jury under Evid. R. 403. Although allowing an expert witness to testify that a party suffers from post-concussion syndrome might be relevant, probative, and only nominally prejudicial in other instances, we are convinced that the testimony in this case was dangerously susceptible of misleading the jury on the issue of causation and was unfairly prejudicial to Sears. Specifically, we are concerned that the expert testimony invited the inference that because Manuilov suffered from post-concussion syndrome, his headache and dizziness symptoms fitting the syndrome pattern must be the result of a physical brain injury he incurred at Sears. See Daubert, 509 U.S. at 591, 113 S.Ct. at 2796, 125 L.Ed.2d at 482 (“scientific validity for one purpose is not necessarily scientific validity for other, unrelated purposes”); Steward, 652 N.E.2d at 499 (scientific principles underlying child sexual abuse syndrome not sufficiently reliable to allow expert testimony thereon to prove occurrence of abuse, but such testimony may be admissible to explain child’s recantation of abuse allegation or “unexpected behavior patterns seemingly inconsistent with the claim of abuse”); see also Carnahan v. State, 681 N.E.2d 1164, 1168 (Ind.Ct.App.1997) (Sullivan, J., dissenting) (tendency is to take Battered Women’s Syndrome evidence “and to conclude that because the alleged victim fits the profile of a battered woman, it is more likely than not that she was the victim of a battery with reference to the charged crime”).
In holding that the trial court abused its discretion in allowing Quillen to offer his opinion about post-concussion syndrome, we do not invade the province of the medical community and suggest that such a diagnosis would be useless in formulating a treatment plan for a patient who exhibits its classic symptoms;25 nor do we hold medical profes*990sionals to an impossibly high standard with respect to the factual bases of their expert opinions.26 Rather, we find that Manuilov failed to demonstrate that Quillen’s opinion regarding post-concussion syndrome was based on reliable scientific principles and analysis.
IIB. Blinder’s opinions
Blinder, the psychiatrist who performed psychiatric assessments of Manuilov in July 1991 and in June 1995, testified that in his opinion, Manuilov suffered from a variety of conditions, including anxiety disorder, panic attacks, dysthymia, dizziness, and headaches, all of which are consistent with a diagnosis of post-concussion syndrome. Blinder further opined that Manuilov’s symptoms and his fall at the Sears store were causally related, and that the blow he received to his head at Sears had disabled him “for reasons that are combined, both physical and psychological factors.” Blinder also stated that he “must leave the question of a possible organic con-tributive” to Manuilov’s complaints of dizziness to his colleagues in physical medicine.27
Without going into exhaustive detail or engaging in repetitive analysis on the issue of post-concussion syndrome, we merely note that Blinder agreed with Sears’ statements that “[s]hort of an autopsy and ... and maybe not even that, [there is] no test that can detect the changes, uh, the existence of changes to the brain, if any, from the blow to the head,” and that “it would be improper for anyone to say that [Manuilov’s] medical records prove that [he] has a physical injury in his brain.” In light of his acquiescence on this point, and considering his medical opinion that there may be an organic contributive to Manuilov’s symptoms about which he could not testify, we agree with Sears’ assertion that Blinder was incompetent to render an opinion that Manuilov had suffered physical brain damage; regardless of his eminent status as a psychiatrist, his impressive credentials do not give him carte blanche to engage in unfettered speculation regarding the physical condition of Manuilov’s brain.
Similarly, there is no indication that Blinder was qualified to offer an expert opinion on the likelihood that Manuilov could resume his career as a high-wire performer. We agree with Sears that the trial court had initially sustained its objection to Blinder’s testimony that Manuilov could “safely cross the high wire” 96 or 97 out of 100 times; we can only presume that the ensuing flurry of objections and responses caused the trial court to mistakenly reverse its original ruling and allow Blinder to repeat his opinion. With respect to the purely speculative nature of Blinder’s testimony, we refer to Judge Tinder’s opinion in Porter I:
Merely because an opinion of scientific causation comes from a person learned in medical science does not provide that opinion with a sufficient scientific basis. An expert cannot rely solely on his or her own stature, intellect or intuition to support an opinion admissible to aid the trier of fact. The basis — the “reasoning” and “facts and data” — of an opinion is distinct from the expert’s qualifications as an expert in the field.
791 F.Supp. at 1345.
Manuilov may be correct that psychiatrists “are uniquely qualified to treat *991and diagnose mental and emotional disorders that have a physical etiology,” but he fails to demonstrate how a psychiatrist could so precisely and reliably quantify a high-wire artist’s chances for future vocational success. “Although the testimony need not be known to a certainty, any inference or assertion must be derived by the scientific method.” Hottinger, 665 N.E.2d at 596. We have failed to discover any factual basis or scientific method behind Blinder’s estimate and agree that it was materially prejudicial to Sears and misleading to the jury in its determination of both the severity of Manuilov’s injuries and his damages. See Davis v. State, 476 N.E.2d 127, 134-135 (Ind.Ct.App.1985), tram, denied (1987) (“When unsubstantiated estimates are used in probability calculations, speculation is presented to the jury clothed in scientific accuracy; the prejudicial impact clearly outweighs the probative value. However, where probability testimony is based on empirical scientific data, rather than unsubstantiated estimates, the presentation and admission of probability testimony need not constitute error.”).
III. Damages
Because we reverse the trial court’s judgment and remand for a new trial, we need not consider the issue of damages.
Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the trial court is reversed, and this cause is remanded for a new trial.
STATON, J., concurs.
RILEY, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. Manuilov and his wife were divorced in 1992; the claims of his wife and daughter were dismissed by the Wayne Superior Court on March 4, 1997, leaving Manuilov as the sole plaintiff in this case.
. Also referred to as "post-concussive syndrome” or "postconcussional disorder.”
. The word "not” does not appear in the original transcript; however, the context of Quillen's testimony clearly shows that a diagnostic test would not definitively show the cause of a patient’s symptoms indicative of post-concussion syndrome.
. Evid. R. 104(a) reads in relevant part: "Preliminary questions concerning the qualification of a person to be a witness, the existence of a privilege, or the admissibility of evidence shall be determined by the Court, subject to the provisions of subdivision (b),” which reads, “When the relevancy of evidence depends upon the fulfillment of a condition of fact, the Court shall admit it upon, or subject to, the introduction of evidence sufficient to support a finding of the fulfillment of the condition." A hearing held *974pursuant to Evid. R. 104(a) to evaluate the qualifications of an expert scientific witness and the reliability of the scientific principles in issue under Evid. R. 702 may also be referred to as a Daubert hearing, the significance of which will be more fully explained below. See, e.g., Smith v. Ford Motor Company, 908 F.Supp. 590, 594, n. 5 (N.D.Ind.1995) (trial court held Daubert hearing and concluded that expert witness could testify as to “origin and cause” of pickup truck fire, "but could not testify as to the adequacy of the design” of the truck).
. On cross-examination, Blinder stated that he had discovered no "criminal history or anti-social behavior" in Manuilov's background, having "specifically asked" Manuilov and his attorney.
.Manuilov refers to Sears’ motion to correct errors, which states that Sears received the faxed documents on the second day of trial (October 21), to buttress its assertion that Sears received them the day before Blinder testified (October 22). However, when Sears’ counsel presented the documents to the trial court on October 23, he stated that he had received them on the previous day and directed the court's attention to the "time and date stamped on the fax”; for whatever reason, tire documents contained in the record do not bear any time or date stamp. Because the trial court did not openly contradict Sears’ counsel's version of events, we can only assume that Sears’ reference to the "second day of trial” in its motion to correct errors is either a typographical error or a memory lapse.
. Manuilov’s assertion to the contrary on this point is not supported by the record.
. In reviewing the record, it is impossible to determine whether Manuilov unequivocally admitted to any specific acts of violence in response to Sears’ inquiry; consequently, we have refrained from summarizing the content of Manui-lov’s answers and have limited our recital of the facts to the substance of Sears’ questions. Man-uilov did admit that he was arrested and put in jail after Kurihara called the police on December 13, 1995.
. The documents include an "ATTACHMENT To Application For TEMPORARY PROTECTIVE ORDER” describing an incident of physical abúse on December 13, 1995; an untitled document dated December 15, 1995, and signed by Kurihara that is obviously related to tire temporary protective order; a "RECOMMENDATION REGARDING TEMPORARY PROTECTIVE ORDER” against Manuilov from the District Court, Family Division of Clark County, Nevada, filed December 19, 1995, and signed by a district court master who recommended that a hearing be held and that the order be granted; a "TEMPORARY PROTECTIVE ORDER AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE” from the same court filed December 19, 1995, and containing the names of both Manuilov and Kurihara as adverse parties; a "RETURN OF SERVICE” form dated December 28, 1995, and filed January 10, 1996, certifying the delivery of the temporary' protective order and the relevant application and attachment; and "TEMPORARY PROTECTIVE ORDER COURT MINUTES” dated January 11, 1996, which notes that the commissioner found Manui-lov in contempt of court for violating the protective order and sentenced him to 25 days (suspended) in the Clark County Detention Center; the commissioner also recommended that the protective order be dissolved.
. As mentioned above. Sears’ counsel made the following observation regarding "prejudice” during his attempt to introduce the contested evidence: "[T]here’s two kinds of prejudice ... [u]nfair prejudice that ... leads to confusion and giving the evidence more weight than it deserves, and there’s the other part of prejudice, which is the fact that it’s true and just hurts their case." This sentiment echoes Judge Staton’s observation in Cadiz v. State: "However, the inquiry is not whether evidence is prejudicial; rather, the inquiry is whether the evidence is unfairly prejudicial since all relevant evidence is inherently prejudicial." 683 N.E.2d 597, 600 (Ind.Ct.App.1997). "Prejudice” may be generally defined as "[a] leaning towards one side of a cause for some reason other than a conviction of its justice,” or specifically with respect to evidence as an "undue tendency to move [a] tribunal to decide on [an] improper basis [citation omitted].” Black’s Law Dictionary 1179 (6th ed.1990).
. “The well established rationale behind Evidence Rule 404(b) is that the juiy is precluded from making the 'forbidden inference' that the defendant had a criminal propensity and there*980fore engaged in the charged conduct.” Thompson v. State, 690 N.E.2d 224, 233 (Ind.1997).
. We will hereinafter indicate the omission of footnotes as "[]" for purposes of legibility.
. Ind. Evidence Rule 404(a)(3) provides that "[e]vidence of the character of a witness, as provided in Rule 607, 608 and 609” is admissible to prove that the witness acted in conformity with her character or a trait of character.
. Federal Rule 608(b) reads in relevant part as follows:
Specific instances of the conduct of a witness, for the purpose of attacking or supporting the witness’ credibility, other than conviction of crime as provided in rule 609, may not be proved by extrinsic evidence. They may, however, in the discretion of the court, if probative of truthfulness or untruthfulness, be inquired into on cross-examination of the witness (1) concerning the witness’ character for truthfulness or untruthfulness, or (2) concerning the character for truthfulness or untruthfulness of another witness as to which character the witness being cross-examined has testified. [Emphasis supplied.]
. In his discussion of Ind. Evidence Rule 404(a), Judge Miller is careful to draw the distinction between a party placing a person’s character "in issue” (“determined by reference to the substantive law and the pleadings,” i.e., "[i]f a party’s character constitutes an essential element of proof of a charge, claim, or defense by a party") and a parly's “openfing] the door to an opponent’s presentation of otherwise inadmissible evidence” by presenting certain evidence of its own; Ind. Evidence Rules 608(b) and 611 govern the admissibility of evidence in the context of “opening the door.” (Emphasis supplied.) 12 Indiana Practice § 404.103 at 340-341.
.See Reeves v. Boyd & Sons, Inc., 654 N.E.2d 864 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), trans. denied (1996) below. Although the exact date of the original trial does not appear in this opinion, we acknowledge that it almost certainly occurred before the adoption of the Indiana Rules of Evidence in January 1994. As will be seen from the following cases, both the general rule of law prohibiting the admission of specific acts for impeachment purposes and its exception in the case of a party “opening the door” predate the adoption of the Indiana Rules of Evidence by many years.
. Consider the following instructive language from Breese v. State, 449 N.E.2d 1098, 1117 (Ind.Ct.App.1983):
It is incorrect to say that a witness's testimony is "impeached” by a statement of a third party which merely disputes or is contrary to the facts stated by the first witness. Such statement if otherwise admissible is merely evidence placing the matter in dispute for resolution by the trier of fact [citation omitted]. Breese cites [FahlerJ as support for his argument that he should have been permitted to present contradictory evidence'to “counteract the false impression created by Dr. Moore.”... However, Fahler did not involve attempted "impeachment” by a third person’s statement but rather the statement of the witness, and is thus distinguishable.
. Cf., e.g., Heck v. State, 552 N.E.2d 446, 452 (Ind.1990), cert. denied, Heck v. Richards, 507 U.S. 929, 113 S.Ct. 1308, 122 L.Ed.2d 696 (1993) (no error found in allowing testimony of defendant's daughter that defendant had threatened to retaliate against her alleged rapist; defendant had “attempted to intimate that someone else, such as his daughter Roberta, had been responsible” for his wife’s death; defendant had therefore "opened the door” to daughter’s rebuttal testimony); Christopher v. State, 531 N.E.2d 480, 482 (Ind.1988):
The cross-examination of appellant [convicted of conspiracy] as to whether his wives were fearful of him came about by reason of his gratuitous testimony on direct examination that he never threatened his wives at any time. He thus injected the issue of his treatment of his wives. It was thus legitimate for the State to pursue that open door to attempt to ascertain the true situation.
. In Kumho Tire Company, Ltd. v. Carmichael, - U.S. -, 119 S.Ct. 1167, 143 L.Ed.2d 238 (1999), the U.S. Supreme Court held that the "gatekeeping” function of Federal Rule of Evidence 702 applies to all expert testimony.
. In the federal system, the trial court must make this "preliminary assessment” pursuant to an Federal Rule of Evidence 104(a) Daubert hearing. See Daubert, 509 U.S. at 592, 113 S.Ct. at 2796, 125 L.Ed.2d at 482. Although our supreme court has not specifically mandated Dau-bert hearings as a prerequisite for determining the admissibility of expert scientific testimony (i.e., in addition to or to the exclusion of preliminary questions or offers to prove), we note that the stated purpose of the Indiana Rules of Evidence under Ind. Evidence Rule 102 is to "eliminate] unjustifiable expense and delay”; in the interest of promoting sound trial practice, we therefore encourage trial courts to conduct Dau-bert hearings under Evid. R. 104(a) before trial. During the hearing and at trial, counsel should preserve a proper record for appeal in the form of specific objections, preliminary questions, or offers to prove, in the event that certain testimony is ruled either admissible or inadmissible by the trial court. Furthermore, although we are aware that a trial court is not “bound by tire Rules of Evidence, except those with respect to privileges” in determining "the qualification of a person to be a witness” or "the admissibility of evidence” under Evid. R. 104(a), and that certain evidence presented at such a hearing may therefore be considered inadmissible at trial or simply never offered at trial, a party must lay a similarly sufficient evidentiary foundation for a jury before it may elicit certain testimony from an expert witness. The requirement to make such a record must be taken in conjunction with Ind. Evidence Rule 705: "The expert may testify in terms of opinion or inference and give reasons therefor without first testifying to the underlying facts or data, unless the court requires otherwise. The expert may in any event be required to disclose the underlying facts or data on cross-examination.”
. See also Robert Lowell Miller, Jr., 13B Indiana Practice, Courtroom Handbook on Indiana Evidence 207 (1999).
. We first note that Sears raised an objection to Quillen’s testimony about post-concussion syndrome "for all the reasons expressed in [its] pretrial motion [in limine]," subsequently requested a continuing objection "for this witness,” and only later raised a more specific objection to such testimony (emphasis supplied). In Hobson v. State, 495 N.E.2d 741, 744 (Ind.Ct.App.l986), this Court approved the use of continuing objections; however, we stress that the "record must demonstrate that the continuing objection or reference to a prior objection fully and clearly advises the trial court of the specific grounds for the objection.” Smith v. State, 565 N.E.2d 1059, 1061 (Ind.1991). Here, as did our supreme court in Smith, we find that Sears' reference to its motion in limine sufficiently apprised the trial court of the specific basis for its objection and thus preserved the issue for our review. See id..; see also Carter v. State, 634 N.E.2d 830, 832-833 (Ind.Ct.App.1994) (purpose of motion in limine is to "prevent the display of potentially prejudicial material to the jury until the trial court has the opportunity to rule on its admissibility”; however, the trial court’s ruling on the motion is not a final ruling on the admissibility of evidence and does not preserve tire error for appeal; therefore, a party must object to the "introduction of challenged evidence at trial and specify the grounds upon which the objection is premised"); Ind. Trial Rule 46 (party must "[make] known to the court ... his objection to the action of the court and his grounds therefor”). With respect to Blinder’s testimony about post-concussion syndrome, discussed below, we note that Sears allowed him to expostulate on its possible causes and symptoms and did not object until plaintiff’s counsel asked him about his 1991 diagnosis of Manuilov. Because we hold that the trial court committed reversible error on other grounds, however, we need not consider this argument further. Cf. Fleener v. State, 656 N.E.2d 1140, 1141 (Ind.1995) ("defense counsel cannot be defaulted for failing to repeat his Rule 702(b) objection after it had once been made, argued, and overruled”). We remain nonplused, however, at Sears’ failure to specifically object to the opinions of both Quillen and Blinder that Manuilov’s symptoms were caused from the head injury he suffered as a result of his fall in the Sears store. Nevertheless, we find that the unfairly prejudicial effect of the post-concussion syndrome evidence substantially outweighed any corresponding "curative” effect of what appears to be the unchallenged expert opinions regarding causation.
. We observe in passing that the most recent Indiana case that contains any mention of post-concussion syndrome is this Court’s denial of the appellant’s petition for rehearing in Crown Prodnets Co. v. Brandenburg, 126 Ind.App. 48, 130 N.E.2d 73 (1955), which was issued almost 40 years before the adoption of the Indiana Rules of Evidence.
. See, e.g., Ind. Evidence Rule 104(e) ("[Evid. R. 104] does not limit the right of a party to introduce before the jury evidence relevant to weight or credibility."). Manuilov's insinuation that Sears may not question the validity of his experts’ testimony because it offered no expert testimony of its own is not supported by either case law or rule.
. As our supreme court noted in Noblesville Casting Div. of TRW, Inc. v. Prince, "Medicine, for instance, is not yet an exact science; to *990demand reasonable certainty in medical opinions places a sometimes insurmountable barrier in the face of the candid and straightforward medical expert.” 438 N.E.2d 722, 727 (Ind.1982).
. Neither do we mean to denigrate the impressive professional qualifications of either Quillen or Blinder, the expert witnesses who testified in the case at bar; however, this Court has held that consideration of an expert’s credentials is not conclusive in determining the reliability of his scientific testimony. Lytle, 696 N.E.2d at 474.
. At trial, Blinder admitted to making the following statement: "I must leave the question of a possible organic contributive to Mr. Manuilov's complaints of dizziness to my colleagues in physical medicine. But it is clear that they certainly could be a consequence of panic attacks triggered by the accident of issue and a post-concussive syndrome.” To round out our discussion about the uncertainties of causation with respect to post-concussion syndrome, we note that Man-uilov testified that he had fallen 40 feet onto concrete during a high-wire act in Madison Square Garden in 1974, after which he experienced temporary paralysis of his right side, remained in the hospital for approximately two months, and did not return to work for eight months.