=== CASE 9741191 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:06.599025+00 ===

PAGE, Justice
(dissenting).
I join the dissent of Justice Tomljanovich. I write separately to note that there is no question that Dennis Linehan is an extremely dangerous person. There is also no question that he has been tried, convicted, and punished under our criminal law. Some might argue, myself included, that the sentence 1 he received was not severe enough and that it should have been longer. Certainly if constitutional limitations did not exist, I would have' no qualms about Linehan remaining in preventive detention for the rest of his life. However, constitutional limitations do exist, and we must respect those limitations even if it means that the Dennis Linehans of the world must be set free after completing their criminal sentence. Thus, I respectfully dissent because I believe that the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act goes well beyond the limits imposed by our constitution and permits unrestrained preventive detention based solely on an individual’s dangerousness.
I also write separately to comment on the court’s treatment of Blodgett. Blodgett was a 4-3 decision of this court which I joined. In re Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d 910 (Minn.1994). I joined that decision because I believed the court’s holding fit within constitutional limitations. While I did believe then, and still believe now, that our decision in Blodgett fit within constitutional limits, I also believe that with that decision we reached the extreme outer limits of constitutionally permitted preventive detention. The court now holds that Blodgett would have to be overturned if we were to find the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act unconstitutional. I disagree. My reading of Blodgett is that the “inability to control” sexual impulses has constitutional significance and represents a substantive due process threshold for preventive detention. That is the basis on which I joined the court’s opinion. Indeed, this requirement previously saved the Psychopathic Personality Commitment Act from a vagueness challenge in Pearson v. Probate Court of Ramsey County, 205 Minn. 545, 287 N.W. 297 (1939), aff'd, 309 U.S. 270, 60 S.Ct. 523, 84 L.Ed. 744 (1940). In Pearson, this court stated:
Applying these principles to the case before us, it can reasonably be said that the language of Section 1 of the [Psychopathic Personality Commitment Act] is intended to include those persons who, by a habitual course of misconduct in sexual matters, have evidenced an utter lack of power to control their sexual impulses and who, as a result, are likely to attack or otherwise inflict injury, loss, pain or other evil on the objects of their uncontrolled and uncontrollable desire. It would not be reasonable to apply the provisions of the statute to every person guilty of sexual misconduct nor even to persons having strong sexual propensities. Such a definition would not only make the act impracticable of enforcement and, perhaps, unconstitutional in its application, but would also be an unwarranted departure from the accepted meaning of the words defined.
Id. at 555, 287 N.W. at 302-03 (emphasis added).
The court now holds that the instant case is indistinguishable from Blodgett despite the fact that the “inability to control” requirement articulated in Blodgett is not contained in the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act. In upholding the psychopathic personality statute, the Blodgett court made clear that there are constitutional limitations to the state’s use of preventive detention. However, no such limitations are found in the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act. The only real criteria for commitment under the Sexually Dan*202gerous Persons Act is dangerousness. Thus, the court’s decision today goes well beyond Blodgett The court has, in essence, concluded that there are no constitutional limitations on the state’s use of preventive detention.
Today the target is people who are sexually dangerous. Which class of people, who are different from us and who we do not like, will it be tomorrow?
As Justice Simonett wrote in Blodgett, at issue is not only “the safety of the public on the one hand and, on the other, the liberty interests of the individual * * *. In the final analysis, it is the moral credibility of the criminal justice system that is at stake.” 510 N.W.2d at 918. By the court’s decision today, that credibility is placed in jeopardy.
. A sentence of life in prison without the possibility of release may well have been appropriate based on the criminal conduct for which Linehan was convicted. Indeed, it may have been better than he deserved. In any event, such a sentence would have certainly met constitutional muster. Unfortunately, for whatever reason, at the time Linehan’s crime was committed, the legislature did not see fit to provide for such a sentence.

=== CASE 2226494 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:10.435675+00 ===

123 Ind. App. 160 (1952)
109 N.E.2d 98
HUNTINGTON POST NO. 7, THE AMERICAN LEGION
v.
ARNOLD
No. 18,328.
Court of Appeals of Indiana.
Filed December 11, 1952.
*161 Lee M. Bowers, Arthur J. Palmer and Bowers, Feightner & Palmer, all of Huntington, Indiana, Robert Gates and Gates & Gates of Columbia City, for appellant.
Claude Cline, of Huntington, and John W. Whiteleather, of Columbia City, for appellee.
WILTROUT, J.
Appellee brought this action to recover for services rendered appellant in performing labor and in supervising the remodeling of appellant's home. The complaint alleges that on or about February 1, 1949, appellee "was requested to submit a proposition as to basis upon which he would undertake said work of remodeling the same upon an hourly basis and on the basis of supervising remodeling according to plans to be furnished by said defendant. That on or about said date, this plaintiff submitted a proposal, in writing, to the effect that he would do so at a hourly rate of $2.50 plus 5% on cost of material and labor, not including any percentage on his own labor and not including labor and material on electric wiring, plumbing and heating ... Plaintiff further says that after the submission of said proposal to so perform said *162 work, this plaintiff was called into conference and was verbally told that said defendant had accepted the proposition and that he should proceed with the said work."
The total of the amounts paid for labor and materials was stipulated. Appellant by its answer admitted that it agreed to hire appellee at $2.50 per hour. The principal dispute was as to whether there was any agreement to pay appellee anything at all in addition to the $2.50 per hour.
Evidence was introduced that the handwritten proposal was given to the chairman of appellant's building committee. The proposal itself was not introduced in evidence, there being evidence that it was left in the hands of appellant. Appellee's motion to require appellant to produce the proposal was sustained. Appellant did not produce it, and oral evidence was admitted in proof of its contents. There was further evidence that appellee and a Mr. Diamond later met with the building committee at the Legion Home, and the proposal was lying on the table. The 5% was discussed. Appellee was asked if he would take the job at the rate proposed. He answered in the affirmative and was told to go ahead with the job. This evidence was in sharp conflict with that adduced on behalf of appellant. Nevertheless there was ample evidence from which the jury could properly conclude that there was a written proposal or offer which was accepted by appellant.
Error is claimed in the giving of appellee's instructions Nos. 2, 4, and 5.
Objection was made to instruction No. 2 that it assumes that a contract was entered into by and between the parties; that it does not fully cover the issues in the case, and is mandatory in form. This instruction is similar to one given in the *163 case of Wells v. Morrison (1883), 91 Ind. 51. It discusses the defense of payment and concludes:
"Should you believe from the evidence that there was a valid contract between the parties and that the defendant paid the whole of the money due on the contract and agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant, then your finding should be for the defendant; but if you should believe from the evidence that there was a valid contract between the parties and that the defendant only paid a part of the amount due under the contract and agreement, then your finding should be for the plaintiff in the amount of the principal and interest due the plaintiff in such sum as is remaining unpaid, but in no event more than $3,750.00, the amount prayed for."
This instruction clearly is not subject to the objection that it assumes that a contract was entered into by and between the parties. On the contrary, it is specifically limited to the situation which would exist should the jury believe from the evidence that there was a valid contract between the parties. The mere fact that an instruction is mandatory in form does not render it erroneous. Appellant does not attempt to inform us either by its objection to the instruction or by its brief as to what, if any, essential element was omitted from the instruction, and hence no error is shown.
Objection was made to Instruction No. 4 that it assumes a contract was entered into between the parties, and that it is mandatory in form. The objection is not tenable. The jury was instructed as to the law "if you find from the preponderance of the evidence that a contract existed between the plaintiff and defendant concerning the subject matter of this suit as alleged in the complaint...."
*164 Instruction No. 5 is an instruction dealing entirely with the assessment of the amount of recovery. Error in such assessment is not assigned as one of the causes in the motion for new trial. The appellant must therefore be deemed to have waived error, if any, in this instruction. Continental Assurance Co. v. Krueger (1946), 116 Ind. App. 693, 66 N.E.2d 133; City of Terre Haute v. Webster (1942), 112 Ind. App. 101, 40 N.E.2d 972; Pittsburgh, etc., R. Co. v. Macy (1915), 59 Ind. App. 125, 107 N.E. 486.
Error is claimed in the admission of certain testimony. The court permitted testimony to be given over appellant's objection: (a) as to who held the contract for the wiring and lighting performed in the remodeling, as well as the heating and plumbing contracts; (b) that appellee had conferences with materialmen; (c) the number of men employed under appellee's supervision; (d) that other work was going on with reference to plumbing, heating and wiring while appellee was working; (e) what appellee understood his duties to be. It is appellant's argument that there was only one issue in the case, that is, was there a contract such as plaintiff alleged in his complaint? It is true that the parties stipulated the amounts of the materials used and the amounts paid for labor. Nevertheless, by its answer, appellant denied that appellee performed all the work and services as alleged in his complaint. This evidence was proper as bearing on appellee's performance of the contract.
The treasurer of appellant's building committee testified by deposition. On direct examination he testified that he was present at the meeting of the building committee with appellee. This meeting, the evidence shows, was held between a year and a half and two years prior to the taking of the deposition. When asked whether *165 anything was said at the meeting about compensation in addition to $2.50 per hour he answered, "No, not to the best of my knowledge and recollection." After testifying on cross-examination as to who held the contracts for the plumbing and heating he was allowed to answer on cross-examination the questions: "What was the basis of that contract?" As to the plumbing contract he answered: "Cost plus but I again do not recall the percentage of the contract." As to the heating contract he answered: "It was a part of the plumbing as I recall and was on the same basis." The objection was that, "This is wholly outside the issues and has nothing whatsoever to do with the contract between the plaintiff and defendant Legion Post and has nothing to do with the contract on which plaintiff seeks to recover in this case."
The latitude and control of cross-examination rests largely in the sound discretion of the trial court, and a clear abuse of such discretion must be shown in order to constitute reversible error. Denmure v. Gray (1940), 108 Ind. App. 60, 27 N.E.2d 135; Craig, Exrx. v. Citizens Trust Company (1940), 217 Ind. 434, 26 N.E.2d 1006; Piggly-Wiggly Stores v. Lowenstein (1925), 197 Ind. 62, 147 N.E. 771; Ledford et al. v. Ledford (1884), 95 Ind. 283. A cross-examiner may propound questions to investigate the situation of the witness with respect to his memory and knowledge of the witness concerning the matters to which he testifies and in so doing is not limited strictly to the specific facts to which he testified on direct examination. Lavengood v. Lavengood (1947), 225 Ind. 206, 73 N.E.2d 685; Boyle v. The State (1886), 105 Ind. 469, 5 N.E. 203; Hyland v. Milner et al. (1885), 99 Ind. 308. The questions here related to contracts made near the same time as appellee's contract *166 and covering a part of the same remodeling project.
The fact that appellant made other contracts with other persons on a cost plus basis would not tend to prove that the contract with appellee was such as appellee asserts. It was appellant's privilege to make as many and as varied contracts as it could. Evans v. Koons (1894), 10 Ind. App. 603, 38 N.E. 350; Shell Petroleum Corp. v. Earnest (1933), 97 Ind. App. 483, 187 N.E. 211; Feichter v. Swift (1922), 77 Ind. App. 427, 132 N.E. 662; Wacker v. Essex (1918), 67 Ind. App. 584, 119 N.E. 466; Featherstone, etc., Mach. Co. v. Criswell (1905), 36 Ind. App. 681, 75 N.E. 30.
Appellant might well have requested an instruction limiting the application of this testimony, but it did not see fit to do so. Denny v. State (1921), 190 Ind. 76, 129 N.E. 308; Benjamin v. McElwaine-Richards Company et al. (1894), 10 Ind. App. 76, 37 N.E. 362; Smith et al. v. Meiser, Guardian (1894), 11 Ind. App. 468, 38 N.E. 1092.
We conclude that the court did not abuse its discretion in permitting this cross-examination.
Judgment affirmed.
NOTE.  Reported in 109 N.E.2d 98.

=== CASE 2226515 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:11.027945+00 ===

557 N.W.2d 328 (1997)
Garry M. REHN, Respondent,
v.
Barbara FISCHLEY, Defendant and Third-Party Plaintiff, Petitioner, Appellant,
v.
GREATER ANOKA COUNTY ANIMAL HUMANE SOCIETY, Third-Party Defendant, Petitioner, Appellant.
No. C0-95-813.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
January 2, 1997.
*330 Robert E. Kuderer, Teresa M. Croke, Johnson & Condon, P.A., Kevin P. Keenan, Charles E. Lundberg, Bassford, Lockhart, Truesdell & Briggs, P.A., Minneapolis, for appellant.
William Starr, Starr & Fleagle, P.L.C., Charles A. Beckjord, Charles A. Beckjord, Attorneys at Law, Minneapolis, for respondent.
Jeffrey D. Hedlund, Faegre & Benson, L.L.P., Minneapolis, amicus curiae.
Heard, considered and decided by the court en banc.
OPINION
TOMLJANOVICH, Justice.
Appellants, Dr. Barbara Fischley and the Greater Anoka County Animal Humane Society ("Humane Society"), seek review of the court of appeals' reversal of the trial court's directed verdict in favor of Dr. Fischley. Respondent Garry M. Rehn claimed he was injured after using formalin to disinfect cat cages at the Humane Society in January 1993. Rehn alleged that Dr. Fischley was negligent in: 1) recommending the use of formalin to the executive director of the Humane Society; 2) providing the formalin to the executive director of the Humane Society; and 3) in failing to provide adequate warnings and directions regarding the dangers and safe use of formalin.[1] Fischley filed a third-party complaint against the Humane Society for contribution or indemnity alleging that if Rehn was injured by the formalin, his injuries were caused in whole or in part by the negligence of the Humane Society. The trial court granted appellants' motion for directed verdict on the grounds that Dr. Fischley's actions were within her official duties as an unpaid member of a nonprofit corporation's board of directors and therefore were protected by Minnesota Statutes section 317A.257.[2] A divided panel of the court of appeals reversed and remanded the case for a new trial on the grounds that Dr. Fischley had not met her burden of proving that her actions were within the scope of her official duties as an unpaid member of the Humane Society's board of directors. We reverse and reinstate the directed verdict of the trial court.
The facts are undisputed. Dr. Fischley became a member of the Humane Society's board of directors in November 1992. A licensed veterinarian, she joined the board after the head of the Minnesota State Board of Veterinary Examiners asked her to serve on the board as an advisor, largely because the Humane Society was experiencing problems, including poor infectious disease control.
In December 1992, Greater Anoka County Humane Society executive director Jana Webster-Vaughn[3] learned that two kittens *331 from her facility had tested positive for panleukopenia, a virus commonly known as feline distemper.[4] Webster-Vaughn then called Dr. Fischley to find out how to disinfect the cages at the Anoka County facility. Webster-Vaughn testified that she placed the call only because of Dr. Fischley's status as a board member. Dr. Fischley then read verbatim to Webster-Vaughn the following passage from a veterinarian textbook:[5]
The virus is resistant to trypsin and most disinfectants but can be inactivated by 0.5% formalin or 1-to-32 dilution of commercial hypochlorite solution.
Neither Webster-Vaughn nor Dr. Fischley knew that hypochlorite solution consisted of hypochlorous acid, a solution used as a bleaching and oxidizing agent.[6] Dr. Fischley later admitted she did not know that formalin was unsafe as a surface disinfectant. Thus, Webster-Vaughn testified that Dr. Fischley left her with the impression that the only available option for disinfecting the cat cages was the surface application of formalin, which is a buffered 10 percent solution of formaldehyde.[7] Webster-Vaughn then asked Dr. Fischley where she could acquire some formalin and Dr. Fischley offered to provide some to the Humane Society. Dr. Fischley warned that she had observed people experiencing headaches and nausea while using formalin and recommended that only one person use the formalin at a time, and that the person's skin and face be covered during use.
At this time, respondent Garry Rehn was working at the Humane Society as a veterinarian technician assistant. At the direction of Webster-Vaughn, Rehn and veterinarian technician Elizabeth Hult went to Dr. Fischley's office to pick up the formalin. Dr. Fischley was not there, but her assistant, who also is a veterinarian, provided the formalin in a distilled water jug with the words "10% formalin" written on the side. Hult subsequently wrote the words "Do not inhale, wear gloves, mask when using, careful, harmful" on the side of the jug. Rehn subsequently scribbled out the words "distilled water" from the side of the jug. At no time did either Dr. Fischley or the Humane Society distribute directions for the use of formalin, as required by OSHA regulations.
A few days later, Rehn volunteered to clean the cages using the formalin. He wore yellow Platex-like gloves and asked Webster-Vaughn for a mask but was told to wear a towel over his face, which he did. Rehn prepared the disinfectant by adding two or three squirts of formalin from a syringe into a gallon-sized pail filled with water. He then began cleaning one of the rooms by applying the formalin solution directly to the surface of the walls and floor with towels. About two or three hours later, Rehn expressed concern to Webster-Vaughn that the dilution rate was not strong enough. Upon her suggestion, Rehn then phoned Dr. Fischley at her office. Fischley testified that she read him the same instructions she had read Webster-Vaughn. Dr. Fischley said she then refused to give any further advice and told Rehn to speak with his supervisor regarding the appropriate dilution rate. Without any more consultation with either Dr. Fischley or Webster-Vaughn, Rehn added three more squirts of formalin from a little syringe and one more squirt of formalin from a bigger syringe into the pail and cleaned the room again. He repeated this process more than once during the day. He then worked on another room for approximately four or five hours.
At the close of plaintiff's case in chief, Dr. Fischley moved for a directed verdict on the *332 basis of Minnesota Statutes section 317A.257, which reads in part:
Except as provided in subdivision 2, a person who serves without compensation as a director, officer, trustee, member, or agent of an organization exempt from state income taxation under section 290.05, subdivision 2 * * * is not civilly liable for an act or omission by that person if the act or omission was in good faith, was within the scope of the person's responsibilities as a director, officer, trustee, member, [or] agent, * * * and did not constitute willful or reckless misconduct.
Minn.Stat. § 317A.257, subd. 1 (1996). Subdivision 2 includes two parts. Subdivision 2(a) enumerates four specific exceptions, none of which are applicable here. But subdivision 2(b) describes a limitation upon the statute's protection for physical injury:[8]
Subdivision 1 does not limit an individual's liability for physical injury to the person of another or for wrongful death that is personally and directly caused by the individual * * *.
Minn.Stat. § 317A.257, subd. 2(b) (1996). In his motion for a new trial, Rehn argued that section 317A.257 is an affirmative defense and that Dr. Fischley waived her rights under the statute by failing to plead the defense in her answer. Dr. Fischley argued that the defense was a statutory immunity and, therefore, could not be waived. Both the trial court and court of appeals agreed that section 317A.257 is an affirmative defense, but the trial court allowed Dr. Fischley to amend her answer to include the defense because Rehn waived his objection by arguing the merits of the defense statute at trial. The trial court then granted the directed verdict, holding that Dr. Fischley had proven that her acts of recommending and providing the formalin: 1) were done in good faith, 2) were within the scope of her responsibilities as an uncompensated member of the board of directors, 3) were not willful or reckless misconduct, and 4) did not personally and directly cause physical injury to Rehn. The court of appeals reversed, holding that section 317A.257 did not apply because Dr. Fischley did not prove that her acts of recommending and providing formalin were within her specific responsibilities as authorized by statute or by the corporate charter or bylaws.
I.
Before we consider the applicability of section 317A.257 to the case at bar, it is important that we classify the protection as either an affirmative defense or an immunity. Although it is not dispositive in this case, the differences between affirmative defenses and immunities are significant for at least two reasons. First, a party waives an affirmative defense if it is not included in a responsive pleading. Minn. R. Civ. P. 12.02 (1994). An immunity, although best included within an answer, is not waived if it is not included in the answer. See Snyder v. City of Minneapolis, 441 N.W.2d 781, 788 (Minn.1989) (holding that the statutory limit on damages stated in Minn.Stat. § 466.04 is not an affirmative defense for the purposes of Minn. R. Civ. P. 8.03); but see Elwood v. County of Rice, 423 N.W.2d 671, 674 (Minn.1988) (referring to qualified immunity as affirmative defenses); Peterson v. Knutson, 305 Minn. 53, 60, 233 N.W.2d 716, 720 (1975) (referring to qualified immunity as an affirmative defense). Second, the application of an immunity typically is a matter of law that is best resolved before the parties engage in lengthy discovery. See Elwood, 423 N.W.2d at 675. Affirmative defenses, on the other hand, often require so many factual inquiries that jury issues cannot be avoided. See SCSC Corp. v. Allied Mut. Ins. Co., 533 N.W.2d 603, 611 (Minn.1995) (regarding applicability of an exclusion clause in an insurance contract); Thiele v. Stich, 425 N.W.2d 580, 583 (Minn.1988) (regarding assertion of a statute of limitations); Anderson v. First Nat'l Bank of Pine City, 303 Minn. 408, 411, 228 N.W.2d 257, 259 (1975) (regarding ratification of a mortgage).
We treat affirmative defenses differently from immunities because they serve different purposes. Whereas an affirmative *333 defense protects a party from liability, an immunity typically protects a party from suit. Anderson v. City of Hopkins, 393 N.W.2d 363, 364 (Minn.1986). This difference is more than mere semantics. The very foundation of an immunity's protection typically is grounded in the special status of a defendant. The traditional basis for immunity is that "though the defendant might be a wrongdoer, social values of great importance required that the defendant escape liability." W. Page Keeton et al., Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts § 131, at 1032 (5th ed.1984) (hereinafter "Prosser"). Unlike immunities, however, affirmative defenses "reflect the judgment that the defendant's action is not tortious at all, or if tortious, is morally justified." Prosser § 131, at 1032. In summary, an immunity focuses on the defendant, an affirmative defense on the defendant's actions.
It is for these reasons that section 317A.257 grants a statutory immunity. The protection provided in section 317A.257 is not based upon the justification of a defendant's specific actions, but rather upon the defendant's status as an unpaid director, officer, member or agent of a nonprofit corporation. It is true that the statute limits protection to those actions that are: 1) taken in good faith, 2) within the scope of the person's responsibilities, and 3) not willful or reckless misconduct. But the statute does not require that an uncompensated person's actions be legitimate or justified, as is typical with an affirmative defense. Instead, the statute will protect otherwise negligent behavior so long as it is not willful, reckless or in bad faith. Consequently, section 317A.257 provides immunity to those who, by their status as uncompensated persons, qualify for its protection from facing suit.
This is not to say that those relying upon section 317A.257 have no facts to prove. Although immunity generally absolves a defendant from the costs associated with defending a suit, the burden remains with the defendant to allege facts sufficient for a court to determine as a matter of law that the immunity applies. Prosser, supra, § 132. As this court has stated, "[T]he burden of proof generally rests on the one who seeks to show he is entitled to the benefits of a statutory provision." In re Application of City of White Bear Lake, 311 Minn. 146, 150, 247 N.W.2d 901, 904 (1976). Likewise, a defendant relying upon an immunity bears the burden of proving he or she fits within the scope of the immunity. See Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 815-19, 102 S. Ct. 2727, 2736-39, 73 L. Ed. 2d 396 (1982) (regarding federal qualified immunity); Rico v. State, 472 N.W.2d 100, 104-05 (Minn.1991) (regarding statutory and official immunities); Elwood, 423 N.W.2d at 676-79 (regarding official and statutory immunities). Because the statute's purpose is to protect uncompensated persons from suit, its applicability is best determined at the earliest possible point in the proceedings, although a later determination is not fatal. Elwood, 423 N.W.2d at 675-76 (regarding qualified immunity under 42 U.S.C. § 1983). In the case at bar, therefore, Dr. Fischley has the burden of proving to the court that her acts of recommending and providing the formalin: 1) were done in good faith, 2) were within the scope of her responsibilities as a member of the board of directors, 3) were not willful or reckless misconduct, and 4) did not personally and directly cause physical injury.
II.
Typically, a motion for a directed verdict presents only a question of law for the trial court regarding the sufficiency of the evidence to present a fact question for the jury to decide. Midland Nat'l Bank of Minneapolis v. Perranoski, 299 N.W.2d 404, 409 (Minn.1980). In reviewing a trial court's order for a directed verdict, an appellate court must make an independent judgment about the appropriateness of the directed verdict. Walton v. Jones, 286 N.W.2d 710, 714 (Minn.1979). Because the determination of an immunity's application is best decided by the trial court at the earliest possible juncture, however, the trial court's determination necessarily will include mixed questions of law and fact. In this situation, we will correct erroneous applications of law, but accord the trial court discretion in its ultimate conclusions and review such conclusions under an abuse of discretion standard. Maxfield *334 v. Maxfield, 452 N.W.2d 219, 221 (Minn. 1990).
It is undisputed that Dr. Fischley at all times acted in good faith,[9] that Dr. Fischley was not compensated for her position as a member of the Humane Society's board of directors, and that Dr. Fischley was asked about the cat cages only because of her status as a board member. Despite these facts, the court of appeals held that Dr. Fischley failed to meet her burden of proving that her actions of recommending the use of formalin and then providing the formalin without adequate warning were within the scope of her responsibilities as a director:
The fact that an individual wanted respondent to serve as a director so that she could provide advice and the fact that respondent understood and expected the [Executive] Director would call her for advice do not establish that giving advice was within the scope of respondent's responsibilities as a director. The responsibilities of a director are established by statute, articles of incorporation, and corporate bylaws.
Rehn v. Fischley, No. C0-95-813, slip op. at 6-7, 1995 WL 731306 (Minn.App. Dec. 12.1995). The court of appeals correctly asserted that a board derives its authority from only two sources: the state via statute or the corporation via its articles of incorporation or corporate bylaws. Minn.Stat. § 317A.201 (1996) (nonprofit corporation); Minn.Stat. § 302A.201 (1996) (for-profit corporation); see Harry G. Henn and John R. Alexander, Laws of Corporations § 207, at 562-63 (3rd ed.1983) (hereinafter, "Henn and Alexander"). Likewise, it is a longstanding tenet of corporation law that a member of the board has no authority to act individually unless specifically authorized by the corporate bylaws or articles of incorporation. Baldwin v. Canfield, 26 Minn. 43, 1 N.W. 261 (1879); see Henn and Alexander § 208, at 564 (stating that "directors can exercise their management functions only when duly convened as a board"). Consequently, the court of appeals' holding that Dr. Fischley failed to establish that her individual actions of recommending and then providing formalin were within her responsibilities as a member of the board is correct.[10]
Such a finding does not end the analysis, however. Section 317A.257 protects more than directors. It also protects officers, trustees, members and agents. Were we to adopt the court of appeals' position, a director who decides to donate her individual time will receive no protection because those actions always fall outside the very narrow scope of her technical responsibilities as a director. Meanwhile, a nondirector who decides to donate her time will receive protection because her actions always fall within the broad scope of her responsibilities as either a member or agent of the organization. The legislature certainly could not have intended such an absurd result when it passed this statute in 1989. To the contrary, the amicus curiae points out that the intent of the legislature was to provide a broad protection to all uncompensated contributors. "By listing all of the various `hats' that volunteers might wear, the statute * * * plainly provides protection to all volunteers, effectively dispensing with the legal formalities (such as what the articles of incorporation or bylaws, if any, might say) regarding their exact role with the charity." Such a reading is consistent not only with the plain meaning of the statute, but with the real world of nonprofit corporations, where corporate structure is often lacking and everybody, from directors to part-time volunteers, typically helps with the most menial of tasks. See Daniel L. Kurtz, Board Liability, Ch. 3 (1988); Howard L. Oleck, Non-profit Corporations, Organizations and Associations § 221, at 506 (3rd. ed.1974) (stating that "Ordinarily, a trustee, director, or officer of a nonprofit organization also may be an employee.") Consequently, we hold that the broad wording of section 317A.257 protects all uncompensated persons acting on behalf of the nonprofit corporation, and not just those uncompensated persons acting within the specific *335 scope of their duties as defined by their official positions. As a result, a director acting outside the specific scope of his or her duty as members of the board will receive the statute's protection so long as the director is acting on behalf of the nonprofit corporation.
Likewise, we hold that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in finding that Dr. Fischley met her burden of providing facts sufficient to prove that her actions were neither willful nor reckless, and that her conduct, although arguably negligent, did not personally and directly cause Mr. Rehn's physical injuries.
Reversed, the directed verdict of the trial court is reinstated.
PAGE and BLATZ, JJ., took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.
NOTES
[1]  Rehn also alleged that Dr. Fischley's actions constituted veterinary malpractice. The trial court dismissed the claim and the court of appeals affirmed. The issue is not before this court.
[2]  In the alternative, the trial court also dismissed the claim for failure to warn, stating that Dr. Fischley owed no duty to Rehn. The court of appeals reversed, stating that Dr. Fischley indeed had a duty to warn. However, the issue is not before this court.
[3]  Webster-Vaughn's position as executive director is distinct from Dr. Fischley's position as a member of the board of directors. Webster-Vaughn is a salaried officer of the nonprofit corporation, whereas Dr. Fischley is an unpaid member of the board of directors.
[4]  Panleukopenia is a virus that mostly affects the digestive tract of cats. The virus causes vomiting, diarrhea, is highly infectious, and is fatal in a high percentage of cases.
[5]  Dr. Niels C. Pederson, Feline Infectious Diseases 15 (1988).
[6]  Sodium hypochlorite is commonly known as household bleach.
[7]  An expert testified at trial that both formaldehyde and bleach are irritants and can have short-term effects. But formaldehyde can cause permanent lung damage through small exposures to low concentrations. Bleach, on the other hand, would cause permanent lung damage only if used in very high concentrations.
[8]  For the purposes of this appeal, appellants stipulated that the use of formalin caused plaintiff physical injury.
[9]  Good faith is defined as "honesty in fact in the conduct of an act or transaction." Minn.Stat. § 317A.011 subd. 10 (1996).
[10]  Likewise, the trial court's holding that Dr. Fischley's actions were within her duties as a director was incorrect.

=== CASE 2226528 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:11.321922+00 ===

557 N.W.2d 541 (1997)
454 Mich. 20
Mary E. RYAN, Independent Personal Representative of the Estate of Stephen Ryan, deceased, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
BRUNSWICK CORPORATION; Bayliner Marine Corporation; Carl Stirns Marine; and Blue Fin Marina, jointly and severally, Defendants-Appellees.
Docket No. 102762, Calendar No. 14.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Argued November 14, 1996.
Decided January 28, 1997.
*543 Conybeare Law Office, P.C. by John C. Johnson, St. Joseph, for plaintiff-appellant.
Plunkett & Cooney, P.C. by Mark H. Verwys, Grand Rapids, Smith, Haughey, Rice & Roegge, P.C. by Patrick F. Geary, Grand Rapids, and Faegre & Benson, L.L.P., of counsel by Daniel J. Connolly and Mark J. Carpenter, Minneapolis, MN, for defendants-appellees.
*542 OPINION
BOYLE, Justice.
I
In this case we consider whether provisions of the Federal Boat Safety Act (FBSA), 46 U.S.C. §§ 4301-4311, preclude claims of negligence arising from the failure to design, manufacture, or equip a recreational motorboat with a propeller guard and the failure to warn others of the dangers associated with the unguarded propeller. We hold that plaintiff's claims are preempted by the actions of the National Boating Safety Advisory Council and the concomitant acceptance by the United States Coast Guard of the recommendation that it "should take no regulatory action to require propeller guards"[1] that were made under the authority of the Federal Boat Safety Act.
II
Plaintiff-appellant's husband, Stephen J. Ryan, died on September 23, 1989, from injuries he received when he was struck by the propeller of a motorboat while he was swimming. Plaintiff brought this wrongful death action against Bayliner Marine Corporation, Mercury Marine, Division of Brunswick Corporation, Brunswick Corporation, Carl Stirns Marine, and Blue Fin Marina.[2] Motions for partial summary disposition were granted pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(4) and 2.116(C)(8) *544 on behalf of defendants Bayliner Marine Corporation, Mercury Marine, Brunswick Corporation, and Blue Fin Marina.[3]
Following the grant of the motions for partial summary disposition, a stipulation by the parties and an order of dismissal with prejudice of all claims not covered by the court's order was entered.[4] The Court of Appeals affirmed the grant of partial summary disposition, agreeing that the claims were preempted.[5] Because neither Blue Fin Marina nor Carl Stirns Marine have participated in the appellate proceedings, the primary defendant in this appeal is Brunswick Corporation.
III
The purpose of the FBSA is to promote boating safety. To this end, the act provides a coordinated national boating safety program that unites the federal government and states in an effort to compel manufacturers to provide safer boats and boating equipment to the public. Achievement of this objective is encouraged by requiring that manufacturers comply with safety standards promulgated by the Secretary of Transportation. S. Rep. No. 92-248, 1971 U.S.Code Cong. & Admin. News (85 Stat. 213) 1333. Incentives to state participation are provided through federal grant-in-aid payments to states that have, or that develop, an accepted boat safety program.
Congress grants the Secretary of Transportation exclusive authority to establish national safety standards for recreational vessels and associated equipment. 46 U.S.C. § 4302(a)(1). To facilitate this duty, the secretary has the option to delegate regulatory functions to a designated agency that then operates under its supervision. 46 U.S.C. § 4303(a). The United States Coast Guard has been designated as that agency. Carstensen v. Brunswick Corp., 49 F.3d 430, 431 (C.A.8, 1995), cert den ___ U.S. ___, 116 S.Ct. 182, 133 L.Ed.2d 120 (1995).
Pursuant to the act, the secretary must consult with the National Boating Safety Advisory Council (NBSAC) concerning the need for regulation in a given area and the extent to which proposed regulations will contribute to recreational boating safety. 46 U.S.C. § 4302(c)(4).[6] In accordance with the act, *545 NBSAC was consulted, and, in 1988, at the request of the Coast Guard, a subcommittee was appointed for the purpose of reviewing and analyzing data involving recreational boating accidents where persons in the water were struck by boat propellers. The subcommittee was commissioned to consider the feasibility of mechanical guards in preventing boat propeller injuries.[7]
After a year-long study and public hearings, the subcommittee reached the unanimous conclusion that the "U.S. Coast Guard should take no regulatory action to require propeller guards." Report of the Propeller Guard Subcommittee at 24 (November 7, 1989). The subcommittee resolved that "[t]he development and use of devices such as `propeller guards' can ... be counter-productive and can create new hazards of equal or greater consequence." Id. at 23. Of the possible negative effects, propeller guards were found to have the potential to "decrease an operator's ability to maintain control over the boat at `normal' speeds, increase the probability of striking a body in the water, and create a possibility of causing greater injury to those struck." Mowery v. Mercury Marine, Div. of Brunswick Corp., 773 F.Supp. 1012, 1016 (N.D.Ohio, 1991) (emphasis in the original). The subcommittee's recommendation that regulatory action to require propeller guards not be taken was accepted by both the NBSAC and the United States Coast Guard.
IV
In this case we are faced with the issue of determining whether plaintiff's common-law products liability claims[8] are preempted under the Federal Boat Safety Act. We hold that they are.
The doctrine of federal preemption has its origin in the Supremacy Clause of article VI, cl. 2, of the United States Constitution, which declares that the laws of the United States "shall be the supreme Law of the Land...." Where the principles of federal preemption apply, state courts are deprived of subject matter jurisdiction. Congressional intent is the cornerstone of preemption analysis. People v. Hegedus, *546 432 Mich. 598, 607, 443 N.W.2d 127 (1989).[9]
Federal provisions that invalidate state law must be narrowly tailored to support a presumption against preemption of state law. Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr, 518 U.S. ___, ____, 116 S.Ct. 2240, 2250, 135 L.Ed.2d 700 (1996).[10] State police powers are not to be superseded unless that is the clear and unequivocal intent of Congress. Cipollone v. Liggett Group, Inc., 505 U.S. 504, 516, 112 S.Ct. 2608, 2617, 120 L.Ed.2d 407 (1992). This is especially true where state regulation of matters relating to health and safety are involved. Hillsborough Co. v. Automated Medical Labs. Inc., 471 U.S. 707, 715, 105 S.Ct. 2371, 2376, 85 L.Ed.2d 714 (1985).
Of fundamental importance to the resolution of this issue is the premise that the plain meaning of a statute must be given effect unless there is reason to believe that Congress intended a more restrictive reading. CSX Transportation Inc. v. Easterwood, 507 U.S. 658, 113 S.Ct. 1732, 123 L.Ed.2d 387 (1993). The viewing court seeks the intent of Congress from text and the "`structure and purpose of the statute as a whole' ... [including] the way in which Congress intended the statute and its surrounding regulatory scheme to affect business, consumers, and the law." Medtronic, ___ U.S. at ___, 116 S.Ct. at 2251.
Federal preemption is either express or implied. If express, the intent of Congress to preempt state law must be clearly stated in the statute's language or impliedly contained in the statute's structure and purpose. Cipollone, supra at 516, 112 S.Ct. at 2617. In the absence of express preemption, implied preemption may exist in the form of conflict or field preemption. Conflict preemption acts to preempt state law to the extent that it is in direct conflict with federal law or with the purposes and objectives of Congress. Field preemption acts to preempt state law where federal law so thoroughly occupies a legislative field that it is reasonable to infer that Congress did not intend for states to supplement it. Cipollone, supra at 516, 112 S.Ct. at 2617. However, as seven members of the Cipollone Court agreed, when "Congress has considered the issue of pre-emption and has included in the enacted legislation a provision explicitly addressing that issue, and when that provision provides a `reliable indicium of congressional intent with respect to state authority' ... `there is no need to infer congressional intent to preempt state laws from the substantive provisions' of the legislation." Id. at 517, 112 S.Ct. at 2618, quoting California Federal Savings & Loan Ass'n v. Guerra, 479 U.S. 272, 282, 107 S.Ct. 683, 690, 93 L.Ed.2d 613 (1987).[11]
V
To resolve the issue of federal preemption before us we examine two provisions of the Federal Boat Safety Act, the federal preemption provision of § 4306, and the saving clause provision of subsection 4311(g). The federal preemption provision reads in relevant part:
*547 [A] State ... may not establish, continue in effect, or enforce a law or regulation establishing a recreational vessel or associated equipment performance or other safety standard or imposing a requirement for associated equipment ... that is not identical to a regulation prescribed under section 4302 of this title. [46 U.S.C. § 4306.]
The saving clause provides:
Compliance with this chapter or standards, regulations, or orders prescribed under this chapter does not relieve a person from liability at common law or under State law. [46 U.S.C. § 4311(g).]
Plaintiff submits that the use of the term "law or regulation" in § 4306 of the statute is ambiguous and therefore incapable of preempting state common-law causes of action. We disagree, noting that "`[t]he obligation to pay compensation can be, indeed is designed to be, a potent method of governing conduct and controlling policy.'" Cipollone, supra at 521, 112 S.Ct. at 2620, citing San Diego Building Trades Council v. Garmon, 359 U.S. 236, 247, 79 S.Ct. 773, 780-81, 3 L.Ed.2d 775 (1959). "`[State] regulation can be as effectively exerted through an award of damages as through some form of preventive relief.'" Id.
While common-law damages actions may constitute a form of state regulation, the issue before us is not whether the act preempts common-law remedies for claims supplementary to, but not inconsistent with, federal regulations.[12] The threshold question is, rather, whether Congress intended that common-law causes of action such as those before this Court be considered a "law or regulation" under the act. We find that it did.
In Cipollone, supra, the United States Supreme Court was faced with the issue whether preemptive provisions of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act displaced the plaintiff's common-law tort claims. At issue were two statutory provisions of the act, the first enacted in 1965 and the second in 1969. The 1965 provision was narrowly drafted and was found only to preempt cautionary statements.[13] The 1969 version, however, was held to have expanded the act's scope of preemption by mandating that "[n]o requirement or prohibition based on smoking and health shall be imposed under State law...." Cipollone, supra at 515, 112 S.Ct. at 2617. Interpreting the 1969 act to preempt common-law regulations, the Court wrote that "[t]he phrase `[n]o requirement or prohibition' sweeps broadly and suggests no distinction between positive enactments and common law; to the contrary, those words easily encompass obligations that take the form of common-law rules." Id. at 521, 112 S.Ct. at 2620.
Comparing the language in the 1969 preemption clause in Cipollone to the language used by Congress in the preemptive clause of the FBSA, we conclude that Congress intended the preemptive clause of the FBSA to reach claims that the product is defective for failure to have a propeller guard or to warn of the dangers of not having such a guard. In Cipollone, supra, the statute read "[n]o requirement or prohibition ... shall be imposed under state law...." The FBSA, on the other hand, declares that a state may not "enforce a law or regulation... imposing a requirement for associated equipment...." 46 U.S.C. § 4306. Noting that Cipollone has defined state regulation as encompassing common-law damages actions,[14] we find the difference in the language of the preemption provisions for the purposes *548 of federal preemption to be insignificant.[15]
In so finding, we are cognizant, however, of the Texas Supreme Court decision in Moore v. Brunswick Bowling & Billiards Corp., 889 S.W.2d 246 (Tex., 1994), in which the court found, in an identical context, that the plaintiff's products liability claims were not preempted by the FBSA. The learned panel of the Texas Supreme Court wrote:
We recognize that the term "law" can include both common law and statutory law. However, in Cipollone, the Supreme Court stated generally that "the presumption against pre-emption might give good reason to construe the phrase `state law' in a pre-emption provision more narrowly than an identical phrase in another context." [Id. at 249, quoting Cipollone, supra at 522, 112 S.Ct. at 2620-21.][[16]]
However, the Moore court, while perceiving "no basis in the language of the statute or legislative history"[17] to find preemption, failed to address the "long history of preemption in maritime safety matters" [18] that is premised on the need for uniformity and that "assures that manufacture for the domestic trade will not involve compliance with widely varying local regulations." [19] Nor did Moore acknowledge that a majority of the Cipollone Court, on which Moore relied, declined to adopt a narrow interpretation of the term "state law,"[20] or that, because of the inherent conflict between state and federal law,[21] the Cipollone Court preempted the plaintiff's claims that relied on a "state law `requirement or prohibition ... with respect to ... advertising or promotion.'" [22]
While we agree that a preemption clause must be narrowly construed, having concluded that state law includes common-law actions, we cannot conclude other than that a state claim based on the absence of propeller guards is preempted by the federal decision that propeller guards should not be required.[23] In so holding, we join numerous other courts that have held that "[c]ommon law causes of action may constitute state *549 regulation and `impose a requirement' on manufacturers to have propeller guards through an award of damages." Lewis v. Brunswick Corp., 922 F.Supp. 613, 615 (S.D.Ga., 1996).[24]
VI
Plaintiff also contends that the action taken by the Coast Guard was an informal decision rather than a formal regulation as required by the act.[25] Section 4306 of the FBSA mandates that a state law or regulation shall be preempted if it is not identical to a regulation promulgated under the act. There is no dispute that the action taken by the Coast Guard was a determination not to regulate; propeller guard installation and use were not expressly prohibited by the Coast Guard. The Coast Guard did decide, however, that propeller guards should not be required on recreational watercraft.
A decision not to regulate does not automatically invoke preemption,[26] but may carry the force of a positive enactment. Arkansas Electric Cooperative v. Arkansas Public Service Comm., 461 U.S. 375, 384, 103 S.Ct. 1905, 1912, 76 L.Ed.2d 1 (1983).[27] Nevertheless, when a federal agency has actively analyzed the proposed area of regulation and has deliberately concluded that regulation is not appropriate in a given area, federal inaction will preempt state law not identical to it. This is not to say that inaction indicated preemption, but rather that "`[w]here a comprehensive federal scheme intentionally leaves a portion of the regulated field without controls, then the preemptive inference can be drawnnot from federal inaction alone, but from inaction joined with action.'" Toy Mfrs. of America, Inc. v. Blumenthal, 986 F.2d 615, 622 (C.A.2, 1992), quoting Puerto Rico Dep't of Consumer Affairs v. Isla Petroleum Corp., 485 U.S. 495, 503, 108 S.Ct. 1350, 1354-55, 99 L.Ed.2d 582 (1988).[28]
*550 The Coast Guard's decision not to require propeller guards on recreational vessels granted manufacturers the opportunity to choose whether or not they felt it wise to install propeller guards on recreational boats. Moss v. Outboard Marine Corp., 915 F.Supp. 183, 186 (E.D.Cal., 1996); Mowery, supra at 1016. Holding defendants liable under state tort laws for failing to install a propeller guard would effectively eliminate that choice. Davis v. Brunswick, 854 F.Supp. 1574, 1582 (N.D.Ga., 1994).[29] More precisely, "it would allow juries to do what state legislatures cannot." Id.[30] Accordingly, we find that the Coast Guard's decision not to require propeller guards was an intentional and reasoned determination not to regulate in a given area and "[a]ny state law or regulation requiring manufacturers to install propeller guards would not be identical to the Coast Guard regulatory position." Carstensen, 49 F.3d at 431.[31]
VII
Plaintiff contends that the saving clause provision of subsection 4311(g), read in conjunction with the federal preemption provision of § 4306, provides a clear indication of the legislative intent not to preempt state common-law causes of action such as those involved here. We disagree.
As evidenced above, the plain meaning of the statute expresses the intent of Congress to preempt state law causes of action such as those brought by plaintiff. The legislative history surrounding the enactment of the FBSA also bears witness to that intent. Davis, supra at 1580.
In enacting the FBSA, Congress wrote that "the annual loss of life is of [a] sufficiently alarming proportion that the Federal Government should require products involved to be built to standards of safety commensurate with the risks associated with their use." S. Rep. No. 92-248, 1971 U.S.Code Cong. & Admin. News (85 Stat. 213) 1334 (emphasis added). States were encouraged to participate in this plan by implementing state boating safety programs. Id. at 1333. State participation was also to be encouraged in the enforcement of established regulations. Id. at 1334.
Delineating governmental responsibility in this manner was wholly consistent with the underlying goal of the actto provide uniformity to the recreational boating industry. According to Congress, the "need for uniformity in standards if interstate commerce is not to be unduly impeded supports the establishment of uniform construction and equipment standards at the Federal level." Id. at 1335 (emphasis added). At the same time, states are left free, and are encouraged, to regulate the operation and use of recreational vessels.[32]
*551 What was taken away by the federal preemption provision was in part restored by the saving clause provision of subsection 4311(g). The legislative history surrounding the enactment of the saving clause provision provides:
This section ... is intended to clarify that compliance with the Act or standards, regulations, or orders promulgated thereunder, does not relieve any person from liability at common law or under State law. The purpose of the section is to assure that in a product liability suit mere compliance by a manufacturer with the minimum standards promulgated under the Act will not be a complete defense to liability. [Id. at 1352 (emphasis added).]
We find that it would be inconsistent with the language of the statute and with the legislative intent to hold that the saving clause provision preserves plaintiff's claims from the reach of federal preemption. Thus, we join a long line of cases that have similarly held that common-law products liability actions alleging liability for failing to incorporate a propeller guard on a recreational vessel are expressly preempted under the FBSA. We find the analysis in these cases more persuasive than that of the sole case holding to the contrary.[33]
Plaintiff contends that the defendant had a duty to design and manufacture a motor with a propeller guard. Because state regulations requiring propeller guards are preempted by the FBSA, and because the federal government currently does not require that motors be manufactured with propeller guards, we conclude that the grant of summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(4) and (C)(8) was proper.
VIII
Plaintiff's common-law tort claims are preempted by the Federal Boat Safety Act. For these reasons, we affirm the Court of Appeals decision.
MALLETT, C.J., and BRICKLEY, MICHAEL F. CAVANAGH, RILEY and WEAVER, J., concur.
MARILYN J. KELLY, J. not participating.
NOTES
[1]  Report of the Propeller Guard Subcommittee at 24 (November 7, 1989).
[2]  The complaint alleged that Mercury Marine was negligent in the design and manufacture of its inboard motor, propeller assembly, and replacement propeller system, and in failing to equip the propeller with a guard or protective device to prevent invasive cutting injuries. Similar allegations were brought against the Bayliner and Brunswick Corporations.
Plaintiff contends that Blue Fin Marina was negligent in selling, retailing, distributing, and installing the unguarded replacement propeller, that Carl Stirns Marine was negligent in retailing a defective boat and propeller assembly system, and that the defendants were negligent in failing to warn of the dangers associated with the unguarded motor and propeller system.
Because the plaintiff has not argued that the failure to warn claims should be severed from the claims of negligence for failure to install a propeller guard, we have not analyzed these claims separately.
[3]  Arguments on the motions were heard before Judge Michael E. Dodge in the Cass Circuit Court, and an order was entered on March 17, 1993, granting defendants' motions and dismissing plaintiff's propeller guard and duty to warn claims.
The trial court stated:
The Court: Based upon the briefs that have been filed and the argument that I have heard I am satisfied that the proper result here is partial summary disposition; that that is dictated by the federal doctrine of preemption; and that the cases which have been cited to me by defendant[s] in their briefs are applicable.
As both Judge Morris in Washtenaw County and Judge Giovan in Wayne County have indicated, it is clear to this Court that the statutory scheme set forth by the Federal Boat Safety Act does constitute preemption in this area; the Court finds that the goal of the act is to provide uniform regulations, and that a jury award would conflict with the objective of that act.
Federal law in my opinion has regulated this area, including common law tort claims, by deciding not to require propeller guards; therefore, plaintiff's tort claim for the absence of such a guard is expressly preempted by the act. Because this Court finds that federal law does preempt state law in this area, the Court necessarily lacks jurisdiction to hear this matter and, accordingly, partial summary disposition is appropriate under (C)(4) for the lack of subject matter jurisdiction, and also as I think correctly argued by the defendant, it fails to state a claim upon which relief can be granted because the failure to equip its product with a propeller guard or to warn of its absence is something that the manufacturer of an outboard or inboard outdrive boat propulsion unit cannot be held liable for. Since that is the case, I grant the defendant's motion for partial summary disposition under both (C)(4) and (C)(8) for those reasons I've indicated.
[4]  This order was entered on March 26, 1993. The parties to the stipulation were defendants Mercury Marine, Brunswick Corporation, Bayliner Marine Corporation, Blue Fin Marina, and Carl Stirns Marine.
[5]  209 Mich.App. 519, 526, 531 N.W.2d 793 (1995) (one member of the panel dissented, finding persuasive the reasoning of Moore v. Brunswick Bowling & Billiards Corp, 889 S.W.2d 246 [Tex., 1994]).
[6]  The NBSAC is a twenty-one-member council, comprised of three groups of seven members. Each member of the council is appointed by the Secretary of Transportation and is considered to have particular "expertise, knowledge, and experience in recreational boating safety." 46 U.S.C. § 13110. The council is made up as follows:
(b)(1) The membership of the Council shall consist of
(A) 7 representatives of State officials responsible for State boating safety programs;
(B) 7 representatives of recreational vessel manufacturers and associated equipment manufacturers; and
(C) 7 representatives of national recreational boating organizations and from the general public, at least 5 of whom shall be representatives of national recreational boating organizations. [46 U.S.C. § 13110.]
[7]  The charge to the subcommittee was as follows:
Review the available data on the prevention of propeller-strike accidents and Coast Guard study of various methods of shrouding propellers to prevent contact [with a] person in the water.
Assess the arguments for and against some form of mechanical guard to protect against propeller strikes reflecting the positions of state boating law administrators, the recreational boating industry, and the boating public.
Among points to be considered:
a. what is the incidence of such accidents?
b. is there a trend toward more or fewer such accidents?
c. what are the possible solutions and their advantages/disadvantages?
d. how is this problem being addressed in other nations?
e. what would be the direct costs and indirect costs (fuel economy, maintenance, etc.) of mechanical solutions?
f. can the risks be addressed adequately by education?
g. should the Coast Guard move towards a federal requirement for some [sic, kind?] of propeller guard?
h. assess the potential for propeller equipped with each of several propeller guard designs to cause injury. How much has the propeller guard reduced the injury potential compared to the injury potential of the same propeller operating in an unguarded manner?
i. should only new boats and motors be equipped with propeller guards, or should all boats eventually be equipped with a guard?
j. what is the practical boat length limit beyond which propeller guards would not be required? are there other parameters which would dictate upper limits for guard installation? [Report of the Propeller Guard Subcommittee at 1 (November 7, 1989).]
[8]  Products liability claims in Michigan are based on a single statute, M.C.L. § 600.2946; M.S.A. § 27A.2946, and are fault based. Prentis v. Yale Mfg. Co., 421 Mich. 670, 365 N.W.2d 176 (1984).
[9]  See also Cipollone v. Liggett Group, Inc., 505 U.S. 504, 516, 112 S.Ct. 2608, 2617, 120 L.Ed.2d 407 (1992) ("`[t]he purpose of Congress is the ultimate touchstone'" of preemption analysis, citing Malone v. White Motor Corp., 435 U.S. 497, 504, 98 S.Ct. 1185, 1190, 55 L.Ed.2d 443 (1978)), quoting Retail Clerks Int'l Ass'n v. Schermerhorn, 375 U.S. 96, 103, 84 S.Ct. 219, 222-23, 11 L.Ed.2d 179 (1963); Mowery v. Mercury Marine, Div. of Brunswick Corp, supra at 1014 ("To determine whether a claim is preempted, a court must examine Congressional intent," citing Schneidewind v. ANR Pipeline Co., 485 U.S. 293, 299-300, 108 S.Ct. 1145, 1150-51, 99 L.Ed.2d 316 (1988)).
[10]  See Teper v. Park West Galleries, 431 Mich. 202, 208, 427 N.W.2d 535 (1988).
[11]  The Cipollone Court further noted:
We resort to principles of implied preemptionthat is, inquiring whether Congress has occupied a particular field with the intent to supplant state law or whether state law actually conflicts with federal law ... only when Congress has been silent with respect to preemption. [Id. at 532, 112 S.Ct. at 2625-26 (Blackmun, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).]
But see Freightliner Corp. v. Myrick, 514 U.S. ___, 115 S.Ct. 1483, 1488, 131 L.Ed.2d 385 (1995) ("At best, Cipollone supports an inference that an express pre-emption clause forecloses implied pre-emption; it does not establish a rule").
[12]  The defendant contends both that a state may only regulate identically to federal regulation and, alternatively, that the language of the saving clause establishes a federal floor that the state may supplement. While we are inclined to believe that the latter is the more plausible view, because the former would make the saving clause a nullity, we need not resolve this question given our conclusion that a requirement for a propeller guard conflicts with the federal determination that propeller guards are not required.
[13]  505 U.S. at 519-20, 112 S.Ct. at 2618-19.
The 1965 version of the statute provided:
No statement relating to smoking and health, other than the [§ 4] statement ... shall be required on any cigarette package. [Id. at 514, 112 S.Ct. at 2616.]
[14]  Goodwin v. Bacon, 127 Wash.2d 50, 61, 896 P.2d 673 (1995) ("The relevance of Cipollone is its definition of state regulation").
[15]  See also Gorton v. American Cyanamid Co., 194 Wis.2d 203, 215, 533 N.W.2d 746 (1995) "([I]t is apparent that state constitutions, state statutes, and state regulations will all be encompassed within the definition of `state law.' Also falling within the heading of state law [for federal preemption purposes], is the concept of state common law tort actions."); Cortez v. MTD Products, Inc., 927 F.Supp. 386, 390 (N.D.Cal., 1996) ("there is no apparent difference, for purposes of measuring preemptive reach, between a `requirement or prohibition ... based on State law,' on the one hand, and ... a `standard or regulation' established by a State"); Edwards v. Murray Chris-Craft Sportboats, Inc., 873 F.Supp. 618, 621 (M.D.Fla., 1994) ("The phrase `law or regulation' in the subject preemption provision clearly encompasses common law actions").
[16]  The Moore court also based its holding on the fact that Congress has, in various other statutes, directly referred to state common-law causes of action when it intended that those actions be preempted. The court noted that the existence of a saving clause, as well as the "significant state interest at issue," provided grounds for its conclusion that common-law claims were not preempted by the FBSA. Id. at 251.
[17]  Id. at 250.
[18]  S. Rep. No 92-248, 1971 U.S.Code Cong. & Admin. News (85 Stat. 213) 1341.
[19]  Id.
[20]  Justice Stevens, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices White and O'Connor, concluded that the term "state law" reached beyond "positive enactments" to include some common-law damages actions. Id. at 521, 112 S.Ct. at 2619-20. Justice Scalia, joined by Justice Thomas, concluded that all the plaintiff's common-law claims were preempted. Id. at 548, 112 S.Ct. at 2633-34. Only Justice Blackmun, joined by Justices Kennedy and Souter, so narrowly interpreted the statute as to conclude that the plaintiff's common-law actions were not preempted. Id. at 531-44, 112 S.Ct. at 2625-32.
[21]  The federal provision read in part, "[n]o requirement or prohibition ... shall be imposed ... with respect to advertising or promotion...." Id. at 515, 112 S.Ct. at 2616-17.
[22]  Id. at 524, 112 S.Ct. at 2621-22.
[23]  Moore contends that the fact that the Cipollone statute did not contain a saving clause supported its conclusion that there was "no `good reason to believe' that Congress meant less than it said." Moore, 889 S.W.2d at 250, n. 7, quoting Cipollone, supra at 522, 112 S.Ct. at 2620-21. While a saving clause is an indication of Congressional intent, given the Court's presumption against preemption in Cipollone and the narrow application by the plurality to the various claims at issue in the case, we are unable to conclude that the absence of the clause in that case is a distinction with a difference for this case.
[24]  See Moss v. Outboard Marine Corp., 915 F.Supp. 183 (E.D.Cal., 1996); Carstensen v. Brunswick Corp., supra; Davis v. Brunswick Corp., 854 F.Supp. 1574 (N.D.Ga., 1993); Shield v. Bayliner Marine Corp., 822 F.Supp. 81 (D.Conn., 1993); Farner v. Brunswick Corp., 239 Ill.App.3d 885, 180 Ill.Dec. 493, 607 N.E.2d 562 (1992); Mowery v. Mercury Marine, Div. of Brunswick Corp., supra; Shields v. Outboard Marine Corp., 776 F.Supp. 1579 (M.D.Ga., 1991); Denison v. Brunswick Corp, Washtenaw Circuit Court (Docket No. 91-041618-CZ, July 10, 1992).
[25]  Plaintiff argues that the Federal Administrative Procedures Act, 5 U.S.C. §§ 552-553, mandates that formal procedures of notice and publication be followed by an agency that seeks to promulgate rules. Because these formal procedures were not followed by the United States Coast Guard in the instant case, plaintiff contends that the decision not to require regulation in the area of propeller guards is not a formal regulation.
The defendant contends that the United States Coast Guard does not, and never has, provided notification of its intent not to regulate in a given area. As defendant argued, "[w]hy would you cut down trees to print raft after raft after raft of regulation that says `We're not going to require this. We're not going to require that. We're not going to require this. We're not going to require that?'" We agree with the defendant that it is nonsensical to require the United States Coast Guard to comply with notice provisions in a situation where the Coast Guard makes a reasoned determination not to regulate.
[26]  Freightliner v. Myrick, n. 11, supra, ___ U.S. at ____, 115 S.Ct. at 1487; see also Toy Mfrs. of America, Inc. v. Blumenthal, 986 F.2d 615, 622 (C.A.2, 1992) (a federal decision not to regulate does not automatically invoke preemption of state law: "`That was obviously not meant in an unqualified sense; otherwise, deliberate federal inaction could always imply pre-emption which cannot be,'" quoting Puerto Rico Dep't of Consumer Affairs v. Isla Petroleum Corp., 485 U.S. 495, 503, 108 S.Ct. 1350, 1354-55, 99 L.Ed.2d 582 [1988]).
[27]  "[A] federal decision to forgo regulation in a given area may imply an authoritative federal determination that the area is best left un regulated, and in that event would have as much preemptive force as a decision to regulate." Id. at 384, 103 S.Ct. at 1912 (emphasis in the original).
See also Moss v. Outboard Marine Corp., n. 24 supra at 186; Carstensen v. Brunswick Corp., supra at 431; Davis v. Brunswick Corp., n. 24 supra at 1582; Farner v. Brunswick Corp., n. 24 supra; Mowery v. Mercury Marine Div. of Brunswick Corp., n. 24 supra at 1016, and Shields v. Outboard Marine Corp., n. 24 supra at 1581.
[28]  See also Freightliner Corp. v. Myrick, n. 11 supra, ___U.S. at___, 115 S.Ct. at 1486; Stanley v. Bertram-Trojan, Inc., 855 F.Supp. 657, 658 (S.D.N.Y., 1994) ("The critical difference between those cases and this is that propeller guards specifically were considered by the Coast Guard as a subject of regulation and were found not feasible because they may increase danger rather than reduce it.... There is no evidence here that the Coast Guard ever considered adopting regulations concerning safety standards for hatches"); Cortez v. MTD Products, Inc., n. 15 supra at 392-393; Riley v. Becton Dickinson Vascular Access, Inc., 913 F.Supp. 879, 893-94 (E.D.Pa., 1995); Baltimore & Ohio R. Co. v. Oberly, 837 F.2d 108, 115 (C.A.3, 1988) (the EPA's simple statement that it was "`unnecessary for EPA to establish further property line facility emission standards'" did not meet the level of specificity required to show that the agency intended to preempt state law).
[29]  As opposed to a hypothetical state regulation that required more flotation devices than those required by federal regulation, a determination in a given state that a product is defective for failure to have a propeller guard is a condemnation of the product line in the given state, a conclusion that directly implicates the statutory goal of uniformity. Prentis v. Yale Mfg. Co., n. 8 supra at 689, 365 N.W.2d 176 (the whole product line is "at risk" in a design defect case).
[30]  See also Mowery v. Mercury Marine Div. of Brunswick Corp., supra at 1017; Shields v. Outboard Marine Corp., n. 24 supra at 1581 ("To allow a jury to decide the plaintiffs' claim would set a precedent for allowing other juries nationwide to decide questions of boat safety, which would result in a patchwork of regulations clearly inconsistent with the purpose of the Act").
[31]  See Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr, supra, ___ U.S. at ___, 116 S.Ct. at 2258, in which the Court, in noting the general applicability of the federal regulations before it, wrote:
[T]his [is] quite unlike a case in which the Federal Government has weighed the competing interests relevant to the particular requirement in question, reached an unambiguous conclusion about how those competing considerations should be resolved in a particular case or set of cases, and implemented that conclusion via a specific mandate on manufacturers or producers.
[32]  The federal preemption provision provides:
This section provides for federal preemption in the issuance of boat and equipment safety standards. This conforms to the long history of preemption in maritime safety matters and is founded on the need for uniformity applicable to vessels moving in interstate commerce. In this case it also assures that manufacture for the domestic trade will not involve compliance with widely varying local requirements. At the same time, it was recognized that there may be serious hazards which are unique to a particular locale and which would justify variances at least with regard to the carriage or use of marine safety articles on boats. Therefore, the section does permit individual States to impose requirements with respect to carrying or using marine safety articles which go beyond the federal requirements when necessary to meet uniquely hazardous local conditions or circumstances. A right of disapproval, however, is reserved to the Secretary to insure that indiscriminate use of state authority does not seriously impinge on the basic need for uniformity.
The section does not preempt state law or regulation directed at safe boat operation and use, which was felt to be appropriately within the purview of state or local concern. [Id. at 1341 (emphasis added).]
[33]  See Moore v. Brunswick, supra.

=== CASE 9741194 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:21.36511+00 ===

Connolly, J.
This consolidated appeal from the district court for Lancaster County arises out of the district court’s issuance of peremptory writs of mandamus that ordered the Nebraska Equal Opportunity Commission (NEOC) to return Ronald Shepherd and Randall Chapp (appellees) to their previously held positions of employment with the NEOC. In this appeal, we are asked to determine the constitutionality of Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 81-2706 and 81-2707(1) (Reissue 1994) of the State Government Effectiveness Act.
*519We conclude that § 81-2707(1) is unconstitutional because it permits an officer of the legislative branch of state government to encroach upon the prerogatives and duties of the executive branch in violation of the separation of powers clause of article II, § 1, of the Nebraska Constitution. As a result, we reverse the district court’s orders issuing peremptory writs of mandamus, without reaching the constitutionality of § 81-2706.
I. BACKGROUND
In March 1995, the appellees were fired from their employment as full-time investigators with the NEOC pursuant to disciplinary charges brought against them. As a result, they filed charges with the Public Counsel (Ombudsman), claiming that they had been wrongfully fired by the NEOC in retaliation for having cooperated with a legislative investigation of possible NEOC wrongdoing. The appellees assert that their cooperation in the investigation constituted protected whistleblower activity under the State Government Effectiveness Act (Whistleblower Act), Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 81-2701 through 81-2710 (Reissue 1994 & Cum. Supp. 1996).
The Whistleblower Act was enacted by the Legislature in order to “encourage public officials and employees to disclose information concerning possible violations of law and fiscal waste or mismanagement in state government to elected state officials or the [Ombudsman] and to prohibit reprisals for such disclosures by state employees.” § 81-2702.
As required by § 81-2706(1) of the Whistleblower Act, the Ombudsman conducted an investigation and found there existed reasonable grounds to believe that the appellees were fired for engaging in protected whistleblower activity. The Ombudsman, as required by § 81-2706(4), then issued his findings to the State Personnel Board. The State Personnel Board, without any further proceedings, then ordered the NEOC to reverse the firings and to reinstate the appellees to their previously held positions of employment until an official hearing could be held pursuant to § 81-2707(1).
The NEOC refused to comply with these orders. As a result, the appellees commenced this action in the district court, which issued peremptory writs of mandamus ordering the NEOC to *520reinstate the appellees to their positions. The NEOC appeals, and the two appeals have been consolidated for purposes of briefing and argument.
II. ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
Summarized and rephrased, the NEOC alleges the district court erred in entering peremptory writs of mandamus because §§ 81-2706 and 81-2707(1) of the Whistleblower Act are unconstitutional, in violation of the separation of powers clause of Neb. Const, art. II, § 1.
We note that §§ 81-2706 and 81-2707 were amended effective September 9, 1995. See §§ 81-2706 and 81-2707 (Cum. Supp. 1996). The amended versions did not go into effect until after the Ombudsman and the State Personnel Board acted under, and the district court applied, §§ 81-2706 and 81-2707 (Reissue 1994) in the instant case. The amendments do not affect any issue pertinent to these appeals. Thus, these appeals will be decided under §§ 81-2706 and 81-2707 (Reissue 1994).
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
The party claiming a statute is unconstitutional has the burden to show and clearly demonstrate that the questioned statute is unconstitutional. Callan v. Balka, 248 Neb. 469, 536 N.W.2d 47 (1995).
A statute is presumed to be constitutional, and all reasonable doubts will be resolved in favor of its constitutionality. Chrysler Motors Corp. v. Lee Janssen Motor Co., 248 Neb. 322, 534 N.W.2d 309 (1995); Pick v. Nelson, 247 Neb. 487, 528 N.W.2d 309 (1995).
Even when a law is constitutionally suspect, a court will attempt to interpret it in a manner consistent with the Constitution. CenTra, Inc. v. Chandler Ins. Co., 248 Neb. 844, 540 N.W.2d 318 (1995); State ex rel. Grape v. Zach, 247 Neb. 29, 524 N.W.2d 788 (1994).
IV.ANALYSIS
1. Whether Case Is Moot
As a result of a grievance procedure contained in the state’s union contract with the Nebraska Association of Public *521Employees/AFSCME, an arbitrator has ordered that the appellees be reinstated to employment with the NEOC. Thus, a preliminary issue presented is whether the arbitration order rendered the appeal before this court moot.
A case becomes moot when the issues initially presented in litigation cease to exist or the litigants lack a legally cognizable interest in the outcome of litigation. Duggan v. Beermann, 245 Neb. 907, 515 N.W.2d 788 (1994). The public interest exception to the rule precluding consideration of issues on appeal due to mootness requires a consideration of the public or private nature of the question presented, desirability of an authoritative adjudication for further guidance of public officials, and the likelihood of future recurrence of the same or a similar problem. Bamford v. Upper Republican Nat. Resources Dist., 245 Neb. 299, 512 N.W.2d 642 (1994).
In the instant appeal, the State continues to have a legally cognizable interest in the constitutionality of the Whistleblower Act despite the arbitration order. Furthermore, there is a public desire for an authoritative adjudication to guide public officials (Ombudsman, personnel board) in the performance of their duties. Moreover, there is a likelihood that this same constitutional problem will reoccur in the future yet evade review if we find the issue to be moot. As a result, we will proceed with the merits of this appeal.
2. Whether Constitutionality of Statutes Was Properly Raised
Before reaching the NEOC’s separation of powers argument, we must first address the appellees’ claim that the NEOC did not properly raise the constitutional issue at the district court level. Except in the “most unusual cases,” for a question of constitutionality to be considered on appeal, it must have been properly raised in the trial court. If not so raised, it will be considered to have been waived. See, State v. Huebner, 245 Neb. 341, 513 N.W.2d 284 (1994); In re Estate of Snyder, 217 Neb. 356, 348 N.W.2d 136 (1984).
The NEOC does not argue that it raised the separation of powers issue in the district court. However, the NEOC argues that it did not have an opportunity to raise the issue in the dis*522trict court because of the nature of peremptory writs of mandamus. A discussion of the types of mandamus writs will be helpful to understand this argument.
Two types of writs of mandamus are recognized and defined: (1) alternative writs and (2) peremptory writs. Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-2158 (Reissue 1995). The basic difference between these two types of writs is that alternative writs require the defendant be given an opportunity to “show cause why he [or she] has not done as commanded,” whereas peremptory writs are generally issued in an ex parte fashion and do not require notice or that the defendant be given an opportunity to “show cause why he [or she] has not done as commanded.” § 25-2158. See Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-2160 (Reissue 1995). “When the right to require the performance of the act is clear and it is apparent that no valid excuse can be given for not performing it, a peremptory mandamus may be allowed in the first instance. In all other cases, the alternative writ must be first issued . . . .” Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-2159 (Reissue 1995).
In the instant case, the district court, as permitted by statute, issued the peremptory writs without first issuing alternative writs. Furthermore, the court issued the peremptory writs in an ex parte fashion without providing the NEOC notice or an opportunity to show cause why the writs should not be issued. Moreover, no other pleadings or written allegations are allowed by law. See Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-2164 (Reissue 1995). Thus, the NEOC correctly asserts that it did not have an opportunity to raise the separation of powers argument at the district court level.
We determine that a defendant must be given an opportunity to raise nonfrivolous, constitutional challenges to the issuance of peremptory writs of mandamus. Our standard when reviewing the alleged unconstitutionality of a statute is that it presents a question of law that must be determined independently from the conclusion reached by the trial court. Jones v. State, 248 Neb. 158, 532 N.W.2d 636 (1995). As a result, we conclude that this case need not be remanded to the district court, because it is one of those “most unusual cases” in which a question of constitutionality has not been waived and will be considered on *523appeal although it was not raised in the district court. See, In re Estate of Snyder, supra; State v. Huebner, supra.
3. Whether Statutes Are Violative of Separation of Powers Clause of Nebraska Constitution
(a) Overview of Whistleblower Act
The NEOC asserts that § 81-2707(1) of the Whistleblower Act is unconstitutional because it permits an officer of the legislative branch of state government to encroach upon the prerogatives and duties of the executive branch, in violation of the separation of powers clause of Neb. Const, art. II, § 1.
Section 81-2705 sets forth the conduct that is prohibited under the Whistleblower Act. That section states in pertinent part that any person who has authority to take or effect personnel action shall not, with respect to such authority, take such personnel action against an employee because of the employee’s disclosure of information, submission of allegations of wrongdoing, or providing of information or testimony to the Ombudsman or other official. The term “personnel action” is defined broadly in § 81-2703(4) to encompass virtually any action in the workplace which might adversely affect the employee.
Sections 81-2706 and 81-2707(1) are challenged by the NEOC. Section 81-2706(1) states that “[t]he [Ombudsman] shall receive any allegation of a violation of section 81-2705 and investigate to determine whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has occurred or is about to occur.” Section 81-2706(4) then goes on to provide in pertinent part that if the Ombudsman finds there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of § 81-2705 has occurred, he or she shall transmit his or her findings in writing to the Governor and to the State Personnel Board. Finally, § 81-2707(1) states in pertinent part:
Upon receiving the [Ombudsman’s] finding that there is reason to believe a violation of section 81-2705 has occurred or is about to occur, the State Personnel Board . . . shall, without further proceedings, stay or reverse the personnel action until a hearing can be held to determine *524if there is reason to believe that a violation of section 81-2705 is contemplated or has occurred. Such board . . . shall, at the earliest possible date, hold a hearing to determine whether a violation has occurred or is about to occur.
(Emphasis supplied.)
(b) Whether Removal of Executive Employees Is Duty and Prerogative of Executive Branch of State Government
The NEOC asserts that § 81-2707(1) is violative of Neb. Const, art. II, § 1, which provides:
The powers of the government of this state are divided into three distinct departments, the legislative, executive and judicial, and no person or collection of persons being one of these departments, shall exercise any power properly belonging to either of the others, except as hereinafter expressly directed or permitted.
(Emphasis supplied.)
In other words, the Nebraska Constitution prohibits one branch of government from encroaching on the duties and prerogatives of the others or from improperly delegating its own duties and prerogatives. Calabro v. City of Omaha, 247 Neb. 955, 531 N.W.2d 541 (1995); Clemens v. Harvey, 247 Neb. 77, 525 N.W.2d 185 (1994). This aspect of the separation of powers clause serves as the beam from which our system of checks and balances is suspended. State ex rel. Spire v. Conway, 238 Neb. 766, 472 N.W.2d 403 (1991).
Article IV, § 1, of the Nebraska Constitution states in pertinent part:
The heads of all executive departments established by law, other than those to be elected as provided herein, shall be appointed by the Governor, with the consent of a majority of all members elected to the Legislature, but officers so appointed may be removed by the Governor. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the heads of the various executive or civil departments shall have power to appoint and remove all subordinate employees in their respective departments.
Article IV, § 10, of the Nebraska Constitution states in pertinent part:
*525The Governor shall have power to remove, for cause and after a public hearing, any person whom he may appoint for a term except officers provided for in Article V of the Constitution .... The Governor shall have power to remove any other person whom he appoints at any time and for any reason.
In State ex rel. Beck v. Young, 154 Neb. 588, 591, 48 N.W.2d 677, 679 (1951), this court held:
Except as limited by the Constitution itself the supreme executive power is to be exercised by the Governor and, under the division of powers devised by the Constitution, neither the Legislature nor the courts may exercise the powers thus conferred upon the executive branch. The power to remove an officer or employee in the executive branch of the government is an executive function.
(Emphasis supplied.)
The Beck court then went on to restate that “[t]he power of appointment and removal is in the Governor . . . and the legislative or judicial branches may not properly trench upon the executive power thus granted.” Id. at 594, 48 N.W.2d at 681 (citing Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52, 47 S. Ct. 21, 71 L. Ed. 160 (1926)). Thus, it is clear that the power to remove an employee in the executive branch of state government is an executive duty and prerogative.
(c) Whether Ombudsman Is Officer of Legislative Branch of State Government
The NEOC asserts that § 81-2707(1) calls for an officer of the Legislature to encroach upon the executive branch’s duty and prerogative to remove executive employees. The crux of the NEOC’s separation of powers argument is premised on the claim that the Ombudsman is an officer of the legislative branch of state government. This claim is not disputed by the appellees and is supported by state statutory law.
The Ombudsman is nominated and appointed, his or her salary is set, and he or she may be removed, by the Legislature. See Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 81-8,241 and 81-8,243 (Reissue 1994). Furthermore, the Ombudsman reports to the Legislature and exercises the authority and performs the duties provided by the *526Legislature. See § 81-8,241; Neb. Rev. Stat. § 81-8,251 (Reissue 1994). As such, we conclude that the Ombudsman is an officer of the legislative branch of state government.
(d) Whether “Shall” as Used in § 81-2707(1)
Should Be Construed as Mandatory or Discretionary
The NEOC argues that encroachment occurs because § 81-2707(1) mandates, through the use of the word “shall,” that the State Personnel Board either temporarily stay or reverse the personnel action taken against an employee based upon the Ombudsman’s finding of reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of the Whistleblower Act has occurred. Conversely, the appellees argue that the word “shall” as used in § 81-2707(1) should not be construed as mandatory and, thus, that that subsection does not call for encroachment upon the executive branch’s duties and prerogatives.
(i) General Rule That “Shall”
Considered Mandatory
Neb. Rev. Stat. § 49-802 (Reissue 1993) states in pertinent part that
[u]nless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Legislature, rules for construction of the statutes of Nebraska hereafter enacted shall be as follows:
(1) When the word may appears, permissive or discretionary action is presumed. When the word shall appears, mandatory or ministerial action is presumed.
See, also, Bank of Gering v. Glover, 192 Neb. 575, 223 N.W.2d 56 (1974); Anderson v. Carlson, 171 Neb. 741, 107 N.W.2d 535 (1961).
In other words, the general rule is that in the construction of statutes, the word “shall” is considered mandatory and inconsistent with the idea of discretion. Payne v. Nebraska Dept. of Corr. Servs., 249 Neb. 150, 542 N.W.2d 694 (1996). It is particularly so considered when the statute is addressed to public officials. State ex rel. Smith v. Nebraska Liquor Control Commission, 152 Neb. 676, 42 N.W.2d 297 (1950); Trobough v. State, 120 Neb. 453, 233 N.W. 452 (1930).
*527
(ii) Spirit and Purpose of Whistleblower Act Do Not Require “Shall” To Be Construed as Permissive Rather Than Mandatory
While the word “shall” may render a particular provision of a statute as mandatory in character, when the spirit and purpose of the legislation require that the word “shall” be construed as permissive rather than mandatory, such will be done. State ex rel. Grape v. Zach, 247 Neb. 29, 524 N.W.2d 788 (1994).
It is clear that the spirit and purpose of the Whistleblower Act were to ensure that an allegedly aggrieved state employee could bring his or her complaint to the Ombudsman and, if the Ombudsman finds reasonable grounds to believe the complaint has merit, that the employee “shall” receive an immediate stay or reversal from the personnel action taken against him or her and a prompt evidentiary hearing. However, if the State Personnel Board is free to disregard the Ombudsman’s reasonable-grounds finding and to not order an immediate stay or reversal and an evidentiary hearing, then the legislative intent has been undermined.
A further indication that the Legislature intended the word “shall” to be mandatory is the additional language in § 81-2707(1) which provides:
Upon receiving the [Ombudsman’s] finding that there is reason to believe a violation of section 81-2705 has occurred or is about to occur, the State Personnel Board . . . shall, without further proceedings, stay or reverse the personnel action until a hearing can be held to determine if there is reason to believe that a violation of section 81-2705 is contemplated or has occurred.
(Emphasis supplied.)
In other words, the statute proscribes the State Personnel Board from conducting further proceedings before it issues the order of stay or reversal. If the word “shall” was merely intended to be a recommendation to the State Personnel Board, then the board would be unable to make a rational, independent decision, since it is proscribed from hearing argument and receiving evidence before making its decision. Thus, by proscribing further proceedings, the Legislature has made clear its intent to require the State Personnel Board to issue orders of *528stay or reversal based on nothing more than the Ombudsman’s finding of reasonable grounds.
Furthermore, the word “shall” appears 36 times in the Whistleblower Act. A word or phrase repeated in a statute will bear the same meaning throughout the statute, unless a different intention appears. Anderson v. Carlson, supra. If the word “shall” in § 81-2707(1) means “may,” then what meaning are we to give “shall” the other 35 times it appears in the Whistleblower Act? Moreover, through its use of the word “may” nine times in close proximity to the word “shall,” it is clear that the Legislature understands the distinction between these words and intended each to mean what it says.
Thus, upon reviewing the statutory language and context of the Whistleblower Act, we are not persuaded that the spirit and purpose of the legislation require us to depart from the general rule and construe the word “shall” in § 81-2707(1) as permissive rather than mandatory.
(Hi) Case Distinguishable From Those in Which This Court Has Construed “Shall” as Permissive Rather Than Mandatory
Only three times has this court construed the word “shall” to be permissive in order to save a statute from constitutional infirmity. In Nebraska Loan & Building Ass’n v. Perkins, 61 Neb. 254, 85 N.W. 67 (1901), this court construed as permissive a portion of a legislative act of 1873 which stated in pertinent part that although the dues, fines, premiums, and other charges paid by members of a building and loan association may aggregate a greater amount than the legal rate of interest on loans made to them, such payments shall not be construed to make such transactions usurious. The court reasoned:
It is not within the province of the legislature to interpret the law, or to apply it to particular cases, that being peculiarly the duty of the courts. But we do not think that the legislature, in reciting that the contracts of these associations should not be construed to be usurious, intended to usurp judicial functions. While the wording of the statute would bear the construction that it was a direction to the courts, yet the substance of the legislation must be *529regarded, rather than the form, and for that reason we are of opinion that it was rather the intention of the legislature to establish a rule of interest relative to this particular class of contracts; that the act is declaratory, the intent thereby being to relieve the contracts of these institutions from the operation of the usury laws, rather than an attempt to arrogate to the legislature judicial functions.
Id. at 261, 85 N.W. at 69.
In State, ex rel. Sorensen, v. State Bank of Minatare, 123 Neb. 109, 242 N.W. 278 (1932), we held that a legislative act providing that the secretary of the department of trade and commerce shall be the sole receiver of all insolvent state banks amounts to no more, in a judicial proceeding properly pending in a court of equity for the liquidation of a bank, than a legislative recommendation to the judiciary to appoint him, as otherwise the enactment would be an unconstitutional encroachment on judicial power. The court reasoned:
French legislators once imprisoned judges for failure to comply with the legislative will. Montesquieu suggested a government with legislative, executive and judicial departments, each independent of the other. The framers of the American Constitution and the people of Nebraska adopted that plan. It has been regarded by statesmen and philosophers as an outstanding advancement in the science of government. Throughout the judicial history of the present system the courts have scrupulously respected the prerogatives of the legislative and executive departments and extended to them the comity due to governmental divisions of equal rank, but courtesy does not extend to the surrendering of judicial power. It is an imperative duty of the judicial department of government to protect its jurisdiction at the boundaries of power fixed by the Constitution.
(Emphasis supplied.) Id. at 114, 242 N.W. at 280-81.
In State ex rel. Grape v. Zach, 247 Neb. 29, 37, 524 N.W.2d 788, 797 (1994), this court was faced with construing a statute which read, “ ‘If the court is informed during the course of the proceeding that a proceeding concerning the custody of the child was pending in another state before the court assumed *530jurisdiction it shall stay the proceeding and communicate with the court in which the other proceeding is pending
The court held that the word “shall” was directory, stating that “if the portions of [the statutes] at issue merely recommend that a judge engage in certain communications rather than command that the judge do so, that is, if the provisions are directory rather than mandatory, they will survive constitutional scrutiny.” Id. at 42, 524 N.W.2d at 799-800. The court reasoned:
The due process and ethical problems which arise when judges turn into inquisitors by undertaking to personally investigate the facts in matters they must adjudicate illustrate one of the reasons the distribution of powers clause contained in Neb. Const, art. II, § 1, prohibits the legislative department of government from telling the judicial department of government how to conduct judicial business.
(Emphasis supplied.) Id. at 41-42, 524 N.W.2d at 799 (citing State, ex rel. Sorensen, v. State Bank of Minatare, supra).
Thus, this court has construed the word “shall” to be directory, in order to save the constitutionality of a statute only in cases where the Legislature has attempted to encroach upon the judiciary’s duties and prerogatives by telling the judiciary how to conduct its judicial business.
In Anderson v. Carlson, 171 Neb. 741, 107 N.W.2d 535 (1961), this court held that a statute permitting private taxation without affording property owners the opportunity to be heard by a competent tribunal upon the question of whether the property has been arbitrarily or unjustly included within the boundaries of the proposed district is an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power. In that case the court stated:
In order to suggest a question on construction, appellants urge that the word “shall” be interpreted as permissive in order to uphold a legislative act. With this we do not agree. It is not the function of the courts to legislate. There may be occasions where it is apparent the word “shall” may have been used by inadvertence, and the rest of the act so indicates, in which case appellants’ argument would have merit. However, that is not the case here... .
*531... To so hold would be judicial legislation in which we do not intend to indulge.
Id. at 745-46, 107 N.W.2d at 538-39.
The instant case is distinguishable from Nebraska Loan & Building Ass’n v. Perkins, 61 Neb. 254, 85 N.W. 67 (1901); State, ex rel. Sorensen, v. State Bank of Minatare, 123 Neb. 109, 242 N.W. 278 (1932); and State ex rel. Grape v. Zach, supra, in that in the instant case the Legislature’s encroachment is upon the executive branch, not the judiciary. The judiciary, not the executive branch, serves as a check upon the constitutionality of legislative enactments. As such, the judiciary is permitted to construe legislative enactments in a manner that eliminates legislative attempts to usurp judicial power. As stated, “It is an imperative duty of the judicial department of government to protect its jurisdiction at the boundaries of power fixed by the Constitution.” State, ex rel. Sorensen, v. State Bank of Minatare, 123 Neb. at 114, 242 N.W. at 281. See, also, State ex rel. Grape v. Zach, supra.
For the foregoing reasons, we refuse to give the word “shall,” as it appears in § 81-2707(1), a permissive construction and instead apply the general rule that the word “shall” is mandatory and inconsistent with the idea of discretion.
(e) Whether § 81-2707(1) Calls for Legislative Branch to Encroach Upon Executive Branch’s Duties and Prerogatives
The appellees assert that § 81-2707(1) is not violative of the separation of powers clause, because the State Personnel Board’s actions are not taken because of any order or directive of the Ombudsman, but instead are taken pursuant to the directive of § 81-2707(1). However, this argument places form over substance and is without merit, because it is the Legislature that empowers the Ombudsman with the authority to force a stay or reversal of the firing decision in the first place.
The appellees further assert that even if the word “shall” in § 81-2707(1) is construed as mandatory, that section does not impermissibly permit the legislative branch to encroach upon the executive branch’s duties and prerogatives. They argue that although the Ombudsman’s findings must temporarily be fol*532lowed, ultimately a hearing before the State Personnel Board is held, and thus, the final decisionmaking power as to whether or not to reinstate the employee is in the hands of the State Personnel Board, which is part of the executive branch of state government. See Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 81-1318, 81-1318.01, and 81-1316 (Reissue 1994). Thus, it is claimed that the Ombudsman exercises no control over, but merely has a permissible effect upon, the State Personnel Board because once the Ombudsman submits his or her findings, his or her involvement in the matter has ended.
The appellees are correct in their assertion that under the Whistleblower Act the ultimate authority to determine whether an executive employee was fired in violation of the Act is vested in the State Personnel Board. However, we determine that § 81-2707(l)’s requirement that the Ombudsman’s finding be followed, albeit temporarily, impermissibly calls for the legislative branch to encroach upon the executive branch’s duties and prerogatives. See, Neb. Const, art. IV, § 1; Neb. Const, art. IV, § 10; State ex rel. Beck v. Young, 154 Neb. 588, 48 N.W.2d 677 (1951).
“In accordance with constitutional provisions separating the departments of government, the legislature cannot interfere with, or exercise any powers properly belonging to, the executive department.” (Emphasis supplied.) 16 CJ.S. Constitutional Law § 134 at 434 (1984). See, also, State ex rel. Meyer v. State Board of Equalization & Assessment, 185 Neb. 490, 176 N.W.2d 920 (1970); State ex rel. Beck v. Young, supra. “Thus, the legislature cannot relieve or preclude any executive officer from the performance of a duty enjoined on him by the constitution . . . .” 16 CJ.S., supra, at 434. “The legislature can neither enforce the laws which it has the power to make, nor, in the usual instance, appoint the agents charged with the duty of such enforcement.” 16 Am. Jur. 2d Constitutional Law § 323 at 858 (1979). “The two departments should be kept as distinct and independent as possible.” Id. at 857.
In short, § 81-2707(1) places the legislative branch in a position to dictate to the executive branch how the latter will treat certain executive branch employees until an evidentiary hearing is held. Thus, the Legislature not only is empowered to declare *533what the law is, but, through § 81-2707(1), attempts to reserve to itself the power and authority to administer and enforce the law as well. This we determine is impermissible under the Nebraska Constitution.
V. CONCLUSION
We conclude that § 81-2707(1) of the State Government Effectiveness Act is unconstitutional, in violation of the separation of powers clause of Neb. Const, art. II, § 1. As a result, we reverse the district court’s orders issuing peremptory writs of mandamus.
Reversed.
Fahrnbruch, J., not participating.

=== CASE 9741195 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:21.370196+00 ===

Wright, J.,
dissenting.
I dissent because I cannot conclude that Neb. Rev. Stat. § 81-2707(1) (Reissue 1994) is unconstitutional. In my opinion, § 81-2707(1) does not violate the separation of powers clause of Neb. Const, art. II, § 1, which prohibits one branch of government from exercising the duties and powers “properly belonging to either of the others.” Rather, it is my opinion that § 81-2707(1) merely tells the State Personnel Board (executive branch) how to proceed in order to effectively carry out a law properly enacted by the Legislature. Such procedural constraints imposed by the legislative branch do not intrude upon the central prerogatives of the executive branch such that the Legislature can be said to be exercising a “power properly belonging” to the executive branch. See Loving v. U.S.,_U.S. _, 116 S. Ct. 1737, 135 L. Ed. 2d 36 (1996).
The legislative power is set forth in article III of the Nebraska Constitution. The executive power is set forth in article IV. The judicial power is set forth in article V. The personnel board is a body created specifically by legislative enactment. See Neb. Rev. Stat. § 81-1318 (Reissue 1994). The manner in which the personnel board is to operate is not controlled by the Public Counsel (also known as the Ombudsman), nor is the power of the personnel board exercised by the Public Counsel.
The Legislature enacted the State Government Effectiveness Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 81-2701 through 81-2710 (Reissue 1994 & Cum. Supp. 1996), as a means to ensure that the government *534operates in accordance with the law, by protecting public employees who disclose possible illegalities or improprieties. See § 81-2702. The act requires that the Public Counsel (legislative branch) first make an investigation into charges of any possible violation. The Public Counsel then makes a determination as to whether reasonable grounds exist to believe the act has been violated. See § 81-2706.
If the Public Counsel finds reasonable grounds to believe a violation has occurred, a report is forwarded to the personnel board (executive branch), which is then required to hold a hearing to determine whether there has been a statutory violation. Until the personnel board carries out the hearing, however, it is required to stay the action. The personnel board’s determination is subject to review by the district court (judicial branch). See § 81-2707(3).
In my opinion, the required stay is basic procedural due process, which the Legislature may establish in order to effectively carry out a law that was within the Legislature’s power to enact to protect the public welfare.
It is obvious that the Nebraska Constitution, like the federal Constitution, “ ‘contemplates that practice will integrate the dispersed powers into a workable government. . .' " Loving, 116 S. Ct. at 1743 (quoting Youngstown Co. v. Sawyer, 343 U.S. 579, 72 S. Ct. 863, 96 L. Ed. 1153 (1952) (Jackson, J., concurring)). See, also, Plaut v. Spendthrift Farm, Inc., 514 U.S. 211, 115 S. Ct. 1447, 131 L. Ed. 2d 328 (1995) (state court decisions in period immediately after ratification of federal Constitution drew little distinction between federal and state Constitutions in their understanding of separation of powers). Separation of powers “ ‘ “d[oes] not mean that these [three] departments ought to have no partial agency in, or no controul [sic] over the acts of each other.” ’” Loving, 116 S. Ct. at 1743 (quoting Mistretta v. United States, 488 U.S. 361, 109 S. Ct. 647, 102 L. Ed. 2d 714 (1989)). A “‘hermetic sealing off of the three branches of Government from one another would preclude the establishment of a Nation capable of governing itself effectively.’ ” Loving, 116 S. Ct. at 1743 (quoting Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 96 S. Ct. 612, 46 L. Ed. 2d 659 (1976)).
*535In my opinion, § 81-2707(1) does not create a legislative exercise of power properly belonging to either the executive or the judicial branch. Instead, § 81-2707(1) is merely an example of the necessary integration of those powers.
Lanphier, J., joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2226582 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:12.660218+00 ===

557 N.W.2d 657 (1997)
251 Neb. 389
Rebecca Dau McLAUGHLIN, Appellant,
v.
Leslie C. HELLBUSCH, M.D., Appellee.
No. S-95-177.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
January 3, 1997.
*659 Timothy K. Kelso, of Harris, Feldman, Stumpf Law Offices, Omaha, for appellant.
William M. Lamson, Jr., and David J. Schmitt, of Kennedy, Holland, DeLacy & Svoboda, Omaha, for appellee.
WHITE, C.J., and CAPORALE, WRIGHT, CONNOLLY, and GERRARD, JJ., and LIKES, D.J.
CAPORALE, Justice.
I. STATEMENT OF CASE
In this medical malpractice action, the district court, pursuant to verdict, entered judgment in favor of the defendant-appellee, Leslie C. Hellbusch, M.D. The plaintiff-appellant, Rebecca Dau McLaughlin, responded by challenging the judgment in the Nebraska Court of Appeals which, in a memorandum opinion filed July 3, 1996, reversed the district court's judgment and remanded the cause for a new trial. Hellbusch then successfully petitioned for further review by this court, asserting, in summary, that the Court of Appeals wrongly ruled that the district court (1) erred in its instructions to the jury and (2) lacked jurisdiction to award him costs. We now affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals.
II. BACKGROUND
When McLaughlin did not recover properly from the last of two surgeries performed following two separate knee injuries she sustained a few months apart in her early teens, her then physician, a specialist in sports medicine, referred her to a neurologist, who in turn referred her to Hellbusch, a specialist in neurosurgery. Hellbusch treated McLaughlin from February 15 through August 11, 1988. Upon the initial February 15 consultation, Hellbusch discovered a cyst on McLaughlin's spine and performed surgery, during which he removed some of McLaughlin's backbone in order to drain the cyst. After the cyst recurred a few months later, Hellbusch again performed surgery to remove some of McLaughlin's backbone and the cyst.
McLaughlin, who had a normal spine prior to the surgeries, subsequently developed a progressive kyphosis (an abnormally increased convexity in the curvature of the thoracic spine), a known postsurgical risk in children undergoing the type of surgery Hellbusch performed on McLaughlin. McLaughlin has since undergone corrective surgeries, which have improved but not eliminated the condition.
The evidence as to what McLaughlin and her mother were told about the risks attendant *660 to the Hellbusch surgeries is in conflict, as is the evidence concerning the followup care given and recommended by Hellbusch and other physicians consulted by McLaughlin after the back surgeries. Also in conflict is the extent to which McLaughlin and her mother acted upon the followup care recommended by Hellbusch and other physicians and whether earlier corrective surgery would have produced a better result.
McLaughlin testified that because of the pain resulting from her condition, she cannot engage in heavy lifting, has resigned from employment as a nurse's aide, and has decided not to continue with her planned course of study in physical therapy. McLaughlin also testified that her condition interferes with her current employment as a hotel employee.
III. ANALYSIS
With that background, we turn our attention to the errors Hellbusch assigns to the Court of Appeals, supplying such additional facts as the analyses of those claims require.
1. JURY INSTRUCTIONS
Hellbusch first claims the Court of Appeals incorrectly ruled that the district court erred in failing to instruct the jury, as requested by McLaughlin, concerning the law of concurrent causes and the loss of future earning capacity. Our review of these claims is controlled by the rule that in reviewing a claim of prejudice from instructions given or refused, the instructions must be read together, and if, taken as a whole, they correctly state the law, are not misleading, and adequately cover the issues supported by the pleadings and evidence, there is no prejudicial error necessitating reversal. Sedlak Aerial Spray v. Miller, 251 Neb. 45, 555 N.W.2d 32 (1996).
(a) Concurrent Causes
As a general matter, a litigant is entitled to have the jury instructed only upon those theories of the case which are presented by the pleadings and which are supported by competent evidence. Farmers & Merchants Bank v. Grams, 250 Neb. 191, 548 N.W.2d 764 (1996); Burns v. Metz, 245 Neb. 428, 513 N.W.2d 505 (1994). Here, McLaughlin alleged that Hellbusch's negligence, including his alleged failure to provide appropriate followup care, "was a substantial factor and/or proximate cause" of her injuries and damages; Hellbusch denied the allegation. Thus, neither party specifically alleged that McLaughlin's injuries and resulting damages were caused by the negligence of a third person.
Nonetheless, McLaughlin asserts that, as she requested, she was entitled to a concurrent causes instruction, because there is evidence that her mother knew of her need for followup x rays, asked Hellbusch if McLaughlin could receive such care from her original physician, and then failed to take McLaughlin to that physician. The evidence also suggests that a physician told McLaughlin and her mother that the original physician should continue followup care. In addition, there is evidence that this physician failed to diagnose McLaughlin's condition.
A concurrent causes instruction advises a jury that where the independent negligent acts or omissions of more than one person combine to proximately cause the same injury or damages, each such act or omission is a proximate cause, and each such person may be held responsible for the entire injury or omission, even though some may have been more negligent than others.
In Barry v. Moore, 172 Neb. 57, 108 N.W.2d 401 (1961), Barry, a passenger in an automobile operated by Gitt, pled that Moore's negligence caused a collision between the Gitt and Moore vehicles, and as a result, Barry was injured. Moore pled that he was not negligent and that the collision was caused by Gitt's negligence. Neither party requested an instruction on concurrent causes. We held that "`[t]he trial court has the duty to instruct the jury on issues presented by the pleadings and evidence, whether requested to do so or not, and a failure so to do constitutes prejudicial error,'" id. at 64, 108 N.W.2d at 405, and concluded that the trial court should have given the concurrent negligence instruction. In that regard, we wrote:
[Barry's] claim was based on the broad ground of negligence for which [Moore] *661 was required to respond in damages. If he was guilty of negligence which solely, or in concurrence with Gitt, or which proximately contributed to the accident, [Barry] being in nowise responsible for it, [Barry] was entitled to a recovery of her damages, if any, from him. The jury was entitled to be so informed, and a failure so to do by the court was prejudicial error.
Id.
However, we seem to have confused the issue in Hopwood v. Voss, 174 Neb. 304, 117 N.W.2d 778 (1962). Therein, the plaintiff argued that the district court erred in failing to give a sufficient concurring causes instruction. The court had instructed that the burden was on the plaintiff to prove that the defendant was guilty of one or more of the acts of negligence alleged by the plaintiff, that such negligence was "`the proximate cause'" of the plaintiff's injuries, id. at 310, 117 N.W.2d at 782, and that if any of the plaintiff's damages were not "`caused proximately' "by the negligence of the defendant, id. at 310, 117 N.W.2d at 783, the plaintiff would not be entitled to recover. The plaintiff argued that the district court should have instructed that if the negligence of the defendant, combined with the negligence of a third party, caused the plaintiff's injury, the jury should find for the plaintiff. We disagreed, holding, in sum, that the plaintiff's pleading did not entitle her to the concurrent causes instruction, but if the defendant's answer alleging that a third party caused the accident and injury entitled the plaintiff to the concurrent causes instruction, the plaintiff was not prejudiced, as the district court had separately instructed on concurrent causes.
But in Weiseth v. Karlen, 206 Neb. 724, 295 N.W.2d 103 (1980), we clearly reverted to the principle announced in Barry. In Weiseth, Karlen alleged that Weiseth's negligence in failing to supervise the feeding of liquid protein to Karlen's cattle resulted in the death of two of Karlen's cows and in 194 calves being aborted or born dead. There was evidence from which the jury could have concluded that a third party, who had the obligation to provide an adequate supply of water to the cattle, was negligent. Karlen argued that the district court erred in instructing on concurrent causes. We disagreed, holding that the district court was correct in submitting the issue to the jury, and adopted the comment to NJI 3.42 that the jury must be instructed upon the rights and liabilities of the parties under the theory of concurrent negligence if the evidence warrants, even though the issue is not pled and no instruction is requested.
Thus, to the extent that Hopwood, supra, may be read to be inconsistent with Weiseth, supra, it is hereby specifically overruled.
It is true that McLaughlin's requested concurrent causes instruction did not correctly state the law and that to establish reversible error from a court's failure to give a requested instruction, an appellant has the burden of showing that (1) the tendered instruction is a correct statement of the law, (2) the tendered instruction is warranted by the evidence, and (3) the appellant was prejudiced by the court's failure to give the tendered instruction. See, State on behalf of Joseph F. v. Rial, 251 Neb. 1, 554 N.W.2d 769 (1996); Reavis v. Slominski, 250 Neb. 711, 551 N.W.2d 528 (1996); Farmers & Merchants Bank v. Grams, 250 Neb. 191, 548 N.W.2d 764 (1996). However, it is also true that the trial court, whether requested or not, has a duty to instruct the jury on issues presented by the pleadings and the evidence. Long v. Hacker, 246 Neb. 547, 520 N.W.2d 195 (1994); McDermott v. Platte Cty. Ag. Socy., 245 Neb. 698, 515 N.W.2d 121 (1994); Wilson v. Misko, 244 Neb. 526, 508 N.W.2d 238 (1993).
Under the evidence, the erroneous failure of the district court to inform the jury as to how to treat the separate independent negligent acts of more than one person which combined to proximately cause the same injury, if the jury found such to have been the case, violated the district court's duty and prejudiced McLaughlin.
(b) Loss of Future Earning Capacity
Next, Hellbusch argues that the Court of Appeals incorrectly ruled that the district court erred, although not prejudicially, as the jury did not reach the issue of damages, in failing to submit McLaughlin's detailed proposed jury instruction concerning *662 her loss of future earning capacity. He is correct, because the district court adequately instructed on the matter by advising that if the jury returned a verdict for McLaughlin, then it must decide how much money would fairly compensate her, including, if it should find that such had been proximately caused by Hellbusch's negligence, "[t]he reasonable value of the earning capacity [McLaughlin] is reasonably certain to lose in the future."
It is not error to refuse to give a requested instruction if the substance of the request is included in the instructions given. Melcher v. Bank of Madison, 248 Neb. 793, 539 N.W.2d 837 (1995); Scharmann v. Dayton Hudson Corp., 247 Neb. 304, 526 N.W.2d 436 (1995); Nichols v. Busse, 243 Neb. 811, 503 N.W.2d 173 (1993).
2. AWARDING OF COSTS
Lastly, Hellbusch contends the Court of Appeals erred in suggesting that once McLaughlin perfected her appeal, the district court lost jurisdiction to rule on Hellbusch's pending motion for the taxation of costs. This presents a question of law, in connection with which a reviewing court has an obligation to reach its own conclusions independent of those reached by the lower courts. Sherrod v. State, 251 Neb. 355, 557 N.W.2d 634 (1997).
Hellbusch filed a motion for taxation of costs prior to McLaughlin's filing of her notice of appeal. After McLaughlin perfected her appeal, the district court awarded Hellbusch costs against McLaughlin.
As a general matter, after an appeal has been perfected, the trial court is without jurisdiction to hear a case involving the same matter between the same parties. WBE Co. v. Papio-Missouri River Nat. Resources Dist., 247 Neb. 522, 529 N.W.2d 21 (1995). We held therein that the trial court lacked jurisdiction to enter an order for an attorney fee after the opposing party had perfected its appeal. We apprehend no reason for a different rule with respect to a judicial determination and allowance of costs, and thus hold that after an appeal has been perfected, a trial court lacks jurisdiction to enter an order for costs.
IV. JUDGMENT
As first noted in part I above, the judgment of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2226538 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:11.541904+00 ===

329 Mass. 488 (1952)
109 N.E.2d 133
CLARA E. SMITH
vs.
JACOB HIATT & another.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Worcester.
September 23, 1952.
November 28, 1952.
Present: QUA, C.J., RONAN, WILKINS, SPALDING, & WILLIAMS, JJ.
Stanley B. Milton, (Robert C. Milton with him,) for the defendants.
Nunziato Fusaro, for the plaintiff.
WILLIAMS, J.
This is an action of tort to recover compensation for personal injuries. After the return of a verdict for the plaintiff under leave reserved the judge denied, subject to their exception, a motion of the defendants for the entry of a verdict in their favor.
There was evidence that the plaintiff was employed by *489 the defendants, who were husband and wife, in their home in Worcester as a practical nurse to care for their newborn baby. On the morning of July 17, 1946, the plaintiff went to the kitchen to prepare milk for the baby. She there found the defendant Mrs. Hiatt who had been defrosting the refrigerator. There was ice on the floor which Mrs. Hiatt either had dropped or had failed to remove after it had fallen from the refrigerator. The plaintiff slipped on the ice and was injured. We assume that the evidence was sufficient to warrant a finding that the plaintiff was in the exercise of due care and that Mrs. Hiatt was negligent. No written notice of the time, place, and cause of the injury under G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 84, § 21, was given by the plaintiff to either of the defendants.
The only question presented is whether in the circumstances such notice was required and was a condition precedent to the right to maintain this common law action for negligence. In DePrizio v. F.W. Woolworth Co. 291 Mass. 143, it was decided that the statutory notice must be given where a personal injury was caused by a defective condition within the defendant's building created by snow which had been tracked in from the outside. It was there said (page 147) that the statute "applies to all snow and ice made the basis of action, whether inside or outside the building and whether of natural or artificial origin." See also Walsh v. Riverway Drug Store Inc. 311 Mass. 326, 328; Whalen v. Railway Express Agency, Inc. 321 Mass. 382. The injury to the plaintiff was caused not by the tortious act of either of the defendants in throwing ice which struck the plaintiff, as in Mallen v. James A. Houston Co. 211 Mass. 298, but by the defective condition of the floor. The plaintiff's action is founded upon this condition and she is not relieved from giving the written notice required by the statute either by the fact that Mrs. Hiatt's negligence caused the defective condition or that Mrs. Hiatt was personally present and knew of the plaintiff's fall.
Exceptions sustained.
Judgment for the defendants.

=== CASE 9741196 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:28.226727+00 ===

OPINION
KEITH, Chief Justice.
This case raises questions regarding the scope of the review hearing for final commitments under the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act, Minn.Stat. §§ 253B.02, subd.' 18b, 253B.18, subds. 2-3, 253B.185, subd. 1 (1994) (SDP Act), and the sufficiency of the evidence supporting appellant Dennis Darol Li-nehan’s final and indeterminate commitment. Linehan challenges the district court’s final order of commitment following a statutorily required 60-day review hearing in which the court determined that Linehan continues to qualify for commitment under the SDP Act. He maintains that the 60-day review hearing should be broadly construed as a “double-check” against erroneous commitment; therefore, Linehan argues the district court erred in refusing to allow him to challenge the initial order of commitment at the review hearing. Linehan also contends that evidence introduced at his review hearing demonstrated that “clinical” predictions in favor of his commitment were “potentially too inaccurate to support a deprivation of liberty.”
We granted Linehan’s petition for accelerated review so that we could consider this matter in conjunction with Linehan’s challenge to his initial commitment in In re Linehan, 544 N.W.2d 308 (Minn.1996) (Linehan II). We now affirm.1
I.
In January 1996, the Ramsey County District Court held a hearing reviewing Line-han’s initial commitment in July 1995 to the Minnesota Security Hospital (MSH) as a sexually dangerous person (SDP). As required by the SDP Act, Dr. Thomas Gratzer, senior forensic psychiatrist at MSH, filed a treatment report with the district court in September 1995.2 In the report, Dr. Gratzer concluded that Linehan continues to qualify as an SDP and recommended continued inpatient treatment.
After hearing 5 days of testimony at the review hearing, the district court agreed that Linehan continues to meet SDP Act criteria and ordered final commitment under the statute. Testifying in favor of commitment were Dr. Douglas Fox, a licensed psychologist in private practice retained by Ramsey County, and Dr. Gratzer. Both doctors asserted that Linehan manifests antisocial personality disorder (APD), paraphiliac disorders and alcohol dependency. Dr. Gratzer also listed in his treatment report additional diagnoses of pedophilia and, possibly, sexual sadism. Both doctors concluded that Line-han presents a high risk of engaging in future acts of harmful sexual conduct and is highly likely to reoffend.
Linehan’s only witness was Dr. Paul Meehl, an expert on the accuracy of clinical versus actuarial predictions. The court allowed Dr. Meehl’s testimony over the county’s objections that the substance of Dr. Meehl’s testimony was previously considered in the initial commitment hearing and irrelevant to the issue of what had occurred since the court’s initial order. Although the district court allowed Dr. Meehl’s testimony, the court ruled that it would not allow the relit-igation of factual issues decided at the initial *170hearing, unless such issues were “reopened” by the county or state.
Using a hypothetical base rate of recidivism of 18% from a study on reconviction rates for heterosexual child molesters, Dr. Meehl illustrated that if, in fact, the base rate of recidivism is relatively low, then even a clinician who is highly accurate in predicting future misconduct will often be wrong. Even assuming that Linehan may be in a special group of child molesters more likely than average to reoffend, Dr. Meehl illustrated that clinical prediction accuracy may nonetheless be low.
After hearing the testimony, the district court found clear and convincing evidence that Linehan continues to meet the SDP Act requirements. The court did not specify the disorder or dysfunction upon which it relied. Rather, the court apparently incorporated the findings made during the initial commitment proceeding. The court did, however, address Dr. Meehl’s testimony and the weight it afforded the testimony. The court made clear that it had not credited Dr. Meehl’s testimony on the merits because it was “directed to one point: [t]he difficulty of predicting future recidivist behavior * * As such, the court concluded that Dr. Meehl’s testimony was in essence an attack on the validity of the SDP Act, which should have been raised no later than the initial commitment hearing.
II.
We first address Linehan’s contention that the district court erroneously limited the scope of the review hearing and the state’s response that Linehan lacks standing to raise the issue.
We conclude, as an initial matter, that Linehan has standing to raise the issue. Standing to appeal is conferred when there is injury to a legally protected right. City of St. Paul v. LaClair, 479 N.W.2d 369, 371 (Minn.1992). Moreover, for a party to possess standing, “the right invaded must be immediate, not merely some possible, remote consequence, or mere possibility arising from some unknown and future contingency.” Twin Cities Metro. Pub. Transit Area v. Holter, 311 Minn. 423, 425-26, 249 N.W.2d 458, 460 (1977) (quoting 4 C.J.S. Appeal and Error § 183b(1) at 561). Although the district court admitted Dr. Meehl’s testimony at the review hearing, the court did not fully credit Dr. Meehl’s testimony, but instead considered it beyond the scope of the review hearing. Accordingly, because Linehan was adversely impacted by the district court’s ruling, we find he possesses standing to appeal. See id.
Linehan next argues that the review hearing is intended solely to benefit the patient by providing a forum for consideration of additional evidence that might preserve that person’s freedom from confinement. Accordingly, he contends that the patient may challenge the commitment by demonstrating “either that his commitment was improper ab initio, or that his condition has changed so that the commitment has become improper.” Linehan relies on the United States Supreme Court’s decision in Addington v. Texas, 441 U.S. 418, 428-29, 99 S.Ct. 1804, 1810-11, 60 L.Ed.2d 323 (1979) (citing the “layers of professional review” as a safeguard against continued erroneous commitment).
The state counters that the purpose of the review hearing under the statute is two-fold: first, the review hearing allows the district court to consider the views of the treatment facility before issuing a final commitment order; and, second, the review hearing allows the district court to consider whether changes in the patient’s condition render further commitment as an SDP inappropriate. See Minn.Stat. § 253B.18, subds. 2-3.
The state relies on the language of the statute and commitment act rules for the mentally ill and dangerous which directs first, that a treatment report be filed within 60 days, id.; Rule 12.05, Special Rules of Procedure Governing Proceedings Under the Minnesota Commitment Act of 1982; and, second, that the district court ascertain whether the patient “continues to be” mentally ill and dangerous. Minn.Stat. § 253B.18, subd. 3. Consistent with this two-fold purpose, the state concludes Line-han may not challenge every aspect of the initial commitment order, but is limited to offering evidence that is relevant to a change *171in his condition or rebuts a new determination of the treatment facility. To allow Line-han to reoffer all evidence opposing commitment, including that heard at the initial hearing, would in the state’s estimation be “an enormous waste of time and resources.”
We agree. However, because of the significant liberty interests at stake, we are hesitant to confer res judicata status on the initial commitment order and believe the district court must retain the discretion to consider other evidence which is new and helpful. We therefore hold that evidence considered at the review hearing is properly limited to: (1) the statutorily required treatment report; (2) evidence of changes in the patient’s condition since the initial commitment hearing; and (3) such other evidence as in the district court’s discretion enhances its assessment of whether the patient continues to meet statutory criteria for commitment. See id. § 253B.18, subds. 2-3.
Accordingly, we reject Linehan’s argument that the district court improperly limited its consideration of the evidence. First, Linehan does not assert that his condition has changed since his initial commitment. Second, because the substance of Dr. Meehl’s attack on the accuracy of clinical predictions did not bear on a change in Line-han’s condition, and was previously considered during the initial commitment hearing,3 his testimony in this proceeding was neither new nor helpful. Consequently, the district court was within its discretion in declining to credit the testimony.
Linehan’s final contention is that the county failed to meet its burden of proving that Linehan is highly likely to reoffend. He bases his argument on Dr. Meehl’s testimony regarding the potential inaccuracy of clinicians’ predictions of future behavior. Dr. Meehl’s testimony was the only evidence offered by Linehan at the review hearing. Because we conclude that the district court properly declined to credit Dr. Meehl’s testimony, we now reject Linehan’s argument that there was insufficient evidence of dangerousness to support commitment under the statute. In the absence of contrary evidence, we find the district court properly found sufficient evidence of dangerousness both in the testimony of Drs. Gratzer and Fox, and in Linehan’s failure to contest the county’s assertion that his condition had not changed since the initial commitment hearing.
Affirmed.
BLATZ, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.
. We addressed Linehan's challenge to his initial commitment in Linehan II, 544 N.W.2d at 310. Because we upheld the initial commitment order, we decline to address Linehan's arguments regarding the effect of reversal of that order on an order of final commitment following a review hearing.
. Under the SDP Act, a written treatment report must be submitted to the committing court within 60 days after initial commitment or admission to the treatment facility. The statute directs, "The court, prior to making a final determination with regard to a person initially committed ⅜ * ⅝, shall hold a hearing. * * * ' If the court finds at the hearing * ⅜ * that the patient continues to be [a sexually dangerous person], then the court shall order commitment of the proposed patient for an indeterminate period of time.” Minn.Stat. §§ 253B.18, subds. 2-3, 253B.185, subd. 1.
. Dr. Meehl offered essentially the same theory as was presented by Dr. R. Owen Nelson at the initial hearing, although they illustrated their arguments with different assumed base rates of recidivism. See Linehan II, 544 N.W.2d at 324 n. 2.

=== CASE 2226560 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:12.086099+00 ===

329 Mass. 524 (1952)
109 N.E.2d 452
FREDERICK A. BRYSON, JUNIOR,
vs.
MAYOR OF WALTHAM.
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Middlesex.
November 6, 1952.
December 1, 1952.
Present: QUA, C.J., LUMMUS, SPALDING, WILLIAMS, & COUNIHAN, JJ.
Maurice Caro, for the petitioner.
John A. McCarty, City Solicitor, for the respondent.
LUMMUS, J.
In his petition for a writ of mandamus, filed on March 3, 1952, the petitioner alleges that on February 28, 1950, the then mayor of Waltham appointed him an assessor for three years, that his appointment was confirmed by the city council, and that then the mayor designated him chairman of the board of assessors for three years at an annual salary of $4,100, and again for one year from March 5, 1951. The petitioner further alleges that on February 25, 1952, the successor to that mayor appointed one Vinciullo an assessor for three years, that that appointment was confirmed by the council, and that he then purported to designate said Vinciullo chairman in the place of the petitioner for one year beginning March 3, 1952. The petitioner claims title to the office of chairman until the expiration of three years from March 1, 1950, a term that has not yet expired. The respondent contends that the term of the petitioner as chairman was for only one year from March 5, 1951. The case was presented on agreed *525 facts. The judge dismissed the petition, and the petitioner appealed.
Waltham was governed by a Plan B charter. G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 43, §§ 56-63. By § 60 it was provided that "all heads of departments" shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. The ordinances contained the following provision: "The board of assessors shall have charge of the assessing department. One member of said board shall be appointed by the mayor on or before the first Monday in February in each municipal year to serve for three years from the expiration of the term of the member then next outgoing." The ordinances provided that the mayor shall, "before the first Monday in March, designate one of the assessors as chairman of the board." We think that the entire board was the head of the assessing department, and that the provision in G.L. (Ter. Ed.) c. 43, § 61, that the head of a department may only be removed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the city council does not apply to the removal of a chairman of the board of assessors.
The chairman was to be designated, under the ordinance, before the first Monday in March. Apart from St. 1951, c. 364, the mayor holding office at that time would have had as much right to designate a chairman as any of his predecessors in office. The plain implication is, we think, that the designation could not be effective for a greater period than one year. The designation need not be confirmed by the city council, and the designations made in this case were not so confirmed. The designation of Vinciullo as chairman superseded the designation of the petitioner. Kaplan v. Sullivan, 290 Mass. 67. See also Perkins v. Selectmen of Framingham, 313 Mass. 322.
Statute 1951, c. 364, did not have the effect of continuing the petitioner in the office of chairman of the board of assessors, for that statute provided for the choice of a chairman by the board.
Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 2226565 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:12.214148+00 ===

413 Ill. 448 (1952)
109 N.E.2d 765
GEORGE CLIFFORD DILL,
v.
LOU JACKSON WIDMAN, Appellant.  (ANNIE BIDDLE et al., Appellees.)
No. 32368.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed November 20, 1952.
Rehearing denied January 19, 1953.
*449 HARRY L. PATE, of Tuscola, (WILLIAM C. WINES, of Chicago, and MURRAY F. MILNE, of Springfield, of counsel,) for appellant.
NICHOLS & JONES, of Tuscola, (FRED H. KELLY, of Mattoon, of counsel,) for appellees.
Decree affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE HERSHEY delivered the opinion of the court:
This is an appeal from a decree of the circuit court of Douglas County in a partition proceeding excluding appellant, Lou Jackson Widman, from all participation in the estate of her deceased husband, Berger W. Widman. The estate consists, in great part, of realty. Mrs. Widman, having elected to take a fee in one third thereof, now appeals to have that fee decreed to her. A freehold being necessarily involved, the appeal comes here directly.
*450 Berger W. Widman was a resident of Newman, Illinois, and died testate on August 29, 1949. He was survived by his widow, appellant, a daughter, Annie Biddle, and seven grandchildren. One daughter, Ella Dill, and his first wife, the mother of his two children, preceded him in death.
The will of Widman was admitted to probate September 26, 1949, and on that same date the widow filed a renunciation thereof. By the terms of this will he bequeathed all of his property to his children and grandchildren. In the fourth paragraph of the will he stated that no provision was made for his wife, for the reason that she had been provided for by a postnuptial contract executed in 1935, whereby he deeded to her about 111 acres of land which she agreed to accept in "full settlement of any and all interest she might have as my said wife in my estate."
George Dill, a grandson of testator, filed a complaint, later amended, for the partition of certain real estate belonging to the testator. Appellant filed an election to waive dower and take a fee in one third of this real estate, and filed an answer and counterclaim to the amended complaint. Annie Biddle and the remaining grandchildren, defendant-appellees, filed a counterclaim by which they sought to exclude Mrs. Widman from participation in the estate because an executed postnuptial agreement existed between her and the testator.
Upon hearing, the master and the chancellor found the agreement between testator and his wife to be established, and that it should be enforced. Hence, it was decreed that Lou Jackson Widman should have no interest in her husband's estate.
Appellant and testator were married on April 10, 1935. It is undisputed that on December 11, 1935, testator deeded to appellant about 111 acres of land situated two miles east of Newman and known as the home place. It was *451 recited in the deed that the consideration for the conveyance was one dollar, love and affection, and other good and valuable consideration. On December 18, 1935, she deeded back to the testator a life estate in the same property employing identical language of consideration.
It is the contention of the defendant-appellees that the deed from testator to Mrs. Widman was executed as part of an oral agreement then entered into between them. By this agreement, it is alleged, appellant agreed to accept and did accept a conveyance of about 111 acres, in lieu of all claims or interest in, to, or against the estate of her husband.
It is first incumbent on this court to determine just what claim or interest appellant might have in the estate of her husband. We have previously found that under the law as it existed in this State in 1949, the surviving spouse was given, in the first instance, dower, and the fee descended to the decedent's children encumbered with a right existing in the spouse either to perfect dower or to permit the barring of that right, by which she became vested with a fee in one third of the real estate. Hence, during coverture, a wife had only an imperfect right to dower which she could perfect or permit to become barred. (Bruce v. McCormick, 396 Ill. 482.) It is clear then that prior to her husband's death, Lou Jackson Widman had a statutory interest commonly referred to as an inchoate right of dower in her husband's property as the only thing she could release or convey.
In her answer to the counterclaim of defendant-appellees, Mrs. Widman specifically denied the contract with her husband. Section 2 of the Evidence Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1951, chap. 51, par. 2,) declares parties to a civil suit incompetent to testify when the adverse party sues or defends as an heir or devisee of a decedent. (Mann v. Mann, 270 Ill. 83; Weinebrod v. Rohdenburg, 343 Ill. 318.) Appellant was, therefore, incompetent to testify in this case to any transactions between herself and her husband, *452 since plaintiff and defendant-appellees sue and defend as devisees of the testator. Her testimony denying the alleged agreement could not properly be considered by the court.
Testator's will was first offered in evidence generally as plaintiff's exhibit No. 7. Defendant-appellees, Annie Biddle et al., waived identification of that exhibit and asked to have it considered as their exhibit G. Mrs. Widman also waived identification and joined in its offer as her exhibit No. 107. Thus, she offered the will generally and without restriction as her own exhibit. Where no restriction is placed upon the purpose for which an exhibit is received, it becomes general evidence, and the party offering it can never be heard to say that it is not evidence of the facts stated therein. (Morris v. Central West Casualty Co. 351 Ill. 40.) Moreover, a will is admissible as evidence of, and in connection with, the proof of an agreement to which it refers. (Alward v. Woodard, 315 Ill. 150.) The will of Widman, being generally admitted as an exhibit, is proper evidence in proof of the agreement referred to in its fourth paragraph. It is proper evidence of the facts referred to within that paragraph and no competent evidence in this record in any manner refutes the statement of the testator in paragraph four of his will.
During the course of the hearing before the special master, Kent Morrow, cashier of the State Bank of Newman, testified that he accompanied Mrs. Widman and Warren Biddle, executor of the estate and a defendant-appellee here, to the bank shortly after testator's death for the purpose of opening the bank box. He related that just before the box was opened, appellant said, "I know what is there. We had our agreement right after we were married, and I am satisfied." He explained that "we" referred to appellant and her deceased husband. Morrow also said that when the will was read aloud in her presence, appellant made no comment and failed to deny the contract set forth in the fourth paragraph thereof.
*453 Warren Biddle, on being called to the stand, testified that while he was at the bank with appellant and Morrow, and before the box was opened, Mrs. Widman stated "There is nothing in it for me, I had my part, and I am satisfied." After the will was read she made no comment.
Kent Morrow was certainly a distinterested witness, and his testimony lends substantial support to the assertions in the will. Warren Biddle is executor, heir, defendant-appellee, and, hence, an interested party. His testimony, however, is so similar to that of Kent Morrow in describing the same occurrence, that it is worthy of greater consideration than it might be normally accorded. These statements of Mrs. Widman indicate that such an agreement existed, and in the general form set forth in the will. Appellant, herself, indicated exactly what the will contained with reference to her, prior to the opening of the bank box and the reading thereof. This raises an inference that she knew and could only have known because she and her husband had executed such an agreement.
Helen Lampe, a granddaughter of testator and a defendant-appellee, and her husband, William Lampe, testified that a few days after decedent's funeral and after the will had been obtained from the bank they had a conversation with appellant. When questioned about what she received under the will appellant replied, "Your grandfather took good care of me and I got my part and I am satisfied."
W.C. Booton, an insurance man of Newman, testified that he called on Mrs. Widman shortly after her husband's death to inquire about changing the insurance policies to the executor. She then informed him the 111-acre tract was hers and she was satisfied.
Having received nothing under the will, the only thing appellant could have referred to when stating her husband took good care of her was the deed to the 111 acres. Her statements of satisfaction indicate that she had given up *454 any thought of claim against her husband's estate. These statements certainly indicate an agreement of some kind. The only objection by appellant was that the testimony of Morrow, Booton and Helen Lampe was immaterial. The court overruled this objection and no error is claimed on the ruling. All evidence tending to prove the material facts, or any of them, in a case is admissible, although it may not alone establish the whole case. (Slack v. McLagan, 15 Ill. 242; Central Railway Co. v. Allmon, 147 Ill. 471.) Mrs. Widman failed to deny any of these statements attributed to her though she was perfectly competent and had every opportunity to do so. The first exception to section 2 of the Evidence Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1951, chap. 51, par. 2,) provides that a party or interested person may testify to facts occurring subsequent to the death of a deceased person. These statements attributed to Mrs. Widman subsequent to the death of her husband stand uncontradicted. Where the testimony of a witness is uncontradicted, either by positive testimony or circumstances, and is not inherently improbable, it cannot be disregarded but must be considered with all the other evidence. Kelly v. Jones, 290 Ill. 375; Porter v. Industrial Com. 352 Ill. 392.
The silence of appellant when the will was read aloud in her presence may be taken as evidence of an admission of the truth of the asserted contract between her and the testator. The rule is well recognized that admissions may be implied by silence when the circumstances are such as not only afford an opportunity to act or speak, but also properly and naturally call for action or reply by persons similarly situated. (Bell v. McDonald, 308 Ill. 329.) Certainly, Mrs. Widman had an opportunity to deny the language of the fourth paragraph when read, and it was certainly such a statement as would naturally evoke a denial from anyone in a like position. One does not ordinarily sit idly by when it is asserted that he is a party to an agreement affecting his material worth, unless it is true.
*455 The statements of Mrs. Widman as presented here in uncontradicted fashion, her silence when the will was read, taken with the will as offered in evidence by her indicate that such an oral contract existed. It is admitted that appellant holds about 111 acres of land by deed of December, 1935, thus constituting a completely executed contract.
The contract as here evidenced was eminently fair to Mrs. Widman. It is shown by the stiplation entered into between all these parties that the 111 acres received by appellant under the terms of the contract constituted considerably more than one third of the property owned by the testator in December of 1935 when the contract was executed. By the same stipulation it is indicated that the 111 acres also is slightly more than one third of the total of the real estate owned by testator at his death plus the 111-acre tract. One third is all the interest she could have enjoyed in the estate had no such agreement ever been executed.
The question presented to this court is whether Mrs. Widman could, in this manner, contract away her right to inchoate dower. It is, however, unnecessary for us to determine whether a right to inchoate dower may be contracted away or released by parol for the reason that in this case appellant is estopped to deny the contract. The doctrine of equitable estoppel may apply not only when the right to dower has vested upon the spouse's death, but also when the question is raised as to the inchoate right of dower. (Krueger v. Groth, 190 Wis. 387; citing Rosen v. Tackett, 222 Mich. 673, and Townsend v. Woodworth, 185 Iowa, 99; 2 Tiffany, Real Property, 424, chap. 10, sec. 533.) The general rule is that where a party by his statements or conduct leads another to do something he would not have done but for the statements or conduct of the other, the one guilty of the expressions or conduct will not be allowed to deny his utterances or acts to the loss or damage of the other party. The party claiming *456 the estoppel must have relied upon the acts or representations of the other and have had no knowledge or convenient means of knowing the true facts. Fraud is a necessary element but it is not essential that there be a fraudulent intent. It is sufficient if a fraudulent effect would follow upon allowing a party to set up a claim inconsistent with his former declarations. (Bondy v. Samuels, 333 Ill. 535.) It is established that appellant and her husband entered into an agreement wherein she promised to give up all claim to, or interest she might have in, his estate, and, in consideration for such promise and in reliance thereon, he conveyed to her about 111 acres of land by deed absolute. It was only in reliance upon the representations of Mrs. Widman that testator deeded her this land. To now allow her to claim a right to dower is to permit her to repudiate her contract while still retaining the consideration therefor. Such action on her part, if permitted, would certainly have a fraudulent effect. It is the very purpose of equitable estoppel to prevent fraud and injustice. (Trustees of School v. Village of Cahokia, 357 Ill. 538.) Testator never intended, nor did their agreement sanction, her holding 111 acres by virtue of the deed and one third of the remaining real estate in fee by her election to waive dower. Having received and held that property under the agreement, she is estopped to question the validity of that agreement.
The estoppel here operates in favor of the appellees who are the heirs of the testator, a party to the agreement. It is a general rule that estoppels may operate between parties and their privies, either in blood, in estate, or in law. (31 Corpus Juris Secundum 397.) Appellant is thus estopped to deny the validity of the agreement and is properly excluded from participation in the estate of Widman. Accordingly, the decree of the circuit court of Douglas County is affirmed.
Decree affirmed.

=== CASE 2226566 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:12.224336+00 ===

557 N.W.2d 259 (1996)
Andrew C. CHRISTENSON and ACCO Unlimited Corporation, Plaintiffs,
v.
IOWA DISTRICT COURT FOR POLK COUNTY, Defendant.
No. 95-1484.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
December 18, 1996.
Frank Murray Smith and Mary G. Hellweg of Frank M. Smith Law Office, Des Moines, for plaintiffs.
Lee H. Gaudineer, Jr. of Austin, Gaudineer, Austin, Salmons, Swanson & Hopkins, Des Moines, for defendant.
Considered by HARRIS, P.J., and CARTER, NEUMAN, SNELL, and ANDREASEN, JJ.
CARTER, Justice.
This original certiorari action concerns the relationship of Iowa Code section 808.14 *260 (1995), the statutory authority for issuing administrative search warrants, and section 314.9,[1] which sets out procedures governmental entities must follow to enter private land, in advance of condemnation, during the planning stages of road construction. At issue are the actions of the City of Johnston (the City) in entering upon the lands of plaintiff Andrew Christenson. After considering the authorities cited and arguments presented, we conclude that the commands of section 314.9 restrict the City's right of entry and cannot be avoided by obtaining an administrative search warrant. We sustain the writ.
The City of Johnston proposed to build a new road, Northwest 54th Avenue, which would run between Merle Hay Road and Northwest Beaver Drive. The proposed route would cross land then owned by Andrew Christenson and occupied by ACCO Unlimited, Christenson's tenant [hereinafter "Christenson"]. The City received a $2.8 million grant from the United States Department of Commerce, receipt of which was conditioned on completion of environmental testing. Phase I of the required testing examines the history of the parcel. In Phase II, areas of environmental concern disclosed by Phase I are tested for contamination. Geotechnical tests, determining the load-bearing capacity of the terrain, were also necessary. Both tests involve taking narrow borings, backfilling them, and restoring the surface to near-original condition. The Phase I testing of Christenson's parcel revealed "four locations of recognized environmental conditions." No test site was closer than fifty feet to any building on this property. Christenson originally granted permission to conduct these investigations but later withdrew that authorization.
On August 4, 1995, the City applied for an administrative search warrant granting authority to proceed with the boring on Christenson's property. Christenson filed a petition for declaratory ruling, seeking to quash the administrative search warrant and seeking a temporary injunction until the City complied with Iowa Code section 314.9. Christenson argued that the City must give him thirty days written notice by restricted certified mail. In addition, Christenson argued that section 314.9 prohibited testing within twenty rods (330 feet) of any structure without his consent.
On August 28 the district court issued an order requiring the City to give Christenson thirty days' notice. That order allowed boring to proceed during the week of September 25-29 and permitted that activity within twenty rods of any building. Christenson sought review of that order via certiorari and also sought a stay. We granted the petition for certiorari but denied a stay. On September 25, the district court denied Christenson's motion to quash the administrative search warrant. Christenson appealed that order, and we consolidated the appeal with this certiorari action. The agents of the City subsequently removed two soil borings for geotechnical testing and soil samples from two sites of environmental concern: an electrical dump area and a septic tank drain field. The City has subsequently acquired ownership by eminent domain of the land to which its right of entry had been challenged.
We review the district court's order for correction of errors at law. Iowa R.App.P. 4; Farm & City Ins. Co. v. Gilmore, 539 N.W.2d 154, 156 (Iowa 1995) (declaratory judgment); State v. Finnel, 515 N.W.2d 41, 43 (Iowa 1994) (statutory construction); Whitlock v. Iowa Dist. Ct., 497 N.W.2d 891, 893 (Iowa 1993) (certiorari).
Because the City now owns the land involved, the case at first glance appears to be moot. We reach the merits, however, for two reasons. First, Christenson, should his appeal be successful, may have claims against the City for trespass. Second, even if the plaintiffs have no claims against the City, this appeal contains several questions of substantial "public interest" worthy of our present attention. See Southeast Warren Community Sch. Dist. v. Department of Pub. Instruction, 285 N.W.2d 173, 178 (Iowa 1979).
*261 Christenson argues that section 314.9 is the sole means by which governmental entities may enter private land to conduct road construction surveys. He asserts that it is a special statute that prevails over section 808.14, a general statute. The City argues that section 314.9 had no application within the city limits. As an alternative argument, it urges that it may choose to proceed under either section 314.9 or section 808.14. The statute on which Christenson relies read as follows during the time of the City's entry:
The agency in control of any highway or highway system or the engineer, or any authorized person employed by said agency, may after thirty days' written notice by restricted certified mail addressed to the owner and also to the occupant, enter upon private land for the purpose of making surveys, soundings, drillings, appraisals and examinations as it deems appropriate or necessary to determine the advisability or practicability of locating and constructing a highway thereon or for the purpose of determining whether gravel or other material exists on said land of suitable quality and in sufficient quantity to warrant the purpose of condemnation of said land or part thereof. Such entry, after notice, shall not be deemed a trespass, and the agency may be aided by injunction to insure peaceful entry. The agency shall pay actual damages caused by such entry, surveys, soundings, drillings, appraisals or examinations.
Any damage caused by such entry, surveys, soundings, drillings, appraisals or examinations shall be determined by agreement or in the manner provided for an award of damages in condemnation of land for highway purposes. No such soundings or drillings shall be done within twenty rods of the dwelling house or buildings on said land without written consent of the owner.
Iowa Code § 314.9. The statute authorizing administrative warrants provides:
The courts and other appropriate agencies of the judicial branch ... may issue administrative search warrants, in accordance with the statutory and common-law requirements for the issuance of such warrants, to all governmental agencies or bodies expressly or impliedly provided with statutory or constitutional home rule authority or inspections to the extent necessary for the agency or body to carry out such authority.
Iowa Code § 808.14. The district court found that the City was free to use either section. After considering the meaning of section 314.9 and its relationship to section 808.14, we reach a different conclusion.
Ordinarily, statutes are given effect as written. Consolidated Freightways Corp. v. Nicholas, 258 Iowa 115, 120, 137 N.W.2d 900, 904 (1965). However, if the plain meaning would lead to an absurd or unjust result, courts may reexamine the statute to gather whether the legislature intended, for its own reasons, the result thought to be absurd. Iowa Code §§ 4.4(3)-(4), 4.6(1), (5); Consolidated Freightways, 258 Iowa at 120, 137 N.W.2d at 904. If such a result is in fact intended, the statute will be applied according to its terms. Janson v. Fulton, 162 N.W.2d 438, 443 (Iowa 1968). The interpreter first attempts to ascertain the legislature's intent, and then construes the statute to best achieve the legislative ends. Iowa Code § 4.6(1), (5); Garien v. Schneider, 546 N.W.2d 606, 609 (Iowa 1996); State ex rel. Hager v. Iowa Nat'l Mut. Ins. Co., 430 N.W.2d 420, 422 (Iowa 1988). The interpreter may look to prior enactments of the statute for guidance. Kelly v. Brewer, 239 N.W.2d 109, 114 (Iowa 1976).
Christenson asks this court to enforce the statute as written. The district court noted that, as a practical matter, this statute is only meaningful as to road construction in undeveloped areas. That conclusion stems from the practicability of applying the twenty-rod distance restrictions in urban settings. It is clear, however, that principles of practical application do not serve to restrict the scope of a statute to less than that which is provided in the text of the act. Contrary to the City's claims, the statute is not applicable only to the department of transportation. The statute governs "agencies," and in chapter 314 an "agency" is defined as "any governmental body" with jurisdiction "over any *262 road." Iowa Code § 314.13(1) (emphasis added). The terms "street" and "highway" are defined in the Code as interchangeable terms identifying every way or place open to the public for vehicular traffic. Iowa Code §§ 321.1(48), 306.3(10). The latter statute defines these terms for purposes of "any chapter of the Code relating to highways." Cities can exercise jurisdiction over highways as so defined. Id. §§ 306.1, .3. We conclude that in connection with its activities on Christenson's property the City was acting as an "agency" seeking to build a highway within the meaning of section 314.9.
The ancestor of section 314.9 read, in part:
Prospecting for gravel. The board or commission in control of any highway or highway system ... may after written notice to the owner and to the occupant, enter upon private land and make surveys, borings, and excavations thereon, for the purpose of determining whether gravel or other material exists on said land of suitable quality and in sufficient quantity, to warrant the purchase or condemnation of said land or part thereof and roadway thereto to secure such material for the improvement and maintenance of such highway or highway system.... No such prospecting shall be done within twenty rods of the dwelling house or buildings on said land without written consent of the landowner.
Iowa Code § 309.65 (1965). The statute was amended in response to our decision in Iowa State Highway Commission v. Hipp, 259 Iowa 1082, 147 N.W.2d 195 (1966). In Hipp the highway commission entered land in Floyd County to survey potential routes for Interstate 35. The landowners argued that this was not allowed, and we agreed. We held that the highway commission could not enter private land absent some statutory authority to do so. The legislature provided that authority in 1967 by amending the statute to allow for highway route location surveys and tests, as well as gravel prospecting. In doing so, it retained the twenty-rod rule, applicable by its language to both highway construction surveys and gravel prospecting. 1967 Iowa Acts ch. 258, § 1.
Section 314.9 is animated by two discernable policies: ease of governmental access to facilitate road construction and protection of private property. The twenty-rod rule is a legislature's resolution to the conflict between these two policies. At a certain radius from structures on realty, the public's interest in access to land for highway site selection is outweighed by interests of personal autonomy and property rights. In a 1996 amendment, not applicable to the present dispute, the twenty-rod rule was eliminated. The statute now prohibits drilling and sounding within 150 feet of a dwelling house or fifty feet of any other structure. 1996 Iowa Acts ch. 1126, § 3. Based on the law as it existed when the City's entry was made, however, Christenson had the right to exclude its inspectors at least within 330 feet of any structure.
We are convinced that the protections granted by section 314.9 may not be circumvented through the issuance of an administrative search warrant when the reason for entry is solely for road construction planning purposes. The application for administrative search warrant in the present case discloses no other purpose than that. In Meier v. Sulhoff, 360 N.W.2d 722, 726 (Iowa 1985), this court held that there was no right for an administrative search warrant to assess work place safety law compliance absent statutory authority. The legislature, in response, adopted section 808.14, a general administrative search warrant statute. It did not, as it had in the past (i.e., section 314.9), pass a situation-specific statute; however, several such situation-specific responses to "the inspection problem" remain on the books.[2] We do not presume that the legislature intended to repeal these situation-specific statutes. Lemon v. City of Muscatine, 272 N.W.2d 429, 431-32 (Iowa 1978).
The present dispute brings into play the distinction between general and special statutes. A special statute controls over a *263 general statute if the two conflict. Iowa Code § 4.7. This is true regardless of the respective order of enactment. Lifeline Ambulance, Inc. v. Iowa Ins. Div., 505 N.W.2d 186, 190 (Iowa 1993). Section 314.9 provides a right of entry in favor of any agency in charge of a highway system after thirty days' notice by restricted certified mail and subject to the "twenty rod" limitation. In contrast, section 808.14 provides a right of entry in favor of any governmental agency in the exercise of permissible powers. Section 314.9 is clearly the more specific of the two statutes and is thus controlling.
Although we sustain the writ of certiorari, we are convinced that we are without authority to grant more than the declaratory relief. The additional relief that Christenson has requested involving restrictions on the City's use of the soil samples obtained must be denied. Once the cat is out of the bag it is not feasible to put it back in again. Consistent with the views that we have taken in administrative law cases, the City is not restricted from taking any action that is deemed necessary by the knowledge it has gained from the disputed soil samples. See Manders v. Iowa Dep't of Transp., 454 N.W.2d 364, 366 (Iowa 1990); Westendorf v. Iowa Dep't of Transp., 400 N.W.2d 553, 556-57 (Iowa 1987).
The writ of certiorari is sustained. The judgment in the companion appeal is vacated, and that appeal is dismissed as moot.
WRIT SUSTAINED.
NOTES
[1]  Relevant portions of Iowa Code § 314.9 were amended in 1996, after the events involved in this appeal. 1996 Iowa Acts ch. 1126, § 3. These amendments will be more fully discussed below.
[2]  For several examples of narrow inspection statutes, see Iowa Code §§ 135C.16(3) (inspection of health care facilities); 177A.14 (diseased plants); 189A.12 (adulterated meat); 199.11(2)(a) (unlawful seeds); 455B.103(4)(a)-(d) (contamination); 478.15 (transmission lines); and 717.2A(b)-(c) (neglected livestock).

=== CASE 9741199 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:31.423437+00 ===

LaROCQUE, J.
The State Department of Health and Social Services appeals the decision and order of the circuit court reversing the department's final decision and order terminating Phyllis A. Tannler's eligibility for Medical Assistance (MA) benefits. The department argues that its decision is entitled to deference and that the court misinterpreted the relevant statutes. We reverse the circuit court and affirm the department's decision.
Medical Assistance, also known as "Medicaid," is a joint federal-state program whose purpose is to provide medical services to the poor and needy. 42 U.S.C. § 1396, et seq. To be eligible to receive MA benefits, an individual must meet strict income and asset limits. In determining whether an individual is entitled to benefits, a state may only consider the income and assets actually "available" to the applicant. 42 U.S.C. § 1396a(a)(17); 42 C.F.R. § 435.845. An individual is prohibited from divesting himself or herself of assets in order to meet these limits. Divestment resulting in MA ineligibility is defined as the disposal of resources or assets at less than fair market value within certain time periods relative to the application for MA or the institutionalization of the person making the disposition. Section 49.453(2), Stats.; Wis. Adm. Code § HSS 103.065(4). The definition of "assets" thus becomes relevant in divestment cases. The relevant definition of "assets" in Wisconsin is given in § 49.453(l)(a), STATS., which states that" 'Assets' has the meaning given in 42 *389USC 1396p(e)(l)." That section defines assets as follows:
The term "assets", with respect to an individual, includes all income and resources of the individual and of the individual's spouse, including any income or resources which the individual or such individual's spouse is entitled to but does not receive because of action—
(A) by the individual or such individual's spouse....
The relevant facts are not in dispute. Phyllis was initially determined to be eligible for MA benefits in 1993 when a "community spouse asset allocation" was completed, transferring certain assets to her husband Adolph. Adolph died in 1994 leaving a will that bequeathed all his assets and property to a grandson, while leaving Phyllis nothing. Phyllis did not object to the admission of the will to probate, nor did she file any elections or requests for classification of marital property or allowances.
Phyllis continued to receive MA benefits until 1995 when the department notified her that it was terminating her eligibility because Phyllis "is refusing to take action to claim the statutorily required portion of a deceased spouse's estate." A hearing was held after which the hearing examiner issued a proposed decision concluding that Phyllis' failure to assert a claim against Adolph's estate was not a divestment of an asset. The examiner cited the definition of "asset" contained in 42 U.S.C. § 1396p(e)(l). The examiner concluded that Phyllis did not divest herself of her share of Adolph's estate "because of action" on her part. To the contrary, the examiner concluded that she "took no action to avoid receiving" the share and "[a]n action *390is simply not the same thing as inaction and the terms cannot be used interchangeably."
The department reversed the hearing examiner's proposed decision and terminated Phyllis' MA eligibility. The department relied in part on the interpretation of 42 U.S.C. § 1396p(e)(l) contained in the MA Handbook, which stated that divestment actions that cause income or assets not to be received "because of action" of the spouse include "[r]efusing to take action to claim the statutorily required portion of a deceased spouse's or parent's estate." The department further considered the distinction between action and inaction in this case to be "one without a difference."
Subsequently, Phyllis sought judicial review of the department's decision and order. The court reversed the department's decision and order, finding that the department erroneously interpreted 42 U.S.C. § 1396p(e)(l) and that a correct, interpretation compelled that the department's action be set aside. The department now appeals.
In a ch. 227, Stats., appeal, we review the agency's decision and therefore give no deference to the decision of the trial court. Soo L.R.R. Co. v. Office of Comm 'r of Transp., 170 Wis. 2d 543, 549, 489 N.W.2d 672, 674 (Ct. App. 1992). Interpretation of a statute and its application to the undisputed facts are questions of law we review de novo. Local No. 695 v. LIRC, 154 Wis. 2d 75, 82, 452 N.W.2d 368, 371 (1990). We first look to the statutory language and, if that language is unambiguous, we construe the statute in accordance with its ordinary meaning. Riverwood Park, Inc. v. Central Ready-Mixed Concrete, Inc., 195 Wis. 2d 821, 828, 536 N.W.2d 722, 724 (Ct. App. 1995). A statute is ambiguous if it is capable of being understood by reasonably *391well-informed persons as having two or more different meanings. Id. If the statute is ambiguous, we may examine its content, subject matter, scope, history and purpose to determine legislative intent. Id.
We conclude that two reasonable persons could attribute different meanings to the word "action" as used in the definition of assets in the Medicaid statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1396p(e)(l). It could mean, as Phyllis contends, only affirmative or active conduct. It could mean, as the department contends, "acts of omission" as well. The department's contention is not unreasonable. The law routinely treats a failure to act as "action" for the purpose of imposing consequences. Thus, for example, the legislature's grant of governmental immunity under § 893.80(4), STATS., for torts of agents and employees speaks of "acts done in their official capacity . . . ." (Emphasis added.) Nevertheless, when courts consider the limits upon that immunity, they treat a failure to act in the same light as active conduct. See, e.g., Domino v. Walworth County, 118 Wis. 2d 488, 347 N.W.2d 917 (Ct. App. 1984) (question of governmental immunity for deputy sheriffs failure to act to effect removal of a fallen tree across road).
The department's determination that Phyllis divested herself of an asset under the terms of § 1396p(e)(l) is a legal conclusion. We are not bound by an agency's conclusions of law. See Kelley Co. v. Marquardt, 172 Wis. 2d 234, 244, 493 N.W.2d 68, 73 (1992). We do, however, defer to an agency's legal conclusions in certain instances:
First, if the administrative agency's experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge aid the agency in its interpretation and application of the statute, the agency determination is entitled *392to "great weight." The second level of review provides that if the agency decision is "very nearly" one of first impression it is entitled to "due weight" or "great bearing." The lowest level of review, the de novo standard, is applied where it is clear from the lack of agency precedent that the case is one of first impression for the agency and the agency lacks special expertise or experience in determining the question presented.
Jicha v. DILHR, 169 Wis. 2d 284, 290-91, 485 N.W.2d 256, 258-59 (1992) (citations omitted).
The department argues that we should give its interpretation of 42 U.S.C. § 1396p(e)(l) great weight. However, we conclude that the appropriate standard is the middle standard, because while our research uncovered no cases directly on point, the MA Handbook does speak directly to the issue presented by this case. Because the MA Handbook is designed to assist state and local agencies to implement the federal-state MA program, we conclude that its provisions are persuasive in resolving disputes such as the one before the court.1 Accordingly, we give the department's interpretation of § 1396p(e)(l) due weight when interpreting its language.
*393We conclude that the reference to "action" in 42 U.S.C. § 1396p(e)(l) is ambiguous. While it requires that an individual take "action," Phyllis argues that "action" means the affirmative performance of an act. The department argues that Phyllis' election not to file a claim is sufficient to constitute action.
Because the statute is ambiguous, we consider its purpose. Medical assistance is a joint federal-state program aimed at providing medical services to the poor and needy. 42 U.S.C. § 1396, et seq. The divestment provisions of that program are an attempt to prevent the government, and therefore the taxpayers, from having to subsidize the medical care of individuals who are, but for the divestment, able to pay the cost of their own care. The department's interpretation of § 1396p(e)(l) is consistent with this purpose: a failure to file a claim for one's statutorily-required share of an estate results in the government subsidizing the health care of that individual when, but for the failure to file, the individual would be able to pay the cost of her own care. Giving due weight to the department's final decision and order, we conclude that Phyllis' decision not to file a claim against Adolph's will was an action within the meaning of § 1396p(e)(l) because her decision resulted in exactly the type of divestment that provision was designed to address.2 We decline to adopt a construction of that section that would defeat its legislative purpose. See Town of De Pere v. City of De Pere, *394184 Wis. 2d 278, 283-84, 516 N.W.2d 1, 2-3 (Ct. App. 1994).
Finally, we note that § 1396p(e)(l), also defines "assets" as "income or resources which the individual ... is entitled to but does not receive because of action ... by the . . . individual's spouse . . . In this case, Adolph drafted a will that failed to leave to Phyllis property to which she was entitled under Wisconsin law. Neither party discusses whether Adolph's conduct constituted "action by the . . . individual's spouse," thereby resulting in Phyllis' ineligibility. We therefore decline to address the question further.
By the Court. — Order reversed.
We recognize that we are not bound by the terms of the MA Handbook and that where a handbook or manual is inconsistent with a statute, this court must apply the statute. See Zimmerman v. DHSS, 169 Wis. 2d 498, 505, 485 N.W.2d 290, 292 (Ct. App. 1992). However, because we conclude that 42 U.S.C. § 1396p(e)(l) is ambiguous in the context of this case, we appropriately turn to other sources for aid in interpreting fe provisions. As we discuss below, we conclude that the quoted portion of the MA Handbook is consistent with the purpose behind § 1396p(e)(1).
The liquid asset limit for MA eligibility is $2,000. 20 C.F.R. § 416.1205(c); § 49.47(4)(b)3g, Stats. It is undisputed that the portion of Adolph's estate to which Phyllis was entitled would have made her ineligible for MA benefits.

=== CASE 9741200 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:31.42823+00 ===

CANE, P.J.
(dissenting). I respectfully dissent. Divestment resulting in medical assistance ineligibility is defined as the disposal of resources or assets at less than fair market value within certain time periods relative to the application for medical assistance benefits or the institutionalization of the person making the disposition. Section 49.453(2), Stats.1 In essence, indi*395viduals cannot take some action to divest themselves of an asset in order to become or remain eligible for medical assistance. Section 49.453(l)(a), STATS.2
Action is defined as "Conduct; behavior; something done; the condition of acting; an act or series of acts." Black's Law Dictionary 28 (6th ed. 1990). The term act is defined as an external manifestation of the actor's will. "In its most general sense, this noun signifies something done voluntarily by a person;... In a more technical sense, it means something done voluntarily by a person, and of such a nature that certain legal consequences attach to it." Id. at 25. Similarly, WEBSTER'S New Collegiate Dictionary 12 (1980), defines action as "the bringing about of an alteration by force", *396"an act of will", and "a thing accomplished." As the circuit court noted, nowhere in these definitions is there expressed the concept of passivity, resignation or acceptance. To the contrary, all of the synonyms denote just the opposite: an act of performance.
One must keep in mind that Phyllis Tannler did nothing in this case. She did not dispose or divest herself of any assets in order to receive medical assistance benefits. Simply put, Phyllis's husband willed his estate to a grandson and the grandson's wife. In order for Phyllis to claim a share of her husband's estate, she is required to assert a claim against her husband's estate. If she does nothing, the estate passes on to the named beneficiaries. She did nothing. The department reasons that by electing not to file a claim against her husband's estate, Phyllis was taking an action to divest herself of an asset because the decision not to file such a claim is an act in itself. I disagree.
Were this a situation where Phyllis had been gifted a share of her husband's estate and she refused to accept the gift, I would agree with the department. In that type of a situation, she would have been required to take some action to divest herself of an asset in order to remain eligible for medical assistance. However, this is not even a gift requiring that she take some action to refuse. Therefore, I disagree with the majority and conclude that Phyllis took no action to divest herself of an asset.
Section 49.453(2), STATS., provides in relevant part:
(2) Ineligibility for medical assistance for certain services.
(a) Institutionalized individuals. Except as provided in sub. (8), if an institutionalized individual or his or her spouse, or another person acting on behalf of the institutionalized individual or his or her spouse, transfers assets for less than fair market value on or after the institutionalized individual's look-back date, the institutionalized individual is ineligible for medical assistance for the following services for the period specified under sub. (3):
1. For nursing facility services.
2. For a level of care in a medical institutional equivalent to that of a nursing facility.
3. For services under a waiver under 42 USC 1396n.
(b) Noninstitutionalized individuals. Except as provided in sub.
(8), if a noninstitutionalized individual or his or her spouse, or *395another person acting on behalf of the noninstitutionalized individual or his or her spouse, transfers assets for less than fair market value on or after the noninstitutionalized individual's look-back date, the noninstitutionalized individual is ineligible for medical assistance for the following services for the period specified under sub. (3):
1. Services that are described in 42 USC 1396d(a)(7), (22) or (24).
2. Other long-term care services specified by the department by rule.
Section 49.453(l)(a), Stats., provides that "assets" has the meaning given in 42 U.S.C. § 1396p(e)(l) (1995), which states:
The term "assets", with respect to an individual, includes all income and resources of the individual and of the individual's spouse, including any income or resources which the individual or such individual's spouse is entitled to but does not receive because of action—
(A) by the individual or such individual's spouse,
(B) by a person, including a court or administrative body, with legal authority to act in place of or on behalf of the individual or such individual's spouse, or
(C) by any person, including any court or administrative body, acting at the direction or upon the request of the individual or such individual's spouse.

=== CASE 9741201 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:33.31232+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Kelly R. Christner claims that due to the test result from an improperly obtained sample of his blood, a Red Willow county judge convicted him of operating or being in the actual physical control of a motor vehicle while he had an excessive concentration of alcohol in his body.
Upon Christner’s appeal to the district court for Red Willow County, that court affirmed Christner’s county court conviction. *551Christner then appealed to the Nebraska Court of Appeals. We transferred the matter to this court’s docket pursuant to our authority to regulate the dockets of the two appellate courts.
We reverse Christner’s conviction and direct that the charge against him be dismissed.
FACTS
The sole charge against Christner, for which he was convicted in the Red Willow County Court, was that Christner, while operating a motor vehicle upon the public streets and highways within Red Willow County, violated that portion of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,196 (Reissue 1993) which provides, in pertinent part: “It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or be in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle: . . . (b) When such person has a concentration of ten-hundredths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of his or her blood . . . .”
Christner entered a not guilty plea to the charge and waived a jury trial. At a bench trial, certain facts contained in the arresting officer’s report and certain other facts were received in evidence by stipulation of the parties. It was also stipulated that if certain witnesses were called to testify, they would lay the necessary foundation for the introduction into evidence of exhibit 5, which is a report of the McCook Community Hospital clinical laboratory. The report reflects that shortly after Christner was arrested, a sample of his blood was taken, and that a chemical test of it revealed that Christner had a concentration of . 10 of 1 gram or more by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his blood, to-wit: .188. Christner objected to the court’s receiving in evidence the test result, because he was not adequately advised of the consequences of his taking or refusing to submit to a blood test. The trial court overruled Christner’s objection and admitted into evidence the result of his blood test.
The status of this appeal is such that if Christner’s blood test result should not have been received in evidence, then there was insufficient evidence to convict him of the violation with which he was charged. On the other hand, if the trial court properly received into evidence Christner’s blood test result, Christner’s conviction should be affirmed.
*552ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
Restated, Christner contends that the trial court erred in (1) receiving into evidence the result of his blood test and (2) finding that the evidence supported a finding that he had .10 of 1 gram or more by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his blood, in violation of § 60-6,196.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
Statutory interpretation is a matter of law in connection with which an appellate court has an obligation to reach an independent, correct conclusion irrespective of the decision made by the court below. State v. Lujano, ante p. 256, 557 N.W.2d 217 (1996); State v. Johnson, 250 Neb. 933, 554 N.W.2d 126 (1996); Smith v. State, 248 Neb. 360, 535 N.W.2d 694 (1995).
In a bench trial of a law action, including a criminal case tried without a jury, erroneous admission of evidence is. not reversible error if other relevant evidence, admitted without objection or properly admitted over objection, sustains the trial court’s factual findings necessary for the judgment or decision reviewed; therefore, an appellant must show that the trial court actually made a factual determination, or otherwise resolved a factual issue or question, through use of erroneously admitted evidence in a case tried without a jury. State v. Lujano, supra; State v. Lomack, 239 Neb. 368, 476 N.W.2d 237 (1991). See, also, State v. Chambers, 241 Neb. 66, 486 N.W.2d 481 (1992).
In determining whether evidence is sufficient to sustain a conviction in a bench trial, an appellate court does not resolve conflicts in evidence, pass on credibility of witnesses, evaluate explanations, or reweigh evidence presented, which are within a fact finder’s province for disposition. A conviction in a bench trial of a criminal case is sustained if the evidence, viewed and construed most favorably to the State, is sufficient to support that conviction. The trial court’s findings have the effect of a jury verdict and will not be set aside unless clearly erroneous. State v. Johnson, supra; State v. Hand, 244 Neb. 437, 507 N.W.2d 285 (1993).
On appeal, if it appears the evidence is sufficient to support a conviction, the cause may be remanded to the district court for further proceedings; if the evidence is not sufficient, the cause *553must be dismissed. State v. Lee, 227 Neb. 277, 417 N.W.2d 26 (1987). See State v. Palmer, 224 Neb. 282, 399 N.W.2d 706 (1986).
ANALYSIS
Under his first assignment of error, Christner contends that the administrative license revocation postarrest advisement (advisory form) read to him prior to his agreeing to take a blood test did not adequately advise him of the consequences of submitting to a blood test, as required by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,197(10) (Reissue 1993) and this court’s decision in Smith v. State, 248 Neb. 360, 535 N.W.2d 694 (1995). Specifically, Christner contends that the advisory form did not advise him that the result from his blood test could be used against him in a criminal proceeding. It is undisputed that the advisory form read to Christner prior to his blood test was the same as the advisory form adjudged statutorily inadequate under § 60-6,197(10) in Smith.
In Smith, we addressed the issue of whether an arresting officer, by reading an advisory form, gave a driver-arrestee adequate notice, as required by- § 60-6,197(10), of the consequences of failing a chemical test. We held that the advisory form read to the defendant in Smith prior to the administration of his chemical breath test failed to fully inform him of the consequences of submitting to, or submitting to and failing, a chemical test as mandated by § 60-6,197(10). That statute, in relevant part, provides:
Any person who is required to submit ... to a chemical blood, breath, or urine test or tests . . . shall be advised of (a) the consequences of refusing to submit to such test or tests and (b) the consequences if he or she submits to such test and the test discloses the presence of a concentration of alcohol in violation of subsection (1) of section 60-6,196.
(Emphasis supplied.)
(As an aside, we note that the Nebraska Legislature amended the foregoing provision, with an operative date of February 27, 1996, to read: “Any person who is required to submit to a chemical blood, breath, or urine test or tests pursuant to this section *554shall be advised that refusal to submit to such test or tests is a separate crime for which the person may be charged.” § 60-6,197(10) (Cum. Supp. 1996).)
We held in Smith v. State, 248 Neb. at 365, 535 N.W.2d at 697-98, that “[t]he sensible reading of § 60-6,197(10) indicates that the Legislature intended drivers to be advised of the natural and direct legal consequences flowing from submitting to a chemical test and failing it.” We found that the advisory form in Smith failed to inform the defendant that “the results of a valid chemical test could be competent evidence in any prosecution involving a driving under the influence offense.” Id. at 366, 535 N.W.2d at 698. Citing our decision in State v. Deets, 234 Neb. 307, 450 N.W.2d 696 (1990), we concluded in Smith that the purpose of requiring an officer to advise a driver-arrestee of the consequences of refusing to take a breath test was to ensure that the driver-arrestee was in a position to make a rational and voluntary decision as to whether to submit to a chemical test. As a result, we held that the advisory form used in Smith was statutorily inadequate because it did not inform a driver-arrestee of all of the consequences of submitting to and failing a chemical test. We ultimately held that the defendant’s motor vehicle operator’s license could not be revoked by the director of the Nebraska Department of Motor Vehicles because the defendant was not fully informed of the consequences of submitting to a chemical test for alcohol concentration in his body.
We have reaffirmed our Smith decision in Perrine v. State, 249 Neb. 518, 544 N.W.2d 364 (1996), and in Biddlecome v. Conrad, 249 Neb. 282, 543 N.W.2d 170 (1996).
As previously stated, the key question in Christner’s appeal is whether the result of his chemical blood test should have been received in evidence when he had not been fully advised of the consequences of taking the test, including the fact that the test result could be used against him in a criminal prosecution.
This court has not ruled upon the issue involved in the case at bar as it pertains to a criminal case. However, the Court of Appeals has held that when a driver-arrestee has not been fully informed of the consequences of taking a chemical test to determine the concentration of alcohol in his or her body, his or her refusal to take the test is not admissible in evidence to support *555a criminal charge of refusing to take such a test. State v. McGurk, 95 NCA No. 45, case No. A-95-162 (not designated for permanent publication). The Court of Appeals, in State v. Hatcliff, 95 NCA No. 45, case No. A-95-198 (not designated for permanent publication), held that the results of a blood test which were preceded by an inadequate advisement of the consequences of taking the test are inadmissible in a criminal case to prove the concentration of alcohol in a driver-arrestee’s body. The Court of Appeals reached the same conclusion in a criminal case, State v. Hingst, 4 Neb. App. 768, 550 N.W.2d 686 (1996). On petition for further review by this court, we affirmed the Court of Appeals’ judgment. See State v. Hingst, ante p. 535, 557 N.W.2d 681 (1997).
A driver-arrestee who is required to submit to a chemical blood, breath, or urine test under § 60-6,197 should be advised of the natural and direct legal consequences of submitting to a chemical test. See Smith v. State, 248 Neb. 360, 535 N.W.2d 694 (1995). Such consequences include that any incriminating results from such a test may be used against the person in a criminal proceeding. Id. Thus, we determine that in a criminal case, if the defendant was read an inadequate advisory form before taking the test, it is error for a trial court, over the defendant’s objection, to admit into evidence the results of a chemical blood, breath, or urine test to prove the concentration of alcohol in the defendant’s body.
In this case, the trial court could not have determined that Christner was operating a motor vehicle with .10 of 1 gram or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his blood without relying upon the results of Christner’s blood test. The record clearly establishes the fact that the county court, acting as the trier of fact, relied upon the results of Christener’s blood test to reach its factual finding that Christner operated his motor vehicle with .10 of 1 gram or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his blood in his body. It is also clear that the court based its legal conclusion that Christner operated his motor vehicle while he had .10 of 1 gram or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his blood based on Christner’s blood test.
In State v. Chambers, 241 Neb. 66, 70, 486 N.W.2d 481, 484 (1992), we held that “the erroneous admission of evidence in a *556bench trial of a law action, including a criminal case tried without a jury, is not reversible error if other relevant evidence, admitted without objection or properly admitted over objection, sustains the trial court’s necessary factual findings.” A reversal is warranted in such a case “if the record shows that the trial court actually made a factual determination, or otherwise resolved a factual issue or question, through the use of erroneously admitted evidence.” Id. (citing State v. Chambers, 241 Neb. 60, 486 N.W.2d 219 (1992)).
In this case, there is no other evidence to support a finding that Christner had .10 of 1 gram or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of his blood, an essential element of the crime with which he was charged and upon which he was tried and convicted. The trial court relied explicitly and exclusively upon the result of a blood test to find Christner guilty of the charge against him.
Although we are compelled to reverse Christner’s conviction, we must examine the sufficiency of the evidence presented against him in order to resolve this matter completely. See State v. Lee, 227 Neb. 277, 417 N.W.2d 26 (1987). See, also, State v. Palmer, 224 Neb. 282, 399 N.W.2d 706 (1986).
In Lee, we stated that “[i]f it appears the evidence is sufficient to support the convictions, the cause may be remanded to the district court for further proceedings; if the evidence is not sufficient . . . the cause must be dismissed.” 227 Neb. at 283, 417 N.W.2d at 30.
After a careful examination of the record, we find that no properly admissible evidence was obtained upon which Christner could be convicted of either operating or having actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon the public streets and highways while he was under the influence of alcohol or while he had an illegal concentration of alcohol in his body.
Therefore, we must reverse Christner’s conviction and direct that the charge against him be dismissed.
Reversed and remanded with DIRECTIONS TO DISMISS.

=== CASE 9741202 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:33.316554+00 ===

*557Fahrnbruch, J.,
concurring.
I agree with the majority that it is error for a trial court, over a defendant’s objection, to admit into evidence the results of a chemical blood, breath, or urine test to prove the concentration of alcohol in the defendant’s body if the defendant was read an inadequate advisory form before taking the test. The dissenters contend that the legislative intent behind Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,197(10) (Reissue 1993), as it stood at the time relevant to this case, controlled the meaning of the statute. To support their contention, the dissenters cite legislative history, as well as the revised version of § 60-6,197(10) that followed this court’s decision in Smith v. State, 248 Neb. 360, 535 N.W.2d 694 (1995).
In reading a statute, a court must determine and give effect to the purpose and intent of the Legislature as ascertained from the entire language of the statute considered in its plain, ordinary, and popular sense. See, Village of Winside v. Jackson, 250 Neb. 851, 553 N.W.2d 476 (1996); County Cork v. Nebraska Liquor Control Comm., 250 Neb. 456, 550 N.W.2d 913 (1996); State v. Cox, 247 Neb. 729, 529 N.W.2d 795 (1995).
Section 60-6,197(10), as it stood at the time relevant to this case, provided, in relevant part:
Any person who is required to submit ... to a chemical blood, breath, or urine test or tests . . . shall be advised of (a) the consequences of refusing to submit to such test or tests and (b) the consequences if he or she submits to such test and the test discloses the presence of a concentration of alcohol in violation of subsection (1) of section 60-6,196.
(Emphasis supplied.) The dissenters contend that the above statutory language, when read in light of its legislative history, should be construed to mean something less than what it says. Specifically, the dissenters contend that “the only relevant consequences contemplated by § 60-6,197(10) are the penalties for refusing to submit to a chemical test and for failing a chemical test.” The language of § 60-6,197(10) does not support such a contention.
When the Legislature enacted § 60-6,197(10), it mandated that a driver-arrestee be advised of “the natural and direct legal *558consequences flowing from submitting to a chemical [blood, breath, or urine] test and failing it,” Smith, 248 Neb. at 365, 535 N.W.2d at 697-98, because the Legislature substantively required, by the words of the statute, that any person who is required to submit to a chemical test be advised of the consequences of submitting to such a test. Section 60-6,197(10) contains no language limiting the advisement of consequences in the manner suggested by the dissenters.
Under the law of this state, statutes covering substantive matters in effect at the time of the transaction govern, not later enacted statutes. See State v. Groff, 247 Neb. 586, 529 N.W.2d 50 (1995).
The dissenters seemingly have forgotten that beginning with the founding of this nation one of the basic reasons for courts to exist is to protect the individual from arbitrary acts of government. The right to be fully advised of the consequences of taking or refusing to take a chemical test for alcohol was granted by the Legislature in § 60-6,197(10). The dissenters ignore the plain language of the statute as it existed at the time of Christner’s arrest and would arbitrarily take away a right of Christner’s which was bestowed upon him by the Legislature.
Accordingly, I concur in the majority’s decision because at the time of Christner’s arrest Smith was the controlling law and § 60-6,197(10) had yet to be revised. The advisory form read to Christner was inadequate, and the trial court erred in receiving Christner’s blood test result into evidence.
White, C.J., joins in this concurrence.

=== CASE 9741203 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:33.319885+00 ===

Connolly, J.,
dissenting.
In my opinion, the advisory form which the law enforcement officer read to Christner, prior to his blood test, was adequate under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 60-6,197(10) (Reissue 1993) to advise Christner of the penal consequences of refusing to submit to the test and of failing the test.
It is undisputed that the advisory form read to Christner is the same as the advisory form that was at issue in Smith v. State, 248 Neb. 360, 535 N.W.2d 694 (1995). Thus, the only discernible difference between Smith and the instant case is that Smith arose in the context of an administrative license revoca*559tion proceeding, whereas the instant appeal arises from a criminal prosecution for driving under the influence.
As in Smith, the majority of this court once again ignores the legislative intent behind § 60-6,197(10). See Smith v. State, supra (Connolly, J., dissenting). This is so, as the majority notes, despite the Nebraska Legislature’s having amended § 60-6,197(10), which now provides: “Any person who is required to submit to a chemical blood, breath, or urine test or tests pursuant to this section shall be advised that refusal to submit to such test or tests is a separate crime for which the person may be charged.” § 60-6,197(10) (Cum. Supp. 1996).
While this amended version of § 60-6,197(10) is not applicable in the instant case, it is clear that the amendment was “in direct response to the July 1995 ruling of the Nebraska Supreme Court in a case called Smith v. State.” Public Hearing, L.B. 939, Committee on Transportation, 94th Leg., 2d Sess. 17 (Jan. 16, 1996). At the public hearing for L.B. 939, Senator Douglas A. Kristensen, principal introducer, stated:
The logical conclusion of the Supreme Court’s ruling could be an unending and an unlimited advisement form.. . . That could affect all drunk driving cases in this state. That’s not the logical conclusion. That’s not what the Legislature intended, and it certainly isn’t what good public policy should be.
Id. at 18-19.
Clearly, the only relevant consequences contemplated by § 60-6,197(10) are the penalties for refusing to submit to a chemical test and for failing a chemical test. In the instant case, the advisory form which the law enforcement officer read to Christner advised him of the criminal penalties for first, second, third, and fourth or subsequent convictions for both offenses. As a result, Christner was sufficiently informed of the requisite consequences. Accordingly, the trial court was correct in receiving Christner’s blood test result, and therefore, I would affirm.
Wright and Gerrard, JJ., join in this dissent.

=== CASE 9742933 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 21:22:54.578971+00 ===

Keville, J.
(concurring). Although I concur in the result reached by the majority, I disagree in part with the path followed in arriving at that result.
First, the docket, the original papers and the briefs support the plaintiff’s representation, not disputed by the defendant, that the allowance of the defendant’s motion to modify the temporary injunction, thus paving the way for the bank merger, took place without notice of a hearing and without the presentation of evidence or argument. It appears that the only notice given with respect to the motion was on October 3, 1975, after it had been allowed.
Second, when the motion was filed, and when it was allowed, the defendant lacked standing to bring it. Not only had she not qualified as a trustee under the will (see *7282 Newhall, Settlement of Estates § 410 [4th ed. 1958], and cases cited therein), but the judge, who allowed the motion, had already determined that the defendant held the assets of the estate, including the bank stock, as a constructive trustee; and he had ordered her to hold all of the assets for the purpose of transferring them to a trustee of the testamentary trust. In the disposition of the motion it would appear that no account was taken of the provisions of G. L. c. 203, §§19 and 23.
Third, I disagree with the view of the majority that the allowance of that motion was interlocutory, and that, therefore, the plaintiff’s appeal from its allowance is not properly before us. One of the “essential purposes” of the testator in establishing the trust under his will was to provide for the continued operation of the Park National Bank in which he held the controlling interest. The record demonstrates his intention that control of the bank should remain “in the family” after his demise. As the majority opinion points out, the will provides that the trustee, in the event that Stephen were not interested in running the bank, is to give Douglas a chance to demonstrate his ability to assume a responsible position in the bank’s operation, and that the trustee, in her discretion, could vote the bank stock to that end.
The judge’s allowance of the defendant’s motion to modify the temporary injunction thus permitted the defendant to effectuate a merger with a larger bank and gave the defendant leave to frustrate the testator’s expressed intent and to vitiate one of the salient provisions of the trust. See and compare Mazzola v. Myers, 363 Mass. 625, 635, 638 (1973). In my view the allowance of the motion was, in substance, a final decree in so far as it concerns the plaintiff; and his appeal from the allowance is, therefore, properly before us. Cummings v. Tolman, 292 Mass. 58, 60 (1935). General Heat & Appliance Co. v. Goodwin, 316 Mass. 3, 5 (1944). Vincent v. Plecker, 319 Mass. 560, 583 (1946). Jefferson v. Flynn, 348 Mass. 165, 166 (1964).
However, although the plaintiff filed a motion in the Probate Court under Mass.R.A.P. 6(a), 365 Mass. 848 (1974), to stay the modification of the temporary in june*729tion for the purpose of restraining the substitution of the Western Bank & Trust Company shares for those of the Park National Bank, he failed to press his application for a stay or to comply with other requirements of that rule, or to seek relief under the provisions of G. L. c. 215, § 23. Neither did he elect to appeal from the final judgment, which was subsequently entered in the case, although in connection with that judgment the probate judge had made a finding that the principal purpose of the trust would not be affected by the exchange of shares of the two banks which was negotiated pursuant to the modification of the temporary injunction. On the basis of the record before us, I agree that the judge’s modification of the injunction should not be disturbed.

=== CASE 3027437 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:15.388177+00 ===

United States Court of Appeals
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
___________
No. 00-3922
___________
Mario Humberto Gonzalez-Godinez,        *
*
Petitioner,                 *
* Petition for Review of a Decision of
v.                                * the Board of Immigration Appeals.
*
Immigration and Naturalization          *         [UNPUBLISHED]
Service,                                *
Respondent.                 *
___________
Submitted: June 15, 2001
Filed: August 3, 2001
___________
Before LOKEN and MORRIS SHEPPARD ARNOLD, Circuit Judges, and
BATAILLON,* District Judge.
___________
PER CURIAM.
Three times in 1991 and early 1992, seventeen-year-old Mario Humberto
Gonzalez-Godinez was seized by the Guatemalan military for conscription into the
army. Each time, he escaped. In July 1992, while hiding from the army near his
family’s home, Gonzalez-Godinez encountered Guatemalan guerrillas, who urged him
to join their insurgency forces. Fearing both the army and the guerrillas, Gonzalez-
*
The HONORABLE JOSEPH F. BATAILLON, United States District Judge for
the District of Nebraska, sitting by designation.
Godinez fled Guatemala and illegally entered the United States in November 1992.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service commenced deportation proceedings.
Gonzalez-Godinez conceded deportability and applied for asylum or withholding of
deportation. He now appeals the decision of the Board of Immigration Appeals that he
is ineligible for asylum or withholding of deportation because he does not have a well-
founded fear of persecution within the meaning of 8 U.S.C. §§ 1101(a)(42)(A),
1158(b)(1).
The BIA concluded that Gonzalez-Godinez does not have a well-founded fear
of persecution on account of his political opinions because there is no evidence the
Guatemalan military considers him a subversive and no evidence the guerrillas would
harm him if he continues to refuse to join them. Although Gonzalez-Godinez argues
that he has a well-founded fear of imprisonment or punishment by the army if he returns
to Guatemala, the BIA properly observed, “If [the army is] looking for him, it is
justified by his repeated desertions and possible complicity in murder [that occurred
while he was at an army camp]. The [Guatemalan army’s] method of conscription . .
. is not persecution.” Likewise, that guerrillas attempted to recruit Gonzalez-Godinez
into their fighting forces does not establish persecution on account of his political
opinions. See Miranda v. INS, 139 F.3d 624, 627 (8th Cir. 1998). After careful review
of the administrative record, we conclude that substantial evidence supports the
agency’s decision to deny asylum and withholding of deportation. Accordingly, we
affirm.
A true copy.
Attest:
CLERK, U. S. COURT OF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT.
-2-

=== CASE 9741210 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:39.096053+00 ===

OPINION
BROOK, Judge
Case Summary
Appellant-defendant Interim Healthcare of Fort Wayne, Inc. ("Interim") appeals' the trial court's denial of Interim's motions for summary judgment against appellees-plaintiffs Kimberly Moyer ("Kimberly"), by her next friend, Karen Moyer ("Karen") and Edward Moyer ("Edward") (collectively, "the Moyers") and Karen and Edward individually. We affirm.
Issues
Interim raises three issues for review, which we reorder and restate as follows:
I. whether the trial court erred in denying Interim's motion for summary judgment on the Moyers' claim of respondeat superior;
II. whether the trial court erred in denying Interim's motion for summary judgment on the issue of a non-delegable duty; and
III. whether the trial court erred in denying Interim's motion for summary judgment on the Moyers claim for negligent hiring and retention.
Facts and Procedural History
The facts most favorable to the Moyers as the non-moving party indicate that Michelle Baral ("Baral") completed an application for employment as a home health aide with Interim on August 1, 1995. Interim requested written references and conducted a criminal background inquiry with the Indiana State Police. Baral's two references were positive, and the background inquiry revealed no prior criminal history. Baral also passed a required series of written and skills tests. Interim hired Baral as a home health aide on August 16, 1995.
*431Kimberly is mute, severely retarded, and suffers from cerebral palsy. Karen and Edward had contracted with Interim to provide home health care services to fourteen-year-old Kimberly, including feeding, changing, bathing, dressing, and performing range-of-motion exercises. When Kimberly's regular home health aide was on vacation, Interim assigned Baral to care for Kimberly on August 26, 1995, September 2, 1995, and September 9, 1995. During these Saturday visits, Baral would arrive at the Moyers' home at approximately 8:00 a.m. and depart at approximately 3:00 p.m., during which time Karen slept upstairs. Baral was neither expected nor authorized to administer medication to Kimberly. After Baral left the Moyers' home on September 9, 1995, Kimberly suffered a seizure caused by injection of a large insulin dose. Kimberly did not take insulin, but Baral had been an insulin-dependent diabetic since approximately 1992.
On September 5, 1997, the Moyers filed suit against Interim and Baral, alleging negligence; intentional battery; negligent hiring, retention, and training; and fraudulent representation. On June 30, 1999, Interim filed a motion for summary judgment. The Moyers responded on October 1, 1999, and moved to amend their complaint to add a theory of non-delegable duty. Interim filed a reply memorandum in support of its motion on November 5, 1999. On December 16, 1999, the trial court summarily denied Interim's motion for summary judgment and granted the Moyers' motion to amend their complaint, which they filed on January 6, 2000. Interim filed a second motion for summary judgment on March 31, 2000, to which the Moyers responded on June 1, 2000. The trial court summarily denied Interim's see-ond summary judgment motion on June 12, 2000, and certified Interim's subsequent petition for interlocutory appeal on September 20, 2000. This court granted Interim's petition on October 26, 2000.
Discussion and Decision
Standard of Review
Summary judgment is appropriate only where the designated evidentiary matter shows the absence of any genuine issue of material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. See Warner Trucking, Inc. v. Carolina Cas. Ins. Co., 686 N.E.2d 102, 104 (Ind.1997). We must determine whether there is a genuine issue of material fact and whether the trial court correctly applied the law. Southport Little League v. Vaughan, 734 N.E.2d 261, 269 (Ind.Ct.App.2000), trans. denied.
A party opposing summary judgment is not required to come forward with contrary evidence until the moving party demonstrates the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. On appellate review, we construe the pleadings, affidavits, and designated materials in a light most favorable to the non-movant. When there are material disputed facts, or if undisputed facts give rise to conflicting reasonable inferences that affect the outcome, they must be resolved in favor of the non-movant.
Warner, 686 N.E.2d at 104 (citations omitted).
I. Respondeat Superior
Respondeat superior is the applicable tort theory of vicarious liability and creates liability for a principal where it would otherwise not exist. Southport Little League, 734 N.E.2d at 268. Under this doctrine, "an employer is Hable for the acts of its employees which were committed within the course and seope of their employment." City of Fort Wayne v. Moore, 706 N.E.2d 604, 607 (Ind.Ct.App.1999), trans. denied.
*432In order to be within the scope of employment the employee must be in the service of the employer. Acts for which the employer is not responsible are those done on the employee's own initiative, with no intention to perform it as part of or incident to the service for which he is employed. However, an employee's wrongful act may still fall within the seope of employment if his purpose was, to an appreciable extent, to further his employer's business, even if the act was predominantly motivated by an intention to benefit the employee himself.
Stropes by Taylor v. Heritage House Childrens Ctr. of Shelbyville, Inc., 547 N.E.2d 244, 247 (Ind.1989) (citations and internal quotations omitted).
In Stropes, nurse's aide Robert Griffin ("Griffin") sexually assaulted a fourteen-year-old welfare department ward and full-time Heritage House resident suffering from cerebral palsy and severe mental retardation. The S&ropes court noted that
Heritage's employee [Griffin] committed some acts unquestionably within the scope of his employment. Griffin began the episode by performing a fully authorized act, stripping the sheets from [Stropes's] bed prior to changing the bedding. He was also authorized to undress David Stropes and to touch his genitals and other parts of his body when bathing him and changing his clothes. [Griffin then got into bed with Stropes and performed oral and anal sex upon him.] Griffin also ended the episode with a fully authorized act, dressing David for the day. [Ilt is beyond question that the abuse David suffered at Griffin's hands was unauthorized by Heritage and committed for Griffin's own gratification.
The fact that this was a sexual assault is not per se determinative of the scope of employment question. A blanket rule holding all sexual attacks outside the seope of employment as a matter of law because they satisfy the perpetrators' personal desires would draw an unprincipled distinction between such assaults and other types of crimes which employees may commit in response to other personal motivations, such as anger or financial pressures. Rather, the nature of the wrongful act should be a consideration in the assessment of whether and to what extent Griffin's acts fell within the seope of his employment such that Heritage should be held accountable.
Rape and sexual abuse constitute arguably the most egregious instances of wrongful acts which an employee could commit on the job and lend themselves to arguably the most instinetive conclusion that such acts could never be within the seope of one's employment, yet other courts have recognized that the resolution of the question does not turn on the type of act committed or on the perpetrator's emotional baggage accompanying the attack.
Id. at 249. The Stropes court then briefly examined two cases standing for the proposition that "the focus must be on how the employment relates to the context in which the commission of the wrongful act arose." Id. at 249 (discussing Marston v. Minneapolis Clinic of Psychiatry, 329 N.W.2d 306, 311 (Minn.1982), Lyon v. Carey, 533 F.2d 649, 654-55 (D.C.Cir.1976)). The court continued,
A jury presented with the facts of this case might find that Robert Griffin acted to an appreciable extent to further his master's business, that his actions were, at least for a time, authorized by his employer, related to the service for which he was employed, and motivated to an extent by [his employer's] interests, and that, therefore, his wrongful *433acts fell within the seope of his employment and Heritage should be accountable. Conversely, a jury might find that Griffin's acts were so divorced in time, place and purpose from his employment duties as to preclude the imposition of lability on his employer. The nature of the acts [was], at the very least, sufficiently associated with Griffin's authorized duties to escape dismissal on summary judgment.
Id. at 250 (initial alteration in original) (citations and internal quotations omitted).
Here, Interim contends that since Baral's duties were restricted to feeding, bathing, and changing Kimberly, and that since she was neither expected nor authorized to administer medication to Kimberly, Baral's authorized acts were "sufficiently different from administering medication or injecting insulin" as to preclude Interim's lability under respondeat superior. We see no substantive distinction, however, between Baral's alleged criminal act and Griffin's criminal act in Stropes, both of which were committed in the midst of otherwise authorized duties.
Interim seeks to invite comparison with Konkle v. Henson, 672 N.E.2d 450 (Ind.Ct.App.1996), where a panel of this court affirmed summary judgment in favor of a minister who molested a minor parishioner, oftentimes while in the church building itself.1 However, the Konkle court noted that there was
no evidence that at the time Henson molested Konkle he was engaging in authorized acts. Konkle testified that on one occasion, Henson gave her a bible to read as he began to attempt to engage in intercourse with her. Howeyer, there is no showing that he was teaching Konkle or performing any other pastoral acts at the time. The unauthorized acts committed by Henson are not similar to his duties as a minister. Henson may have had access to Konkle because of his position as pastor, but he was not engaging in authorized acts or serving the interests of his employer at the time he molested Konkle.
Id. at 457. Interim repeatedly claims that Baral was authorized to perform nothing more than basic "babysitting" duties while caring for Kimberly, but the fact remains that Baral was in the course of performing these duties when she allegedly injected Kimberly with insulin. Thus, as our supreme court held in Stropes, a jury must decide whether Baral's act was so "divorced in time, place and purpose" from her employment duties as to allow Interim to avoid lability. See also Southport Little League, 734 N.E.2d at 270 (Little League equipment manager molested two baseball players; denial of summary judgment affirmed "[blecause the [plaintiffs'] designated materials raise[d] the inference that some of [the equipment manager's] acts were authorized (such as fitting the youths' uniforms) when he viewed [the youths'] genitalia for his sexual gratification and when he sexually molested the youths"). Accordingly, we affirm the trial court's denial of summary judgment on this issue.
II. Non-Delegable Duty
"The duty to exercise care for the safety of another arises as a matter of law out of some relation existing between the parties, and it is the province of the court to determine whether such a relation gives rise to such duty." Stropes, 547 N.E.2d at 253 (internal quotation marks omitted). The Stropes court addressed *434the issue of a non-delegable duty as follows: -
First, onee one has, by contract or otherwise, assumed the duty to protect another, the nature of that duty may be such that the responsibility for providing the protection cannot be delegated even though the protective tasks themselves are.... Second, where an employer has assumed a non-delegable duty to protect a person and his employee inflicts injury on that person, the doctrine of respondeat superior will not interdict the imposition of liability on the employer even if the wrongful act was outside the seope of employment.
Id. at 250-51.
Under respondeat superior, employer liability is coextensive with the powers and advantages engendered by the employment relationship. Because liability is predicated conceptually on the employer's ability to command or control his employee's acts, an employer can be held responsible only for those acts of his employee which are committed with'in the scope of their employment relationship. Under the common carrier exception to respondeat superior, however, the range of employee activities deemed to be under the employer's dominion is irrelevant. Liability is predicated on the passenger's surrender and the carrier's assumption of the responsibility for the passenger's safety, the ability to control his environment, and his personal autonomy in terms of protecting himself from harm; therefore, the employer can be held responsible for any violation by its employee of the earrier's non-delega-ble duty to protect the passenger, regardless of whether the act is within the scope of employment.
Id. at 253.
The Stropes court justified its extension of the common earrier exception to the facts before it as follows:
When Heritage accepted David as a resident of its facility, it was fully cognizant of the disabilities and infirmities he suffered which rendered him unable to care for himself and which, in fact, undoubtedly formed the basis of their relationship. Their "contract of passage" contemplated that the entire responsibility for David's comfort, safety and maintenance would be on Heritage and that the performance of these tasks would be delegated to its employees. Given the degree of David's lack of autonomy and his dependence on Heritage for care and the degree of Heritage's control over David and the cireumstances in which he found himself, we find that Heritage assumed a non-delegable duty to provide protection and care so as to fall within the common carrier exception. The standard of care which Heritage owed to David, therefore, was that actual care be used by Heritage and its employees to provide that protection. The trial court was in error to summarily reject his claim that such a duty existed.
Id. at 258-54. Here, Interim argues that neither it nor Baral assumed "the type of control and responsibility for the patient that was assumed" in Stropes. Specifically, Interim asserts it "never contracted for, nor agreed to assume, the entire responsibility for Kimberly's comfort and safety." Rather, "Interim's role in providing home health aides was merely to assist Kimberly with personal care activities." Interim again observes that Baral was responsible for nothing more than "babysitting" duties in caring for Kimberly while Karen "slept upstairs in the same house."
Nevertheless, given the severity of Kimberly's disabilities and infirmities (which undoubtedly formed the basis of the Moy-ers' relationship with Interim), the degree *435of Kimberly's dependence on Baral for her care, and the degree of Baral's control over Kimberly while in the Moyers' home, we conclude that Interim assumed a non-delegable duty to provide for Kimberly's care and safety. We are unpersuaded by Interim's argument that Interim was not responsible for Kimberly's around-the-clock care or medication and that Karen remained upstairs during Baral's visits. Kimberly was unable to provide for even her most basic needs or protect herself from harm and was thus entirely dependent on Interim's employees for her care and safety. The trial court properly denied Interim's motion for summary judgment on this issue.
III. Negligent Hiring and Retention
Finally, Interim contends that the trial court erred in denying its motion for summary judgment on this issue2 because its investigation of Baral's criminal and employment background revealed no history of misconduct. On her employment application, Baral listed Becky Shank ("Shank") and Regina Gordon ("Gordon") as professional references.3 In a letter dated August 7, 1995, Shank stated that she had known Baral for "a little over a year both in a personal and professional capacity" and that Baral had completed an internship at St. Francis College under her supervision. Shank described Baral as "responsible, honest, and hardworking" and noted that she "showed a genuine concern for the residents under her care, and did her best to see that she met those residents{'] needs{[.]" In a letter dated August 7, 1995, Gordon stated that she had known Baral for three years and that Baral had worked in social services and as a volunteer during a Salvation Army internship. Gordon stated that Baral was "very kind and friendly" and "quick to grasp new information," "carried out all instructions given her and did her work faithfully and enthusiastically," and "always went above and beyond the call of duty."
Notwithstanding these positive references, we conclude that there remains a genuine issue of material fact with respect to Interim's negligent hiring and retention of Baral. Viewing the evidence most favorable to the Moyers as the non-moving party, there is no indication that Interim contacted Tammie Logsdon, the supervisor listed for Baral's most recent employer, Your Friends and Neighbors, where she worked as a residential manager from March 1994 to July 1995. Moreover, the record does not conclusively establish that Interim contacted Baral's supervisors from the three remaining previous employers listed on her application form. In an affidavit, Interim vice president of operations Jon Canfield ("Canfield") stated that Interim "contacted Baral's previous employers and reviewed her professional references," 4 but there is no record of the previous employers' assessment of Baral. *436The extent of Interim's duty to inquire5 and whether Interim breached this duty are questions for a jury to determine. See Kinsey v. Bray, 596 N.E.2d 938, 944 (Ind.Ct.App.1992), trans. denied; see also Ashland Pipeline Co. v. Indiana Bell Tel. Co., 505 N.E.2d 483, 488 (Ind.Ct.App.1987) ("'The question then arises whether the person charged with the duty to inquire had knowledge or means of knowledge of which he did not avail himself, so that knowledge must be implied; such is a question of fact for the trier thereof."), trans. denied; Levinson v. Citizens Nat'l Bank of Evansville, 644 N.E.2d 1264, 1269 (Ind.Ct.App.1994) (recognizing cause of action for negligent hiring and retention of employee; "In order to prevail on this theory, the plaintiff must show that the defendant employer negligently retained an employee who the defendant knew was in the habit of misconducting himself."), trans. denied; Tindall v. Enderle, 162 Ind.App. 524, 526, 320 N.E.2d 764, 766 (1974) ("However, evidence of prior similar actions committed by an employee are often admissible to establish the employer's actual or constructive knowledge of the employee's propensity to commit a later act of negligence or violence as a basis for an action which asserts the negligent hiring or retention of such a person."), trans. denied. We therefore affirm the judgment of the trial court.6
Affirmed.
BARNES, J., concurs.
BAKER, J., concurs in result with separate opinion.
. As the Konkle court noted, "simply because an act could not have occurred without access to the employer's facilities does not bring it within the scope of employment." 672 N.E.2d at 457.
. We note that Interim's summary judgment motion addressed only the Moyers' claims for negligent hiring and retention and did not specifically address the claim of negligent training alleged in the Moyers' complaint.
. Interim's employment application form requests the applicant to list as professional references the names of two licensed nurses "[elxcluding former employers or relatives." There is no indication that either Shank or Gordon is a licensed nurse.
. Canfield's affidavit suggests that Shank was Baral's employer at Your Friends and Neighbors, but the record does not indicate whether Shank was associated with this entity or whether Baral was employed with this entity as part of her internship with St. Francis College, from which she graduated in May 1995.
. We note that Interim does not dispute the existence of such a duty in this case.
. Because we conclude that Interim failed to demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact on this issue, we need not consider the evidence designated by the Moyers in response to Interim's summary judgment motion.

=== CASE 9741211 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:39.100933+00 ===

BAKER, Judge,
concurring in result.
I concur with Parts I and II of the majority opinion, and I vote to affirm the trial court's denial of summary judgment on the claim of negligent hiring and retention. However, unlike the majority, I believe that Interim's motion for summary judgment produced evidence demonstrating an absence of a genuine issue of a material fact on at least one issue of the negligent. hiring and retention claim-proximate cause. See maj. op., at 486 n. 6. Therefore, the Moyers were required to come forward with designated evidence demonstrating a genuine issue of material fact. Because they came forward with such designated evidence, their claim rightly survived summary judgment.
While acknowledging Baral's two positive professional references and an absence of eriminal history, the majority concludes that Interim failed to demonstrate a genuine issue of material fact regarding the claim for negligent hiring and retention. In reaching its conclusion the majority reasons, "[There is no indication that Interim contacted Tammie Logsdon, the supervisor listed for Baral's most recent employer." Maj. op., at 485. The majority also finds support in that "the record does not conclusively establish that Interim contacted Baral's supervisors from the three remaining previous employers listed on her application form." Id.
However, assuming that Interim had a duty to eall Baral's previous employers, the Barals were still required to come forward with evidence showing that these former employers would have revealed negative employment information. In my view, the logical extension of the majority's *437reasoning would allow claims for negligent hiring and retention to survive summary judgment whenever a defendant failed to show that it spoke to an employee's former employers. In other words, the claim would survive summary judgment even if the former employers ultimately would not have given information showing an employee's propensity to commit criminal acts or misconduct.
Here, Interim's Vice President of Operations stated that the company had contacted Baral's previous employers and reviewed her professional references. He also declared, "There was nothing in Baral's history to indicate a habit of misconduct or a propensity to commit an intentional criminal act." These statements necessarily demonstrate a lack of a genuine issue of material fact on proximate causation. Put differently, if there was nothing in Baral's history to put Interim on notice of her propensity for misconduct or committing criminal acts, then Interim could not have proximately caused the Moyers' injuries. Accordingly, the Moyers were required to come forward with contrary evidence about whether Interim's purported failure to call certain recent employers led to the Moyers' injuries. See Warner Trucking, Inc. v. Carolina Cas. Ins. Co., 686 N.E.2d 102, 104 (Ind.1997). The Moyers did so by including two affidavits from employees of Your Friends and Neighbors, Inc., Baral's most recent employer. These former co-workers recounted several unusual incidents, including two deaths, involving Baral's care of patients. For instance, one individual with autism, having no history of seizures, suffered a seizure under Baral's sole care and later stated to the Baral's co-worker, "Michele not hit me so hard."
Though the Moyers came forward with designated evidence creating a genuine issue of material fact on each element of the negligent hiring and retention claim, the majority does not require this production of contrary designated evidence from the Moyers. Rather, the majority concludes that Interim failed to demonstrate a genuine issue of material fact on each element of the Moyers' claim of negligent hiring and retention-a conclusion I disagree with. In effect, the majority has found a duty and breach of that duty; but, without the Moyers' evidentiary designations, there is no contrary evidence that such breach proximately caused the Moyers' injuries. So without requiring contrary designated evidence from the Moyers, then under these cireumstances the majority has dispensed with the element of proximate cause in the tort of negligent hiring and retention. In the end, the Moyers' designated material was sufficient to demonstrate a genuine issue of material fact on proximate cause.

=== CASE 2226587 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:12.821374+00 ===

557 N.W.2d 114 (1996)
219 Mich. App. 415
Charles Davey JENKS, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Dr. Viktor BROWN and Henry Ford Health System, Inc., Defendants-Appellees.
Docket No. 180927.
Court of Appeals of Michigan.
Submitted June 19, 1996, at Detroit.
Decided October 11, 1996, at 9:30 a.m.
Released for Publication December 23, 1996.
*115 Googasian, Hopkins, Hohauser & Forhan by Craig M. Weber, Bloomfield Hills, for plaintiff-appellant.
Kitch, Drutchas, Wagner & Kenney, P.C. by Susan Healy Zitterman, Detroit, for defendants-appellees.
Before WAHLS, P.J., and MURPHY and C.D. CORWIN,[*] JJ.
PER CURIAM.
Plaintiff appeals as of right from the trial court's order granting summary disposition in favor of defendants. We affirm. In his complaint, plaintiff alleges a failure to warn in violation of § 946 of Michigan's Mental Health Code, M.C.L. § 330.1946; M.S.A. § 14.800(946).
*116 Plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in concluding that plaintiff failed to state a cause of action. We disagree. Defendants filed a motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(8) and (10). Because the trial court did not look beyond the pleadings in granting defendants' motion, we review this issue pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(8). See Brown v. Drake-Willock Int'l, Ltd., 209 Mich.App. 136, 143, 530 N.W.2d 510 (1995); Shirilla v. Detroit, 208 Mich.App. 434, 436-437, 528 N.W.2d 763 (1995).
A motion for summary disposition brought under MCR 2.116(C)(8) relies on the pleadings alone, and all well-pleaded factual allegations in a complaint are taken as true, as well as any reasonable inferences or conclusions that can be drawn from the allegations. Peters v. Dep't of Corrections, 215 Mich.App. 485, 486, 546 N.W.2d 668 (1996). A motion for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(8) should be granted only when the claim is so clearly unenforceable as a matter of law that no factual development could possibly justify a right of recovery. Peters, p. 487, 546 N.W.2d 668. This Court reviews a grant of summary disposition de novo on appeal. Id., p. 486, 546 N.W.2d 668.
Plaintiff's complaint alleges that his marriage to Diane Loncar produced one child, a son born in 1984. On October 13, 1987, plaintiff and Loncar were divorced. The judgment of divorce was modified in 1991 to award physical custody of the child to plaintiff and to deny visitation rights to Loncar. Until June 1, 1991, Loncar received psychiatric treatment from defendant Brown. Plaintiff alleges that during her treatment, Loncar told defendants that she intended to kidnap her child and take him "underground."
To establish a prima facie case of negligence, the plaintiff must prove: (1) that the defendant owed a duty to the plaintiff; (2) that the defendant breached that duty; (3) that the defendant's breach of duty was a proximate cause of the plaintiff's damages; and (4) that the plaintiff suffered damages. Baker v. Arbor Drugs, Inc., 215 Mich.App. 198, 203, 544 N.W.2d 727 (1996). Duty is any obligation that the defendant has to the plaintiff to avoid negligent conduct. Simko v. Blake, 448 Mich. 648, 655, 532 N.W.2d 842 (1995); Baker, supra, p. 203, 544 N.W.2d 727. In negligence actions, the existence of a duty is a question of law for the court. Simko, supra, p. 655, 532 N.W.2d 842; Baker, supra, p. 203, 544 N.W.2d 727.
Plaintiff's claim alleges that defendants breached their duty under M.C.L. § 330.1946; M.S.A. § 14.800(946), which provides in pertinent part:
(1) If a patient communicates to a mental health professional who is treating the patient a threat of physical violence against a reasonably identifiable third person and the patient has the apparent intent and ability to carry out that threat in the foreseeable future, the mental health practitioner has a duty to take action as prescribed in subsection (2). Except as provided in this section, a mental health professional does not have a duty to warn a third person of a threat as described in this subsection or to protect the third person.
The question of to whom a mental health practitioner owes a duty under this statute is one of first impression.
When courts construe statutory meaning, their primary goal is to ascertain and give effect to legislative intent. Institute in Basic Life Principles, Inc. v. Watersmeet Twp. (After Remand), 217 Mich.App. 7, 12, 551 N.W.2d 199 (1996). This Court should look first to the specific statutory language to determine the intent of the Legislature. Id. In order to ascertain legislative intent, this Court may examine the legislative history of an act to ascertain the reason for the act and the meaning of its provisions. In re Brzezinski, 214 Mich.App. 652, 665, 542 N.W.2d 871 (1995). A court may consider journals chronicling legislative history. Id.
Enacted in 1989, the duty to warn statute was created to limit the liability of mental health practitioners. House Legislative Analysis, HB 4237, July 11, 1989. In prior years, the commonlaw duty to warn had been extended in some cases to unnamed third parties and even to property. Id. In response to these developments, the duty to warn statute limited a mental health practitioner's *117 duty to that as provided in the statute. M.C.L. § 330.1946(1); M.S.A. § 14.800(946)(1). Furthermore, in order for any duty to arise, a patient must communicate "a threat of physical violence against a reasonably identifiable third person." Id. It is apparent from the language of the statute and its legislative history that it is intended to protect only those readily identifiable individuals against whom a threat of physical violence is made. See Marcelletti v. Bathani, 198 Mich.App. 655, 661, 500 N.W.2d 124 (1993).
In his complaint, plaintiff does not allege that Loncar communicated to defendant Brown a threat of physical violence against plaintiff. Rather, the child is the only "reasonably identifiable third person" against whom Loncar allegedly communicated any kind of threat. Taking plaintiff's well-pleaded facts to be true, we hold that defendants did not owe a duty to plaintiff under M.C.L. § 330.1946; M.S.A. § 14.800(946). In addition, plaintiff's claim is not asserted on behalf of his son, but on his own behalf. Accordingly, the trial court did not err in holding that plaintiff's complaint failed to state a cause of action. Simko, supra, p. 655, 532 N.W.2d 842; Peters, supra, p. 486, 546 N.W.2d 668; Baker, supra, p. 203, 544 N.W.2d 727. Because of our disposition of this issue, we need not address plaintiff's argument that a threat to kidnap constitutes a threat of physical violence.
Plaintiff also argues that the trial court erred in denying his motion to amend his complaint. We disagree. Amendment is generally a matter of right rather than grace. Patillo v. Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, 199 Mich.App. 450, 456, 502 N.W.2d 696 (1992). A trial court should freely grant leave to amend if justice so requires. MCR 2.118(A)(2). Leave to amend should be denied only for particularized reasons, such as undue delay, bad faith, or dilatory motive on the movant's part, repeated failure to cure deficiencies by amendments previously allowed, undue prejudice to the opposing party, or where amendment would be futile. Horn v. Dep't of Corrections, 216 Mich.App. 58, 65, 548 N.W.2d 660 (1996). This Court reviews grants and denials of motions for leave to amend pleadings for an abuse of discretion. Id.
Here, plaintiff's proposed amendments would be futile. Plaintiff sought leave to add to his complaint a count for loss of society and companionship under the Child Protection Law, M.C.L. § 722.621 et seq.; M.S.A. § 25.248(1) et seq. However, this statute "creates a private right of action only in an identified abused child." Marcelletti, supra, p. 661, 500 N.W.2d 124. Because plaintiff does not have a right of action under the Child Protection Law, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying his motion for leave to amend his complaint to add this count. Horn, supra, p. 65, 548 N.W.2d 660.
Plaintiff also sought leave to add to his complaint a count under a common-law theory of negligence. An injury to a child does not give the child's parent a cognizable claim for loss of consortium or society and companionship. Sizemore v. Smock, 430 Mich. 283, 285, 422 N.W.2d 666 (1988).
To the extent that plaintiff's proposed complaint alleges claims for damages other than for loss of consortium or society and companionship, an individual generally has no duty to protect another who is endangered by a third person's conduct. Marcelletti, supra, p. 664, 500 N.W.2d 124. A duty of reasonable care may arise where one stands in a special relationship with either the victim or the person causing the injury. Id. Michigan courts have established in this context a duty of reasonable care toward only those third parties who are "readily identifiable as foreseeably endangered." Id., p. 665, 500 N.W.2d 124.
Danger to a third person is foreseeable only where the psychiatrist determines, or pursuant to the standards of his profession should determine, that his patient presents a serious danger of violence to another. Davis v. Lhim, 124 Mich.App. 291, 303, 335 N.W.2d 481 (1983), rev'd on other grounds sub. nom Canon v. Thumudo, 430 Mich. 326, 422 N.W.2d 688 (1988). Because there was no serious danger of violence to plaintiff, any special relationship that may have existed between defendants and plaintiff's *118 son did not extend to plaintiff. As the Court stated in Sizemore, supra, pp. 292-293, 422 N.W.2d 666, "although it is eminently foreseeable that a negligent injury to one party will result in adverse consequences that affect others to one degree or another, the law cannot redress every injury." Accordingly, we hold that plaintiff's proposed amendment to add a count under a common-law theory of negligence was futile.[1]Marcelletti, supra, pp. 664-665, 500 N.W.2d 124; Davis, supra, p. 303, 335 N.W.2d 481. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying plaintiff's motion for leave to amend his complaint to add this count. Horn, supra, p. 65, 548 N.W.2d 660.
Affirmed.
NOTES
[*]  Circuit judge, sitting on the Court of Appeals by assignment.
[1]  We do not address in this opinion whether a claim brought against a mental health practitioner under a common-law theory of failure to warn is superseded by M.C.L. § 330.1946; M.S.A. § 14.800(946).

=== CASE 2226589 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:12.867326+00 ===

206 Wis. 2d 292 (1996)
557 N.W.2d 412
S.C. JOHNSON & SON, INC., Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
TOWN OF CALEDONIA, a Wisconsin municipality, Defendant-Appellant.[]
No. 95-2700.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs July 25, 1996.
Decided October 23, 1996.
*295 On behalf of the defendant-appellant, the cause was submitted on the briefs Alan Macuvitz and Robert L. Gordon of Weiss, Berzowski, Brady & Donahue of Milwaukee.
On behalf of the plaintiff-respondent, the cause was submitted on the brief of Timothy C. Frautschi of Foley & Lardner of Milwaukee.
An amicus curiae brief on behalf of the League of Wisconsin Municipalities was filed by Curtis A. Witynski of Madison.
Before Anderson, P.J., Nettesheim and Snyder, JJ.
NETTESHEIM, J.
The issue on appeal is whether a property owner may challenge a real estate property tax assessment by commencing a de novo action in the circuit court pursuant to § 74.37(3)(d), STATS. Rejecting the Town of Caledonia's argument that the property owner, S.C. Johnson & Son, Inc., was limited to a certiorari review proceeding pursuant to § 70.47(13), STATS., the circuit court held that a de novo action was permitted.
The circuit court also rejected the Town's alternative argument that the de novo procedure violated the uniformity of taxation clause of the Wisconsin Constitution, art. VIII, § 1. On this issue, the court ruled that the Town did not have standing to raise the constitutionality argument. Alternatively, the court ruled that the de novo procedure did not violate the uniformity clause.
We have previously granted the Town's petition for leave to appeal the circuit court's nonfinal order. We uphold all of the court's rulings. We remand for further proceedings on Johnson's complaint.
*296 FACTS
Johnson owns property in the Town of Caledonia, Racine County. Johnson challenged the Town's 1994 assessment of its property. The Board of Review rejected Johnson's challenge and sustained the assessment. Johnson then paid the disputed assessment and filed a claim with the Town pursuant to § 74.37(2), STATS., for a refund of the challenged portion of the tax. The Town denied the claim.
Johnson then filed the instant action in the circuit court. However, Johnson did not seek the usual form of certiorari judicial review pursuant to § 70.47(13), STATS. Instead, Johnson commenced a conventional civil action by serving and filing a summons and complaint against the Town. Johnson alleged that the Town had imposed an excessive tax and seeks a refund of the disputed portion of the tax. Johnson claims that it is entitled to a full trial de novo pursuant to § 74.37(3)(d), STATS. The Town challenged this procedure and asked the trial court to construe Johnson's action as a certiorari action limited to a review of the record generated before the Board of Review.
The circuit court denied the Town's request. The court ruled that § 74.37(3)(d), STATS., permits a property owner to obtain a trial de novo in the circuit court to recover the amount of the claim not allowed by the Town. The Town appeals. The League of Wisconsin Municipalities has participated in this appeal as amicus curiae.
*297 DISCUSSION
Statutory Construction
[1, 2]
The question presented is one of first impression in Wisconsin. The issue involves the interpretation and reconciliation of §§ 70.47(13) and 74.37(3)(d), STATS. The interpretation of a statute presents a question of law which we review without deference to the trial court's ruling. Goff v. Seldera, 202 Wis. 2d 601, 617, 550 N.W.2d 144, 151 (Ct. App. 1996). Nonetheless, despite our de novo standard of review, we value a trial court's decision on a question of law. Scheunemann v. City of West Bend, 179 Wis. 2d 469, 475-76, 507 N.W.2d 163, 165 (Ct. App. 1993).
Section 70.47(13), STATS., provides:
CERTIORARI. Except as provided in s. 70.85, appeal from the determination of the board of review shall be by an action for certiorari commenced within 90 days after the taxpayer receives the notice under sub. (12). The action shall be given preference. If the court on the appeal finds any error in the proceedings of the board which renders the assessment or the proceedings void, it shall remand the assessment to the board for further proceedings in accordance with the court's determination and retain jurisdiction of the matter until the board has determined an assessment in accordance with the court's order. For this purpose, if final adjournment of the board occurs prior to the court's decision on the appeal, the court may order the governing body of the assessing authority to reconvene the board. [Emphasis added.]
Section 74.37, STATS., provides, in part:
*298 (2) CLAIM. (a) A claim for an excessive assessment may be filed against the taxation district, or the county that has a county assessor system, which collected the tax.
. . . .
(3) ACTION ON CLAIM. (a) In this subsection, to "disallow" a claim means either to deny the claim in whole or in part or to fail to take final action on the claim within 90 days after the claim is filed.
. . . .
(d) If the taxation district or county disallows the claim, the claimant may commence an action in circuit court to recover the amount of the claim not allowed. The action shall be commenced within 90 days after the claimant receives notice by registered or certified mail that the claim is disallowed. [Emphasis added.]
The appellate issue turns on the meaning of the word "action" in subsec. (3)(d) of § 74.37, STATS. Johnson argues that this language authorizes a full trial de novo in the circuit court, including a jury trial if requested.
The Town argues that this language simply refers to the traditional certiorari form of judicial review recognized by § 70.47(13), STATS. The Town contends that the trial de novo procedure represents "a radical departure from long-settled procedure." Specifically, the Town contends that a de novo procedure: (1) violates principles of issue preclusion, (2) converts the Board's role from that of an independent arbiter of the assessment dispute into that of a defender of the assessor's valuation, (3) bars the remand procedures which certiorari permits, and (4) eliminates the presumptions which the law presently accords to the assessment.
The League of Municipalities shares the concerns voiced by the Town. However, the League candidly *299 acknowledges that the statutes, together with relevant legislative history and case law, may well support Johnson's argument. We now examine these sources.
We begin with Pelican Amusement Co. v. Town of Pelican, 13 Wis. 2d 585, 109 N.W.2d 82 (1961). There, the supreme court addressed § 74.73(1), STATS., 1957, the predecessor statute to the present § 74.37, STATS. That statute permitted an action for the recovery of illegal taxes paid. Pelican, 13 Wis. 2d at 591, 109 N.W.2d at 85. The court said:
Prior to 1955, § 74.73(4) required an allegedly excessive assessment to be reviewed by an appeal from the determination of the board of review by a writ of certiorari to the circuit court. By ch. 440, Laws of 1955, the provision that required an appeal from the determination of the board of review was eliminated.
Id. at 593, 109 N.W.2d at 86 (emphasis added).
The legislative history of § 74.37, STATS., supports the supreme court's statement in Pelican. In 1953, the legislature enacted § 74.73(4), STATS., which expressly stated that no claim or action could be brought based upon an allegedly excessive assessment. Laws of 1953, ch. 435, § 2. The statute further stated that "[t]he amount of an assessment shall be reviewed by appeal from the determination of the board of review . . . ." Id. However, in 1955, the legislature repealed this statute. See Laws of 1955, ch. 440. The legislative history accompanying this repeal demonstrates that the action was taken with the intent to allow the circuit court to take testimony and make findings of fact in assessment *300 cases.[1]See Drafting Request, microformed on Laws of 1955, ch. 440 (Leg. Ref. Bureau).
Finally, in 1987, the legislature enacted § 74.37, STATS., in its current form. Consistent with the Pelican holding, subsec. (3)(d) of this statute authorizes an action in circuit court to collect the amount of the claim not allowed. The history accompanying this enactment states that the statute embodies the Pelican rule which envisions the alternative methods of judicial review. 1987 Wis. Act 378, § 74.37 (notes following).
Other language in § 74.37(4)(a), STATS., when compared with the certiorari statute, § 70.47(13), STATS., supports this interpretation. Section 74.37(4)(a) provides:
No claim or action for an excessive assessment may be brought under this section unless the procedures for objecting to assessments under s. 70.47, except under s. 70.47(13), have been complied with. [Emphasis added.]
By this language, the legislature has required an objecting taxpayer to comply with all of the provisions of § 70.47 governing board of review proceedings before commencing an action "under this section." Section 74.37(4)(a). However, the legislation provided one notable exceptionthe taxpayer need not comply with *301 certiorari procedures set out in § 70.47(13). Since the legislature eliminated the certiorari method of judicial review by this language, it must have contemplated another. This, of course, is exactly what subsec. (3)(d) accomplishes by providing for a separate action in the circuit court.
Section 74.37, STATS., carries other language which, in our judgment, signals the legislative intent to create a separate and distinct method of judicial review. For instance, before an action under § 74.37 may be commenced, the taxpayer must first pay the disputed tax and comply with the claim procedures set out in the statute. Section 74.37(4)(b). Section 70.47, STATS., carries no such requirement.
Finally, and most telling, § 74.37(4)(c), STATS., amended by 1995-96 WIS. ACT 408, § 9, provides that no action may be brought under that statute if the taxpayer has contested the assessment for the same year under § 70.47(13), STATS., the certiorari statute. This clearly signals that the legislature contemplated alternative methods of judicial review at the option of the taxpayer.
[3]
We therefore agree with the circuit court that § 74.37(3)(d), STATS., allows for a trial de novo as a means of judicial review when the taxpayer claims an excessive tax.
We are not unmindful of the anomalies which a de novo procedure presents when compared with the certiorari method of judicial review. However, it is not our function to rewrite the statute where the correct construction is clearly indicated by language of the statute itself, its legislative history and the relevant case law.
*302 Constitutional Issues
Having rejected the Town's statutory construction argument, we turn to the Town's constitutional arguments.
1. Standing
First, however, we must address the trial court's threshold ruling that the Town lacked standing to raise its constitutional challenge. The court premised its ruling on the principle that a municipality, as a creature of the legislature, may not argue that a statute is unconstitutional. Village of West Milwaukee v. Area Bd. of Vocational, Technical & Adult Educ., 51 Wis. 2d 356, 365, 187 N.W.2d 387, 390 (1971).
The Town contends that the "no standing" rule should not apply in this case because it did not challenge the constitutionality of § 74.37, STATS. We agree with the Town that its principal line of defense was its statutory construction argument which did not raise any constitutional issue. However, if the trial court rejected that argument, the Town's alternative argument was that Johnson's interpretation of the statute produced a constitutional violation of the uniformity clause. Thus, the Town did introduce the constitutional question into this case.
In similar situations where a municipality sought to defend a taxpayer's suit by raising claims of unconstitutionality, the Wisconsin Supreme Court has analyzed the question under the "no standing" rule and its exceptions. See, e.g., Fulton Found. v. Department of Taxation, 13 Wis. 2d 1, 11, 108 N.W.2d 312, 317 (1961); Associated Hosp. Serv., Inc. v. City of Milwaukee, 13 Wis. 2d 447, 469, 109 N.W.2d 271, 282 (1961). We will do likewise in this case.
*303 [4, 5]
The "no standing" rule is absolute in cases between an agency or a municipality and the state. See Village of West Milwaukee, 51 Wis. 2d at 365, 187 N.W.2d at 390. The rule also applies in cases between a municipality and a private citizen, but is subject to two exceptions. Id. The rule does not apply: (1) when the governmental agency has a duty to raise the issue, or the agency will be personally affected if it fails to do so, and the statute is held invalid; and (2) if the issue is of "great public concern." Id.
Here, although the Town has substantial powers regarding the imposition and collection of real estate taxes, it is not "charged by any statute with the duty of determining the validity of any tax statute it administers." Fulton, 13 Wis. 2d at 13, 108 N.W.2d at 318. Nor would the Town or any of its employees "be held personally liable if they failed to do so." Id. We conclude the first exception does not apply.
The second exception applies in limited situations involving issues of great public concern. Id. In Fulton, the court determined that the constitutional questions of whether public funds could be diverted to a private purpose and whether a particular tax exemption violated equal protection of the laws both qualified as issues of great public concern. Id. at 13, 14(b), 108 N.W.2d at 318, 109 N.W.2d at 286 (on reconsideration). Likewise, in Associated Hosp., the court held that the issue of whether a particular tax exemption violated the uniformity clause was a great public concern. Associated Hosp., 13 Wis. 2d at 470, 109 N.W.2d at 282.
Obviously, the methods for judicial review of a board of review decision are important and of interest. However, it is not uncommon for the law to provide different and alternative procedures by which a litigant *304 may seek access to the courts. The issue before us does not present any substantive question involving the validity of the tax itself, the method of assessment, the allocation of exemptions, the collection of the tax or the disbursement of tax proceeds. Instead, the issue simply presents the question of whether alternative methods of obtaining judicial review of the valuation and assessment are available.
A further factor which we must consider is whether the constitutional issue is one which a taxpayer is likely, or able, to raise in the future. Fulton, 13 Wis. 2d at 14(b), 109 N.W.2d at 286; City of Madison v. Ayers, 85 Wis. 2d 540, 545, 271 N.W.2d 101, 103 (1978). We take judicial notice that judicial review proceedings of property tax assessments are routinely litigated in the circuit courts of this state. Section 74.37(6), STATS., bars a de novo action in counties with a population exceeding 500,000. Thus, Milwaukee county taxpayers are limited to a certiorari appeal. Therefore the constitutional issues raised by the Town and the League can be asserted by any Milwaukee county taxpayer in a future proceeding. Even in the face of the Town's constitutional arguments, we do not deem this issue to be one of those exceptional issues of great public concern such that the Town, as a creature of the state, should be permitted to challenge the very laws which it is obligated to administer.
[6]
We affirm the trial court's ruling that the Town and the League lack standing to challenge the constitutionality of § 74.37(3)(d), STATS.[2]
*305 2. Constitutionality
Despite its "no standing" holding, the circuit court alternatively addressed the Town's constitutional challenges on the merits. In the interest of completeness, we will do likewise.
The Town contends that the circuit court's ruling violates the uniformity clause of the Wisconsin Constitution, art. VIII, § 1.[3] Specifically, it contends that under the de novo procedure: (1) judges and juries, not assessors, make assessments; (2) judges and juries do not have the necessary information or experience to equalize property valuations and to make assessments; and (3) the disparate procedures of certiorari review and a de novo trial will necessarily produce nonuniform results.
Although the Town couches its argument in different terms, we conclude that the essence of this argument has already been addressed, and rejected, in Fontana v. Village of Fontana-on-Geneva Lake, 107 Wis. 2d 226, 319 N.W.2d 900 (Ct. App. 1982); aff'd on other grounds, 111 Wis. 2d 215, 330 N.W.2d 211 (1983). There, the circuit court originally declared an assessment void and ordered a reassessment. Fontana, 107 Wis. 2d at 229-30, 319 N.W.2d at 901. Upon further review, the court held that the reassessment was also invalid. The court then, sua sponte, determined the appropriate tax. Id. at 230, 319 N.W.2d at 902.
The Village challenged the constitutionality of the circuit court action under the uniformity clause. Id. at 239, 319 N.W.2d at 906. The Village argued that "the statutory authority of the trial court to determine reassessment violates the principle that only the legislature, not the judiciary, may levy taxes." Id.
*306 The court of appeals rejected this argument. The court said:
[A] judicial determination of the amount of taxes justly chargeable is not a levy' of taxes. A court, in determining the proper amount of taxes justly chargeable, is not making a determination as to the amount of assessment or the percentage of assessed value to be taxed, nor is it making a tax levy. A judicial determination which establishes a proper amount of tax does not constitute a direct court exercise of the power of taxation.
Id. at 239-40, 319 N.W.2d at 906.
Here, the Town argues that the circuit court's ruling functionally substitutes the judiciary for the assessor and the Board of Review. Fontana teaches that this is not so.
Last, the Town argues that the de novo process violates the uniformity requirement because § 74.37(6), STATS., bars an action under that statute in counties with a population exceeding 500,000. As such, the Town points out that Milwaukee county taxpayers are limited to a certiorari appeal. The League broadens this to an equal protection claim.
The question of classifications is primarily for the legislature both as to need and basis.
In considering the subject we must bear in mind that the policy of classification is a matter wholly within legislative discretion, and that whether there is room for the classification made in any given case is primarily a legislative question and can never become a judicial one except for the purpose of determining, in any given situation, whether legislative action passed the boundaries of *307 reason, reasonable doubts to be resolved in the negative.
Servonitz v. State, 133 Wis. 231, 239, 113 N.W. 277, 280 (1907).
[7]
For purposes of equal protection, there need only be a rational relationship between the classification and a legitimate government purpose. Love, Voss & Murray v. DOR, 195 Wis. 2d 189, 196, 536 N.W.2d 126, 129 (Ct. App. 1995).
In State ex rel. Johnson v. Cady, 50 Wis. 2d 540, 185 N.W.2d 306 (1971), the supreme court considered a statute which provided probation violators in counties of less than 500,000 with judicial hearings while those violators in counties with more than 500,000 received only administrative hearings. Id. at 550, 185 N.W.2d at 311. Rejecting an equal protection challenge, the court said that territorial uniformity in the administration of justice was not a constitutional requisite. Id. at 551, 185 N.W.2d at 312. The court further stated:
Diversities which are allowable in different States are allowable in different parts of the same State . . . . Large cities may require a multiplication of courts and a peculiar arrangement of jurisdictions. It would be an unfortunate restriction of the powers of the State government if it could not, in its discretion, provide for these various exigencies.
Id. (quoted source omitted).
Likewise, in Knowlton v. Board of Supervisors, 9 Wis. 378 [*410], 389 [*421] (1859), the supreme court said the constitution of this state requires, as a rule, in levying taxes that "[t]he valuation must be uniform, the rate must be uniform. Thus uniformity in such a proceeding becomes equality . . . operating alike upon *308 the taxable property throughout the territorial limits of the state, municipality or local subdivision of the government, within and for which the tax is to be raised." (Emphasis added.) Therefore, under this rule of review, any Milwaukee county taxpayer challenging the legislative scheme for judicial review would necessarily be limited to the procedures applicable in that taxing district. An equal protection argument would necessarily fail under that standard since all Milwaukee county taxpayers are governed by the same certiorari procedure. Thus, there is no uniformity or equal protection violation.
[8]
It is important to remember that the distinction which the legislature has created does not accord judicial review to certain citizens and withhold it from others. Were that the case, serious constitutional problems would undoubtedly exist. Rather, the legislative distinction deals with the method by which the right of judicial review is pursued. Given the deference which the law accords classifications based on population, we see nothing irrational or arbitrary in the legislative scheme at issue in this case. Johnson, 50 Wis. 2d at 553, 185 N.W.2d at 313. Thus, there is no equal protection or uniformity violation.
By the Court.Order affirmed and cause remanded.
NOTES
[]  Petition to review denied.
[1]  The bill drafter's notes reflect that in a phone conversation, Lt. Governor Warren Knowles instructed him to reform ch. 435, Laws of 1953 to provide that the "circuit judge make [sic] take testimony and make finding of fact in assessment cases. Now appeals of Bd of Rev can only remand to Bd for new assessment. Amend ch. 435 so that in certiorari in cir[cuit] c[our]t the court has authority to weigh evidence and make a final determination of the facts." See Drafting Request, microformed on Laws of 1955, ch. 440 (Leg. Ref. Bureau).
[2]  Given its representative status as an entity which speaks for Wisconsin municipalities, we hold the League to the same standing limitations as the Town.
[3]  The League joins in these constitutional arguments.

=== CASE 9741212 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:41.07469+00 ===

JUSTICE O’MARA FROSSARD delivered the opinion of the court: Petitioner, William Devoney, a former Chicago police lieutenant, appeals the circuit court’s decision to affirm the order of the Retirement Board of the Policemen’s Annuity and Benefit Fund of the City of Chicago (Board) denying him pension benefits as a result of his federal conviction for mail fraud. Petitioner contends the Board’s interpretation of section 5—227 of the Illinois Pension Code (Code) (40 ILCS 5/5—227 (West 1998)) regarding the relationship of felony convictions to forfeiture of pension benefits was contrary to law, that the Board’s decision to apply the forfeiture provisions of section 5—227 of the Code (40 ILCS 5/5—227 (West 1998)) was against the manifest weight of the evidence and that he was entitled to prejudgment interest pursuant to section 2 of the Interest Act (815 ILCS 205/2 (West 1998)). We affirm. Petitioner was appointed to the Chicago police department in 1960 and attained the rank of lieutenant. On October 20, 1994, petitioner and 24 other persons were indicted by a federal grand jury for conspiracy to commit insurance fraud. Petitioner was named in one count charging mail fraud. He resigned from the police department the following month. On November, 7, 1994, petitioner entered into a written plea agreement with the United States Attorney’s office and pied guilty to the charge of mail fraud. In August 1995, the Board refused petitioner’s application for retirement benefits on the basis of this felony conviction. Petitioner testified at a hearing before the Board in September 1995 that he pied guilty to one count of the 61-count federal indictment. This count charged that petitioner and two others, Matt Raimondi and David Ballog, Jr., devised a scheme to defraud and obtain money from an insurance company. Ballog approached petitioner about the scheme to defraud, and petitioner agreed to participate. The count alleged that, as part of the scheme, petitioner conspired with his neighbor, Raimondi, and Ballog to give a false report about the place of a personal injury accident involving petitioner’s wife, caused a physician to change a report about the place of the accident, and spoke with insurance adjustors relating to the claim. Petitioner also used the United States Postal Service to mail evidence of wage losses. Ballog pretended to be petitioner’s brother-in-law and helped negotiate a $70,000 settlement for the false claim regarding personal injury to petitioner’s wife. On November 7, 1994, petitioner entered into a plea agreement with the United States Attorney’s office and admitted to the facts alleged within the indictment. On June 21, 1995, the federal district court sentenced petitioner to 16 months of imprisonment, plus supervised release and restitution. The Board had before it the indictment and the sentencing transcript. Petitioner admitted before the Board that he was a police officer entitled to carry a weapon at the time of the fraud and part of his duties were to arrest those who committed crimes in his presence. Petitioner next testified that he had known codefendant David Ballog for 10 years, and he knew that Ballog gambled on horse races, but otherwise had no knowledge of Ballog’s criminal activity. After petitioner’s wife broke her ankle, Ballog proposed a scheme to defraud an insurance carrier. Petitioner admitted that he did not arrest or report Ballog to the authorities. In connection with this false claim, petitioner spoke with the insurance adjustor. In response to a question from the insurance adjustor, he informed the adjustor that he was a lieutenant with the Chicago police department, but he never met with the adjustor while in uniform. Petitioner did not witness his wife’s fall, and his neighbor, Raimondi, with petitioner’s knowledge, submitted a false claim to his insurance carrier regarding petitioner’s wife. Petitioner did not arrest or report Raimondi. On July 23, 1998, the Board voted to deny petitioner’s application. In a seven-page order, the Board stated that it reviewed the indictment, petitioner’s plea agreement, and the transcript of petitioner’s sentencing hearing. During the sentencing hearing, the victim of a March 1994 sexual assault testified she believed that petitioner had interviewed her under a false name in an attempt to get her to withdraw her identification of her assailant, who was related to Ballog. Petitioner disputed this testimony and called witnesses to demonstrate that he did not interview the sexual assault victim. The retired police officer whom petitioner was alleged to have impersonated testified that he was the one who interviewed the victim. This credibility issue was considered at length at the sentencing hearing, and the district court determined that the prosecution had proved by a preponderance of the evidence that petitioner interfered with the investigation of the sexual assault. The federal court increased petitioner’s sentence based on his obstruction of justice. Ballog testified at the sentencing hearing that in 1989 he asked petitioner to find out about an outstanding warrant against him. Petitioner loaned Ballog $5,000 for his mortgage payment and gave Ballog $8,500 from the insurance settlement of petitioner’s wife’s claim. The Board also considered the federal court’s finding that petitioner’s conduct regarding the sexual assault case was not directly involved with the fraud count, but that petitioner had obstructed justice by hiding the facts involved. The Board relied on section 5—227 of the Code, entitled “Felony conviction,” which states in part: “None of the benefits provided for in this Article shall be paid to any person who is convicted of any felony relating to or arising out of or in connection with his service as a policeman.” 40 ILCS 5/5—227 (West 1998). The Board then found that petitioner had engaged in a “scheme to defraud” which involved his “knowing use of his position as a Chicago Police Officer.” It further found that petitioner had obstructed justice in the sexual assault case. Petitioner was not considered to be a credible or truthful witness. The Board noted that petitioner’s statements about his relationship to Ballog and knowledge of Ballog’s criminal background were contradicted by the record. The Board found that petitioner’s “willingness to knowingly participate with others and to protect those co-conspirators was not in keeping with the activity of a police officer and his oath of office.” The Board also found that “but for the fact that [petitioner] was a Police Officer of high rank,” he would not have been in a position to participate in the scheme to defraud. The Board then denied petitioner’s claim for pension benefits. On August 18, 1998, petitioner brought his petition for administrative review. The circuit court found that the issue was whether petitioner was engaged in “activity relating to or arising out [of] or in connection with his services as a policeman.” The court summarized the facts in two cases and chose to follow Dvorak v. Retirement Board of the Policemen’s Annuity & Benefit Fund, 287 Ill. App. 3d 399, 405-06 (1997), where the board denied pension benefits to a retired policeman, rather than Cullen v. Retirement Board of the Policeman’s Annuity & Benefit Fund, 271 Ill. App. 3d 1105, 1108-09 (1995). The circuit court confirmed the Board’s decision and this appeal followed.  Petitioner contends that the Board improperly applied section 5—227 of the Code to the facts of this case. Although both parties maintain that the facts are not in dispute, petitioner asserts that the Board misstated certain facts in its order. The Board’s factual findings may be reversed only if they are contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. Abrahamson v. Illinois Department of Professional Regulation, 153 Ill. 2d 76, 88 (1992). A de nova standard of review is applied to the Board’s construction of the statute and determination of the law. Harrisburg-Raleigh Airport Authority v. Department of Revenue, 126 Ill. 2d 326, 331 (1989). In this analysis, we need not defer to the circuit court’s determination (Zaruba v. Village of Oak Park, 296 Ill. App. 3d 614, 622 (1998)), although substantial weight is given to an agency’s interpretation of a statute it administers. Stillo v. State Retirement Systems, 305 Ill. App. 3d 1003, 1006 (1999). Pension laws should be liberally construed in favor of those to be benefitted. Kozak v. Retirement Board of the Firemen’s Annuity & Benefit Fund, 95 Ill. 2d 211, 217 (1983).  We agree with the Board that, in the context of this case, the application of section 5—227 of the Code presents a mixed question of law and fact. See City of Belvidere v. Illinois State Labor Relations Board, 181 Ill. 2d 191, 205 (1998). The Board applies a two-part test when deciding the issue of whether a police officer’s pension benefits should be forfeited under the first paragraph of section 5—227. The Board first determines the factual circumstances giving rise to the police officer’s felony conviction, which, as this case demonstrates, may be in conflict. The Board then interprets and applies the statutory language “qny felony relating to or arising out of or in connection with his service as a policeman” to the facts of the case. Therefore, the proper standard of review is the clearly erroneous standard, which provides some deference to the Board’s experience and expertise. City of Belvidere, 181 Ill. 2d at 205. We believe that the Board’s factual findings were not clearly erroneous. The findings of fact to which petitioner primarily objects are that: (1) petitioner participated in a scheme to defraud over a long period of time; (2) petitioner obstructed justice with regard to “his conduct with Ballog and the rape case”; and (3) petitioner used his position as a Chicago police officer to further the insurance fraud scheme. There is no dispute over the fact that the insurance scheme in which petitioner was involved was completed within a period of months. In addition, Ballog testified at petitioner’s sentencing hearing that he had had a close relationship with petitioner since the early 1980s and that petitioner helped him resolve an outstanding warrant. Based on this record, the Board had sufficient evidence to conclude that Ballog approached petitioner to participate in the insurance fraud scheme because of their close, long-term relationship and that the scheme was completed within a period of months. Second, regarding the obstruction of justice issue, the Board basically adopted the factual findings of the federal district court, which, after a contested hearing, determined that petitioner obstructed justice. The testimony at petitioner’s hearing, therefore, provides ample evidence to support this conclusion. However, applying section 5—227, we may only consider petitioner’s felony conviction for mail fraud in determining whether he has forfeited his pension benefits. Petitioner had not been charged with or convicted of any felony related to obstructing justice regarding the sexual assault case, and thus the language of section 5—227 precludes us from considering this conduct in determining whether petitioner has forfeited his pension benefits. Therefore, petitioner’s conduct in obstructing justice in the sexual assault case is irrelevant to our analysis of whether petitioner has forfeited his benefits under section 5—227. The third factual finding that petitioner objects to is the Board’s finding that petitioner used his position as a Chicago police officer to further the insurance fraud. In the context of that finding petitioner disagrees with the Board’s legal interpretation of section 5—227 which raises the main issue in this appeal: whether the Board’s decision that petitioner’s mail fraud conviction related to, arose out of, or was in connection with his service as a policeman is clearly erroneous. Section 5—227 states as follows: “None of the benefits provided for in this Article shall be paid to any person who is convicted of any felony relating to Or arising out of or in connection with his service as a policeman. None of the benefits provided for in this Article shall be paid to any person who is convicted of any felony while in receipt of disability benefits. None of the benefits provided for in this Article shall be paid to any person who is convicted of any felony relating to or arising out of or in connection with the intentional and wrongful death of a police officer, either active or retired, through whom such person would become eligible to receive, or is receiving, an annuity under this Article.” 40 ILCS 5/5—227 (West 1998). Recently, in DiFiore v. Retirement Board of the Policemen’s Annuity & Benefit Fund, 313 Ill. App. 3d 546 (2000), the court addressed the second paragraph of section 5—227 in connection with whether a police officer was in receipt of disability benefits at the time of his felony conviction. In DiFiore, the Board did not contest that the police officer’s felony conviction for the aggravated criminal sexual assault of his niece did not trigger forfeiture under the first paragraph of section 5—227. Consequently, the court focused on the second paragraph of section 5—227; however, it also analyzed the purpose of the statute as a whole. The court reasoned that the “statute presupposes a nexus between the wrongful conduct and the receipt of state compensation or benefits.” DiFiore, 313 Ill. App. 3d at 551. The court, however, finding no nexus to justify a denial of pension benefits concluded that because “plaintiff was not receiving, nor was he eligible to receive, disability benefits at the time of his conviction, he does not fall within the purview of the statute and is entitled to his pension.” DiFiore, 313 Ill. App. 3d at 551. The court further explained that the purpose of section 5—227 is to deter public officials from breaching the public trust and to punish those who do and their beneficiaries by requiring forfeiture of pension benefits. DiFiore, 313 Ill. App. 3d at 551. In Cullen v. Retirement Board of the Policeman’s Annuity & Benefit Fund, 271 Ill. App. 3d 1105 (1995), the court addressed the first paragraph of section 5—227, which uses the phrase “any felony relating to or arising out of or in connection with his service as a policeman.” 40 ILCS 5/5—227 (West 1998). This language clearly contemplates a situation where a police officer could commit a felony unrelated to his duties as a law enforcement official. Cullen, 271 Ill. App. 3d at 1109. The court in Cullen considered the same question at issue here and determined whether petitioner’s felony conviction was related to his service as a policeman and thereby required denial of pension benefits under the felony conviction section of the Code. In Cullen, petitioner was involved in a traffic altercation and claimed he shot the victim in self-defense during the altercation. The jury in the criminal trial found Cullen guilty of first degree murder. Regarding the issue of pension benefits, the court in Cullen noted that the legislature in the first paragraph of section 5—227 limited the type of felony conviction that could disqualify a police officer from receiving pension benefits. Rather than only requiring the commission of “any felony,” as contained within the second paragraph of section 5—227, the legislature chose to limit forfeiture of benefits under the first paragraph as follows: “None of the benefits provided for in this Article shall be paid to any person who is convicted of any felony relating to or arising out of or in connection with his service as a policeman.” 40 ILCS 5/5— 227 (West 1998). The court in Cullen noted the petitioner did not identify himself as a police officer, was dressed in street clothes, and did not use his service revolver. The court in Cullen, based on the language of the statute and on the facts, concluded that petitioner’s felonious conduct of shooting a man did not trigger forfeiture under the first paragraph of section 5—227. We agree with Cullen’s interpretation and application of section 5—227 to the facts in that case. In this case, the trial court in affirming the Board’s decision relied on Dvorak-, however, we do not find Dvorak particularly instructive, because the reviewing court in Dvorak did not consider the issue presented in this case. In Dvorak, a police officer on leave of absence to serve as an under sheriff in the Cook County sheriff’s office was convicted of two felony counts of tax fraud and accepting bribes in the procurement of certain contracts. The officer was receiving his pension when he was convicted, and the Board terminated it. On appeal, the officer argued that he was on a leave of absence and, therefore, not a policeman, as defined by the Pension Code, at the time he committed the felonies. The circuit court disagreed and affirmed the denial of benefits. This court in Dvorak affirmed the circuit court and distinguished Cullen. “In Cullen, the issue was whether a police officer’s off-duty conduct was sufficiently related to his service as a policeman. In the instant case, however, plaintiff has argued to this court that the issue is whether any inactive policeman is within the purview of the Act.” Dvorak, 287 Ill. App. 3d at 405. The court in Dvorak did not consider whether the officer’s conduct was related to his service as a policeman; therefore, it provides little guidance for resolution of this question, and we elect to follow the court’s reasoning in Cullen. We agree with the conclusion in Cullen that the exemption provision of the first paragraph of section 5—227 is only triggered by a person’s conviction for a felony related to, arising out of, or in connection with that person’s service as a policeman. In construing a statue, the statutory language is the best indication of the drafter’s intent and unambiguous terms are to be given their plain and ordinary meaning. Cullen, 271 Ill. App. 3d at 1108. Every word, clause or sentence of a statute should be applied so that none is superfluous. Cullen, 271 Ill. App. 3d at 1109. In determining whether petitioner has forfeited his pension benefits under the first paragraph of section 5—227, we are limited to the conduct underlying petitioner’s felony conviction for mail fraud and must decide if this conduct was related to, arose out of, or was in connection with his service as a policeman. Petitioner was indicted for and convicted of a single count of mail fraud in violation of Title 18, United States Code, sections 1341 and 1342 (18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1342 (1994)). The elements of the offense of mail fraud are: (1) a scheme to defraud; and (2) use of the mail for the purpose of executing the scheme. Schmuck v. United States, 489 U.S. 705, 721, 103 L. Ed. 2d 734, 750, 109 S. Ct. 1443, 1453 (1989). As to the second element of the count which was the basis for petitioner’s conviction, we acknowledge that his use of the mail for the purpose of executing the scheme had nothing to do with his service as a policeman. However, mail fraud also requires the government to prove a scheme to defraud, which we believe in this case established conduct related to petitioner’s service as a policeman. The indictment alleged that petitioner devised and participated in a scheme with Ballog and Raimondi to defraud an insurance company and used false and fraudulent pretenses. In his plea agreement and his testimony before the Board, petitioner admitted that he “conspired” with Ballog and Raimondi. Petitioner further testified that Ballog approached him with the scheme and that petitioner agreed to participate with Ballog and Raimondi. At that point, petitioner did not arrest or report Ballog or Raimondi, but facilitated, allowed, encouraged, aided and abetted Ballog and Raimondi in committing a fraud against the insurance company. As a result of the scheme to defraud, petitioner collected $70,000 and split the money with Ballog and Raimondi. Therefore, petitioner’s conduct of entering into a scheme to defraud with others and carrying out the scheme went beyond a single act of individual, personal, criminal conduct while off duty. See Cullen, 271 Ill. App. 3d at 1109. Petitioner’s conduct involved the decision to act in concert with others rather than by himself and facilitate the criminal conduct of others. See DiFiore, 313 Ill. App. 3d at 551. We believe this conduct underlying the scheme to defraud involved ongoing criminal activity of Ballog and Raimondi committed in Devoney’s presence and thereby implicated petitioner’s duties as a police officer. The Illinois Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 provides the following: “It is the duty of every *** policeman *** when a criminal offense or breach of the peace is committed or attempted in his or her presence, forthwith to apprehend the offender and bring him or her before a judge, to be dealt with according to law; to suppress all riots and unlawful assemblies, and to keep the peace ***.” 725 ILCS 5/107—16 (West 1998). That section defines the duty of every police officer in connection with his service as a policeman. By participating in a scheme to defraud with others and concealing the scheme, petitioner breached his duty to report crime, which is a duty arising out of or in connection with his service as a policeman. The public demands faithfulness from police officers to their duty to report and arrest others involved in criminal activity. The purpose of section 5—227 is to deter public officials from breaching the public trust. DiFiore, 313 Ill. App. 3d at 551. This mail fraud scheme could not have been implemented had petitioner reported or arrested Ballog and Raimondi. Devoney admitted that he did not arrest or report his co-conspirators. During the course of the fraudulent scheme in response to a question from the insurance adjustor, Devoney told the insurance adjustor that he was a lieutenant with the Chicago police department, but he never met with the adjustor while in uniform. Regardless of whether Devoney was on duty or off duty, in uniform or not in uniform, the law required Devoney to report crime and arrest persons engaged in criminal conduct. The requirement to report crime and arrest persons engaged in criminal conduct is directly related to Devoney’s service as a policeman. The choice made by Devoney not to report or arrest Ballog and Raimondi therefore was related to Devoney’s service as a policeman. The evidence in the record demonstrates a nexus between petitioner’s wrongful conduct and his receipt of state benefits because his felony conviction was related to his duties as a policeman. Under section 107—16 it is the specific duty to arrest persons who commit crimes, as required of Devoney whether on duty or off duty, in connection with his service as a police officer, that renders Devoney’s conviction of mail fraud a felony conviction “relating to or arising out of or in connection with his service as a policeman” and thereby exempt from benefits under section 5—227. Our analysis is not based on a finding that section 107—16 describes criminal conduct. We are not saying that Devoney’s failure to arrest Ballog and Raimondi constituted the felony relating to his service as a policeman which triggers exemption from benefits under section 5—227. It is Devoney’s conviction for mail fraud that constitutes the felony conviction that triggers exemption from benefits under section 5—227 because the scheme to defraud established conduct related to Devoney’s service as a policeman. Devoney’s duty to arrest Ballog and Raimondi, while engaging in the criminal scheme to defraud was required of Devoney in connection with his service as a policeman under section 107—16 and that duty renders Devoney’s conviction of mail fraud a felony relating to or in connection with his service as a policeman.  Contrary to the conclusion reached by the dissent, we do not intend to overrule Cullen. We agree with the analysis and the conclusion reached in Cullen. However, Cullen differs factually from this case. Devoney, unlike Cullen, was not engaged in a personal matter of individual criminal conduct unrelated to his service as a policeman. Had Devoney engaged in mail fraud without co-conspirators, his conduct would be more analogous to the individual criminal conduct found in Cullen to be unrelated to Cullen’s service as a policeman. Here, Devoney chose over a period of months to conspire with others and allow others to engage in criminal conduct in direct violation of his duty as a police officer to arrest persons who commit crimes. 725 ILCS 5/107—16 (West 1998). Devoney’s choice to criminally conspire with Ballog and Raimondi and to allow them to engage in criminal activity without reporting or arresting them triggers application of section 5—227 and provides a factual basis for the Board’s conclusion that petitioner’s felony conviction was related to his service as a policeman. Therefore, based on the totality of the circumstances, we conclude that the Board’s decision to terminate petitioner’s benefits pursuant to the first paragraph of section 5—227 was not clearly erroneous. We need not decide the issue of prejudgment interest because we conclude that the Board properly terminated petitioner’s pension benefits. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is affirmed. Affirmed. COHEN, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741213 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:41.079482+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE McNULTY, dissenting: The majority has determined that the involvement of Devoney with Ballog and Raimondi related to Devoney’s service as a policeman because he did not arrest them or report them to other officers but, instead, facilitated, allowed, encouraged, aided and abetted them in committing a fraud against the insurance company. I cannot support the position of the majority that, if a policeman violates his statutory duties or his oath of office by failing to report a crime or arrest persons engaged in criminal conduct in which he was a participant, this constitutes a sufficient nexus between the crime and his service as a policeman to trigger the application of section 5—227 of the Pension Code. A policeman cannot commit any crime, felony or misdemeanor without violating his oath of office or his duties under section 107—16 of the Illinois Code of Criminal Procedure. 725 ILCS 5/107—16 (West 1998). The majority attempts to distinguish Cullen, 271 Ill. App. 3d 1105, on the basis that Cullen acted alone, but Devoney acted in concert with others. Nothing in section 107—16 limits its application to crimes committed by others or otherwise supports the distinction the majority tries to draw. If Devoney’s conduct related to his service as a policeman because he violated his duty under section 107—16 when he failed to arrest Ballog after he saw Ballog commit a crime, then Cullen’s conduct equally related to his service as a policeman, because he violated the same duty when he failed to arrest himself after he saw himself commit a crime. The majority’s approach effectively overrules Cullen, and that well-reasoned opinion deserves a better fate. As the majority concedes, there is little question that Devoney’s felonious act in furtherance of the scheme to defraud, the mailing of material relating to a false report of the circumstances of his wife’s accident, had nothing to do with his service as a policeman. His plea agreement contained no admission that he used his position as a police officer to facilitate the operation of the scheme. Under Cullen, the conviction is not related to Devoney’s service as a police officer, and therefore the Board committed clear error by deciding to terminate Devoney’s pension benefits. If a policeman is convicted of a felony while receiving disability benefits under the Pension Code he forfeits them. 40 ILCS 5/5—227 (West 1998). If he commits a felony while receiving pension benefits he forfeits them only if the felony of which he was convicted related to or arose out of or in connection with his service as a policeman. 40 ILCS 5/5—227 (West 1998). A comparison of the two paragraphs in the section shows that the legislature contemplated situations in which a policeman could be convicted of a felony having no connection to his responsibilities as a police officer and still retain the right to receive pension benefits. Cullen, 271 Ill. App. 3d at 1109. If the legislature had intended to provide that pension benefits were subject to forfeiture in the same manner as disability benefits, it could have so provided. It did not. This court has struggled to define the circumstances under which a felony committed by a police officer is sufficiently connected with the performance of police duties that it triggers forfeiture of pension benefits, as the special concurrences and dissents in cases involving this issue amply demonstrate. See, e.g., Dvorak, 287 Ill. App. 3d at 406 (Gordon, J., dissenting); Pascente v. Retirement Board of the Policemen’s Annuity & Benefit Fund, No. 1—95—4367 (1997) (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23) (Hoffman, J., specially concurring; South, J., dissenting). Legislation specifically governs pension benefits and their forfeiture. The separation between the legislative and judicial function is vital to our system of government and judges should not redraft the law to bring felonious conduct within the forfeiture provisions of the statute when its plain language as written does not so provide. As our supreme court has stated: “It is not for courts to pass upon what the *** laws ought to be, but to declare what they are.” People v. Wilcox, 237 Ill. 421, 428 (1908). Therefore, I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 9741214 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:42.555889+00 ===

Per Curiam.
On May 20, 1986, World Radio Laboratories, Inc., brought an accounting malpractice action against Coopers & Lybrand. In its petition, World Radio claimed that Coopers & Lybrand negligently prepared World Radio’s financial statements for fiscal years 1981 through 1984 and negligently failed to advise World Radio as to the inadequacy of its internal accounting controls.
The jury entered a verdict for World Radio and awarded damages of $0 for 1981, $10,300 for 1982, $12,000 for 1983, and $17,018,000 for 1984. Coopers & Lybrand filed a timely appeal. The Nebraska Court of Appeals affirmed the verdict of liability on the part of Coopers & Lybrand but concluded that the evidence was insufficient to support a damage award based on lost profits or a decrease in the value of World Radio. Concluding that the evidence did support an award for accounting expenses incurred to both Coopers & Lybrand and the successor accounting firm, Arthur Young, the court remanded the cause for determination of those fees. The court also held that *264the statute of limitations and the doctrine of contributory negligence did not bar recovery by World Radio. World Radio Labs, v. Coopers & Lybrand, 4 Neb. App. 34, 538 N.W.2d 501 (1995).
The Court of Appeals subsequently modified its opinion and held that World Radio failed to bring its negligence action for 1983 within the 2-year period prescribed by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 25-222 (Reissue 1995). Therefore, the court held, World Radio was prohibited from recovering any damages incurred for 1983. World Radio Labs. v. Coopers & Lybrand, 4 Neb. App. 264, 542 N.W.2d 78 (1996).
Both Coopers & Lybrand and World Radio have petitioned this court for further review. We agree with the Court of Appeals’ determination that Coopers & Lybrand was negligent in auditing World Radio for the years in question and that the evidence is insufficient as a matter of law to sustain a damage award for lost profits or a decrease in World Radio’s value. We also agree with that portion of the court’s opinion remanding this cause for a determination of fees paid to Arthur Young as a result of Coopers & Lybrand’s negligence. However, we modify that portion of the court’s opinion remanding this cause for a determination of the fees paid to Coopers & Lybrand for negligent work insofar as we determine the amount of those damages to be set at $42,000.
I. ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
On petition for further review, Coopers & Lybrand assigns numerous errors. In summary, Coopers & Lybrand argues that the trial court erred by (1) failing to grant Coopers & Lybrand’s motion for a directed verdict on World Radio’s claim that its alleged negligence caused World Radio’s damages, (2) failing to grant Coopers & Lybrand’s motion for a directed verdict on the issue of damages, and (3) failing to grant Coopers & Lybrand judgment on the issue of whether the statute of limitations barred recovery for 1981, 1982, and 1983.
In addition, Coopers & Lybrand argues that the Court of Appeals erred by (1) affirming liability for accounting malpractice on the theory that the negligent acts of World Radio’s chief financial officer could not be attributed to World Radio; (2) failing to grant Coopers & Lybrand’s motions for directed verdict *265and judgment notwithstanding the verdict, considering that the evidence offered to prove causation and damages was insufficient; and (3) remanding the cause for retrial on the issue of damages instead of reducing damages to the amount of the auditing fees.
In its petition for further review, World Radio also assigns numerous errors. In summary, World Radio argues that the Court of Appeals erred by (1) ruling that World Radio’s experts were insufficient as a matter of law, (2) disregarding precedent as to the issue of to what degree of certainty World Radio was required to prove its damages, (3) improperly instructing the jury on World Radio’s theory of damages, and (4) improperly overruling the district court’s decision that the statute of limitations did not bar World Radio’s claims for 1983.
II. BACKGROUND
1. World Radio in 1935 through 1979
World Radio was founded in 1935 when Leo Meyerson began selling radio parts out of his car to amateur and ham radio operators. After a brief interruption during World War II, World Radio reopened and began selling radio equipment and associated electronics by mail order on a worldwide basis.
Leo Meyerson’s son, Larry (Meyerson), joined the company in 1961. With the addition of Meyerson, World Radio quickly responded to the changing trends in the radio market. It was Meyerson that decided to enter the retail consumer electronic business by opening a retail store in Omaha, Nebraska, in 1967. In addition to selling radio equipment, this store also specialized in records, tapes, and stereo equipment.
The retail operations of World Radio expanded steadily throughout the 1970’s. Selling mostly stereo and hi-fi equipment, World Radio increased its sales from $1.4 million in 1971 to over $7 million in 1979. By 1979, World Radio was operating 10 retail stores in two states.
In response to this rapid growth, Meyerson, as president and majority shareholder, sought to “professionalize” the company by hiring new management members. One such member was Joseph Riha, a certified public accountant and former auditor with Coopers & Lybrand. Hired in 1979, Riha served as World *266Radio’s chief financial officer and remained in charge of the accounting department until June 1985.
2. World Radio in 1980 through 1985
The success of World Radio continued into the early 1980’s. Once again responding to changes in industry trends, the company expanded into television and video retail. This expansion proved to be quite successful, as evidenced by sales of $10,955,186 and $19,187,170 in 1982 and 1983, respectively. In addition, the number of retail stores in 1984 had increased to 24, with sales in that year totaling $34,223,889. It was Meyerson’s goal, as president of World Radio, to have 50 stores in operation by 1987.
In light of this success, Meyerson dreamed of “going public,” whereby shares of World Radio stock would be sold to the public. The funds raised by a public offering of World Radio stock would be used to help the company grow further. Meyerson discussed this “dream” with his auditors, Coopers & Lybrand, in 1983. While Coopers & Lybrand accountants advised Meyerson that such an offering could not be made until World Radio acquired $2 million in net profits, Meyerson remained hopeful because World Radio was expected to reap profits in the amount of $2 million by 1985. Despite his initial enthusiasm, Meyerson never drew up formal plans for a public offering or took any other steps in furtherance of his dream.
One of Riha’s first projects upon being hired as chief financial officer was the installment of a “sophisticated” computer system. Upon installation of this new system, World Radio’s cash registers at each retail location were tied to a mainframe in the company’s Council Bluffs, Iowa, headquarters. As a result, the system automatically recorded every sale that took place at each store. Once these were recorded, the computer system would generate a gross margin report that showed each item sold, the cost of merchandise sold, and the gross margin realized. Total figures of the gross margin for the sales of each store were then produced on a daily basis. This information was then interfaced with the general ledger in the computer to show the overall gross margin figures for the entire company. The system was also designed to offset all financial statements by the *267amount of World Radio’s outstanding debts or accounts payable.
World Radio often financed inventory purchases. Due to the large amount of inventory World Radio was purchasing during the early 1980’s, the company often financed its inventory from outside sources using a “floor plan.” Under this approach, World Radio would enter into an agreement with a finance company whereby any goods purchased from a supplier would be delivered to World Radio but charged to the finance company. The finance company would pay the supplier, receiving a cash discount. World Radio would then pay the finance company according to the terms provided in the agreement between the parties. By using such a plan, World Radio received goods at a cheaper rate than if purchased directly from the supplier.
In January 1984, World Radio floor planned its inventory and entered into an unsecured inventory agreement with Westinghouse Credit Corporation (Westinghouse). Under this agreement, Westinghouse paid World Radio’s suppliers for purchased inventory, and Westinghouse, not World Radio, received the cash discount offered by the supplier. Westinghouse then billed World Radio for the full purchase price, to be paid in three equal installments.
Due to the use of installment payments, Riha claimed World Radio’s sophisticated computer system could not keep track of the debt owed to Westinghouse. Thus, World Radio kept track of the Westinghouse account payable in a rudimentary fashion, by simply putting the unpaid invoices in a special drawer in an accounting clerk’s desk. An accounting clerk would then manually keep track of the payment dates and prepare a check payable to Westinghouse. This check would then be signed by Meyerson or Riha.
Unlike other accounts payable, the Westinghouse payable was never entered into the computer system. Instead, the debt would be reflected only if it were manually added to the balance sheet generated by the computer. However, this was never done. This omission resulted in incorrect financial statements which showed liabilities to be too low and the profits for each year to be too high by the amount of the Westinghouse payable. Because the unrecorded Westinghouse payable was $890,111 as *268of June 2, 1984, World Radio’s financial statements, as generated by the computer system, were extremely inaccurate.
Coopers & Lybrand, World Radio’s independent accountants and auditors since 1970, failed to locate the missing Westinghouse payable. It was not until May 21, 1985, that Riha discovered that the June 2, 1984, audited financial statements may not have included the outstanding debt owed to Westinghouse. Upon making this discovery, Riha immediately informed Meyerson, who, shortly thereafter, terminated Riha and extinguished all relations between World Radio and Coopers & Lybrand.
Meyerson then engaged Arthur Young, another national accounting firm, to audit World Radio’s financial records as of June 1, 1985. In addition to the missing Westinghouse payable, Arthur Young discovered material weaknesses in World Radio’s system of internal accounting controls. As a result, Arthur Young was unable to prepare an income statement or other financial statements for the fiscal year ending June 1, 1985.
The particular weaknesses discovered by Arthur Young were formally relayed to World Radio stockholders in a letter dated March 10, 1986. In this letter, Arthur Young stated that World Radio’s accounting system in place on June 1, 1985, and for several years prior thereto, was inadequate because it failed to protect assets and to ensure that transactions had been authorized. In addition, Arthur Young concluded that the financial statements prepared under the system did not adhere to generally accepted accounting principles.
Stanley Scott, a certified public accountant, testified that an auditor has a duty to advise a company of any deficiencies in its accounting system. According to Scott, a failure to discover a material deficiency would affect a company’s financial statements. In Scott’s opinion, the failure to discover deficiencies present in World Radio’s internal accounting controls was a result of Coopers & Lybrand’s failure to follow generally accepted accounting principles.
At trial, World Radio offered evidence that Arthur Young’s inability to prepare financial statements created problems. For instance, World Radio’s relationship with its primary lender, Omaha National Bank, changed dramatically. During 1983, *269World Radio’s credit line with the bank was increased from $600,000 to $1.2 million and in 1984 from $1.2 million to $3 million. Without a financial statement in 1985, however, the bank refused to increase World Radio’s credit line to allow for further expansion. In fact, Meyerson was forced to sign a personal guarantee with the bank to keep World Radio’s revolving credit line.
Meyerson and Luke Northwall, the successor to Riha as chief financial officer, testified that the lack of financial statements also prevented World Radio from purchasing new products and inventory lines, because new suppliers would not sell products and open new credit lines to a company without financial statements. Northwall also opined that World Radio’s accounting system prior to June 1, 1985, was insufficient in that it did not prevent employee theft or protect company assets. Furthermore, in Northwall’s view, the lack of financial statements resulted in World Radio’s experiencing problems with funds, advertising, and layaway and loaner policies.
Malcolm Ballinger, World Radio’s vice president of merchandising, testified that the inability to purchase new product lines in 1985 was especially damaging because the technology in television and video was changing dramatically during this period.
According to Meyerson, the lack of financial statements also prevented the opening of any new stores, because landlords would not be willing to negotiate without such statements. Meyerson also stated that had Coopers & Lybrand informed him that better accounting controls were needed, he would have incorporated them “immediately,” and that had he known of the missing Westinghouse payable, he would not have paid substantial employee bonuses or made profit-sharing contributions. In Meyerson’s words, World Radio “made decisions all the time based on what we believed to be accurate financial statements.”
3. World Radio in 1985 through 1989
Since World Radio had no financial statements, Northwall initiated a “survival plan” to keep World Radio operating through the 1985 Christmas season. This plan called for the liquidation and overall reduction of inventory, including the carry*270ing of fewer items in the product line. The conversion of inventory into cash would provide the needed funds to operate the company. Northwall testified that this generation of operating cash necessarily reduced sales.
In addition to reducing inventory, World Radio also changed its fiscal year to end in February 1986, rather than June 1986. As such, financial statements were prepared for a “stub year,” representing the 36-week period of June 2, 1985, through February 1, 1986. World Radio opted for this approach because it would be too expensive to have Arthur Young reconstruct the records and prepare an income statement for 1985. According to Northwall, the creation of these short-term financial statements was necessary for World Radio’s survival.
The income statement generated for the stub period showed a net income of $1,224,663, with equity increasing to $934,482. These figures differ drastically from the balance sheet prepared by Arthur Young in March 1986, which showed World Radio as having a negative worth of $248,164 as of June 1, 1985. With a positive net income statement for the stub year, World Radio was once again able to represent to the bank and other creditors its ability to make profits.
Despite previous problems, World Radio remained in business after discovering the missing Westinghouse payable and inadequate accounting controls. The evidence adduced at trial showed that World Radio’s creditors continued to do business with World Radio. In response to the newly prepared financial statements for the stub year, the bank was once again willing to increase World Radio’s credit line. World Radio continued to expand its business operations by opening seven new stores in 1986 and 1987. Throughout this time period, World Radio was also engaging in several new markets.
The accounting firm of Peat Marwick prepared World Radio’s audit report for the fiscal year ending January 31, 1987. According to this report, World Radio had earned a net income of $1,229,782 during the 1986 fiscal year. During the same period, World Radio’s equity rose to $2,157,594, an increase of more than $2 million over the negative equity shown on World Radio’s June 1, 1985, balance sheet prepared by Arthur Young. Gross sales for the 1987 fiscal year were $40,562,746.
*271This upward swing came to a halt in 1988. An audit report prepared for the fiscal year ending January 31, 1988, showed that World Radio had incurred a loss of $1,529,659, with a decrease in its equity to $346,809. In March 1988, World Radio stock owned by Meyerson was redeemed, and Ballinger and Northwall became the owners of World Radio. Ballinger and Northwall continued to operate World Radio for another year until operations were ceased on March 29, 1989, when World Radio filed bankruptcy.
4. Evidence of World Radio’s Damages
World Radio filed its original petition against Coopers & Lybrand for professional malpractice on May 20, 1986. The petition was later amended, on February 25, 1987. Pursuant to its amended petition, World Radio alleged damages in the following particulars: inability to obtain or raise equity capital for expansion; inability to expand its business by opening new stores and increasing credit lines; the making of operating decisions based on false financial information; inability to conduct normal business operations; lost revenues; lost discounts, rebates, and advertising allowances and participation; inventory losses; decrease in employee morale; attorney, accounting, and polygraph fees; overtime expenses; entering into business dealings it would not otherwise have entered into; granting of benefits and bonuses it would not otherwise have given; decrease in the value of the company; and inadequate capital to operate its business as configured. World Radio concluded its petition by requesting a judgment against Coopers & Lybrand in the amount of $18,151,945.
At trial, World Radio relied upon the testimony of Northwall and Laurie Shahon, an investment banker in New York, as well as exhibit 180, to establish the nature and scope of these damages. In particular, World Radio claimed that Coopers & Lybrand’s negligence caused World Radio to lose profits and drastically decreased the value of the company.
(a) Exhibit 180 and Lost Profits
Exhibit 180 represents Northwall’s calculations of what World Radio’s profits would have been between 1981 and 1985 *272if proper internal accounting controls had been employed by Coopers & Lybrand. In arriving at these figures, Northwall examined World Radio financial statements prepared after the internal control problems had been fixed. In particular, Northwall considered the balance sheet prepared by Arthur Young for June 1, 1985; the earnings statement for the stub year (June 2, 1985, through February 1, 1986); and the earnings statement prepared by Peat Marwick for the fiscal year ending January 31, 1987. Northwall then determined the percentage of expenses to gross sales during this period (hereafter, 1986-87 period).
Using the computer-generated gross margin reports, Northwall determined the baseline or actual profit figures for 1981 through 1985. These profit figures were adjusted to reflect the same profitability ratio of the 1986-87 period. To obtain these figures, Northwall took World Radio’s actual revenue and cost figures for 1981 through 1985 (as reflected in the gross margin reports) and increased them according to the ratio of expenses to gross sales of World Radio during the 1986-87 period. In so doing, Northwall assumed that the direct operating expenses and various costs, expenses, and rebates for each year would be the same percentage of gross sales. Northwall then added the net-income-after-taxes figure for each year to the stockholders’ equity as shown on World Radio’s May 31, 1980, balance sheet prepared by Coopers & Lybrand. By this method, Northwall determined what he believed to be the stockholders’ equity in World Radio at the end of each fiscal year from 1982 through 1985.
(b) Shahon’s Testimony on Loss of Value
In addition to exhibit 180 and Northwall’s corresponding foundational testimony, World Radio also offered the testimony of Shahon. Having considerable experience in dealing with electronic retail businesses “going public,” Shahon testified as to the value of World Radio as of June 1985.
Before arriving at her opinion of World Radio’s value in June 1985, Shahon first examined information on seven consumer electronics companies that had “gone public.” Shahon determined that five of these seven companies were relevant to a *273determination of the price/eamings ratios of World Radio. A price/eamings ratio represents the price a company is selling for in the marketplace divided by its earnings per share. In other words, the marketplace value of a company can be determined by multiplying that company’s price/eamings ratio by its earnings.
According to Shahon, the price/eamings ratios of the five pertinent companies for the first 5 months of 1985 varied from as high as 20.38 to as low as 11.11. For Shahon’s evaluation of World Radio, she selected a narrower and more “conservative” range of price/eamings ratios of 11 to 16. Therefore, Shahon multiplied World Radio’s 1985 earnings, as shown on exhibit 180, by these ratios. As such, Shahon testified that “assuming the numbers contained on Exhibit 180” had been the case, World Radio was worth between $8 million and $11 million on June 1, 1985. Shahon also testified that World Radio’s negative actual worth of $248,164, as disclosed by its June 1, 1985, balance sheet, made World Radio “virtually worthless.”
In addition to evidence on the issues of lost profits and loss of value, evidence was also presented showing that World Radio had paid Coopers & Lybrand accounting fees in the amounts of $13,000, $14,000, and $15,000 for 1982, 1983, and 1984, respectively.
5. Jury Instructions
The district court gave only two instmctions on damages. Instruction No. 18 instructed the jury to “fix the amount of money which will fairly and fully compensate the plaintiff for its loss proximately caused by the alleged negligence of the defendant.” The instruction went on to state that the jury verdict must be based on evidence and not on speculation, guess, or conjecture.
Instruction No. 19 dealt specifically with World Radio’s claim for lost profits and stated:
The plaintiff seeks damages in the form of lost profits by claiming that the negligent conduct of the defendant prevented its established business from earning profits. In order to do so, the plaintiff has the burden of proving by the greater weight of the evidence: (1) that it is reasonably *274certain that such profits would have been realized except for the negligence, and (2) that the lost profits can be ascertained and measured from the evidence with reasonable certainty.
While lost profits need not be proved with mathematical certainty, neither can they be established by evidence which is speculative and conjectural. The evidence must show with reasonable certainty both that such damages did, in fact, occur and the extent of those damages.
III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
A jury verdict will not be set aside unless clearly wrong, and it is sufficient if any competent evidence is presented to the jury upon which it could find for the successful party. German v. Swanson, 250 Neb. 690, 553 N.W.2d 724 (1996); Patterson v. City of Lincoln, 250 Neb. 382, 550 N.W.2d 650 (1996).
The amount of damages to be awarded is a determination solely for the fact finder, and its action in this respect will not be disturbed on appeal if it is supported by the evidence and bears a reasonable relationship to the elements of the damages proved. Bristol v. Rasmussen, 249 Neb. 854, 547 N.W.2d 120 (1996).
With regard to the overruling of a motion for directed verdict made at the close of all the evidence, appellate review is controlled by the rule that a directed verdict is proper only where reasonable minds cannot differ and can draw but one conclusion from the evidence, where an issue should be decided as a matter of law. McWhirt v. Heavey, 250 Neb. 536, 550 N.W.2d 327 (1996); Lindsay Mfg. Co. v. Universal Surety Co., 246 Neb. 495, 519 N.W.2d 530 (1994).
IV. ANALYSIS
1. Statute of Limitations
At trial, the jury did not award World Radio any damages for 1981. However, the jury did award damages against Coopers & Lybrand for negligence for 1982 through 1984. Coopers & Lybrand argues that the trial court erred by failing to find that recovery by World Radio for 1982 and 1983 was barred by the statute of limitations.
*275The Court of Appeals, in its initial opinion, disagreed with Coopers & Lybrand and upheld the trial court’s decision. Coopers & Lybrand subsequently filed a motion for rehearing following the issuance of the court’s opinion. Coopers & Lybrand asked the court to reconsider whether recovery by World Radio for malpractice occurring during 1983 was barred by the statute of limitations. While the Court of Appeals overruled Coopers & Lybrand’s motion, it modified its initial opinion to reflect that World Radio’s claims arising out of events in 1983 were barred by the statute of limitations.
Pursuant to § 25-222, an action based on professional negligence must be brought within “two years next after the alleged act or omission in rendering or failure to render professional services.” In cases involving negligently prepared audits, the statute begins to run when the audit report is delivered to the client. Lincoln Grain v. Coopers & Lybrand, 215 Neb. 289, 338 N.W.2d 594 (1983).
The 2-year limitation may be extended if facts constituting the basis of the malpractice action are not discovered and could not reasonably be discovered within 2 years of the alleged negligent conduct. See Lindsay Mfg. Co. v. Universal Surety Co., supra. Under such circumstances, § 25-222 allows a malpractice action to be brought within 1 year from the date of discovery or within 1 year from the date the plaintiff acquires facts that would lead to such discovery.
On October 5, 1982, Coopers & Lybrand mailed the audit report to World Radio for the fiscal year ending in 1982. On May 21, 1985, Riha and Meyerson discovered that the Westinghouse payable had not been considered in the 1984 audit and possibly earlier audits. Because they did not discover facts that could legitimately serve as a basis for a malpractice action within 2 years of Coopers & Lybrand’s mailing of the October 5, 1982, audit report, the 1-year discovery exception applied to damages sustained in 1982. More specifically, World Radio could file its negligence action based on the 1982 audit as late as May 21, 1986. Because the action was filed on May 20, 1986, World Radio’s negligence action for 1982 was not barred.
*276The evidence also demonstrates that Coopers & Lybrand mailed the 1983 audit report to World Radio on August 5, 1983. Because World Radio did discover facts within 2 years of Coopers & Lybrand’s mailing of the audit report, World Radio was required to file its petition as to any damages incurred in 1983 by August 5, 1985. Since World Radio filed its action on May 20, 1986, its claim for malpractice arising out of the 1983 audit report was barred by the 2-year statute of limitations.
We therefore hold, as did the Court of Appeals, that the statute of limitations did not bar World Radio’s action for 1982. We also affirm the Court of Appeals’ modified decision and hold that the statute of limitations did bar World Radio’s action for 1983.
2. Negligence
In its appeal to this court, Coopers & Lybrand does not dispute the correctness of the jury’s finding that it was negligent in auditing World Radio. Instead, the main thrust of Coopers & Lybrand’s argument before this court is twofold: (1) that the evidence was insufficient to establish that Coopers & Lybrand’s failure to discover the missing Westinghouse payable and problems with World Radio’s internal control systems constituted the actual and proximate cause of the damages alleged by World Radio, and (2) that even if the issue of proximate cause was properly submitted to the jury in this case, the evidence offered by World Radio to prove its damages was speculative and conjectural as a matter of law.
As a general matter, we note that before a plaintiff may recover for accounting malpractice, the essential elements of any negligence action must be proved, namely, (1) duty, (2) breach, (3) causation, and (4) resulting damages. See Lincoln Grain v. Coopers & Lybrand, 216 Neb. 433, 345 N.W.2d 300 (1984). At issue in the instant case are the elements of causation and damages.
(a) Causation
There are three basic requirements that must be met to establish causation: (1) that “but for” the defendant’s negligence, the injury would not have occurred; (2) that the injury is the natu*277ral and probable result of the negligence; and (3) that there is no efficient intervening cause. Saporta v. State, 220 Neb. 142, 368 N.W.2d 783 (1985). Determination of causation is ordinarily a matter for the trier of fact. Dolberg v. Paltani, 250 Neb. 297, 549 N.W.2d 635 (1996); Merrick v. Thomas, 246 Neb. 658, 522 N.W.2d 402 (1994).
(i) Failure to Discover Missing Westinghouse Payable
There was considerable evidence offered at trial that Coopers & Lybrand failed to find the missing Westinghouse payable on World Radio’s financial statements. In fact, as noted above, Coopers & Lybrand does not dispute the jury’s finding of negligence. What Coopers & Lybrand does dispute, however, is whether its failure to detect the missing payable caused the damage alleged by World Radio.
According to Coopers & Lybrand, it was the existence of the $890,111 account payable to Westinghouse that created financial difficulties for World Radio and not the discovery of it. In Coopers & Lybrand’s view, the failure to detect the payable actually helped World Radio because it overstated World Radio’s actual financial position by the amount of the payable, thereby enabling World Radio to receive credit it would not otherwise have been able to get. Coopers & Lybrand asserts that the failure to discover the missing Westinghouse payable in 1984, at most, delayed the adverse consequences of being indebted in the amount of $890,111. Coopers & Lybrand therefore contends that World Radio failed, as a matter of law, to establish the required element of proximate causation.
Coopers & Lybrand is correct in asserting that it was not responsible for the creation of the Westinghouse payable. This fact alone, however, does not mean that the failure to find the payable did not cause World Radio damage. At trial, Meyerson specifically testified that World Radio “made decisions all the time based on what we believed to be accurate financial statements.” Furthermore, the evidence offered at trial shows that World Radio continued to expand and incur more debt in 1984 and 1985 believing its financial status was sound, as reported by the incorrect financial statements. Meyerson also testified that-had Coopers & Lybrand discovered the missing payable earlier *278and relayed this information to World Radio, World Radio would have immediately made any changes necessary in its internal accounting controls. This evidence was sufficient to allow the jury to conclude that World Radio’s reliance on the incorrect financial statements prepared by Coopers & Lybrand caused World Radio to make business decisions it might not otherwise have made, thereby causing financial damage in the form of lost profits and a loss in the value of the company. For this reason, whether Coopers & Lybrand’s incorrect auditing practices caused World Radio financial harm damage was a factual question for the jury. See Lincoln Grain v. Coopers & Lybrand, 216 Neb. 433, 345 N.W.2d 300 (1984).
(ii) Failure to Discover Inadequate Internal Accounting Controls
In a similar manner, Coopers & Lybrand also argues that its failure to detect weaknesses in World Radio’s internal accounting controls was not the proximate cause of World Radio’s alleged damages. Coopers & Lybrand contends that it was World Radio’s actual financial condition in 1984 and 1985, along with other multiple intervening causes, that led to its demise and eventual bankruptcy.
In support for its position, Coopers & Lybrand points out that World Radio rebounded from any adverse consequences flowing from the failure to discover World Radio’s inadequate internal accounting controls, as evidenced by increased sales in the 1986-87 period. In addition, Coopers & Lybrand asserts that World Radio, as well as the electronics industry in general, changed dramatically in the mid to late 1980’s. The evidence adduced at trial demonstrates that World Radio made significant changes in its management team after the termination of Riha. In 1984, Ballinger was hired as World Radio’s vice president of merchandising. At Ballinger’s request, World Radio reduced prices, increased sales commissions, and introduced an entirely new product line in the form of extended warranty contracts. Ballinger also changed World Radio’s product mix from 10 percent video and 90 percent audio to 46 percent video and 54 percent audio.
*279At the same time, the electronics industry experienced an overall increase in competition. This increase in competition infiltrated several of World Radio’s markets in Iowa and the Kansas City area. As a result, World Radio eventually closed its stores in Kansas City, suffering a loss of $575,000. In a management memorandum dated March 29, 1988, Northwall and Ballinger wrote that the fiscal losses of 1988 “can be directly attributed to operating in unprofitable markets, excessive compensation for selected employees, and disagreements over strategic plans for the future.” According to Coopers & Lybrand, it was these events and occurrences, and not Coopers & Lybrand’s failure to detect World Radio’s inadequate internal accounting controls, that led to World Radio’s financial ruin.
Concerning issues of proximate cause, we have stated that “[a] plaintiff is not bound to exclude the possibility that the [event] might have happened in some other way, but is only required to satisfy the jury, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the injury occurred in the manner claimed.” Vredeveld v. Clark, 244 Neb. 46, 51, 504 N.W.2d 292, 296 (1993). As set out extensively in section 11(2), World Radio offered evidence that Coopers & Lybrand’s failure to discover World Radio’s inadequate internal accounting controls prohibited Arthur Young from preparing an income statement for World Radio as of June 1, 1985. This, in turn, prohibited World Radio from obtaining credit from its bank and suppliers, resulting in World Radio’s inability to purchase additional inventory and new product lines. The testimony also showed that World Radio’s lack of financial statements during this period hindered its ability to open new retail locations. Ballinger testified that these problems persisted as long as World Radio was in business and that World Radio was never able to recover. Finally, World Radio presented evidence that had Coopers & Lybrand informed it of inadequate internal accounting controls at any time after 1982, those problems would have been corrected.
The issue of proximate cause, in the face of conflicting evidence, is ordinarily a question for the trier of fact. Mid Century Ins. Co. v. City of Omaha, 242 Neb. 126, 494 N.W.2d 320 (1992). The record before us clearly contains conflicting evidence regarding proximate causation. Whereas some evidence *280and testimony indicated that World Radio’s financial problems were caused by an increase in competition and bad managerial decisions, other testimony stated that Coopers & Lybrand’s failure to detect the weaknesses in World Radio’s internal accounting controls caused an irreparable decrease in World Radio’s profits and value. Accordingly, the trial court correctly submitted the issue of proximate cause to the jury.
(b) Damages
Our determination that the proximate cause issue was properly submitted to the jury does not end our inquiry. We must now examine the appropriateness of submitting to the jury the damage claim for lost profits and loss of value. In particular, we must determine whether World Radio’s evidence concerning damages was speculative and conjectural as a matter of law.
As- a general matter, the proper measure of damages in a negligence action is that which will place the aggrieved party in the position in which he or she would have been had there been no negligence. McWhirt v. Heavey, 250 Neb. 536, 550 N.W.2d 327 (1996); Patterson v. Swarr, May, Smith & Anderson, 238 Neb. 911, 473 N.W.2d 94 (1991). The nature and amount of damages cannot be sustained by evidence which is speculative and conjectural. Bakody Homes & Dev. v. City of Omaha, 246 Neb. 1, 516 N.W.2d 244 (1994). In addition, a plaintiff must prove damages with reasonable certainty. Patterson v. Swarr, May, Smith & Anderson, supra.
(i) Lost Profits
At trial, Northwall testified as to what he thought World Radio’s profits would have been had Coopers & Lybrand not been negligent in the auditing of World Radio. As noted previously, the testimony offered by World Radio in support of this contention revolved around the validity of exhibit 180. We must therefore determine the accuracy and legitimacy of exhibit 180.
In examining exhibit 180, we note that a claim for lost profits must be supported by some financial data which permit an estimate of the actual loss to be made with reasonable certitude and exactness. Evergreen Farms v. First Nat. Bank & Trust, 250 Neb. 860, 553 N.W.2d 728 (1996). Uncertainty as to the fact of *281whether damages were sustained at all is fatal to recovery, but uncertainty as to amount is not if the evidence furnishes a reasonably certain factual basis for computation of the probable loss. Katskee v. Nevada Bob’s Golf of Neb., 238 Neb. 654, 472 N.W.2d 372 (1991). Loss of prospective profits may be recovered if the evidence shows with reasonable certainty both its occurrence and the extent thereof. Buell, Winter, Mousel & Assoc. v. Olmsted & Perry, 227 Neb. 770, 420 N.W.2d 280 (1988).
Exhibit 180 represents Northwall’s opinion as to what World Radio’s profits would have been in 1981 through 1984 had proper internal accounting controls been used by Coopers & Lybrand. As noted above, Northwall’s conclusions were based upon profits World Radio made during the 1986-87 period, when all internal control problems had been cured. Assuming this same profitability ratio would have been experienced in 1981 through 1984 had proper controls been in place, Northwall simply upgraded the actual profits during this time period by the expenses/gross sales percentage obtained in the 1986-87 period.
Coopers & Lybrand objected to the admission of exhibit 180 at trial and in its motion for directed verdict, alleging that there was insufficient support for the accuracy of the exhibit and that the exhibit was based on speculation and conjecture. We agree.
Northwall’s estimation of lost profits relies exclusively on a comparison of World Radio’s profits in 1981 through 1984 with those generated in the 1986-87 period. In making this comparison, however, Northwall failed to account for the many differences in the business between these time periods. For example, in 1986 and 1987, World Radio operated more stores in different markets and utilized greater space than it had in 1984 and 1985. In 1986 and 1987, World Radio sold a significantly different product mix (46 percent video/54 percent audio) than the product mix it promoted in 1981 through 1985 (10 percent video/90 percent audio). This increase into the video arena involved products with a greater profitability and also yielded World Radio’s offer of extended warranty contracts to its customers. Furthermore, in 1986 and 1987 World Radio had a new management team with a different vision and management style *282that was instrumental in negotiating a variety of revenue-producing contracts. In failing to take these significant changes into account, Northwall was, almost literally, comparing apples to oranges.
We have recently examined the requirements for recovery of lost profits, in Evergreen Farms v. First Nat. Bank & Trust, supra. At issue in that case was the ability of Evergreen Farms, a partnership engaged in the custom cattle feeding business, to recover damages for lost profits that resulted from its bank’s refusal to loan Evergreen $100,000 pursuant to previous loan agreements. It was alleged that the failure to receive these funds prohibited Evergreen from making advance purchases of com at a favorable market rate. This, in turn, prevented Evergreen from guaranteeing a set cost for its services, ultimately resulting in the loss of customers.
In support of the claim for lost profits, an owner of Evergreen opined that Evergreen made a net profit of 10 cents per head of cattle per day. The witness then assumed that Evergreen would have fed 2,000 head of cattle more for a 2-year period if it had been able to guarantee a set cost to customers. However, we noted that Evergreen offered no quantifiable business records for the 2 years in question that would substantiate the testimony. In particular, Evergreen’s tax returns for the years 1986 through 1990 failed to adequately reflect the profits and losses of the partnership. In light of this failure to provide any reliable financial data, we held that the testimony alone was insufficient to establish lost profits with reasonable certitude. In Katskee v. Nevada Bob’s Golf of Neb., 238 Neb. 654, 472 N.W.2d 372 (1991), we examined a situation involving the alleged breach of the obligations of a lessor to offer a right of first refusal to a lessee. In seeking damages for lost profits, the lessee offered testimony from an expert who had compared the lessee’s profits at the new location with the lessee’s profits at the former location. In examining this testimony, we noted that the expert assumed the only difference between the locations was square footage and that the lost profit figures were arrived at by using sales figures from a different time period. We also noted that the expert failed to study what effect other external factors, such as a change in the customer base or relevant market, may have had *283on the diminution in profit figures. Without such studies, we held, the evidence concerning lost profits was too speculative and conjectural to warrant recovery.
In the instant case, World Radio offered no conclusive financial data supporting its claim for lost profits other than Northwall’s composition of exhibit 180. Similar to the situation in Katskee, Northwall’s preparation of exhibit 180 did not involve any studies as to how the relevant changes between the time periods would affect his computations. This failure leads us to conclude that exhibit 180 is speculative and conjectural as a matter of law. Thus, the district court erred in submitting the issue of lost profits to the jury.
(ii) Loss of Value
Shahon’s testimony regarding World Radio’s loss of value necessarily suffers from the same infirmities. As noted above, Shahon computed the value of World Radio as of June 1, 1985, “assuming the numbers contained on Exhibit 180” had been the case. In light of our conclusion that exhibit 180 is speculative and conjectural as a matter of law, Shahon’s testimony regarding loss of value fails for the same reason. Accordingly, Shahon’s testimony is also insufficient to support an award of damages.
(c) Other Damages
Remaining is the. ability of World Radio to recover the accounting fees paid to Coopers & Lybrand for 1982 through 1984. The jury’s verdict finding Coopers & Lybrand negligent in preparing the audit reports for World Radio during this period is undisputed. In addition, the parties stipulated that World Radio had paid fees in the amounts of $13,000, $14,000, and $15,000 for 1982, 1983, and 1984, respectively.
Although this court has not specifically addressed the issue, we believe that an accountant is not entitled to fees for preparing false financial statements. In reaching this conclusion, we adopt the rule as set out in the Court of Appeals’ opinion in this case and as set out at 1 Am. Jur. 2d Accountants § 13 at 537 (1994):
*284While minor inaccuracies in an audit or report may be overlooked, where by reason of the accountant’s negligence, inaccuracies and failure to report facts of serious character appear, he or she is not entitled to compensation. And when compensation is paid to an accountant in reliance upon his or her report, it may be recovered, upon proof that through the accountant’s negligence, the audit was in substance, false.
See, also, Ryan v. Kanne, 170 N.W.2d 395 (Iowa 1969); Allen County Comm’rs v. Baker, 152 Kan. 164, 102 P.2d 1006 (1940).
The evidence adduced at trial establishes that Coopers & Lybrand charged World Radio $42,000 for the preparation of inaccurate financial reports for the period of 1982 through 1984. In accordance with the rule set forth above, Coopers & Lybrand should not have been compensated for its negligent work in preparing the inaccurate reports. Thus, we conclude that World Radio is entitled to an award of $42,000.
In addition to these fees, the Court of Appeals concluded that there was sufficient evidence in the record that World Radio also paid large accounting fees to Arthur Young as a result of Coopers & Lybrand’s negligence but that the jury was not properly instructed on the issue. We agree. Unlike the fees paid to Coopers & Lybrand, however, the precise amount of the fees paid to Arthur Young as a result of Coopers & Lybrand’s negligence cannot be ascertained from the record before us. For that reason, this cause must be remanded on this issue.
V. ADDITIONAL ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
The parties have raised numerous assignments of error involving the jury instructions tendered by the district court as well as the issue of contributory negligence. In light of our holding that World Radio failed to prove its damages for lost profits and loss of value with the required degree of certainty and reliability, we need not, and therefore decline to, address those additional assignments of error.
VI. CONCLUSION
In summary, we conclude that the issue of proximate cause in this case involved a question of fact and was therefore properly *285submitted to the jury. We hold, however, that World Radio’s evidence concerning lost profits and loss of value is speculative and conjectural as a matter of law. For this reason, we affirm that portion of the Court of Appeals’ decision affirming the liability verdict against Coopers & Lybrand and dismissing the damage award for lost profits and loss of value. Furthermore, we conclude that World Radio is entitled to recover the $42,000 in fees it paid to Coopers & Lybrand for negligent audits, as well as the fees World Radio paid to Arthur Young as a result of Coopers & Lybrand’s negligence. Because the amount of fees paid to Arthur Young cannot be ascertained from the record, we remand this cause for determination of those fees.
Affirmed as modified, and cause remanded FOR FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.
Lanphier, J., not participating in the decision.

=== CASE 9741215 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:42.5625+00 ===

White, C.J.,
concurring.
I agree with the result reached by the majority; however, since the record clearly establishes that only one inference could have been drawn based on the evidence produced at trial, i.e., that the trial court should not have submitted the issue of proximate cause to the jury, I write separately.
The majority holds that “whether Coopers & Lybrand’s incorrect auditing practices caused World Radio financial harm damage was a factual question for the jury” and that “the trial court correctly submitted the issue of proximate cause to the jury.”
The majority relies on testimony that World Radio (WR) believed its financial status was sound (although both the chief executive officer and the chief financial officer knew of the missing payable and of the strange method used to account for that payable) and on WR’s assertion that it would have corrected the problems with its internal controls had it known of those problems. The majority also relies on “other testimony ... that Coopers & Lybrand’s failure to detect the weaknesses in [WR’s] internal accounting controls caused an irreparable decrease in [WR’s] profits and value.”
The conclusion is not justified by the evidence and is at best hopeful. An examination of the record reveals that WR, as a *286business, recovered from the effects of any negligence attributable to Coopers & Lybrand (C&L). The majority opinion disregards this evidence. Although WR was unwilling to pay its new auditors the additional costs involved in constructing full financial statements for 1985, WR’s creditors and other vendors continued to do business with WR. Its bank increased WR’s credit line once the financial statements were reconstructed. WR continued to expand its business, opening seven new stores in 1986 and 1987 and reaching several new markets. In 1986 and 1987, WR posted pretax earnings of over $1 million, with gross sales exceeding $40 million in 1987. Significantly, WR’s equity increased by over $2 million in 1986, just 1 year after the discovery of the defect in the financial statements.
Additionally, the evidence clearly shows that many factors other than C&L’s actions resulted in WR’s bankruptcy. After dismissing C&L in 1985, WR made significant changes in its management team, hiring a new chief financial officer and other personnel. WR’s new vice president of merchandising, Malcolm Ballinger, implemented significant changes in WR’s operations — he pushed for the liquidation of old, outdated inventory, reduced prices, increased sales commissions, introduced an entirely new product line in the form of extended warranty contracts, changed WR’s product mix from 10 percent video and 90 percent audio to 46 percent video and 54 percent audio, and created and staffed a new inventory control board that allowed WR to operate at lower inventory levels while still achieving desired sales and profit margins. In 1986, WR began to experience significant competition in several of its markets. WR also stated during its bankruptcy proceedings that a structured buyout of all of Larry Meyerson’s stock in 1988 rendered WR insolvent.
All of these changes occurred during the interim between the termination of C&L and WR’s eventual bankruptcy. By WR’s own admission, these were the factors that led to its demise. In a management memorandum dated March 29, 1988, nearly 3 years after WR dismissed C&L for failing to discover the payable, Luke Northwall and Ballinger blamed WR’s financial problems on market conditions: “[WR’s loss in fiscal 1988] can *287be directly attributed to operating in unprofitable markets, excessive compensation for selected employees, and disagreements over strategic plans for the future. . . . The Company is a viable entity if certain markets are closed.”
Although the question of proximate cause is ordinarily a determination for the jury, when, upon the evidence produced, only one inference can be drawn, it is for the court to decide whether a given act or series of acts is the proximate cause of the injury. Starlin v. Burlington Northern, Inc., 193 Neb. 619, 228 N.W.2d 597 (1975). An injury that could not have been foreseen or reasonably anticipated as a probable result of the negligence is not actionable, nor is an injury that is not a natural consequence of the negligence complained of, and would not have resulted from it but for the interposition of some new, independent cause that could not have been anticipated. Turek v. St. Elizabeth Comm. Health Ctr., 241 Neb. 467, 488 N.W.2d 567 (1992).
Upon the evidence produced at trial, only one inference could have been drawn — WR rebounded from any impact caused by the inaccuracies in its financial statements to generate record profits in 1986 and 1987 and to expand its business over the next several years. Five years later, WR simply fell prey to the highly competitive market in which it operated.
Fahrnbruch, J., joins in this concurrence.

=== CASE 9741216 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:42.881363+00 ===

JUSTICE RARICK delivered the opinion of the court: Claimant, Beverly Matlock, sought benefits pursuant to the Workers’ Compensation Act (Act) (820 ILCS 305/1 et seq. (West 1996)) for injuries sustained while in the employ of American Airlines, employer. The arbitrator awarded claimant temporary total disability benefits and medical expenses plus penalties and attorney fees. On review, a majority of the Industrial Commission (Commission) affirmed the finding of compensability but modified the amount of temporary total disability benefits and reversed the award of penalties and attorney fees. The concurring commissioner would have also affirmed the award of penalties, and the dissenting commissioner would not have found the claim compensable. The circuit court of Cook County confirmed the decision of the Commission. Both claimant and employer appeal. Employer argues the finding that claimant sustained an accident arising out of her employment is against the manifest weight of the evidence. Claimant, in her appeal, contends the denial of penalties and attorney fees is against the manifest weight of the evidence. At the time of the incident claimant was a flight attendant who had worked for employer some 27 years. On November 22,1997, claimant was assigned to the business class cabin on American Airlines Flight 66 bound from Chicago to London. Claimant testified she initially noticed passenger Alva Kathleen Kelly during boarding. Ms. Kelly was noted as being troublesome, and the captain requested the security coordinator to speak with her and assess her “fitness” to travel on Flight 66. The security coordinator found Ms. Kelly to be a bit eccentric but suitable to fly. After the plane took off from Chicago, Ms. Kelly appeared numerous times in the cabin at the galley where claimant was stationed. She was repeatedly told to return to her seat as she was not supposed to be in that area. Eventually the captain removed Ms. Kelly from the galley and informed her she was to return to her seat and put on her seatbelt. Ms. Kelly told a number of the flight attendants on board that the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) was trying to kill her, that she was being forced to leave the country, and that she had $3 million worth of chemicals in her possession. At one point, Ms. Kelly began making unusual requests including asking for oxygen. When her requests for oxygen were denied, Ms. Kelly began crying and claiming she could not breathe. Eventually one of the flight attendants gave Ms. Kelly an oxygen container to quiet her down but did not turn on the oxygen. Once given the container, Ms. Kelly began flashing a cigarette lighter trying to ignite the oxygen. The lighter and container were then taken away from Ms. Kelly and she was confined to her seat. Shortly thereafter, Ms. Kelly covered herself with a shroud and sprayed a chemical, later determined to be parachlorophenol, on herself. The chemical is used mainly as a topical anesthetic by dentists and can cause nausea, vomiting, pallor, hyperventilation, coma, low blood pressure, pulmonary edema, renal failure, shock and palpitations if absorbed through the skin into the bloodstream. The fumes of the chemical permeated into the galley where claimant was working and she began to feel nauseated and dizzy and experienced heart palpitations. The flight attendant who was sitting with Ms. Kelly passed out. The captain diverted the plane and landed in Dublin, Ireland. Ms. Kelly was arrested, and claimant and six other flight attendants and passengers were taken to a local hospital for observation. Claimant was released three hours later and was told to rejoin the flight crew. Claimant resumed her regular duties and flew on to London and then worked the flight back to Chicago in order to return home. She testified she could still smell the odor of the chemical on the plane and felt nauseated. Her heart continued to pound hard or irregularly. Claimant further stated she felt anxious and fearful, and on the return flight to Chicago, she felt as though she was not part of the environment of the plane. When the flight landed in Chicago, claimant immediately was debriefed by the FBI and employer. Employer apologized for the trouble on the flight and gave her a pamphlet entitled “Understanding Traumatic Stress Responses: A Handout for Victims and/or Family Members.” Claimant requested to see a counselor and was sent to Dr. George O’Shea. Claimant met with Dr. O’Shea three times and was told she should continue counseling. Employer refused to pay for any more sessions with Dr. O’Shea, however. At this point, claimant testified, she felt abandoned by employer. Approximately five days later, claimant sought treatment from psychologist Dr. Sharon Lieteau. Claimant had previously treated with Dr. Lieteau in 1992 for depression and again in 1995 following the death of her mother and the burning of her brother in a fire. Dr. Lieteau diagnosed claimant with posttraumatic stress disorder stemming from the November 22 flight incident. Claimant complained of recurring nightmares in which the plane actually explodes and she awakes in the midst of a panic attack. Claimant told Dr. Lieteau she felt as though she had narrowly escaped death and lost her ability to feel safe in her normal environment. She also felt a great deal of anger at employer for allowing Ms. Kelly to board the plane and for abandoning claimant after the incident. Dr. Lieteau noted a significant difference in claimant’s behavior before and after the incident. Specifically she observed a deterioration in claimant’s physical appearance, forgetfulness, and a decreased activity and involvement in her life. At the time of arbitration claimant was still undergoing treatment and had not been released to return to work. Claimant testified she returned to the airport once in January 1998 to pick up a bid sheet to try and return to work. She testified she was very uncomfortable and was afraid that if anyone spoke to her she would faint. She further testified she still experiences anxiety attacks in crowds, has periods of forgetfulness, often becomes disoriented when she attempts to go out by herself, and has difficulty sleeping. Claimant admitted she has been able to keep up with her part-time studies at Chicago State University. Employer’s expert, Dr. Ronald Ganellen, a clinical psychologist, evaluated claimant in March 1998. He disagreed with the diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder and concluded claimant’s problems stemmed more from her anger at employer. He did not release her to return to work, however, and found her to still be in need of psychotherapy. He diagnosed claimant as suffering from adjustment disorder with anxiety. The arbitrator found claimant’s claim compensable and further concluded claimant was entitled to penalties and attorney fees because employer’s conduct was unreasonable and vexatious. Employer was aware of all the events which took place on Flight 66 and sent her for counseling but did not attempt to obtain a medical evaluation to controvert the findings of the doctors until March 1998. The Commission and the circuit court agreed claimant was entitled to benefits but did not find employer’s conduct to be so unreasonable as to justify the imposition of penalties and attorney fees. The circuit court confirmed the decision of the Commission.  In Illinois, psychological injuries are compensable under one of two theories, either physical-mental, when the injuries are related to and caused by a physical trauma or injury, or mental-mental, when the injuries are caused by sudden severe emotional shock traceable to a definite time and place and cause even though no physical trauma or injury was sustained. See City of Springfield v. Industrial Comm’n, 291 Ill. App. 3d 734, 738, 685 N.E.2d 12, 14 (1997). Recovery for nontraumatically-induced mental disability is limited to those employees who can establish that: (1) the mental disorder arose in a situation of greater dimensions than the day-to-day emotional strain and tension which all employees must experience; (2) the conditions exist in reality, from an objective standpoint; and (3) the employment conditions, when compared with the nonemployment conditions, were the major contributing cause of mental disorder. Northwest Suburban Special Education Organization v. Industrial Comm’n, 312 Ill. App. 3d 783, 787, 728 N.E.2d 498, 501 (2000). Mental disorders which develop over time in the normal course of the employment relationship do not constitute compensable injuries. 312 111. App. 3d at 788, 728 N.E.2d at 502. On the other hand, in dealing with the physical-mental category, even a minor physical contact or injury may be sufficient to trigger compensability. See Chicago Park District v. Industrial Comm’n, 263 Ill. App. 3d 835, 842, 635 N.E.2d 770, 776 (1994). In this instance, the Commission concluded claimant could recover under either theory. We agree. We therefore conclude the Commission’s determination is not against the manifest weight of the evidence.  While on Flight 66, claimant was exposed to both emotional and physical trauma at the hands of an unruly and, in fact, dangerous passenger. First, Ms. Kelly continually appeared in places she was not supposed to be. She repeatedly made unusual requests and comments. At one point, she requested oxygen and made such a commotion that she was given an oxygen container to keep her quiet. Ms. Kelly attempted to ignite the oxygen, but because of the foresight of one of the other flight attendants who did not turn on the oxygen, was unsuccessful in her efforts. It is true, claimant did not witness this particular incident but she was informed of the problem by several other attendants. Shortly thereafter, claimant was exposed directly to the chemical parachlorophenal sprayed by Ms. Kelly and suffered immediate physical consequences. She became nauseous and dizzy and experienced heart palpitations. Claimant had no idea at that time what the chemical was or its long-term or short-term effects. Clearly claimant suffered a physical trauma while in the course of her employment. Once on the ground, claimant was observed at a hospital and released, but continued to have aftereffects from both the physical and emotional trauma she had experienced. On the rest of the flight to London, she continued to feel nauseous and suffered irregular heartbeats. On the return trip home she felt anxious, afraid and crowded. Claimant sought counseling, but employer refused to pay for further treatment after three sessions even though employer’s counselor felt claimant was in need of continued therapy. Added to her anxiety and fear, claimant now felt abandoned and mistreated by employer. Claimant’s treating doctor diagnosed claimant as suffering from posttraumatic stress disorder causally related to the traumatic events she experienced in the course of her employment as a flight attendant on American Airlines Flight 66 on November 22, 1997. Clearly claimant’s psychological disability arose from a situation of greater dimensions than the day-to-day emotional strain and tension to which all employees, including flight attendants, are subjected in their employment. While flight attendants may be trained to handle and regularly face unruly passengers, they are not subjected normally to ones that attempt to blow up the plane or spray toxic chemicals in a confined cabin. It is reasonable to infer such events in fact would be terrifying to those responsible for keeping order in the cabin. The situation on Flight 66 on November 22, 1997, was not one faced by all employees or even by most flight crews. As a consequence of her experience, claimant has recurring nightmares in which the plane actually explodes and she awakes in the midst of panic attacks. Claimant feared for her life and has lost the ability to feel safe in her normal environment after 27 years of service as a flight attendant. Even employer’s expert could not state with certainty that the events which took place on Flight 66 were not the triggering events for claimant’s inability to return to work. Rather, it is reasonable to infer claimant’s illness was brought on by the sudden events and emotional shock she experienced on November 22, 1997, while on board Flight 66. Claimant was exposed both to a psychological and physical attack by an unstable passenger while in the course of her employment and should be compensated for her resulting injuries and disability. Any psychiatric counseling in the past notwithstanding, the events of November 22, 1997, clearly were the primary cause of claimant’s current disability.  Turning to the issue of penalties, generally speaking, an employer’s reasonable and good-faith challenge to liability ordinarily will not subject it to penalties under the Act. Board of Education of the City of Chicago v. Industrial Comm’n, 93 Ill. 2d 20, 25, 442 N.E.2d 883, 885 (1982); Complete Vending Services, Inc. v. Industrial Comm’n, 305 Ill. App. 3d 1047, 1050, 714 N.E.2d 30, 32-33 (1999). For instance, when the employer acts in reliance upon responsible medical opinion or when there are conflicting medical opinions, penalties ordinarily are not imposed. Avon Products, Inc. v. Industrial Comm’n, 82 Ill. 2d 297, 302, 412 N.E.2d 468, 470 (1980). Whether an employer’s conduct justifies the imposition of penalties is a factual question for the Commission, and the Commission’s determination on the matter will not be disturbed on review unless it is against the manifest weight of the evidence. Board of Education, 93 Ill. 2d at 25, 442 N.E.2d at 885. In this instance, while the arbitrator concluded penalties were appropriate, the majority of the Commission determined claimant was not entitled to penalties or attorney fees. According to the majority decision, employer had a reasonable basis for disputing the claim because the burden of proof in psychological cases is difficult. It is true the burden of proof in psychological cases is difficult. It is not true, however, that employer had a reasonable basis for disputing the claim in this instance. In fact, employer had no basis for contesting the claim and unreasonably delayed payment of benefits. The evidence presented at arbitration clearly revealed claimant suffered a psychological and physical injury while employed on November 22, 1997. Employer was fully aware of the events that transpired on Flight 66 and acknowledged the traumatic nature of the events when it gave claimant the “Understanding Traumatic Stress Responses” flyer and agreed to send her to a counselor. That counselor, Dr. O’Shea, concluded claimant was still in need of treatment after three sessions, but employer refused to pay for further therapy. In fact employer did not even pay for claimant’s hospital stay in Dublin. As noted in McMahan v. Industrial Comm’n, 183 Ill. 2d 499, 702 N.E.2d 545 (1998): “[t]he refusal of an employer to pay for an injured employee’s medical expenses is as contrary to the purposes of the Workers’ Compensation Act as an employer’s refusal to compensate the employee for lost earnings.” 183 Ill. 2d at 514, 702 N.E.2d at 552. Claimant’s treating doctor, based upon a reasonable degree of medical and psychiatric certainty, diagnosed claimant as suffering from posttraumatic stress disorder causally related to the events that transpired on Flight 66. Employer had no basis to dispute claimant’s disability until sending her to Dr. Ganellen in March 1998, some four months after the episode. Even Dr. Ganellen opined claimant was in need of further psychiatric treatment. Still employer refused to pay compensation. Given the totality of the circumstances, employer’s conduct was unreasonable. Merely because psychological injury cases are difficult to adjudicate does not mean that the award of penalties and attorney fees is unacceptable or inappropriate. Accordingly, we find the Commission’s decision not to award penalties and attorney fees to be against the manifest weight of the evidence and therefore reinstate the arbitrator’s award of penalties and fees pursuant to sections 16, 19(k) and 19(1) of the Act. For the aforementioned reasons, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court confirming the decision of the Commission with respect to the issue of compensability but reverse the decision to deny penalties and attorney fees and further reinstate the decision of the arbitrator granting such fees and penalties. Affirmed in part; reversed in part. HOFFMAN, COLWELL and HOLDRIDGE, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741217 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:42.88561+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE McCULLOUGH, concurring in part and dissenting in part: I agree with the majority affirming on the basis of a physical-mental trauma. I dissent as to the award of penalties. The Commission decision suggests two partial concurrence-dissents. Commissioner KInnaman concurs in granting recovery but would award penalties. Commissioner Gilgis would deny benefits and penalties. This case does present facts concerning psychological injuries, an area even this court has struggled with in adopting a precedent to be used by arbitrators and the Commission. I agree there was sufficient evidence to find physical-mental basis for recovery. It was a complex case, penalties were properly denied by the Commission, and this court should affirm the order of the circuit court. Additionally, we now find the facts of this case and its importance to be such to issue an opinion to provide binding precedent. As the Commission dissent points out, there was “a valid basis to dispute liability in this controversial, hotly-contested ‘mental trauma’ case.” The prior cases and the facts presented here were not so clear as to justify an award of penalties. I would affirm the award of benefits but deny penalties.

=== CASE 3027438 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:15.509979+00 ===

United States Court of Appeals
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
___________
No. 00-3129
___________
Linda Tiessen, et al.,                     *
*
Plaintiffs - Appellants,             * Appeal from the United States
* District Court for the
v.                                   * District of Minnesota.
*
County of Pine, Minnesota,                 *      [UNPUBLISHED]
*
Defendant - Appellee.                *
___________
Submitted: May 18, 2001
Filed: August 3, 2001
___________
Before LOKEN, ROSS, and FAGG, Circuit Judges.
___________
PER CURIAM.
On the night of April 6, 1996, Linda Tiessen telephoned authorities to report that
her husband, Joe Tiessen, was threatening an unknown person in their front yard. An
inebriated Joe Tiessen was arrested and taken to the Pine County jail. At the jail,
Tiessen was not immediately classified as suicidal, as he had been after a similar arrest
four months previously, and his booking was delayed while the jailer worked on other
bookings. The jailer administered an intoxilyzer test, which revealed Tiessen had a
blood-alcohol level of .11, removed his belt and shoes, put him in a holding cell with
another detainee, and checked on Tiessen’s condition two or three times in the next
hour-and-one-half. At 4:06 a.m., the jailer discovered that Tiessen had hung himself.
Linda Tiessen and her children then commenced this action, alleging a claim under 42
U.S.C. § 1983 against Pine County for failure to protect a suicidal pretrial detainee and
negligence claims under state law.
The district court1 granted summary judgment in favor of Pine County,
dismissing the federal claim for failure to prove deliberate indifference to the risk of
inmate suicides and remanding the state law claims to state court. Tiessen, et al. v.
County of Pine, et al., Civ. File No. 98-2594, Memorandum and Order (D. Minn. Aug.
14, 2000). Plaintiffs appeal, arguing the district court improperly weighed the evidence
and made credibility determinations, improperly viewed evidence favorably to Pine
County, and misapplied the deliberate indifference standard in jail suicide cases. After
careful review of the record, we conclude these contentions are without merit. In
determining that Pine County’s customs and practices for training and supervising its
officers were not deliberately indifferent to the risk of jail suicides, the district court
properly applied the standard for ruling on summary judgment motions and this court’s
prior inmate suicide cases. See Gregoire v. Class, 236 F.3d 413, 417-19 (8th Cir.
2000); Williams v. Kelso, 201 F.3d 1060, 1065-66 (8th Cir. 2000); Liebe v. Norton,
157 F.3d 574, 578-80 (8th Cir. 1998); Rellergert v. Cape Girardeau County, 924 F.2d
794, 796-97 (8th Cir. 1991). Accordingly, we affirm for the reasons stated in the
district court’s thorough opinion. See 8th Cir. Rule 47B.
A true copy.
Attest:
CLERK, U. S. COURT OF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT.
1
The HONORABLE PAUL A. MAGNUSON, then Chief Judge of the United
States District Court for the District of Minnesota.
-2-

=== CASE 3027439 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:15.661248+00 ===

Opinions of the United
2007 Decisions                                                                                                             States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit
6-29-2007
Radocesky v. Munley
Precedential or Non-Precedential: Non-Precedential
Docket No. 06-3633
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007
Recommended Citation
"Radocesky v. Munley" (2007). 2007 Decisions. Paper 856.
http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007/856
This decision is brought to you for free and open access by the Opinions of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit at Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in 2007 Decisions by an authorized administrator of Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. For more information, please contact Benjamin.Carlson@law.villanova.edu.
BLD-105                                          NOT PRECEDENTIAL
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT
NO. 06-3633
________________
NICHOLAS RADOCESKY; FAITH FRAZIER;
NICHOLAS R. RADOCESKY; DAUGHTER RADOCESKY
v.
ROBERT MUNLEY; CARMEN MINORA; AMY PHILLIPS;
ANDREW JARBOLA, D.A. Lackawanna County;
CHARLES WITACONIS, Assistant Public Defender;
MICHAEL BARRASSE, Lackawanna County Judge;
UNKNOWN CITY SOLICITOR
Nicholas N. Radocesky,
Appellant
____________________________________
On Appeal From the United States District Court
For the Middle District of Pennsylvania
(D.C. Civ. No. 06-cv-00553)
District Judge: Honorable James M. Munley
__________________________
Submitted Under 28 U.S.C. § 1915(e)(2)(B)
January 25, 2007
Before: McKee, Fuentes and Roth, Circuit Judges
(Filed: June 29, 2007 )
_________________
OPINION
_________________
PER CURIAM
Appellant Nicholas Radocesky filed an in forma pauperis civil rights action in
United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania against several judges
of the Lackawanna County Court of Common Pleas, members of the District Attorney’s
Office, and members of the Public Defender’s Office, alleging that these individuals took
advantage of him in convincing him to plead guilty to a misdemeanor possession of a
controlled substance charge. Originally, his bail was revoked when he did not plead
guilty to a Delivery charge in accordance with the terms of the plea agreement. His
public defender then worked out a new agreement that would result in his release if he
would plead guilty to a misdemeanor possession charge. He did so, and two other
misdemeanor counts were dismissed as a result of the plea. Radocesky is neurologically
disabled and suffers from organic brain syndrome, apparently as a result of a serious
automobile accident. In an amendment to the complaint, he indicated that he was seeking
compensatory and punitive money damages for the sake of his family and to secure their
future
In an order entered on June 29, 2006, the District Court dismissed the complaint
under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) for failure to state a claim upon which
relief may be granted. The court reasoned that judges are immunized from a suit for
damages for acts done in the performance of their judicial duties. Stump v. Sparkman,
435 U.S. 349, 356-57 (1978). The decision whether or not to initiate or prosecute a case
2
is completely discretionary with prosecutors and also is absolutely immunized from a suit
for damages. Imbler v. Pachtman, 424 U.S. 409 (1976). Finally, no liability attaches
under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 for representation of a criminal defendant, because a public
defender does not act under color of law in representing his or her client. Polk County v.
Dodson, 454 U.S. 312 (1981).1 Radocesky filed a timely motion for reconsideration,
contending that he had alleged a number of “declaratory decree violations” which would
not be immunized from suit.
Radocesky appeals. His motion to appeal in forma pauperis was granted by our
Clerk and he was notified that his appeal would be considered under 28 U.S.C. §
1915(e)(2)(B).
We will dismiss the appeal under 28 U.S.C. § 1915(e)(2)(B)(i). An appeal is
frivolous when it lacks an arguable basis either in law or fact. Neitzke v. Williams, 490
U.S. 319, 325 (1989). Under Rule 12(b)(6), dismissal of a complaint is proper only if it is
clear that no relief could be granted under any set of facts that could be proved consistent
with the allegations. Conley v. Gibson, 355 U.S. 41, 45-46 (1957). It is clear here that no
relief could be granted under any set of facts that could be proved consistent with the
allegations. The District Court properly dismissed the amended complaint on the basis of
immunities and the absence of state action. This action does not involve a demand for
1
Radocesky also sought the court’s assistance in bringing two unidentified inmates to
justice for sexually assaulting him. The court noted for his benefit that it had no authority
to bring charges against the inmates.
3
prospective relief to which the District Court’s immunities analysis might not apply. In
addition, Heck v. Humphrey, 512 U.S. 477 (1994), bars the action because the conviction
has never been invalidated.2
We will dismiss the appeal as frivolous.
2
Thomas Gilholy, the Superintendent of the Lackawanna County jail, also was named
as a defendant in the original complaint, and the Pennsylvania Board of Probation and
Parole, and/or certain of its officials, were named in an amendment. There are no
allegations directed at these defendants and they were thus entitled to dismissal under
Rule 12(b)(6) as well.
4

=== CASE 9741220 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:46.124009+00 ===

OPINION
GARDEBRING, Justice.
This criminal case raises several issues under the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and the comparable provision in the Minnesota Constitution. We are asked to determine whether there was an objective legal basis for the initial traffic stop and whether, assuming the stop was valid, there was consent for the ensuing search. Because we conclude that there was no objective legal basis for the stop and no consent to the search, we reverse the court of appeals and vacate the conviction.
Appellant Thomas Otto George pleaded guilty to illegal possession of a handgun, Minn.Stat. § 624.714 (1994), preserving omnibus issues pursuant to State v. Lothenbach, 296 N.W.2d 854 (Minn.1980). He was fined and placed on two years of unsupervised probation. On appeal, he asserted that evidence seized when he was stopped by a Minnesota state trooper should have been suppressed as the product of an unconsented search during a traffic stop that was itself unconstitutional. The court of appeals ruled that there was a “particularized and objective basis” for making the stop and that the search of George’s motorcycle was made with consent.
The facts are these: Minnesota State Trooper Eric Vaselaar was on routine patrol on Interstate 90 in Nobles County when he noticed George and a passenger riding a motorcycle westbound on the freeway. At the time, there was significant motorcycle traffic on the highway due to the then-upcoming motorcycle rally in Sturgis, South Dakota. According to Trooper Vaselaar’s testimony at the omnibus hearing, he decided to stop George because the motorcycle appeared to have three headlights, a lighting-configuration Vaselaar believed to be in violation of Minnesota law.
After stopping the motorcycle, Vaselaar approached George, advised him that he had been pulled over because of the motorcycle’s lighting configuration, requested George’s driver’s license and asked George to sit in *577the patrol car. Noticing that George had a folding knife attached to his belt, Vaselaar requested him to remove the knife and his jacket and to leave them on the motorcycle. George complied. In the patrol car, Vaselaar asked if George’s license address was current. George informed Vaselaar that he had recently moved and supplied the correct address. Vaselaar issued George a warning-card for not having the correct address on his license and for the motorcycle’s lighting-configuration.
After completing the warning cards, Vasel-aar asked George if he was carrying any weapons, open containers of alcohol, or controlled substances. George replied that he was not. After explaining the warnings, Va-selaar asked George if he “had any objections if [the trooper] wanted to take a couple of moments and take a look through the bike looking for the things [they’d] talked about.” Vaselaar’ testified at the omnibus hearing that George told him he had “no objections.” George testified that he responded “yes,” observing that the search would be “a waste of time” but that Vaselaar stated it was his time and he was “gonna search it anyway.” George testified that Vaselaar did not explain that George had a right not to permit the search. George also said that he did not feel he had consented to Vaselaar’s search of the vehicle.
Trooper Vaselaar asked George to unlock the motorcycle’s saddlebags. George did so and resumed his seat in the car. With the assistance of another trooper, Vaselaar searched George’s jacket. He found a plastic bag containing a box of .22 magnum ammunition. Vaselaar asked where the gun to which the ammunition belonged was located; George responded that he had forgotten about the gun and that it was in his jacket. The troopers recovered a .22 magnum, a Derringer-type revolver, and Vaselaar asked George if he had a permit for the weapon. Upon learning that he did not, Vaselaar arrested George. Searching George incident to the arrest, Vaselaar discovered a flat cigarette case in George’s vest pocket containing three homemade cigarettes, which smelled strongly of marijuana. Vaselaar again asked him if any weapons or controlled substances were on or in the bike. This time George responded that a nine millimeter handgun, ammunition, a pipe, and a film canister containing marijuana were in the bike’s travel pack. Vaselaar retrieved these items. Va-selaar testified that George made no comments or statements regarding the search.
At the omnibus hearing, during which both George and Vaselaar testified, George contested both the stop and the search as unconstitutional and moved to suppress the items seized. George claimed that there was simply no probable cause for the traffic stop because Vaselaar knew the headlight configuration was not illegal and also that Vaselaar’s asserted “objective legal basis” for the stop (suspicion of illegal headlight configuration) was only a pretext for his real intention of obtaining consent to search for evidence of other illegal activity.1 The trial court denied George’s motion. Noting that it was aware that the state patrol had initiated a program targeting motorcycle riders on their way to or from the Sturgis Rally, the trial court said that the stop was “no doubt ⅜ * * a pretext stop in that the officer’s intention was to seek a consensual search of [George’s] motorcycle and belongings.” Nevertheless, relying on *578State v. Everett, 472 N.W.2d 864, 867 (Minn.1991), the trial court concluded that, based upon Yaselaar’s belief that the headlight configuration on George’s motorcycle violated Minn.Stat. § 169.49 (1994), “the stop was valid.” The court also rejected George’s claim that the ensuing search was not consensual.
On appeal, the court of appeals relied upon Berge v. Commissioner of Pub. Safety, 374 N.W.2d 730 (Minn.1985), to conclude that Vaselaar’s stop was valid because his “belief (or ‘suspicion’ or ‘assumption’) that the violation occurred was reasonably inferable from what he did see.” Id. at 733. The court also held that “the trial court did not clearly err in accepting the trooper’s account of the conversation and concluding that George consented to the search.” State v. George, No. CX-94-2638, slip op. at 7, 1995 WL 579253 at *3 (Minn.App. Oct. 3,1995).
In reviewing factual determinations by the trial court bearing on a motion to suppress on Fourth Amendment grounds, we follow the “clearly erroneous” standard. See e.g., State v. Kvam, 336 N.W.2d 525, 528-29 (Minn.1983).
We begin with the question of whether the traffic stop was justified by an objective legal basis. When interpreting the Fourth Amendment, which governs the legality of investigatory stops, the U.S. Supreme Court has stated that such a stop “must be justified by some objective manifestation that the person stopped is, or is about to be, engaged in criminal activity.” United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417, 101 S.Ct. 690, 695, 66 L.Ed.2d 621 (1981). This court, in turn, has held that, to make a lawful traffic stop, a law enforcement officer must have a “particularized and objective basis for suspecting the particular persons stopped of criminal activity.” Berge, 374 N.W.2d at 732 (quoting Cortez, 449 U.S. at 417-18, 101 S.Ct. at 694-95). Such a suspicion, however, must be something more than a mere hunch; the officer must have objective support for his belief that the person is involved in criminal activity. State v. Johnson, 444 N.W.2d 824, 825-26 (Minn.1989) (citing United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 7, 109 S.Ct. 1581, 1585, 104 L.Ed.2d 1 (1989)). Our cases, however, do not require much of a showing in order to justify a traffic stop. Ordinarily, if an officer observes a violation of a traffic law, however insignificant, the officer has an objective basis for stopping the vehicle. See, e.g., State v. Pleas, 329 N.W.2d 329 (Minn.1983) (upholding stop based on officer’s observation of broken windshield, no front license plate, and rear plate upside down), and State v. Barber, 308 Minn. 204, 241 N.W.2d 476 (1976) (upholding stop based on officer’s observation that license plate was wired on rather than bolted on).
Vaselaar testified that he stopped George because he believed George’s headlight configuration violated Minn.Stat. § 169.49, which states that a motorcycle cannot have more than two headlights. The state argues that the motorcycle ridden by George appeared to Vaselaar to have three headlights and, therefore, that he had an objective legal basis for stopping George. As long as the basis for the stop is reasonable and not the product of whim or caprice or malice, the state contends, the stop is constitutional.
George argues that the headlight configuration on his Harley Davidson was legal, noting that the three lamps identified by Vaselaar as headlights are, in fact, one headlight and two auxiliary passing lamps. He points to the rules promulgated by the Department of Public Safety regarding motor vehicle lighting, which define auxiliary passing lamps as lights intended to supplement a standard headlight. See Minn.R. 7425.0110, subp. 6, 7, 33 (1995). George also notes that in order to sell its motorcycles in Minnesota, Harley Davidson must certify that its vehicles are in compliance with Minnesota Rules, including those that he cites. Finally, he notes that Minn.Stat. § 169.56, subd. 4 states that “any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed two auxiliary driving lamps mounted on the front” of the vehicle.
On these facts, we hold that Trooper Va-selaar did not have an objective legal basis for suspecting that the George was driving his motorcycle in violation of any motor vehicle law (or that he was violating any other law). The front lights on George’s motorcycle were standard equipment installed at the factory: one high/low beam headlamp and *579two low beam auxiliary passing lamps that supplement the lower beam of the standard high/low beam headlamp. State law clearly permits a motorcycle to have two standard high/low beam headlamps and two of the auxiliary passing lamps. There was no objective basis in the law for the trooper to reasonably suspect that George was operating his motorcycle in violation of this law.
Although our conclusion that there was no objective legal basis for the stop would be sufficient to resolve this case, we choose to address the consent to search issue also raised on appeal in order to provide further guidance to the trial courts in considering such matters. A search of a vehicle with the owner’s valid consent is a lawful search. Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 222, 93 S.Ct. 2041, 2045, 36 L.Ed.2d 854 (1973). However, to support a claim that consent was given, the state must prove that it was given freely and voluntarily. Bumper v. North Carolina, 391 U.S. 543, 548, 88 S.Ct. 1788, 1791-92, 20 L.Ed.2d 797 (1968). The voluntariness of consent is not easily defined. Schneckloth, 412 U.S. at 224, 93 S.Ct. at 2046. It must be determined after a careful examination of the circumstances surrounding the giving of the consent. Id. at 227, 93 S.Ct. at 2047-48; State v. Howard, 373 N.W.2d 596, 599 (Minn.1985) (citing Schneck-loth ).
We have repeatedly noted that the evaluation of the constitutionality of a search is a complex calculation, requiring careful balancing of the competing interests inherent in a police-citizen encounter. In such a situation, the “requirement of voluntariness reflects ‘an accommodation of the complex values implicated in police questioning of a suspect.’ ” State v. Dezso, 512 N.W.2d 877, 880 (Minn.1994) (quoting Schneckloth, 412 U.S. at 224-25, 93 S.Ct. at 2046-47). In Dezso, we said:
The police must be able to seek the cooperation and ask questions of individuals if the safety and security of the community is to be preserved. At the same time, individuals have a liberty interest, constitutionally protected, against unreasonable prying into their personal affairs. So it is that an officer has a right to ask to search and an individual has a right to say no.
⅝ * * * p-jf. jg p0jnt when an encounter becomes coercive, when the right to say no to a search is compromised by a show of official authority, that the Fourth Amendment intervenes. Consent must be received, not extracted.
Id.
Here, George argues that failure to object to a search is not indicative of consent. Trooper Vaselaar’s question as to whether George had any objections to a search, George asserts, implied that Vaselaar planned to search anyway and was not really seeking consent but merely appraising George of his intention. Vaselaar asked if George objected to the search after first requesting that George remove his knife and jacket — requests George interpreted as commands. This sequence, George contends, indicated that he was not free to prevent Va-selaar’s search.
The state insists that the trial court’s ruling was proper, that a reasonable person in George’s position would have felt free to decline Vaselaar’s request. Conceding that traffic stops can be slightly intimidating, the state observes that this one was not out of the ordinary and, further, it should have been less so for George, who testified that he had been arrested previously.
Underlying our consideration of this con-•sentlssue are ouf~s_erfoüsT:'üñcerns related-t(T the “pretext problem,” inasmuch as the Supreme Court has now made clear that the constitutional reasonableness of a traffic stop does not turn on the actual motivations of the officer involved. Whren v. United States, — U.S.-,-, 116 S.Ct. 1769, 1774, 135 L.Ed.2d 89 (1996). We note first that “very few drivers can traverse any appreciable distance without violating some traffic regulation.” B. GEORGE, Constitutional Limitations on Evidence in Criminal Cases 65 (1969 ed.) (quoted in 3 WarRen R. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 5.2(e), at 86 (3rd ed. 1996)). Second is our concern that police, who have enormous discretion in enforcing traffic laws, may take advantage of their right to stop motorists for routine traffic violations in order to target,, members of groups “identified by factors that are totally impermissible as a basis for law enforcement *580activity.” United States v. Scopo, 19 F.3d 777, 785-86 (2d Cir.1994), cert. denied, — U.S. -, 115 S.Ct. 207, 130 L.Ed.2d 136 (1994) (Newman, J., concurring).
Because of similar concerns, one commentator has suggested that the concept of voluntary consent ought to be deemed meaningless in the context of a so-called consensual encounter between police and a citizen at an airport or in the context of other police-citizen contacts, e.g., when an officer is effecting a routine traffic stop. See, Rebecca A. Stack, Note, Airport Drug Searches: Giving Content to the Concept of Free and Voluntary Consent, 77 Va.L.Rev. 183, 202 (1991). Short of rejecting the concept of consent to search in the context of routine traffic stops, courts can and should demand sufficient proof in an individual case that the consent to search was truly express, clear and voluntary.
Our opinion in State v. Dezso, 512 N.W.2d 877 (Minn.1994), illustrates one way of doing just that, by subjecting claims of voluntary consent in this context to careful appellate review. In Dezso, a trooper stopped a truck after clocking it at 63 m.p.h. in a 55 m.p.h. zone. The trooper, intending only to warn the driver, took the driver’s license from him and asked him to sit in the front seat of the squad car with him. While waiting for a response to a remote check on the driver’s license and the vehicle registration, the trooper asked the driver if he had any alcohol, weapons or controlled substances in his pickup. When the driver said no, the trooper asked, “Any objections if I were to take a look?” The driver replied: “Yeah, if you want to.” The license check revealed that the driver’s license was valid and there were no Minnesota violations. When the trooper returned the license, the driver appeared to tilt the wallet away from the trooper’s view. The trooper testified he thought the driver was “trying to hide something” so — despite having no need for additional identification— the trooper asked the driver if he had anything else with his name on it. While the driver was attempting to provide the trooper with additional identification without revealing the contents of his wallet, the trooper leaned over to look in the wallet and the following conversation took place:2
TROOPER: “Mind if I take a look at your wallet?”
DRIVER: “No, it’s just my stuff.” TROOPER: “Can I take a look at the wallet?”
DRIVER: “Yeah, I got, ah [unintelligible] cards.”
TROOPER: “What do you got in your hand there?”
DRIVER: “Oh, a piece of paper.” TROOPER: “Mind if I take a look at it?” DRIVER: “Well, it’s mine * * * not doing anything.”
The trooper testified that the driver handed him the wallet, whereas the driver testified that the trooper grabbed it. While going through the wallet the trooper discovered blotter acid (LSD). This led to a search of the truck and the discovery of a rifle, a pistol, and a small amount of marijuana.
Reversing the court of appeal’s decision affirming the driver’s conviction of possession of LSD, we said:
It would seem there was apparent consent. As we read the trial court’s findings, we understand the trial court to have discredited the defendant’s testimony that the officer grabbed his wallet and to have found that defendant handed over his wallet to the officer. But the fact that the wallet was handed over without a verbal protest does not, by itself, establish that the delivery was voluntary. Failure to object is not the same as consent. See State v. Howard, 373 N.W.2d 596, 599 (Minn.1985) (“Mere acquiescence on a claim of police authority or submission in the face of a show of force is, of course, not enough.”) Consequently, the trial court’s conclusion that the defendant “voluntarily surrendered” the wallet is not sustainable simply because there was an “absence of any protest.”
Id. at 880. We then proceeded to examine the totality of the circumstances bearing on *581whether the defendant voluntarily consented, “including the nature of the encounter, the kind of person the defendant [was], and what was said and how it was said.” Id. In concluding that the state failed to sustain its burden of proving voluntary consent, we said:
The officer’s questions, though couched in nonauthoritative language, were official and persistent, and were accompanied by the officer’s body movement in leaning over towards the defendant seated next to him. There is no indication that defendant was aware that he could refuse to let the officer see the wallet. From the nature of the questions asked and the answers given, it is not all that clear that defendant was voluntarily consenting to a search of his wallet. Arguably, defendant’s answers seem not so much to indicate willingness to allow the search as an effort, under intimidating circumstances, to fend off a search with equivocal responses.
Id. at 881.
Applying the type of careful review that we spelled out in Dezso, we hold that under the totality of circumstances in this case, the state failed to meet its burden of proving that the defendant voluntarily consented to the search. As in Dezso, George’s responses to Trooper Vaselaar appear more in the nature of “an effort ⅜ ⅜ * to fend off a search with equivocal responses.” See Id. Like Dezso, George was stopped on an alleged minor traffic violation. Like Dezso, each response by George to the question of the trooper led to additional queries. Like Dez-so, George was unaware that he had a right to refuse consent to the search or to leave,3 and in George’s case, he was confronted by not one, but two law enforcement officers. Equivocation as to consent in such intimidating circumstances is not enough to meet the constitutional test of Schneckloth and Bumper. It is precisely the kind of “mere acquiescence ⅜ * * or submission” that we rejected in State v. Howard, 373 N.W.2d 596, 599 (Minn.1985).
In summary, we conclude both that the trooper did not have the required objective legal basis for suspecting George was driving his motorcycle in violation of any motor vehicle law and that the ensuing search was invalid under the totality of circumstances because the state failed to meet its burden of proving that the George voluntarily consented to the search of his motorcycle. Accordingly, we vacate George’s conviction of possession of a handgun without a permit.
PAGE and BLATZ, JJ., took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.
SPECIAL CONCURRENCE
. Although George also argues before this court that the stop was illegal because of its "pretextual” nature, our holdings as to the lack of a reasonable basis for the stop and the lack of consent for the search obviate the need for a determination on this issue. Nevertheless, we note that the United States Supreme Court has recently considered this issue. Whren v. United States, - U.S. -, 116 S.Ct. 1769, 135 L.Ed.2d 89 (1996). Whren involved a stop by plainclothes police officers of a vehicle that, having waited at a stop sign for an extended period of time, turned suddenly without signalling and sped away at an unreasonable speed. The occupants were ultimately arrested for and convicted of another, more serious crime, and at a pre-trial suppression hearing argued that the traffic stop was a pretext. Id. at-, 116 S.Ct. at 1772. The Court concluded that the constitutional reasonableness of a traffic stop does not turn on the actual motivations of the officer involved. Id. at -, 116 S.Ct. at 1774. "[T]he Fourth Amendment's concern with 'reasonableness' allows certain actions to be taken in certain circumstances, whatever the subjective intent.” Id. at-, 116 S.Ct. at 1775. We believe that under a Whren analysis, any subjective desire by Trooper Vasel-aar to seek evidence of other illegal activity 1 would not have invalidated the stop, had it been otherwise valid.
. A microphone in a video camera located on the dashboard of the patrol car recorded the conven-sation between the trooper and the driver while they were in the 'patrol car.
. Although the United States Supreme Court has recently held that notification of one’s right to leave is not a necessary prerequisite to a determination that a consent to search was voluntary, Ohio v. Robinette, -U.S.-, 117 S.Ct. 417, 136 L.Ed.2d 347 (1996), the absence of knowledge of the right to leave may be considered as part of the totality of the circumstances in evaluating a consent to search.

=== CASE 9741221 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:46.128549+00 ===

TOMLJANOYICH, Justice
(concurring).
I concur with the majority and write only to emphasize that there are two aspects to the second issue addressed by the court. The first is whether it is legitimate for a police officer as part of a routine traffic stop, and in the absence of probable cause to search, to ask the stopped driver for consent to search and to search pursuant to that consent. The second aspect of the issue is whether, if it is legitimate to ask for consent in this situation, under what circumstances will the driver’s response be sufficient to constitute voluntary consent.
Our decisions in this case and in Dezso represent what I believe will be an ongoing attempt to come to grips with the increasing use by state troopers and police officers of subtle tactics to get motorists and others to “consent” to searches. It appears state troopers and police officers are receiving training on getting “consent” to search, similar to the training sales people receive in getting people to agree to buy things they do not want. One technique is to ask the defen-' dant a question along the following lines: “You wouldn’t mind if I looked in the truck, would you?” If the person says “no,” the officer searches. Consumer protection laws provide some protection to consumers who, as a result of sales pitches from sales people, *582“consent” to purchase products they do not want. We are not dealing with vacuum cleaners in this case but with the liberty and privacy interests of all the people of the State of Minnesota, and we have an obligation to ourselves and to the Constitution of this State to do what we can, in our limited role as a court of last resort, to provide reasonable'protection to those interests. We have done this in related contexts. See, e.g., Ascher v. Commissioner of Public Safety, 519 N.W.2d 183, 187 (Minn.1994) (holding that police use of temporary roadblock to stop cars and investigate large number of drivers in the hope of discovering evidence of alcohol-impaired driving by some of them violates Minn. Const, art. I, § 10, which generally requires police to have individualized objective, articulable suspicion of criminal wrongdoing before stopping a motorist), and Matter of Welfare of E.D.J., 502 N.W.2d 779, 783 (Minn.1993) [relying on Minnesota Constitution in adhering to so-called Menden-hall/Royer standard1 in determining when a person is “seized” for Fourth Amendment purposes and in rejecting United States Supreme Court’s departure from that standard in California v. Hodari, 499 U.S. 621, 111 S.Ct. 1547,113 L.Ed.2d 690 (1991) ].
I am not prepared at this time to specify the form those protections might take. As the majority notes, we could reject the concept of consent to search in the context of routine traffic stops and so-called voluntary street encounters. A more plausible option is to extend our decision in State v. Scales, 518 N.W.2d 587 (Minn.1994) (requiring that all custodial interrogation, including the giving and the waiving of rights, must be recorded when questioning occurs in a place of detention and before then unless not feasible) to the interchange in cases like this in which the trooper or police officer seeks consent to search. Another possibility is to require that the trooper or police officer clearly inform the driver that he has a constitutional right to refuse to consent to the requested search. See Rebecca A. Stack, Airport Drug Searches: Giving Content to the Concept of Free and Voluntary Consent, 77 Va.L.REV. 183, 205-08 (1991).2 At a bare minimum, we must give heightened review of issues of-voluntary consent in this context, as we did in Dezso.
In summary, I agree with the court that all we need to do in this case is give the issue of voluntary consent the kind of heightened review we gave it in Dezso. Doing that, I agree that under the totality of circumstances the state failed to meet its burden of proving that the defendant voluntarily consented to the search.
. See Florida v. Royer, 460 U.S. 491, 103 S.Ct. 1319, 75 L.Ed.2d 229 (1983).
. The United States Supreme Court in Ohio v. Robinette, - U.S. -, 117 S.Ct. 417, 136 L.Ed.2d 347 (1996) filed Nov. 18, 1996, interpreting the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution, held that there is no federal requirement that a lawfully seized defendant be advised he is free to go before his consent to search will be recognized as voluntary.

=== CASE 9741222 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:49.650578+00 ===

OPINION
SULLIVAN, Judge.
Karen Railing ("Mother") appeals from the trial court's denial of her motion to correct errors regarding the trial court's Order on Support and College Expenses. She asserts that the court's findings are inadequate with reference to the failure to *982recognize overtime pay in computing the income of Lonnie Hawkins ("Father") and that the court, without regard to overtime pay, erroneously computed Father's gross weekly income.
We reverse and remand for further proceedings.
The relevant facts follow. S.E.B. was born to Mother on October 21, 1979. Father acknowledged paternity of S.E.B., and the trial court entered a support order establishing that Father was required to pay $25.00 per week in support. Over the years, the amount of child support that Father was required to pay was increased periodically.
On August 13, 1999, Mother filed a petition to modify the trial court's most recent support order, and requesting the trial court to order Father to contribute to S.E.B.'s college expenses. After a hearing, the trial court determined that Father's gross weekly income was $625.00 and ordered him to pay $32.80 per week in child support plus an additional $69.20 per week for S.E.B.'s college expenses, for a total of $102.00 per week.
Mother filed a motion to correct errors, glleging, among other claims, that the trial court erred in the course of calculating Father's income. Following a hearing, the trial court increased Father's child support obligation to reflect his lack of visitation with S.E.B., but denied Mother's motion in all other respects.
In this case, Father has not filed an appellee's brief, In such instance, we need not undertake the burden of developing arguments for the appellee. See Fisher v. Board of Sch. Trustees, 514 N.E.2d 626, 628 (Ind.Ct.App.1986). Applying a less stringent standard of review, we may reverse the trial court when the appellant establishes prima facie error. Id. "Prima facie" is defined as "at first sight, on first appearance, or on the face of it." Hamiter v. Torrence, 717 N.E.2d 1249, 1252 (Ind.Ct.App.1999) (quoting Johnson County Rural Elec. Membership Corp. v. Burnell, 484 N.E.2d 989, 991 (Ind.Ct.App.1985)).
Here, the issue is whether the trial court erred in the course of modifying Father's child support obligations.
A.
Mother claims that the trial court erred by failing to express its reasons for excluding Father's overtime income from his gross weekly income. The Child Support Guidelines' definition of weekly gross income includes overtime pay. See Ind.Child Supp. Guideline 3(A)(1). However, such income can be "irregular or nonguaranteed, which cause{s] difficulty in accurately determining the gross income of a party." Child Supp.G. 3, Commentary 2(b). Thus, a determination as to whether overtime should be included in a parent's weekly gross income is very fact sensitive. Id. For that reason, when a trial court determines that it is not appropriate to include irregular income in the determination of a parent's child support obligation, the trial court should express its reasons. Id.; see also Hamiter, 717 N.E.2d at 1252. In addition, the dependability of a parent's overtime income and the parent's ability to maintain such income are crucial factors in determining whether such income should be included in a parent's weekly gross income. See Thompson v. Thompson, 696 N.E.2d 80, 84 (Ind.Ct.App.1998). Therefore, the trial court must indicate in its findings and conclusions that it has considered those factors. Id.
In the instant case, the trial court's order determining the amount of Father's gross weekly income does not discuss Father's overtime pay. All that we may infer from the order is that the trial court chose *983not to include Father's overtime income in his weekly gross income. Consequently, on the face of its order the trial court did not abide by the requirements of Child Support Guideline 3, and Mother has demonstrated prima facie error. It is necessary to reverse the trial court's judgment and remand with instructions for the trial court to issue findings and conclusions, in keeping with the principles set forth in Thompson, with respect to Father's overtime income. See Thompson, 696 N.E.2d at 84.
B.
Mother argues that the trial court "imputed an amount for [Father's] weekly gross income which was even less than his actual basic wage." Appellant's brief at 15. The Indiana Child Support Guidelines define weekly gross income, in relevant part, as:
actual weekly gross income of the parent if employed to full capacity, potential income if unemployed or underemployed, and imputed income based upon "in-kind" benefits Weekly gross income of each parent includes income from any source, exeept as excluded below, and includes, but is not limited to, income from salaries, wages, ... overtime,. ...
Child Supp.G. 3(A)(1).
Here, the trial court imputed to Father a weekly gross income of $625.00. At the hearing on Mother's petition, Father presented evidence that during 1999, prior to Mother filing her petition to modify on August 13, 1999, Father had a year-to-date gross income of $19,875.37, or an average weekly income of $625.00. Father also submitted a child support worksheet to the trial court that listed $625.00 as his gross weekly income for 1999 prior to the filing of the petition. Mother correctly notes that Father testified that he was making $680.00 per week at the time of the hearing in 2000, and argues that the trial court should have adopted this figure as Father's gross weekly income.1
In determining that Father's weekly gross income was $625.00, the evidence upon which the trial court totally relied, was restricted to Father's evidence concerning 1999 during which period he was admittedly not "employed to full capacity" because he did not work during the first two months of that year. Child Supp.G. 3(A)(1). The trial court totally disregarded the evidence of Father's income from the time of the filing of Mother's modification petition in 1999 to the time of the evidentiary hearing in 2000, and disregarded the fact that during the time Father was employed, at no time did he earn less than a base wage of $17.00 per hour and at no time, exeept for vacation, did he work less than forty hours per week. This reflection of Father's actual and current income is contained within two of Father's Earnings Statements, prepared by the employer, covering periods in the year 2000, and filed as exhibits at the time of the hearing.
The Guidelines contemplate that the Child Support Obligation Worksheet, which contains relevant income information, be filed "when the court is asked to order support." Child Supp.G. 3(B). *984Nevertheless, such filing is not conclusive with regard to the income to be considered for purposes of entering a final support order. To so hold would allow for gross aberration of the facts relevant to a fair and accurate determination of child support in conformity with the purpose and intent of the Guidelines. This would be particularly egregious in situations in which there has been a dramatic change in the income of a party or of the parties, or in which there has been an appreciable period of time elapsed between filing of the support modification petition and the evidentiary hearing.
Mother has demonstrated that when Father is fully employed, as has been the case ever since February 1999, his average gross weekly wage exceeds $625.00. The clear evidence is that his starting base wage was $17.00 per hour and that except for vacation, he has never worked less than forty hours per week. This reflects a minimum base wage of $680.00 per week. The $55.00 per week difference is not de minimis.
If overtime pay is injected into the equation, as provided in the Support Guidelines, the weekly gross pay is even higher.
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the judgment of the trial court, and remand for additional findings with regard to the inclusion or exelusion of overtime pay and for recomputation of Father's support obligation premised upon a weekly gross income of no less than $680.00.
NAJAM, J., concurs.
SHARPNACK, C.J., dissents with opinion.
. In regard to Father's 1999 gross weekly income, Mother notes in her brief's statement of facts that Father was unemployed for approximately the first two months of 1999, and that his average gross weekly income for the weeks during which he was actually employed in 1999 is higher than the figure Father presented to the trial court as his gross weekly income. Contrary to the view expressed in the dissent, the argument made by Mother in this regard speaks for itself and requires no additional elaboration or authority.

=== CASE 2226658 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:15.333472+00 ===

207 Wis. 2d 129 (1997)
557 N.W.2d 812
STATE of Wisconsin, Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
Larry R. DOWE, Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner.
No. 95-0314-CR.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
Oral argument September 10, 1996.
Decided January 24, 1997.
For the defendant-appellant-petitioner there were briefs and oral argument by Bryan J. Borman, assistant state public defender.
For the plaintiff-respondent the cause was argued by Stephen W. Kleinmaier, assistant attorney general, *130 with whom on the brief was James E. Doyle, attorney general.
Amicus curiae brief was filed by Robert R. Henak and Shellow, Shellow & Glynn, S.C., Milwaukee for the Wisconsin Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers.
¶ 1. ANN WALSH BRADLEY, J.
This case is before the court on a petition for review filed by the defendant, Larry R. Dowe. The defendant seeks review of a court of appeals' decision[1] affirming a non-final order of the circuit court for Waukesha County, Marianne E. Becker, Judge, denying his motion to dismiss. The defendant argues that because possession of marijuana with intent to deliver[2] is a lesser-included offense of being a dealer in possession of marijuana without a tax stamp,[3] the State's act of charging him with both offenses constitutes double jeopardy.
[1]
¶ 2. In State v. Hall, 207 Wis. 2d 54, 557 N.W.2d 778 (1997), this court held that the drug tax stamp statute is unconstitutional. Thus, we do not reach the double jeopardy issue presented in this case, because the defendant cannot be prosecuted for being a dealer in possession of marijuana without a tax stamp. Instead, we reverse and remand to the circuit court for further proceedings on the charge of possession of marijuana with intent to deliver and with directions to dismiss with prejudice the drug tax stamp charge.
*131 By the Court.Reversed and cause remanded with directions.
NOTES
[1]  State v. Dowe, 197 Wis. 2d 848, 541 N.W.2d 218 (1995).
[2]  Wis. Stat. § 161.41(1m)(h)1 (1991-92).
[3]  Wis. Stat. § 139.95(2) (1991-92).

=== CASE 3027446 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:16.498228+00 ===

Opinions of the United
2007 Decisions                                                                                                             States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit
6-29-2007
Greenbaum v. Comm Social Security
Precedential or Non-Precedential: Non-Precedential
Docket No. 06-2780
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007
Recommended Citation
"Greenbaum v. Comm Social Security" (2007). 2007 Decisions. Paper 859.
http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007/859
This decision is brought to you for free and open access by the Opinions of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit at Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in 2007 Decisions by an authorized administrator of Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. For more information, please contact Benjamin.Carlson@law.villanova.edu.
NOT PRECEDENTIAL
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 06-2780
STACEY L. GREENBAUM,
Appellant
v.
JO ANNE B. BARNHART,
COMMISSIONER OF SSA
On Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania
(D.C. No. 05-cv-00533)
District Judge: Honorable Mary A. McLaughlin
Submitted Pursuant to Third Circuit LAR 34.1(a)
June 5, 2007
Before: SMITH, COWEN, and SILER,* Circuit Judges.
(Filed: June 29, 2007)
OPINION OF THE COURT
____________
*The Honorable Eugene E. Siler, Jr., Senior United States Circuit Judge for the Sixth
Circuit, sitting by designation.
SILER, Circuit Judge.
Stacey L. Greenbaum appeals the District Court’s grant of summary judgment to the
Commissioner in this social security case. We agree with the District Court that substantial
evidence supports the Commissioner’s decision in denying benefits and so we will affirm.
I.
Because we write only for the parties, we present the facts briefly.
Greenbaum was born in 1965. She holds a bachelor’s degree in recreational therapy
and has worked as a nutrition specialist. She was last employed as a recreational therapist.
She took a leave of absence from that job in January 1993 after falling at work and injuring
her right side. She resumed her work in June 1993–this time light duty only, three days a
week. She stopped working completely in February 1994 and has since been unemployed.
Greenbaum applied for disability insurance benefits in May 1996, alleging disability
as of February 5, 1994, due to multiple impairments.           After a hearing before an
Administrative Law Judge (“ALJ”), she was denied benefits; the Appeals Council later
remanded the case to the ALJ.1 At the second hearing before the ALJ, Greenbaum testified
to several ailments including pain in her right hand, arm, shoulder and neck; headaches; and
1
Specifically, the Appeals Council directed the ALJ to “[g]ive further
consideration to the claimant’s maximum residual functional capacity during the entire
period at issue and provide rationale with specific references to evidence of record in
support of the assessed limitations [and] [i]n so doing, evaluate the treating and
nonexamining source opinions . . . and explain the weight given to such opinion
evidence.”
2
poor sleep.2 The ALJ again denied Greenbaum’s application. The Appeals Council denied
Greenbaum’s second request for review and Greenbaum filed this matter in the District
Court. The District Court granted the Commissioner’s motion for summary judgment and
denied Greenbaum’s motion. We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291.
II.
In order to receive disability benefits, a claimant must establish that she is disabled
under the Social Security Act. We exercise plenary review over a grant of summary
judgment and so our role on appeal is the same as the role of the District Court. See
Plummer v. Apfel, 186 F.3d 422, 427 (3d Cir. 1999). Specifically, we must affirm if the
ALJ’s findings are supported by substantial evidence. Burns v. Barnhart, 312 F.3d 113, 118
(3d Cir. 2002).
Here, the ALJ found that Greenbaum’s impairments, although severe, did not result
in total disability. Rather, she determined that Greenbaum retained the residual functional
capacity to engage in sedentary work. Greenbaum challenges this conclusion on three
grounds. First, she argues that substantial evidence does not support the ALJ’s decision to
deny disability benefits. Second, she argues that the ALJ did not properly assess her residual
functional capacity as required by the remand order of the Appeals Council. Third, she
argues that the ALJ failed to address inconsistencies in the vocational expert’s testimony with
2
The details of Greenbaum’s medical history were well described by the ALJ and
we will not repeat those details separately here.
3
the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (“DOT”), as required by Social Security Ruling
(“SSR”) 00-4p.
The ALJ discussed Greenbaum’s limitations at great length in her decision. The
opinion provides factual foundations for her findings. Because substantial evidence supports
the ALJ’s determination, we find no reversible error.
Greenbaum argues that on remand the ALJ should have discussed each of the
functions listed on the form located in the state agency residual physical functional capacity
assessment. There is, however, no legal requirement that every conceivable function must
be discussed. Moreover, the Appeals Council was satisfied that the ALJ’s decision fulfilled
its remand order when it affirmed the ALJ.
Throughout the relevant period, Greenbaum saw more than twenty physicians whose
opinions often contradicted one another. She now argues that the ALJ improperly rejected
or did not properly evaluate certain opinion evidence. These opinions, however, were not
supported by the record as a whole. Therefore, the ALJ was not required to accord these
contradictory opinions controlling weight. See 20 C.F.R. § 404.1527(d)(4) (“the more
consistent an opinion is with the record as a whole, the more weight we will give to that
opinion”). Additionally, Greenbaum’s subjective complaints suggested a greater severity
than was shown by objective, uncontradicted medical evidence. Thus, substantial evidence
supported the residual functional capacity that the ALJ assessed.
The ALJ found that Greenbaum was able to lift no more than 10 pounds, which is
commensurate to the sedentary job level. Two of the three positions that the vocational
4
expert identified can be performed at the sedentary level, although they require a heightened
reasoning ability. However, because Greenbaum has a college degree, she has the required
educational background to perform these occupations. There is no evidence that her physical
impairments affected her reasoning skills. Thus, the vocational expert’s testimony was not
at variance with the DOT and no explanation was required.
III.
Because substantial evidence supports the ALJ’s determination, we will affirm the
judgment of the District Court.
5

=== CASE 9741223 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:49.654532+00 ===

SHARPNACK, C.J.,
concurring in part and dissenting in part.
I fully concur with the majority's decision to reverse and remand so that the trial court may enter findings of fact and conclusions thereon as to Father's overtime income. I disagree with the majority on the question of Father's gross weekly income.
The trial court issued findings and conclusions with regard to Father's gross weekly income. When reviewing the trial court's findings of fact and conclusions thereon, we consider the evidence that supports the judgment and the reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. Scott v. Scott, 668 N.E.2d 691, 695 (Ind.Ct.App.1996). We must affirm the judgment of the trial court unless the evidence points incontrovertibly to an opposite conclusion. Id.
Here, the trial court imputed to Father a weekly gross income of $625.00. At the hearing on Mother's petition to modify, Father presented evidence that during 1999, prior to Mother filing her petition on August 13, 1999, Father had a year-to-date gross income of $19,375.37, or an average weekly income of $625.00. Father also submitted a child support worksheet to the trial court that listed $625.00 as his gross weekly income for 1999 prior to the filing of the petition. This evidence supports the trial court's finding that Father's gross weekly income was $625.00. See In re Paternity of Thompson, 604 N.E.2d 1254, 1257 (Ind.Ct.App.1992), reh'g denied. Thus, the evidence does not point incontrovertibly to a conclusion opposite that reached by the trial court. Although Mother is correct that Father testified that he was making $680.00 per week at the time of the hearing, her argument that the trial court should have chosen that figure is a request to reweigh the evidence, which we cannot do.2 See Scott, 668 N.E.2d at *985702. Therefore, I would affirm the trial court's judgment as to Father's gross weekly income, and I respectfully dissent on this issue.
. Mother also claims that Father was unemployed for approximately the first two months *985of 1999, but as the majority notes, she only raises this claim in her brief's statement of facts. She fails to develop this claim in the argument section of her brief and does not cite authority to support it. Thus, I would conclude that she has waived it for our review. See former Ind. Appellate Rule 8.3(A)(7); Harris v. Harris, 690 N.E.2d 742, 745 (Ind.Ct.App.1998).

=== CASE 9741224 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:51.320079+00 ===

*503Gerrard, J.
Appellant, John C. Tess, seeks further review from the Nebraska Court of Appeals’ summary dismissal of his appeal of a district court order sustaining summary judgment in favor of appellees, Lawyers Title Insurance Corporation and Dakota Title and Escrow Co. For the reasons stated herein, we conclude that the district court order sustaining appellees’ motion for summary judgment, which in effect completely dismissed from the lawsuit one of two defendants and completely dismissed one of two causes of action pled, is a final, appealable order. As such, the Court of Appeals erred in summarily dismissing Tess’ appeal. However, upon consideration of the merits, we affirm the judgment of the district court.
I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
In the summer of 1986, Tess and his now former wife entered into negotiations with Herbert Osborne, now deceased, a real estate broker and developer, for the purchase of an 80-acre tract of land located on what was at that time the northwest outskirts of Omaha. Unable to afford the entire tract, Tess offered to purchase a 20-acre portion located on the corner of 168th Street and West Maple Road. Osborne readily agreed to Tess’ proposal, as he had other prospective buyers interested in purchasing 10-acre portions of the same tract.
Osborne acted in several capacities during this transaction. He was the seller and trustee of the property, as well as Tess’ lender and real estate agent. In addition, Osborne and his partner, Charles Rasmussen, were longtime clients of Dakota Title. On September 3, 1986, Osborne submitted an application for title insurance with respect to the property Tess intended to purchase to Dakota Title, the local agent for Lawyers Title. On this application, Osborne indicated that the parties to be insured were John C. and Maureen C. Tess.
The title insurance commitment issued to Osborne stated an effective date of September 9,1986, and failed to recite that the parcel of land at issue was subject to any protective covenants. Further, the title insurance commitment provided that Dakota Title was to be notified prior to the closing of the transaction, so *504that the status of title could be updated. Tess does not recall ever receiving the title insurance commitment.
Notwithstanding the fact that the title insurance commitment recited an effective date of September 9, 1986, a Dakota Title document described as a title binder search sheet and bearing the initials “EP” indicates that the title search on the property at issue was in fact conducted on September 11. Edwin Peabody, Dakota Title’s former vice president and a licensed abstracter and title agent, claimed to have no recollection of the specific facts concerning this title search. However, Peabody explained the likely reason for the discrepancies between the effective date of the commitment for title insurance and the date the search was conducted in this matter was that Dakota Title would normally backdate title insurance commitments to reflect the delay expected between the recording of an instrument and its appearance in the index of the register of deeds.
The record also reflects that on the same day Dakota Title conducted its title search in regard to Tess’ property, Osborne and Rasmussen executed protective covenants with respect to the entire 80-acre tract of land at issue. Peabody notarized the execution of these protective covenants. The covenants recite that they are to run with the land and bind all present and future owners. The covenants provide, in pertinent part, that the properties may only be used for residential and farming purposes, and specifically proscribe commercial farming and restrict the number of horses and ponies permitted on each lot. The covenants were recorded on September 12, 1986.
When Osborne divided the 80-acre tract for sale, he parceled out Tess’ 20 acres and five other tracts roughly 10 acres each. Dakota Title prepared title insurance commitments for each of these tracts at approximately the same time it prepared the title insurance commitment for Tess. Only the commitments prepared listing Tess and his then father-in-law and mother-in-law as insureds failed to report the existence of the protective covenants. Title insurance commitments listing all of the other purchasers as insureds, all with the effective dates of September 11, 1986, recite the existence of the protective covenants even though the covenants were not recorded until September 12.
*505Tess was not represented by an attorney during this sale. Instead, Tess said he relied on Osborne, as the experienced real estate professional, to be fair and aboveboard during the entire transaction. At closing on October 1, 1986, Tess admitted seeing a warranty deed executed in his favor which recited that the property was subject to protective covenants of record. Tess said that he questioned Osborne about the covenants and told Osborne that he wanted to retain an attorney before proceeding. According to Tess, Osborne persuaded him that he did not need to hire an attorney and that the covenants did not apply to his 20-acre parcel, but instead pertained only to the 10-acre parcels. Tess closed on the property on October 1.
Dakota Title was not notified of the real estate closing date and did not conduct an updated search of title prior to the closing. The Lawyers Title insurance policy issued with Tess as the insured, effective October 7, 1986, notes Tess’ recorded deed and mortgage of October 7, but the protective covenants are not shown as exceptions on the policy.
From 1986 to 1993, Tess lived in the farmstead house on the property and operated a boarding stable. In late 1992, Tess was approached by a representative of Emeth, Inc., and entered into negotiations for the sale of his property. When Emeth discovered the existence of the protective covenants on the eve of closing, it backed out of a proposed sale.
Tess filed suit against Lawyers Title and Dakota Title alleging two causes of action: (1) breach of the contract for title insurance and (2) negligence in regard to appellees’ failure to either discover or disclose the existence of the protective covenants. On September 26, 1994, Dakota Title moved the court for summary judgment, and Lawyers Title moved the court for partial summary judgment. The district court granted Dakota Title’s motion for summary judgment with respect to the breach of contract cause of action. The court found Dakota Title acted solely as a disclosed agent for Lawyers Title with respect to the purchase of title insurance and made no attempt to bind itself. The court overruled the motions with respect to the negligence cause of action.
Subsequently, on January 31,1995, both appellees moved the court for summary judgment with respect to the negligence *506cause of action. On May 4, the district court sustained appellees’ motion. The court found that the commitment for title insurance accurately reflects the public record as of its effective date, September 9, 1986; therefore, as a matter of law, appellees were not negligent in its preparation. Further, Dakota Title was only under a duty to update the title status prior to closing upon notification by one of the parties. Because no one provided such notification, Dakota Title was without a duty to update the title status. Finally, the court found that Tess did not rely on Dakota Title’s search of the record to establish marketable title at the time of closing. Instead, Tess relied on Osborne’s representations.
The result of the district court order sustaining summary judgment was to effect a complete dismissal of Dakota Title as a party to the suit and the complete dismissal of Tess’ negligence cause of action. Thus, the only matter pending before the district court is Tess’ cause of action for breach of the insurance contract with respect to Lawyers Title.
Tess timely appealed the district court’s May 4, 1995, order. The Court of Appeals summarily dismissed Tess’ appeal, finding it lacked jurisdiction because the district court order was not a final order. See Tess v. Lawyers Title Ins. Corp., 3 Neb. App. xlix (case No. A-95-608, July 13, 1995).
II. SCOPE OF REVIEW
When a jurisdictional question does not involve a factual dispute, its determination is a matter of law, which requires an appellate court to reach a conclusion independent from the decisions made by the lower courts. City of Lincoln v. Twin Platte NRD, 250 Neb. 452, 551 N.W.2d 6 (1996).
Summary judgment is proper only when the pleadings, depositions, admissions, stipulations, and affidavits in the record disclose that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact or as to the ultimate inferences that may be drawn from those facts and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Larkin v. Ethicon, Inc., ante p. 169, 556 N.W.2d 44 (1996).
III. ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
Tess asserts that the Court of Appeals erred in dismissing the instant appeal because complete dismissal of one of multiple *507defendants in a suit is a final order with respect to that defendant, and complete dismissal of one of two separate causes of action is a final order with respect to that cause of action.
In regard to the merits of his appeal, Tess claims that the district court erred (1) in finding that as a matter of law, appellees were not negligent and that Tess did not rely on appellees in purchasing the property at issue, and (2) in overruling Tess’ motion for a continuance of the summary judgment hearing.
IV. ANALYSIS
1. Jurisdiction
(a) Dismissal of Dakota Title as Party Defendant
For an appellate court to acquire jurisdiction of an appeal, there must be a final order entered by the court from which the appeal is taken. Conversely, an appellate court is without jurisdiction to entertain appeals from nonfinal orders. Currie v. Chief School Bus Serv., 250 Neb. 872, 553 N.W.2d 469 (1996); City of Lincoln v. Twin Platte NRD, supra. Three types of final orders may be reviewed on appeal: (1) an order which affects a substantial right and which determines the action and prevents a judgment, (2) an order affecting a substantial right made during a special proceeding, and (3) an order affecting a substantial right made on summary application in an action after a judgment is rendered. Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 25-1902 and 25-1911 (Reissue 1995); Currie v. Chief School Bus Serv., supra; Rohde v. Farmers Alliance Mut. Ins. Co., 244 Neb. 863, 509 N.W.2d 618 (1994); Jarrett v. Eichler, 244 Neb. 310, 506 N.W.2d 682 (1993). However, to be final, an order must dispose of the whole merits of the case. When no further action of the court is required to dispose of a pending cause, the order is final. If the cause is retained for further action, the order is interlocutory. Olsen v. Olsen, 248 Neb. 393, 534 N.W.2d 762 (1995).
In Currie v. Chief School Bus Serv., supra, we held that a district court order sustaining the defendant’s motion for summary judgment which dismissed the plaintiff’s negligence claim with prejudice is a final, appealable order because it affects substantial rights of the plaintiff and was made during a special proceeding, notwithstanding the fact the district court still had pending before it the defendant’s counterclaim.
*508Tess asserts that the May 4, 1995, district court order was a final, appealable order because, in effect, it dismissed with prejudice his negligence cause of action against both appellees and, at the same time, dismissed with prejudice Dakota Title as a defendant in the lawsuit.
Appellees argue that the district court order was not a final, appealable order because the court did not completely dispose of all matters alleged in the suit. Tess may protect his interest by appealing the court’s order at the conclusion of the litigation with respect to Tess’ contract cause of action against Lawyers Title still pending before the district court.
In Green v. Village of Terrytown, 188 Neb. 840, 199 N.W.2d 610 (1972), we held that an order which effects a dismissal with respect to one of multiple defendants in a negligence action was a final, appealable order as to the defendant dismissed. In Green, this court recognized the competing interests at stake.
[A] paramount consideration is to be liberal in permitting appeals, but, on the other hand, that piecemeal or successive appeals are not desirable. It would appear there is a further consideration, namely that where there are multiple defendants and the action' is dismissed as to one defendant, that defendant no longer has a voice in the determination of the litigation and if the remaining parties permit the litigation to drag on for months or years, he has no way of bringing an end to the litigation or ascertaining whether or not it has been finally determined as to him. This is a very important consideration in determining whether or not such an order of dismissal is a “final order.”
Id. at 841, 199 N.W.2d at 611.
Green controls the instant case. The district court order sustaining appellees’ motion for summary judgment completely dismissed Dakota Title from the lawsuit. Accordingly, the order was a final, appealable order, and Tess is correct to assert that the Court of Appeals erred in dismissing his appeal in regard to Dakota Title.
(b) Dismissal of Negligence Cause of Action Against Both Appellees
Furthermore, Tess correctly asserts that complete dismissal with prejudice of one of multiple causes of action is a final, *509appealable order as to that cause of action. In Interholzinger v. Estate of Dent, 214 Neb. 264, 333 N.W.2d 895 (1983), we held that an order sustaining the defendant’s motion for summary judgment which dismissed the plaintiff’s cause of action for alleged legal malpractice was a final, appealable order notwithstanding the fact that the separate and distinct cause of action for money had and received remained pending for trial. However, the Interholzinger court was careful to distinguish separate causes of action from different theories of recovery. Thus, if Tess pled separate causes of action as opposed to different theories of recovery, the district court order was a final, appealable order with respect to his negligence claim.
In Interholzinger v. Estate of Dent, supra, the plaintiff sued the estate of his attorney, alleging professional negligence on the part of the attorney concerning the manner in which he attempted to sell the plaintiff’s business. The plaintiff also pled a cause of action for money had and received by the deceased attorney. In Interholzinger, we found this to be two separate causes of action, as the causes are based on two separate factual occurrences: the receipt and holding of money, and the performance of legal services.
Similarly, in Ravenna Bank v. Custom Unlimited, 223 Neb. 540, 391 N.W.2d 557 (1986), this court found a petition which alleged default on a promissory note by a partnership and enforcement of a guarantee of that debt by an individual partner to constitute two causes of action. Even though both causes were based on one debt, because a guarantee is a collateral undertaking by one to answer for the debt of another, the petition in fact described two transactions.
In contrast, in P. R. Halligan Post 163 v. Schultz, 212 Neb. 329, 322 N.W.2d 657 (1982), the plaintiff filed suit against the parents of a 13-year-old boy to recover damages to a building caused by a fire set by the child. The petition alleged two purported causes of action: parental liability for the willful and intentional acts of a child, and negligent supervision of the child. This court held dismissal of the first “cause of action” was not a final, appealable order, as both “causes of action” were instead merely different theories of recovery arising out of the same factual circumstances involving the same parties.
*510The instant case is controlled by the Interholzinger and Ravenna Bank cases. Here, Tess alleges that in 1986, appellees negligently failed to either discover or disclose in a title commitment protective covenants affecting property he intended to purchase, and later in 1994, Lawyers Title failed to indemnify him pursuant to the terms of the title insurance policy. Tess does not allege one set of operative facts from which all damages flow. Instead, he has alleged the occurrence of two separate transactions. The operative facts regarding the negligence cause of action commenced on September 11, 1986, and concluded on or about the October 1 closing date (i.e., failure to discover or disclose protective covenants in title commitment). The operative facts regarding the contract cause of action commenced with the issuance of the title insurance policy on October 7 and continue until the time of trial (i.e., failure to indemnify insured for damage by reason of defect or unmarketability of title for use intended by Tess). As such, we conclude that Tess has pled two causes of action, not two theories of recovery. Accordingly, the Court of Appeals erred in determining that the district court order was not a final, appealable order with respect to the complete dismissal with prejudice of Tess’ negligence cause of action against both appellees.
2. Summary Judgment
Having determined the jurisdictional issue, we proceed to the merits of the appeal. In reviewing a summary judgment, an appellate court views the evidence in a light most favorable to the party against whom the judgment is granted and gives such party the benefit of all reasonable inferences deducible from the evidence. Larkin v. Ethicon, Inc., ante p. 169, 556 N.W.2d 44 (1996). The party moving for summary judgment has the burden to show that no genuine issue of material fact exists and must produce sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Melick v. Schmidt, ante p. 372, 557 N.W.2d 645 (1997).
In order to succeed in an action based on negligence, a plaintiff must establish the defendant’s duty, a breach of that duty, proximate causation, and damages. Hand v. Starr, 250 Neb. 377, 550 N.W.2d 646 (1996).
*511(a) Duty of Title Insurance Company
At the outset, it should be noted that Tess’ negligence claim is based upon alleged acts or omissions in the preparation of the “September 9” title insurance commitment and not upon any responsibility imposed on the title insurance company on account of its October 7, 1986, policy of insurance. The title insurance commitment, oftentimes referred to as a binder, is not a title policy. As in the instant case, it is often in the form of a preliminary report on the status of the title. As such, it is issued at the end of the title search process undertaken by the insurer. D. Barlow Burke, Jr., Law of Title Insurance § 15.2 (2d ed. 1993). In contrast, title insurance is a contract for indemnity under which the insurer is obligated to indemnify the insured agáinst losses sustained in the event that a specific contingency, e.g., the discovery of a lien or encumbrance affecting title, occurs. See Heyd v. Chicago Title Ins. Co., 218 Neb. 296, 354 N.W.2d 154 (1984).
In Heyd v. Chicago Title Ins. Co., 218 Neb. at 303, 354 N.W.2d at 158-59, we held that
a title insurance company which renders a title report and also issues a policy of title insurance has assumed two distinct duties. In rendering the title report the title insurance company serves as an abstracter of title and must list all matters of public record adversely affecting title to the real estate which is the subject of the title report. When a title insurance company fails to perform its duty to abstract title accurately, the title insurance company may be liable in tort for all damages proximately caused by such breach of duty. A title insurance company’s responsibility for its tortious conduct is distinct from the insurance company’s responsibility existing on account of its policy of insurance. Different duties and responsibilities imposed on the title insurance company, therefore, can be the basis for separate causes of action — one cause of action in tort and another in contract.
In the instant case, Tess claims that Dakota Title is liable for either failing to discover or failing to disclose in its title insurance commitment the existence of protective covenants when Dakota Title had actual knowledge of such protective *512covenants. Tess claims that Lawyers Title is vicariously liable for Dakota Title’s misrepresentation because Dakota Title was acting as Lawyers Title’s agent.
This case presents the question whether a title company has a duty to report known, but as yet unrecorded, matters affecting title to the real estate in a preliminary title insurance commitment. A majority of other jurisdictions have accepted the theory that a title company should be liable in tort for a misrepresentation made in a preliminary commitment of title insurance. See, e.g., Bank of California v. First American, 826 P.2d 1126 (Alaska 1992); Moore v. Title Ins. Co. of Minnesota, 148 Ariz. 408, 714 P.2d 1303 (Ariz. App. 1985); White v. Western Title Ins. Co., 40 Cal. 3d 870, 710 P.2d 309, 221 Cal. Rptr. 509 (1985); Shada v. Title & Trust Co. of Fla., 457 So. 2d 553 (Fla. App. 1984); Ford v. Guarantee Abstract & Title Co., 220 Kan. 244, 553 P.2d 254 (1976); Malinak v. Safeco Title Ins. Co. of Idaho, 203 Mont. 69, 661 P.2d 12 (1983). But see, e.g., Brown’s Tie & Lumber v. Chicago Title, 115 Idaho 56, 764 P.2d 423 (1988); Walker Rogge, Inc. v. Chelsea Title & Guar. Co., 116 N.J. 517, 562 A.2d 208 (1989) (title company owes no duty beyond that which is assumed in its title policy).
The cases which find tort liability generally stress that one function of the preliminary commitment is to give interested persons knowledge concerning the state of the title so that they may plan arid structure transactions concerning the property. See Ford v. Guarantee Abstract & Title Co., supra. This is a function distinct from that of insurance, for a title policy may be issued without a preliminary commitment and without reporting what the state of the title is. Bank of California v. First American, supra.
We agree with the authorities which hold that there may be tort liability for misrepresentations made in preliminary commitments for title insurance. In our view, the same reasoning would impose a duty upon a title company to report to interested persons known, but as yet unrecorded, matters affecting title to the real estate in a preliminary title insurance commitment. Such preliminary title insurance commitments provide an essential service to prospective buyers and lenders in this state. They are told what transactions must take place before they can *513receive clear title or an effective security. Bank of California v. First American, supra.
Despite disclaimers, preliminary title reports are normally relied upon by insureds, escrow agents, and lenders with full knowledge, and sometimes with the encouragement, of the insurance company. If the insurer actually intended the list of title defects in the preliminary report to be used just to inform the potential insured of the proposed contract terms, the list could be presented in the policy at the time it is offered to the insured, as is the case with most other types of insurance policies. Instead, the title insurance company’s preliminary report is issued prior to closing of the land contract — at the same stage in the transaction as is the abstract or attorney’s opinion — and the company should know that it will likely be used in the same manner.
Joyce Dickey Palomar, Title Insurance Companies’ Liability for Failure to Search Title and Disclose Record Title, 20 Creighton L. Rev. 455, 480-81 (1987). We therefore hold that title insurance companies and their agents are required to exercise the degree of skill and knowledge normally possessed by members of the profession in good standing in the locality concerning preliminary title information which is transmitted to their customers.
The above-stated duty is not that of a guarantor; instead, it is the duty to exercise reasonable care. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 552 at 126-27 (1977), which provides in relevant part:
(1) One who, in the course of his business, profession or employment, or in any other transaction in which he has a pecuniary interest, supplies false information for the guidance of others in their business transactions, is subject to liability for pecuniary loss caused to them by their justifiable reliance upon the information, if he fails to exercise reasonable care or competence in obtaining or communicating the information.
(2) Except as stated in Subsection (3), the liability stated in Subsection (1) is limited to loss suffered
(a) by the person or one of a limited group of persons for whose benefit and guidance he intends to supply the *514information or knows that the recipient intends to supply it; and
(b) through reliance upon it in a transaction that he intends the information to influence or knows that the recipient so intends or in a substantially similar transaction.
Appellees assert that our holding in Heyd v. Chicago Title Ins. Co., 218 Neb. 296, 354 N.W.2d 154 (1984), was abrogated in 1985 when the Legislature passed the Abstracters Act, Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 76-535 through 76-558 (Reissue 1990 & Cum. Supp. 1994), and defined those matters which constitute a “report of title.” Section 76-537(9) provides that a “report of title” shall not include a title insurance commitment or policy. Appellees claim that since a title insurance commitment is neither an abstract of title nor a “report of title,” an “abstracter’s duty” can no longer arise from the issuance of a title insurance commitment. This argument is misplaced, as the duty announced herein is one of reasonable care under the circumstances and not an “abstracter’s duty” as set forth in Heyd.
Further, appellees assert that because the commitment for title insurance accurately reflected all matters of public record as of its effective date, September 9, 1986, there could be no breach of duty.
This assertion, however, ignores Tess’ claim that Dakota Title had actual notice of the protective covenants at issue when it conducted its title search for his title insurance commitment. Peabody, Dakota Title’s vice president, notarized the protective covenants executed by Osborne and Rasmussen on the same day that an agent for Dakota Title with the initials “E.P.” conducted the title search with respect to Tess’ property. Further, the protective covenants are noted on all other title insurance commitments prepared for the buyers of the 10-acre parcels — except the commitment prepared for Tess’ father-in-law and mother-in-law. These other title insurance commitments were prepared contemporaneously with Tess’ title insurance commitment.
The evidence construed in a light most favorable to Tess reveals that appellees were on actual notice of something outside the record which clearly affected title, as Dakota Title had actual knowledge of the protective covenants at the time it pre*515pared the preliminary commitment for title insurance. Here, an issue of material fact existed regarding the knowledge that appellees possessed at the time they prepared the preliminary title commitment and whether appellees’ failure to note the protective covenants in the preliminary commitment for title insurance breached their duty as a title insurer rendering a preliminary title commitment. As such, it would be erroneous for the district court to grant appellees’ motion for summary judgment, unless the court properly concluded as a matter of law that appellees’ alleged breach of duty was not a proximate cause of Tess’ damages.
(b) Proximate Cause
Appellees assert and the district court found that Tess did not rely on the title insurance commitment in deciding to proceed with the transaction. Instead, Tess relied on Osborne’s assurances that the protective covenants referenced in the warranty deed only applied to the 10-acre parcels. Thus, appellees’ negligence, if any, did not cause Tess’ damages.
The issue of proximate cause, in the face of conflicting evidence, is ordinarily a question for the trier of fact. World Radio Labs. v. Coopers & Lybrand, ante p. 261, 557 N.W.2d 1 (1996). The evidence regarding causation is not in conflict. The president of Dakota Title, by way of affidavit, asserted that a copy of the title insurance commitment was sent to Osborne and was not sent to Tess. By deposition, Tess testified that he did not recall receiving or seeing a title insurance commitment prior to, or at the time of, closing on October 1, 1986. There is simply no evidence in the record that Tess saw the title insurance commitment, much less relied upon any representations made in the commitment..
In Lawrence v. Chicago Title Ins. Co., 192 Cal. App. 3d 70, 77, 237 Cal. Rptr. 264, 268 (1987), the court aptly stated: “Even if the preliminary report constitutes a representation of title upon which the recipient is entitled to rely, a claim of negligence must be predicated upon the insured’s actual reliance on the report.” (Emphasis supplied.) See, also, Muhlenkort v. Union County Land Trust, 530 N.W.2d 658 (S.D. 1995). We agree. The evidence establishes, as a matter of law, that Tess did *516not see the title insurance commitment prior to closing and did not rely upon any representations in the commitment in deciding to proceed to closing in this matter. As such, we determine that any alleged acts of appellees in failing to note the protective covenants in the preliminary commitment for title insurance are not the proximate cause of any damages to Tess.
Tess also claims that the district court erred in failing to grant a continuance to allow Tess an opportunity to elicit expert testimony with regard to the issue of appellees’ duty and breach thereof. In light of our determination regarding proximate cause, it is unnecessary to consider this assignment of error.
V. CONCLUSION
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is thus reversed, and the cause remanded thereto with the direction that it affirm the May 4, 1995, judgment of the district court with regard to the negligence cause of action. As noted in part I, Tess’ cause of action for breach of contract with respect to Lawyers Title is pending in the district court.
Reversed and remanded with direction.

=== CASE 9741225 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:51.325513+00 ===

Lanpheer, J.,
concurring.
I concur. The majority states, on the issue of proximate causation, that Tess did not rely upon any representations made in the title commitment. I agree that Tess did not see the title insurance commitment.
Tess did however rely on the statements of his agent, Osborne, regarding the title insurance commitment. Osborne was sent a copy of the title insurance commitment. Osborne also persuaded Tess that he did not need to hire an attorney and that the covenants did not apply to his 20-acre parcel, but, instead, pertained only to the 10-acre parcels.
Further, Osborne acted as a dual agent by functioning as seller and trustee of the property as well as Tess’ lender and real estate agent. Under Nebraska law, notice or knowledge of a dual agent is imputed to and binds the principal to whom such notice or knowledge would be imputed if the agent represented him alone. See Thomas v. Jarecki, 109 Neb. 549, 191 N.W. 669 (1922). Thus, Osborne’s notice and knowledge of the title insurance commitment is imputed to Tess. Tess’ reliance on *517Osborne’s statements establishes actual reliance on the document which supports Tess’ claim of negligence.
However, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 76-537(9) (Cum. Supp. 1994) provides that a report of title does not include a title insurance commitment; therefore, no abstracter’s duty arises. In the absence of a duty, there is no negligence.
Caporale, J., joins in this concurrence.

=== CASE 9741226 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:57.237164+00 ===

Neff, P.J.
This appeal stems from the circuit court’s order of summary disposition for third-party defendant, Aldon Carissimi, dismissing the contribution claim brought by third-party plaintiffs, the Jonases. They appeal that order as of right, and we reverse and remand for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
I
The material facts of this case are not in dispute. In June 1991, Aldon Carissimi was operating his motor vehicle while his eight-year-old daughter, Theresa Carissimi, rode in the front passenger seat, allegedly without wearing her seat belt. At some point on the day in question, an automobile driven by Eleanor Jonas struck the vehicle driven by Mr. Carissimi and, Theresa was thrown against the windshield and eventually died from the injuries she sustained.
*549In the initial cause of action, plaintiff, Paula Carissimi, as personal representative of Theresa’s estate, sued the Jonases for wrongful death. The Jonases then filed a third-party claim against Mr. Carissimi, alleging they were entitled to contribution because of his failure to ensure that Theresa was secured by a seat belt as required by MCL 257.710e(4); MSA 9.2410(5)(4). Mr. Carissimi then filed a motion for summary disposition, but the trial court took the matter under advisement to allow further discovery to occur.
Subsequently, plaintiff amended her complaint and included Mr. Carissimi as a party defendant. Mr. Carissimi then renewed his motion for summary disposition, arguing that the contribution action was not necessary because the relative fault of the defendants in a negligence case is a question for the jury.
The trial court granted Mr. Carissimi’s motion, but for reasons other than those argued by the parties. The court first determined that because Mr. Carissimi’s liability arose out of the statute, he was not a joint tortfeasor with the Jonases, and thus they were barred from bringing a contribution action. The court then recognized that, as a result of its ruling, plaintiff could simply dismiss Mr. Carissimi as a party defendant, leaving the Jonases to bear the entire amount of the damages award, regardless of Mr. Carissimi’s negligence or statutory violation, if any. Accordingly, the court determined that the five-percent limit in MCL 257.710e(6); MSA 9.2410(5)(6) on the amount a recovery for damages may be reduced because of negligence attributable to the failure to wear a seat belt in violation of the statute applies to a contribution claim against a defendant where the claim is based on the *550failure to secure a seat belt on a child in violation of the statute and the defendant stands to gain from the potential award of damages. The opinion, however, is unclear regarding whether the trial court allowed contribution against Mr. Carissimi.
n
We first address whether the trial court erred in following Virgilio v Hartfield, 4 Mich App 582; 145 NW2d 367 (1966), and determining that the contribution action could not proceed on the basis that Mr. Carissimi was not a joint tortfeasor because his liability arose out of the statute rather than out of negligence. We find this ruling to have been in error.
In Salim v LaGuire, 138 Mich App 334, 341; 361 NW2d 9 (1984), this Court examined the contribution statute, MCL 600.2925a; MSA 27A.2925(1), in the context of a dramshop act cause of action, and reached the following conclusion:
(1) [T]he former bar against contribution among nonjoint tortfeasors is abolished; (2) the right of contribution exists among nonintentional wrongdoers who share a common liability; and (3) common liability exists among individuals who are responsible for an accident which produces a single indivisible injury.
Thus, in Salim, this Court allowed a contribution action to proceed between a drunk driver, whose duty arose out of negligence, and the provider of the drinks, whose duty arose out of statute. Id. In reaching its conclusion, the Court in Salim, supra at 340-341, noted that the holding in Virgilio, supra, has been superseded.
We find Salim applicable here. Although Mr. Carissimi’s duty, if any, arose out of the statute, any liabil*551ity he must bear is common with the Jonases in the sense that Theresa suffered a single, indivisible injury as a result of the combination of the negligence that led to the accident and the alleged failure to wear her seat belt. Therefore, we reverse that portion of the trial court’s opinion holding that the Jonases’ contribution action must fail because Mr. Carissimi was not a joint tortfeasor in this action.1
m
Although the parties settled the underlying case before this appeal was taken, we conclude that this case must be remanded to allow the contribution claim to proceed. MCL 600.2925a(3); MSA 27A.2925(1)(3) provides:
A tort-feasor who enters into a settlement with a claimant is not entitled to recover contribution from another tortfeasor if any of the following circumstances exist:
(a) The liability of the contributee for the injury or wrongful death is not extinguished by the settlement.
(b) A reasonable effort was not made to notify the contributee of the pendency of the settlement negotiations.
(c) The contributee was not given a reasonable opportunity to participate in the settlement negotiations.
(d) The settlement was not made in good faith.
Because the settlement extinguished Mr. Carissimi’s liability, he was on notice of the settlement, it appears he had every opportunity to participate in the settlement, and the settlement was made in good *552faith, the contribution action is not forestalled by the settlement.2
IV
On remand, we restrict the issues the parties may litigate in only one way. Contrary to the trial court’s conclusion, we hold that the five-percent cap in MCL 257.710e(6); MSA 9.2410(5)(6) does not apply to this case.
The statutory provision in question provides:
Failure to wear a safety belt in violation of this section may be considered evidence of negligence and may reduce the recovery for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or operation of a motor vehicle. However, such negligence shall not reduce the recovery for damages by more than 5%. [MCL 257.710e(6); MSA 9.2410(5)(6).]
In Ullery v Sobie, 196 Mich App 76, 80; 492 NW2d 739 (1992), this Court, while upholding the constitutionality of the five-percent cap, determined that its purpose was “to prevent the injured party from recovering substantially less based solely on the failure to wear a safety belt.” Similarly, this Court in Thompson v Fitzpatrick, 199 Mich App 5, 8; 501 NW2d 172 (1993), held that the five-percent cap was “intended by the Legislature to protect plaintiffs against drastic reduction in damage awards.”
Combining the statutory purpose behind the cap with the plain language of the statute, which provides that it applies only to “the recovery for damages,” we *553conclude that the five percent cap in the statute applies only to limit the reduction of the recovery available to plaintiffs who fail to wear their seat belts. Any other interpretation would be contrary to the plain wording of the statute and, thus, is not permitted. Lorencz v Ford Motor Co, 439 Mich 370, 376; 483 NW2d 844 (1992).
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court erred in holding that the five percent cap limited the amount the Jonases could recover from Mr. Carissimi in a contribution cause of action.
Reversed and remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Jansen, J., concurred.
We express no opinion with regard to the merits of the Jonases’ contribution claim against Mr. Carissimi.
Because the issue is not before us, we express no opinion with regard to whether Mr. Carissimi’s alleged failure to ensure his daughter was buckled up constitutes negligence or may be used as evidence of negligence.

=== CASE 9741228 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:51:57.475557+00 ===

OPINION
DAVIES, Judge.
In this appeal from a summary judgment, appellant insureds argue that a minor’s claim should not be barred despite failure of both the parents and the minor child to give respondent insurer notice of the claim. Appellants also argue that failure to give the insurer notice of child’s action against a thud party caused the insurer no prejudice and should not defeat the claim. We affirm.
FACTS
Appellants Abigail Schoffman (child), Michael Schoffman (father), and Lynn Van Ort (mother) seek coverage from respondent Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Minnesota (Blue Cross) for medical claims resulting from injuries the child sustained in a school bus accident.
The district court awarded summary judgment to Blue Cross because appellants failed to notify Blue Cross of the child’s claims within the contractually defined 15-month notice period. The court found this failure of notice prejudiced Blue Cross. The prejudice arose, the court ruled, because appellants initiated and settled a lawsuit with a third-party tortfeasor (the bus company) without notifying Blue Cross, thus effectively depriving Blue Cross of its subrogation rights.
ISSUES
1. Was the requirement that claimant child give notice of child’s claim tolled during child’s minority or, if tolled, was the parent, as named insured, obligated to give the notice?
2. Were Blue Cross’s subrogation rights prejudiced by failure of an insured to give Blue Cross notice of a lawsuit by the insured against a third party and of its settlement?
ANALYSIS
On appeal from summary judgment, this court must determine whether any genuine issues of material fact exist and whether the district court properly applied the law. Offerdahl v. University of Minn. Hosps. & Clinics, 426 N.W.2d 425, 427 (Minn.1988). The evidence must be viewed in the light most favorable (to the nonmoving party. Id.
I. Waiver of Notice
A. Express Waiver
Appellants’ contract with Blue Cross requires that a claim be filed within 15 months after the date medical services are received. The contract expressly waives this filing requirement for legally incapacitated claimants. Appellants argue that this waiver applies to claims by minors.
The policy’s claim provision provides:
You must file a written claim within 90 days after a covered service is provided. If this is not reasonably possible, we accept claims for up to 15 months .after the date of service. Failure to file a claim within the required time limits will result in a denial of your claim. We waive these time limits if you cannot file the claim because you are legally incapacitated.
The policy defines “you” as “the subscriber named on the identification (ID) card and other covered dependents.” Reading this definition into the policy’s “filing a claim” provision makes clear that a written claim within the notice period had to have been *627filed either by the father (the subscriber named on the ID card) or by the child. Thus, although the child’s notice is waived during her minority, the father’s notice obligation is not waived. The claim is barred because father, the subscriber, failed to give notice.
The Minnesota statutes on which appellants rely are not applicable here. Appellants cite: (1) Minn.Stat. § 529.01(9), which defines “incapacitated” for purposes of the Uniform Custodial Trust Act; (2) Minn.Stat. § 541.15(a)(1), which provides that a disability period is not counted for purposes of statutes of limitations; and (3) Minn.Stat. § 645.45(14), which defines “minor” for statutory construction purposes. These definitions are all applicable to special situations unrelated to the facts here.
Furthermore, the cases appellants cite from other jurisdictions are distinguishable. The first case, McCrary v. City of Odessa, 482 S.W.2d 151, 154 (Tex.1972), questions the notice requirement of a municipal charter, not of an insurance contract. The second case is Ferguson v. Nationwide Mut. Ins., 61 Misc.2d 912, 307 N.Y.S.2d 347 (Civ.Ct.1970). That jurisdiction has since ruled to the contrary, holding that “ ‘the mere fact of infancy is insufficient to toll the notice requirement contained in the policy.’ ” Winstead v. Uniondale Union Free Sch. Dist., 170 A.D.2d 500, 565 N.Y.S.2d 845, 847 (1991) (quoting Virtuoso v. Aetna Cas. & Sur., 134 A.D.2d 252, 520 N.Y.S.2d 439 (1987)). The third case, Allstate Ins. Co. v. Campbell, 95 N.J.Super. 142, 230 A.2d 179, 184 (1967), excused a minor’s late notice in an insurance dispute, but only because the insurance company failed to show prejudice. A lack of prejudice, everyone concedes, excuses the obligation to give notice.
B. Implied Waiver
Appellants also argue that Blue Cross impliedly waived its notice requirement. Because appellants improperly raise this issue for the first time on appeal, we will not address it. See Thiele v. Stick, 425 N.W.2d 580, 582-83 (Minn.1988) (“An appellate court may not base its decision on matters outside the record on appeal ⅜ ⅜ *.”).
C. Prejudice from Failure to Give Claim Notice
As a general rule, an insured’s breach of a policy provision, such as [a] notice provision * * * ⅞411 not lead to a forfeiture of insurance benefits absent a showing that the insurer has been prejudiced.
Hopkins v. Empire Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 474 N.W.2d 209, 213 (Minn.App.1991).
Blue Cross alleges prejudice from failure of notice because, had it been notified of the claims, it could have arranged for medical care pursuant to its provider discount rate. This might be actual prejudice. But, because the claimed prejudice could on this record fail as de minimis, prejudice becomes a fact issue and summary judgment on failure to give notice of claim is precluded. This, however, is not the basis for our finding of prejudice as a matter of law.
II. Subrogation Prejudice
Blue Cross also argues that its subro-gation rights were prejudiced by appellants’ failure to notify it of the third-party tort action and a proposed settlement of that claim. The district court agreed. Although respondent asserts this as prejudice relating to failure to give notice of claim, we analyze it as a defense independent of claim notice.
On appeal, appellants do 'not argue that Blue Cross’s subrogation rights were not prejudiced by the lack of notice of the third-party action.1 Rather, appellants claim that they had no duty under the policy to notify Blue Cross of the third-party action. Blue Cross’s subrogation rights depend, however, not just on the policy, but also “on ‘general principles of equity and the nature of the contract of insurance.’ ” Schmidt v. Clothier, 338 N.W.2d 256, 262 (Minn.1983) (quoting Bacich v. Homeland Ins. Co., 212 Minn. 375, 376, 3 N.W.2d 665, 665 (1942)). As the district court concluded, by settling claims with the tortfeasors without providing notice to *628Blue Ci’oss, appellants effectively denied Blue Cross any ability to protect its subrogation rights. See American Family Mut. Ins. Co. v. Baumann, 459 N.W.2d 923, 927 (Minn.1990) (absent notice of intended settlement with tortfeasors, release by plaintiff is deemed prejudicial to plaintiffs UIM insurer).
If Blue Cross had been aware of the third-party action prior to appellants’ settlement with the tortfeasors, Blue Cross could have protected any subrogation right to recover all or a portion of claims paid. But the failure to give Blue Cross timely notice of the third-party action deprived Blue Cross of the ability to protect itself.
Appellants claim that Blue Cross knew about the child’s claim at a time when it could have asserted a subrogation right; they claim Blue Cross received and denied a $16 claim eight months before the third-party action settled and paid a $241.28 claim two months before that time. These claims do not, however, flag the existence of a third-party lawsuit. Further, they fail as notice because the policy limits subrogation rights to cases where claims of more than $5,000 are paid. These small claims, thus, would not realistically trigger the kind of inquiry appellants suggest should have been made.
DECISION
The district court properly granted summary judgment.
Affirmed.
. In a partial settlement agreement filed with this court, appellants waived their argument that Blue Cross's subrogation rights were not actually prejudiced by the lack of notice of the third-party lawsuit and intended settlement.

=== CASE 2226646 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:14.863058+00 ===

557 N.W.2d 17 (1996)
251 Neb. 298
James DAEHNKE, Appellant,
v.
NEBRASKA DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES and the State of Nebraska, Appellees.
No. S-94-1155.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
December 13, 1996.
*18 Dalton W. Tietjen, of Tietjen, Simon & Boyle, Omaha, for appellant.
Don Stenberg, Attorney General, and Lisa D. Martin-Price, Lincoln, for appellees.
WHITE, C.J., and CAPORALE, FAHRNBRUCH, LANPHIER, WRIGHT, CONNOLLY, and GERRARD, JJ.
CONNOLLY, Justice.
We are asked to interpret a labor contract between the appellant, James Daehnke, and his employer, the appellees, Nebraska Department of Social Services (DSS) and the State of Nebraska. The issue is whether a provision in the contract that places a 30-workday time limitation on the employer for initiating disciplinary action against an employee is applicable to all disciplinary actions or only in those instances where the employee has been reassigned or suspended pending an internal investigation.
Daehnke filed a grievance with DSS, asserting that DSS took disciplinary action against him in an untimely manner as prohibited by the contract. After DSS denied his grievance, Daehnke presented his grievance to the Nebraska State Personnel Board (Board). Following an evidentiary hearing, the Board likewise denied Daehnke's grievance. Daehnke then appealed the Board's decision to the district court for Lancaster County pursuant to Neb.Rev.Stat. § 84-917 (Reissue 1994) of the Administrative Procedure Act. The district court affirmed the Board's decision, and Daehnke appeals.
We conclude that DSS was not subject to the contract's "30-workday rule" when initiating disciplinary action, because Daehnke was not reassigned or suspended pending an internal investigation. We therefore affirm.
BACKGROUND
The facts in this case are not disputed by the parties. Daehnke is employed by DSS in *19 a position covered by article 10 of the 1991-93 collective bargaining agreement between the Nebraska Association of Public Employees Local 61 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (NAPE/AFSCME) and the State of Nebraska. Sections 10.1 and 10.2 of the labor contract provide as follows:
ARTICLE 10-DISCIPLINE OR INVESTIGATORY SUSPENSION
10.1 An employee shall be disciplined in accordance with this labor contract. Discipline will be based upon just cause and will in no case be effective until the employee has received written notice of the allegations describing in detail the issue involved, the date the alleged violation took place, the specific section or sections of the contract or work rules involved, except in emergency or critical situations where oral notice shall suffice, and has had an opportunity to present justification of their actions at a prediscipline meeting. Any disciplinary action or measure imposed upon an employee may be processed as a grievance through the grievance procedure when it is in violation of the terms of this contract. The level of discipline imposed shall be based on the nature and severity of the infraction. The Employer shall not discipline an employee without just cause, recognizing and considering progressive discipline.
10.2 When the Employer determines that an employee must be removed from a current work assignment pending the completion of an investigation by the Employer to determine if disciplinary action is warranted, the Employer may:
a. reassign the employee to another work assignment at their current rate of pay until the investigation is completed.
b. suspend the employee from work without pay until the investigation is completed.
The Employer shall have thirty work days from the date of discovery of an infraction to initiate disciplinary action except when the Employer is awaiting the results of an outside investigation. If no action is taken, disciplinary action is barred for that particular incident.
On December 3, 1992, Daehnke's supervisor received a client complaint regarding alleged behavior of Daehnke. On January 21, 1993, 32 workdays after DSS received the client complaint, DSS initiated disciplinary action against Daehnke through a predisciplinary letter notifying him of a meeting to discuss the client complaint. Daehnke was not reassigned to another work assignment or suspended without pay, and no outside investigation was in progress. On April 23, Daehnke received a written disciplinary warning from DSS regarding the client complaint.
After Daehnke received the disciplinary warning, he filed a grievance with DSS asserting that the agency violated § 10.2 of the labor contract by initiating disciplinary action against him more than 30 workdays after it received the client complaint. In his grievance, Daehnke sought to have "[a]ll disciplinary action stopped, all information regarding [the] incident [and] subsequent proceedings removed from [his] personnel file [and] any other relief to make [him] whole." After DSS denied his grievance, Daehnke presented his grievance to the Board. The Board, by agreement of the parties, appointed a hearing officer. Following an evidentiary hearing, the hearing officer issued a written recommendation to the Board stating:
I find that this issue was recently resolved... in the District Court of Lancaster County, Nebraska, in the case of NEBRASKA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH-VS-LORENZ, Docket 487, Page 3, wherein the court held: "... the so called '30 day work rule' is applicable to investigatory suspensions only, that is, for instances where the employee has been suspended or reassigned pending the results of an in-house investigation. It does not apply to disciplinary actions where the employee has not been suspended or reassigned."... [T]herefor[e] the language in question only applies to those disciplinary actions contemplated under § 10.2 of the Labor Contract. When the entire § 10 is read as a whole it then becomes clear and unambiguous that the language in question applies only to *20 those matters covered in § 10.2 of the Labor Contract[.]
The Board voted to adopt the hearing officer's recommended decision as its official decision. Daehnke appealed the Board's decision to the district court for Lancaster County pursuant to § 84-917(5)(a) of the Administrative Procedure Act. The district court affirmed the Board's decision, finding that the " `30 work day rule' applies only to investigatory suspensions where the employee has been suspended or reassigned." Daehnke appeals.
ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
Daehnke alleges the district court erred in determining that the relevant portion of § 10.2 of the labor contract applies only in cases of investigatory suspensions when employees have been suspended or reassigned and not to all disciplinary actions contemplated by state employers.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
The construction of a contract is a matter of law, in connection with which an appellate court has an obligation to reach an independent, correct conclusion irrespective of the determinations made by the court below. Stephens v. Radium Petroleum Co., 250 Neb. 560, 550 N.W.2d 39 (1996); Solar Motors v. First Nat. Bank of Chadron, 249 Neb. 758, 545 N.W.2d 714 (1996).
ANALYSIS
Article 10 of the labor contract sets forth those provisions agreed to by NAPE/AFSCME and the State of Nebraska concerning discipline and investigatory suspensions taken against state employees. Section 10.1 outlines the general provisions applicable to all disciplinary actions taken against state employees. Section 10.2 outlines the provisions applicable when an employer determines that the allegations of wrongdoing warrant the removal of the employee from his or her current work assignment pending an internal investigation to determine if disciplinary action should be taken. Section 10.2 provides an employer with two options in the event the employer chooses to remove the employee pending an investigation: "a. reassign the employee to another work assignment at their current rate of pay until the investigation is completed. b. suspend the employee from work without pay until the investigation is completed."
The disputed 30-workday rule appears in § 10.2 immediately following the investigatory reassignment and suspension provisions. The rule states: "The Employer shall have thirty work days from the date of discovery of an infraction to initiate disciplinary action except when the Employer is awaiting the results of an outside investigation. If no action is taken, disciplinary action is barred for that particular incident."
Daehnke asserts that the district court erred in failing to find that the 30-workday rule applies to all disciplinary actions contemplated by state employers. Conversely, DSS asserts that the district court correctly determined that the 30-workday rule applies only in cases where an employee has been suspended or reassigned to a different position pending the completion of an internal investigation. The parties do not dispute that Daehnke was not reassigned or suspended.
In interpreting a contract, a court must first determine, as a matter of law, whether the contract is ambiguous. C.S.B. Co. v. Isham, 249 Neb. 66, 541 N.W.2d 392 (1996); Kropp v. Grand Island Pub. Sch. Dist. No. 2, 246 Neb. 138, 517 N.W.2d 113 (1994); Baker's Supermarkets v. Feldman, 243 Neb. 684, 502 N.W.2d 428 (1993). A contract is ambiguous when a word, phrase, or provision in the contract has, or is susceptible of, at least two reasonable but conflicting interpretations or meanings. Winfield v. CIGNA Cos., 248 Neb. 24, 532 N.W.2d 284 (1995); Union Ins. Co. v. Land and Sky, Inc., 247 Neb. 696, 529 N.W.2d 773 (1995). This determination is to be made on an objective basis, not by the subjective contentions of the parties; thus, the fact that the parties have suggested opposing meanings of the disputed instrument does not necessarily compel the conclusion that the instrument is ambiguous. Murphy v. City of Lincoln, 245 Neb. 707, 515 N.W.2d 413 (1994); Baker's Supermarkets v. Feldman, supra.
*21 Daehnke would have us construe the 30-workday rule without looking to the rest of § 10.2 and the rest of the contract as well. However, a contract must be construed as a whole, and if possible, effect must be given to every part thereof. C.S.B. Co. v. Isham, supra; Rains v. Becton, Dickinson & Co., 246 Neb. 746, 523 N.W.2d 506 (1994); Baker's Supermarkets v. Feldman, supra. In other words, a party may not pick and choose among the clauses of a contract, accepting only those that advantage it. Bedrosky v. Hiner, 230 Neb. 200, 430 N.W.2d 535 (1988); Fisbeck v. Scherbarth, Inc., 229 Neb. 453, 428 N.W.2d 141 (1988).
Upon reading the contract as a whole, we determine that it is not capable of being understood in more senses than one. See, Bedrosky v. Hiner, supra; Luschen Bldg. Assn. v. Fleming Cos., 226 Neb. 840, 415 N.W.2d 453 (1987). As a result, we conclude as a matter of law that the contract is not ambiguous.
A contract written in clear and unambiguous language is not subject to interpretation or construction and must be enforced according to its terms. C.S.B. Co. v. Isham, supra; Lee Sapp Leasing v. Catholic Archbishop of Omaha, 248 Neb. 829, 540 N.W.2d 101 (1995). The terms of a contract are to be accorded their plain and ordinary meaning as ordinary, average, or reasonable persons would understand them. Rains v. Becton, Dickinson & Co., supra; Murphy v. City of Lincoln, supra.
Giving the terms of the contract their plain and ordinary meaning, it is clear that the 30-workday rule was designed to prevent the employer from creating lengthy delays in taking disciplinary action while an employee is suspended without pay or reassigned to another work assignment pending an internal investigation. However, this concern is not present absent suspension or reassignment.
Thus, we determine that the 30-workday rule clearly and unambiguously modifies only the contract provisions relating to investigatory reassignments and suspensions and does not pertain to the initiation of discipline in general. As a result, we conclude that the manner in which DSS took disciplinary action against Daehnke was not subject to the 30-workday rule.
Finally, Daehnke argues in his brief that certain evidence submitted at the Board hearing concerning the intended applicability of the 30-workday rule violated the parol evidence rule. However, Daehnke did not state this argument as an assigned error in his brief. Errors which are argued but not assigned will not be considered by an appellate court. Pantano v. McGowan, 247 Neb. 894, 530 N.W.2d 912 (1995); Wolf v. Walt, 247 Neb. 858, 530 N.W.2d 890 (1995). As a result, we do not address this argument.
CONCLUSION
We conclude that DSS was not subject to the contract's 30-workday rule when initiating disciplinary action, because Daehnke was not reassigned or suspended pending an internal investigation. We therefore affirm.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2226647 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:14.947744+00 ===

206 Wis. 2d 509 (1996)
557 N.W.2d 457
Robert E. LEE & ASSOCIATES, INC., Plaintiff,
v.
David, J. PETERS, individually, and Peters Service Center, Inc., Defendants-Third Party Plaintiffs-Counter Defendants-Fifth-Party Plaintiffs-Sixth Party Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
Carl KLEMM, INC., D/B/A Klemm Tanklines, a Wisconsin Corporation, Third Party Defendant-Fourth Party Plaintiff-Counter-Plaintiff,[]
GREAT WEST CASUALTY COMPANY, Fourth Party Defendant,
INTEGRITY MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY, Fifth-Party Defendant-Respondent,
Richard CISLER, Sixth-Party Defendant.
No. 96-0172.
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs October 1, 1996.
Decided November 19, 1996.
*512 On behalf of the defendants-third party plaintiffs-counter defendants-fifth-party plaintiffs-sixth party plaintiffs-appellants, David J. Peters and Peters Service Center, Inc., the cause was submitted on the briefs of Steven P. Bogart and Colleen D. Ball of Reinhart, Boerner, Van Deuren, Norris & Rieselback, S.C. of Milwaukee.
On behalf of the fifth-party defendant-respondent, Integrity Mutual Insurance Company, the cause was submitted on the brief of Paul J. Pytlik of Otjen, Van Ert, Stangle, Lieb & Weir, S.C. of Milwaukee.
Before Cane, P.J., LaRocque and Myse, JJ.
CANE, P.J.
David J. Peters and Peters Service Center, Inc., (Peters), appeal a summary judgment *513 granted in favor of Integrity Mutual Insurance Company (Integrity). Peters asserts that Integrity's commercial property insurance policy affords coverage to Peters for costs incurred to remediate contamination on its property, and that Integrity's commercial general liability policy (CGL) obligates Integrity to indemnify and defend Peters against Klemm's counterclaim.
Integrity argues that its commercial property policy and CGL do not afford coverage to Peters. We conclude that Peters is not covered under Integrity's commercial property policy or the personal injury provision of Integrity's CGL policy, but that there is coverage for the groundwater contamination under the property damage provision of the products/completed operations form of Integrity's CGL.
The relevant facts are not disputed. David J. Peters owns and operates Peters Service Center, a gas station located in Green Bay. The gas station stores gasoline in underground storage tanks. The tank for unleaded gasoline holds 8,000 gallons of fuel.
On October 18, 1991, at 9:15 p.m., Peters measured 23.5 inches, or 1,526 gallons, of gasoline in its unleaded fuel tank. Peters ordered 6,000 gallons of unleaded gas from Grosskopf Oil, Inc., which subcontracted delivery of the gas to Klemm. Later that night, at approximately 11:45 p.m., Klemm's employee, Richard Cisler, delivered a load of gasoline to Peters. After Cisler measured 22.5 inches[1] of gasoline in Peters' unleaded fuel tank, he pumped 6,500 gallons of unleaded gasoline, 500 more gallons than Peters ordered, into the tank.
*514 On October 19, 1991, Peters discovered gasoline in the manhole for the unleaded tank fill pipe and recognized that a gas spill had occurred. Peters promptly notified the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and retained 149 Wis. 2d 64, 437 N.W.2d 884 (1989). & Associates, Inc., an environmental consultant, to investigate the spill and develop a remediation plan. Lee's test results indicated that the groundwater in the vicinity of Peters Service Center was contaminated with unleaded gasoline.
The DNR investigated the spill, issued a notice of violation of § 144.76, STATS., the hazardous substance spills statute, to Klemm, and ordered Klemm to hire an environmental consultant to investigate the contamination and prepare a remediation plan. The DNR concluded that soil and groundwater contamination had occurred at the Peters site. Klemm's consultant excavated soil from the site, constructed monitoring wells and analyzed numerous soil samples. The test results indicated that the soil contamination was not the result of a single spill, but instead was caused by spills of gasoline produced prior to 1991, as well as the unleaded gasoline delivered by Klemm on October 19, 1991.[2]
This appeal arises from a lawsuit filed by Lee against Peters, seeking payment for the environmental remediation services it provided to Peters. Peters filed a third-party action against Klemm, contending that Klemm was responsible for the spill. Klemm filed a fourth-party complaint against its insurer, Great West Insurance Company, and a counterclaim against *515 Peters. Klemm subsequently joined Great West on the grounds that coverage was available to Klemm.
Klemm's counterclaim against Peters alleged that much of the contamination remediated through the cleanup was from gasoline spills predating the Klemm spill. Peters filed a fifth-party complaint against its insurer, Integrity Mutual Insurance Company, claiming that the damages alleged in the counterclaim were covered by Integrity. Integrity filed a sixth-party action against Richard Cisler, Klemm's employee.
Peters' fifth-party action against Integrity is the subject of this appeal. The allegations in Klemm's counterclaim involve the response costs incurred by Klemm to remediate the environmental contamination at the Peters site. At issue in this appeal are the applicability and interpretation of various provisions of Integrity's insurance policy.
[1,2]
The construction of an insurance policy presents a question of law, which we review independently of the trial court. American States Ins. Co. v. Skrobis Painting & Decor., Inc., 182 Wis. 2d 445, 450, 513 N.W.2d 695, 697 (Ct. App. 1994). We review summary judgments de novo. Id. Summary judgment is appropriate "if the pleadings, depositions, answers, admissions and affidavits show that there is no genuine issue of material fact and, as a matter of law, that the moving party is entitled to judgment." Id.
[3-5]
Several general principles guide the interpretation of an insurance policy in Wisconsin. The court must construe the words of the policy's provisions as would a reasonable person in the position of the insured. School District of Shorewood v. Wausau Ins. Cos., 170 Wis. 2d 347, 367, 488 N.W.2d 82, 88-89 (1992). In order to *516 determine whether the insurer has a duty to defend the claim, the court must compare the allegations in the complaint against the insured to the terms of the policy. Id. at 364-65, 488 N.W.2d at 87-88. The court must narrowly construe policy exclusions against the insurer and resolve any ambiguities in the policy in favor of coverage. Smith v. Atlantic Mut. Ins. Co., 155 Wis. 2d 808, 811, 456 N.W.2d 597, 598 (1990).
Peters argues that Integrity's commercial property policy affords insurance coverage because the damage caused to Peters was a loss related to a vehicle when Klemm unloaded the gasoline from his truck. We disagree. At issue are the following provisions regarding the cleanup and removal of pollutants:
We will pay your expense to extract "pollutants" from land or water at the described premises if the release, discharge or dispersal of the "pollutants" is caused by or results from a Covered Cause of Loss that occurs during the policy period.
"Pollutants" are defined in the policy as "any solid, liquid, gaseous or thermal irritant or contaminant, including smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis, chemicals and waste."
The policy's Cause of Loss-Special Form expressly excludes the following occurrences from coverage:
Release, discharge or dispersal of "pollutants" unless the release, discharge or dispersal is itself caused by any of the "specified causes of loss". But if loss or damage by a Covered Cause of Loss results, we will pay for the resulting damage caused by the "specified cause of loss".
"Specified Cause of Loss" means the following: Fire; lightning; explosion; windstorm or hail; smoke; aircraft or vehicles; riot or civil commotion; vandalism; *517 leakage from fire extinguishing equipment, sinkhole collapse; volcanic action; falling objects; weight of snow, ice or sleet; water damage. (Emphasis added.)
Although Integrity's commercial property policy does not define "vehicles," Wisconsin courts have interpreted vehicular insurance provisions on a number of occasions. In some of these cases, the courts have adopted a broad interpretation of the terms "arising out of the use of a vehicle." For example, our supreme court determined that the accidental shooting of an insured passing motorist by a disabled deer hunter who was seated in the bed of his pickup truck arose out of the use of the truck for purposes of under insured motorist insurance coverage. Thompson v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 161 Wis. 2d 450, 463, 468 N.W.2d 432, 437 (1991); see also Kemp v. Feltz, 174 Wis. 2d 406, 417, 497 N.W.2d 751, 756 (Ct. App. 1993).[3]
However, Integrity's commercial property policy does not refer to conduct "arising out of the use of" a vehicle. Instead, the policy refers to a vehicles as a "specified cause of loss." We recognize a significant difference between damages "arising out of" the use of a vehicle and damages "caused by" a vehicle. As stated by our supreme court, "The words `arising out of the use' are very broad, general and comprehensive terms, and we believe they should generally be accorded a reasonably *518 liberal construction." Tomlin v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Liab. Ins. Co., 95 Wis. 2d 215, 225, 290 N.W.2d 285, 290-91 (1980).
These words are commonly understood to mean "originating from, growing out of, or flowing from, and require only that there be some causal relationship between the injury and the risk for which coverage is provided." However, this causal relationship is not of the type which would ordinarily be necessary to warrant a finding of "proximate cause" or "substantial factor" as those terms are used in imposing liability for negligent conduct. Rather, the focus of this "causation" inquiry is on the risk for which coverage has been afforded.
Garcia v. Regent Ins. Co., 167 Wis. 2d 287, 294-95, 481 N.W.2d 660, 663-64 (Ct. App. 1992) (citing Lawver v. Boling, 71 Wis. 2d 408, 238 N.W.2d 514 (1976)). Therefore, we conclude that a broad interpretation of the term "vehicle" is not warranted under the terms of Integrity's commercial property policy.
[6, 7]
We are not persuaded that the release, discharge or dispersal of the gasoline onto Peters' property was "caused by" Klemm's truck. When an independent act causes the damage at issue, the fact that the vehicle was used as a means of transportation to the site and was present at the site when the damage occurred does not necessarily establish coverage, even under a broad "arising out of the use" provision. See Saunders v. National Dairy Prod. Corp., 39 Wis. 2d 575, 582-83, 159 N.W.2d 603, 607 (1968); Snouffer v. Williams, 106 Wis. 2d 225, 228-29, 316 N.W.2d 141, 142-43 (Ct. App. 1982). The facts of this case indicate that the conduct of Klemm's employee resulted in the release of contaminants. Klemm's truck was used merely to transport the *519 gasoline to Peters' property. In light of these circumstances, it would be inaccurate for us to conclude that the truck caused the gasoline spill. We therefore conclude that Integrity's commercial property policy does not provide Peters with insurance coverage for the remediation costs.
Next, Peters argues that the Coverage B provision of Integrity's CGL requires Integrity to indemnify and defend Peters for the spill as a "personal injury." We disagree. The Coverage B clause provides that Integrity will do the following:
We will pay those sums that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as damages because of "personal injury" ... to which this insurance applies.
....
"Personal injury" means injury, other than "bodily injury," arising out of one or more of the following offenses:
....
c. Wrongful entry into, or eviction of a person from, a room, dwelling or premises that the person occupies.
The issue is whether this CGL clause requires Integrity to defend and indemnify Peters in connection with the counterclaim. In Wisconsin:
An insurance company's duty to defend an insured sued by a third party is determined solely by the allegations in that third party's complaint. Any doubt as to whether or not the insurance company has a duty to defend is "resolved in favor of the insured." Although an insurance company that "declines to defend does so at [its] peril," it is not liable to its insured unless there is, in fact, coverage *520 under the policy, or coverage is determined to be "fairly debatable."
Production Stamp. Corp. v. Maryland Cas. Co., 199 Wis. 2d 322, 326-27, 544 N.W.2d 584, 586 (Ct. App. 1996) (citations omitted). The allegations in the counterclaim against Peters involve contribution for the response and remediation costs incurred by Klemm.
Our review of this issue is guided by Edgerton v. General Cas. Co., 184 Wis. 2d 750, 517 N.W.2d 463 (1994), and its progeny. In Edgerton, the DNR sent a letter to the property owners of a landfill to notify them that the site was contaminated, and to request their voluntary assistance in cleaning up the contamination on their property. Id. at 759-60, 517 N.W.2d at 468. When the property owners sought coverage from their insurers for the environmental damage to their own property, the insurers denied coverage. See id. at 762, 517 N.W.2d at 469. The CGL policy provisions in Edgerton were similar to Integrity's: both promised to defend any "suit seeking damages" and to indemnify the insureds for "damages" that the insureds were "legally obligated to pay." See id. at 758-62, 517 N.W.2d at 468-69.
The pertinent question in Edgerton was whether there was a "suit seeking damages." Our supreme court decided that the DNR letter did not trigger the insurance companies' duty to defend under the terms of the CGL because the notification was not a "suit."[4]Id. at 758, 517 N.W.2d at 468. The court also decided that the *521 past and future remediation costs were "equitable relief," rather than "damages" as that term was used in the insurance policies. Id. at 783-85, 517 N.W.2d at 478-79. In the words of the court, "[A]s an equitable form of relief, response costs were not designed to compensate for past wrongs; rather, they were intended to deter any future contamination by means of injunctive action, while providing for remediation and cleanup of the affected site." Id. at 785, 517 N.W.2d at 478. The court concluded that because this type of damage was not "legal damages," it was not covered under the provisions of the insurance policies. Id.
We agree with Peters that the effect of Edgerton is not to deny any and all coverage to an insured whenever a case involves contaminated property. Cases decided after Edgerton have limited its holding. In General Cas. Co. v. Hills, 201 Wis. 2d 1, 548, N.W.2d 100 (Ct. App. 1996), we decide that Edgerton did not preclude insurance coverage for environmental contamination to the property of a third party. The third party sought monetary compensation for the response and remediation costs it incurred to clean up environmental contamination to which the insured contributed. Id. at 11, 548 N.W.2d at 104. We decided that these damages were "damages" covered by the insurer's CGL policy, and that a contrary conclusion was "neither required by Edgerton nor consistent with the purposes of CGL policies: to indemnify insureds for damage they cause to others' property." Id. at 12, 548 N.W.2d at 104.
In Sauk County v. Employers Ins., 202 Wis. 2d 434, 550 N.W.2d 439 (Ct. App. 1996), the court reached a similar result. It stated that Edgerton "does not say *522 that contribution and indemnification claims do not constitute legal damages," and that Hills "specifically rejected the argument that suits premised solely upon recovering for costs incurred to clean up and remediate environmental contamination will never constitute `suits seeking damages.'" Sauk County, 202 Wis. 2d at 443-44, 550 N.W.2d at 443. The court concluded that Edgerton is dispositive when the remediated property is the insured's own property, but that Hills governs when the remediated property is that of a third party. Sauk County, 202 Wis. 2d at 443-44, 550 N.W.2d at 443.
[8]
Edgerton is distinguishable from the instant case. The contamination at issue in Edgerton only affected property owned and operated by the insureds. In contrast, we are persuaded by Peters' argument that the contamination affected property owned and operated by Peters, as well as the groundwater supply, which was not property owned and operated by Peters. After its investigation of the Peters site, the DNR determined that soil and groundwater contamination resulted from the gasoline spill. Groundwater contamination is damage to public property rather than property owned by an individual. Patz v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 817, F. Supp. 781, 783-84 (E.D. Wis. 1993).
Additionally, the insureds in Edgerton sought coverage for the remediation costs they would incur in response to the DNR letter. Here, the remediation work was performed by Klemm, and Peters now seeks indemnification for the liability he may incur from claims asserted by Klemm. In the counterclaim, Klemm alleged claims for contribution, unjust enrichment/quantum meruit, and negligence, and requested *523 compensatory damages from Peters.[5] In this respect, and because the contaminated property was not only Peters' property, this case falls within the scope of Hills and Sauk County. Because Klemm has asserted a "suit seeking damages," insurance coverage is not precluded by Edgerton.
Because Edgerton does not preclude the coverage, we must consider Peters' argument that the groundwater contamination constitutes a "wrongful entry" under the personal injury provision. Peters relies on several cases in which the courts have decided that groundwater contamination can constitute negligent trespass or "wrongful entry," resulting in coverage under personal injury insurance coverage provisions such as the provision at issue in this case. See City of Edgerton v. General Cas. Co., 172 Wis. 2d 518, 550, 493 N.W.2d 768, 781 (Ct. App. 1992), modified in 184 Wis. 2d 750, 517 N.W.2d 463 (1994) ("We conclude that access to, and use of, an undefiled underground water supply is a right of private occupancy. The invasion of that right is a [covered] personal injury liability...."); see also Scottish Guarantee Ins. Co. v. Dwyer, 19 F.3d 307 (7th Cir. 1994); Fortier v. Flambeau Plastics Co., 164 Wis. 2d 639, 476 N.W.2d 593 (Ct. App. 1991). We decline to adopt the reasoning of this line of cases.
*524 [9,10]
Instead, we decide that there is no coverage for environmental contamination under the terms of Integrity's insurance provisions for personal injury.[6] An unambiguous insurance provision must be interpreted according to its plain meaning. Duncan v. Ehrhard, 158 Wis. 2d 252, 260, 461 N.W.2d 822, 825 (Ct. App. 1990.) "Where the terms of a policy are unambiguous, this court merely applies those terms rather than engaging in construction." Id. at 259, 461 N.W.2d at 825. In this case, we determine that the environmental contamination resulting from the gas spill does not constitute personal injury arising out of "wrongful entry into, or eviction of a person from, a room, dwelling or premises that the person occupies," as is specified in the policy. Therefore, we conclude that Integrity's personal injury provision provides no coverage to Peters.[7]
Next, Peters argues that the CGL products/completed operations coverage form provides coverage for the spill as "property damage." We agree. The provision states that Integrity will do the following:
We will pay those sums that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as damages because of "bodily *525 injury" or "property damage" to which this insurance applies. We will have the right and duty to defend any "suit" seeking those damages.
"Property damage" is defined as:
a. Physical injury to tangible property, including all resulting loss of use of that property. All such loss of use shall be deemed to occur at the time of the physical injury that caused it; or
b. Loss of use of tangible property that is not physically injured. All such loss of use shall be deemed to occur at the time of the "occurrence" that caused it.
[11]
The issue is whether soil and groundwater contamination can constitute "property damage" under this provision. The contamination of Peters' property falls within these definitions. See Maryland Cas. Co. v. Wausau Chem. Corp., 809 F. Supp. 680, 684-85 (W.D. Wis. 1992); Wagner v. Milwaukee Mut. Ins. Co., 145 Wis. 2d 609, 613-14, 427 N.W.2d 854, 856 (Ct. App. 1988), overruled on other grounds by Just v. Land Reclamation Ltd., 155 Wis. 2d 737, 456 N.W.2d 570 (1990). In Wagner, the underground pipes at a gasoline station cracked, causing gasoline to contaminate the soil. We decided that the cost of cleaning up the spill constituted property damage because the contamination caused a "loss of use" under the applicable property damage provision. Id. at 615, 427 N.W.2d at 856-57. In Maryland Casualty, the court addressed groundwater and soil contamination from chemical spills at the site and decided that the groundwater contamination was "property damage" within the terms of the CGL at issue. Id. at 693. We conclude in the instant case that there is coverage under the "property damage" provision of Integrity's CGL.
*526 [12, 13]
The pollution exclusion clause in Coverage A of Integrity's commercial property policy does not bar coverage under the CGL property damage provision of the products/completed operations form. We review the provisions of an insurance contract in the context of the entire policy. Tara N. v. Economy Fire & Cas. Ins. Co., 197 Wis. 2d 77, 91, 540 N.W.2d 26, 32 (Ct. App. 1995). We are also "mindful of the rule that an exclusionary clause in an insurance contract is strictly construed against the insurer." Id. at 90, 540 N.W.2d at 32.
[14]
We have reviewed Integrity's policy in its entirety. Coverage A and the CGL products/completed operations form appear in separate sections of the insurance policy. Although the CGL products/completed operations clause contains a long list of its own exclusions, some of which are identical to those in Coverage A's absolute pollution exclusion, it does not contain its own pollution exclusion clause. If the exclusions in Coverage A were intended to apply to the other policy provisions, it is unlikely that Integrity would reiterate the same exclusions in the CGL products/completed operations clause. Therefore, we conclude that the Coverage A pollution exclusion clause does not apply to Peters' recovery for property damage under the property damage provisions of the CGL products/completed operations form.[8]
*527 [15]
Finally, we consider whether the "owned property" exclusion precludes coverage for Peters' property damage. The provision excludes coverage for "property damage" to "property you own, rent or occupy." In light of our determination that the groundwater was not property owned and operated by Peters, we conclude that the "owned property" exclusion does not preclude coverage for the costs incurred to remediate the groundwater contamination. See Patz, 817 F. Supp. at 783-84. The Patz court recognized the decision of the court of appeals in Edgerton: "[T]he owned-property exclusion does not apply where the concern is not primarily the premises of the insured, but rather the substantial harm, or risk of substantial harm, to third-party property, including natural resources belonging to the people of the state." Id. at 783 (quoting Edgerton, 172 Wis. 2d at 554, 493 N.W.2d at 783). Therefore, although Peters' recovery of costs for cleanup of the contaminated soil is barred by the exclusion, his recovery of costs for cleanup of the contaminated groundwater is not.
We agree with the court that Peters has failed to prove coverage under Integrity's commercial property policy and the personal injury clause in Integrity's CGL products/completed operations form. However, we conclude that Peters has proven coverage with regard to groundwater damage under the property damage provision of Integrity's CGL products/completed operations form. The judgment is affirmed in part, reversed in part, and cause remanded for further proceedings and a determination of attorney fees.[9]
*528 By the Court.Judgment affirmed in part; reversed in part, and cause remanded with directions. No statutory costs are awarded on appeal.
NOTES
[]  Petition to review denied.
[1]  This measurement equates to 1,431.55 gallons on the tank's conversion chart.
[2]  Any possible prior spills that may have resulted in contamination are not at issue in this lawsuit. The counterclaim only concerns contamination resulting from the spill caused by Klemm.
[3]  The injuries sustained by an insured when she was bitten by a dog that was tethered to a parked Jeep "arose out of" the "use" of a motor vehicle. Trampf v. Prudential Prop. & Cas. Co., 199 Wis. 2d 380, 389-90, 544 N.W.2d 596, 600 (Ct. App. 1996). The conduct of a driver, who called and motioned to a child pedestrain to cross the street, also constituted "use" of the vehicle for insurance purposes. Garcia v. Regent Ins. Co., 167 Wis. 2d 287, 304-06, 481 N.W.2d 660, 668-69 (Ct. App. 1992).
[4]  The parties do not deny that Klemm's counterclaim constitutes a "suit." A "suit" is defined as follows:
[A]ny proceeding by one person or persons against another or others in a court of law in which the plaintiff pursues, in such court, the remedy which the law affords him for the redress of an injury or the enforcement of a right, whether at law or equity. Edgerton v. General Cas. Co., 184 Wis. 2d 750, 774, 517 N.W.2d 463, 474 (1994).
[5]  Klemm's counterclaim requested the following damages from Peters:
As a direct and proximate result of [Peters'] breach of his legal duties; Klemm has incurred $103,576.85 in costs damages and other losses, disbursements, and consultants' fees, through August 1994, in cleaning up contaminated soils resulting from [Peters'] negligent maintenance of the underground storage tanks and associated pumps and piping located at the Peters Service Center site.
[6]  See Production Stamp. Corp. v. Maryland Cas. Co., 199 Wis. 2d 322, 544 N.W.2d 584 (Ct. App. 1996) (rejecting the argument that groundwater contamination was an invasion of the right to private occupancy constituting a personal injury under the applicable policy provisions).
[7]  Because we conclude that there is no coverage under the personal injury provision, we do not consider here whether the pollution exclusion in Coverage A applies to the personal injury provision in Coverage B.
[8]  In arriving at this conclusion, we recognize that other courts have decided that coverage is precluded by an absolute pollution exclusion. See Production Stamp. Corp. v. Maryland Cas. Co., 199 Wis. 2d 322, 544 N.W.2d 584 (Ct. App. 1996); Am. States Ins. Co. v. Skrobis Painting and Decorating, Inc., 182 Wis. 2d 445, 513 N.W.2d 695 (Ct. App. 1994).
[9]  Peters requested this court to award attorney fees because it proved coverage under Integrity's policy. We decline to assess the fees, and instead leave the determination of attorney fees to the discretion of the trial court.