=== CASE 9741254 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:23.113558+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, J.
(dissenting). The majority errs in stating that the issue is whether the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act requires the American Motors Corporation to accommodate an employee’s work absences which are occasioned by the employee’s observance of religious holy days. Supra, pp. 340 and 344.1
*370This case does not involve the issue of accommodation. As the majority explains, an accommodation case is one in which the court is to determine “an employer’s obligation where arguably there is a conflict between an employee’s religious practices and the employer’s personnel and management procedures.” Supra, p. 348.
In this case there is no conflict between Bartell’s religious practices and AMC’s personnel and management procedures. Bartell requested days off so that he could observe certain holy days of his religion. AMC’s personnel and management procedure was to provide days off on principal Christian holy days, such as Christmas and Good Friday, and to provide days off to Jews and others on their obligatory holy days. Thus Bartell’s interest in the free exercise of his religion is within the terms of AMC’s established employment policies designed for the efficient operation of the business. When AMC refused to provide time off to Bartell AMC failed to follow its own established personnel and management procedures.
By comparison, the employee in an accommodation case is seeking an exception to the employer’s uniformly applied personnel and management procedures; the employee is asking for approval of a request not within the uniform policies to which other employees are subject in order to enable the employee to be a faithful adherent and remain employed. Bartell made no such request; he asked only that AMC treat him as it treats employees of other religious persuasions in similar jobs in AMC. Bartell asked AMC to apply its uniform policy to him.
The distinction between this case and one in which accommodation is an issue is apparent from reading the accommodation cases cited by the majority.2 The first *371step in an accommodation case is to determine the general personnel policy of the employer. The second step *372is to determine whether this general personnel policy was applied to the employee in question. If the general *373policy was applied uniformly and thus without overt discrimination, the court reaches the question of whether the statutory prohibition against discrimination requires the employer to permit exception to its general policy for this particular employee, that is whether the statutory prohibition against discrimination requires the employer to accommodate for the religious practices of the employee. AMC's general policy was to give employees time off on religious holidays. AMC refused to apply this policy to Bartell. If the refusal to apply a general policy to an employee is overt discrimination there is no reason to consider whether accommodation is required. Accordingly, the court must first determine whether this conduct constitutes overt discrimination because of creed.
An employer’s refusal to grant all employees regardless of creed the same terms or conditions of employment is discrimination. The requirement that an employer grant all employees regardless of creed the same terms or conditions of employment is a requirement of equal treatment, not accommodation. I conclude that AMC’s dismissal of Bartell because he requested time off for religious holidays constituted discrimination because of creed in violation of secs. 111.32(5) (a) and 111.325, *374Stats. 1979-80. I would therefore affirm the decision of the court of appeals.
I further conclude that if I viewed this case as raising the issue whether refusal to accommodate constitutes discrimination because of creed in violation of secs. 111.32(5) (a), 111.325, Stats. 1979-80, I would agree with the reasoning of the circuit court and the court of appeals, not the majority opinion. I therefore dissent.
I.
The Wisconsin Fair Employment Act makes it unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an employee because of creed “with regard to hiring, tenure or term, condition or privilege of employment.” Secs. 111.32(5) (a) and 111.325, Stats. 1979-80.
In determining whether an employer’s conduct constitutes proscribed discrimination, the threshold issue is one of statutory construction: what did the legislature intend when it prohibited discrimination because of “creed” with regard to “hiring, tenure or term, condition or privilege of employment” ?
Absent a specific statutory definition, this court has defined terms in the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act in their commonly accepted dictionary sense. Accordingly, “creed” means “a system of religious beliefs.” A system of religious beliefs includes religious observances and practices, as well as articles of faith. Augustine v. Anti-Defamation League of B’nai B’rith, 75 Wis.2d 207, 249 N.W.2d 547 (1977).3 To “discriminate,” in common usage, means, inter alia, “to make a difference in treatment or favor on a class or categorical basis in disregard of individual merit.” Webster's Third New Inter*375national Dictionary p. 648. This definition is consistent with the definition of discrimination appearing in sec. 101.22 (lm) (b), Stats. 1979-80, which is also enforced by DILHR. Sec. 101.22 (lm) (b), which prohibits discrimination in housing, defines discrimination as follows:
“ ‘Discriminate’ and ‘discrimination’ mean to segregate, separate, exclude or treat any person unequally only because of sex, race, color, physical condition, developmental disability as defined in 51.01(5), religion, national origin or ancestry.”
Applying these accepted definitions to the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act, I conclude that the Act’s prohibition against discrimination because of creed means that an employer cannot lawfully differentiate in its treatment of employees on the basis of the religious beliefs and religious practices of the employees. The issue for the court is therefore whether on the basis of DILHR’s findings of fact and on the undisputed evidence in the record, it appears that when AMC dismissed Bartell it was differentiating in its treatment of employees on the basis of the employees’ religious beliefs and practices.
Generally the application of a legal standard to the facts is viewed as a legal question which this court may determine. We have often stated that the court is not bound by the agency’s determination of a question of law and may properly substitute its judicial judgment. Supra, p. 353; Nottelson v. ILHR Dept., 94 Wis.2d 106, 114-117, 287 N.W.2d 763 (1980); Bucyrus-Erie Co. v. ILHR Dept., 90 Wis.2d 408, 417, 280 N.W.2d 142 (1979).
To determine whether AMC discriminated, I look first to the findings of fact and the undisputed evidence.
The employee, Thomas Bartell, is a member of the Worldwide Church of God. Like other religions the Worldwide Church of God denominates certain days as religious holy days during which the adherent does not *376engage in secular work. Two such religious holy days are involved in this case: the Day of Atonement (Monday, September 18, 1972), and the Feast of Tabernacles (Friday, September 22 through Friday, September 29, 1972). On the first and last days of the Feast of Tabernacles, adherents are not to do secular work and during the feast week the adherents are required to attend a regional religious convention. In 1972 the regional religious convention which Bartell attended was held in Wisconsin Dells and was attended by 10,000. Bartell testified that his religious beliefs required his attendance at this convention. In accordance with his religious beliefs and practices Bartell, in August 1972, requested that he be excused from work on September 18, 22, and 25 to 29,1972. Bartell’s request was denied.
AMC’s refusal to excuse Bartell from work on his obligatory religious holy days is contrary to AMC’s policy to give employees days off for religious purposes. According to the testimony of AMC’s Director of Industrial Relations at the Milwaukee body plant: “When Jewish personnel require time off to celebrate their holidays, they are given the time off. They may or may not get paid for the time off depending on their plant or area. We allow them the time off. Whether they’re compensated for it or not is another matter. It is the company policy to allow a person a day off if they indicate that their religion requires them to take the day off.” The majority recognizes that AMC has a policy of allowing employees to take time off if required for religious purposes. The majority states: “There is also evidence in the record that it was the policy and the usual practice for American Motors to permit sincere believers to abstain from work on obligatory holy days. . . . The record in this case clearly would not warrant a conclusion that American Motors, as a matter of policy, disregarded the religious needs of its em*377ployees. The order of DILHR that American Motors ‘cease and desist from discharging employees on the basis of religion’ was unjustified and unsupported by the record.” Supra, p. 344.
The only conclusion that may be drawn from the record is that AMC treated Bartell differently than it treats employees of other religious persuasions. AMC would have released a person of the Jewish faith from work on Monday, September 18, 1972, Yom Kippur. Yet AMC refused to excuse Bartell, a member of the Worldwide Church of God, from work on the very same day, Monday, September 18, 1972, the Day of Atonement, to celebrate that holy day according to his religious beliefs.
The record reveals that Bartell does not differ from AMC’s other employees in any respect other than his creed.
AMC attempted to persuade DILHR that its refusal to grant Bartell the same terms, conditions or privileges of employment as it grants other employees of different religious persuasions was based not on Bartell’s creed but on Bartell’s deceptive conduct towards AMC. AMC attempted to show that Bartell was deceptive in not telling AMC of his need for days off when he began the program. DILHR concluded, however, that deception had not been proved. As the majority opinion correctly points out, the factual determination that Bartell was terminated for his insistence on observing his religious holy days and not for deception, “was for DILHR to make and would not be disturbed by the court.” Supra, p. 343.
AMC also attempted to show that its refusal to grant Bartell the same terms, conditions or privileges of employment as it grants other employees of different religious persuasions was based not on Bartell’s creed *378but on the special nature of the training program in which Bartell was participating.4
This training program, then brand new at AMC, had a total of three enrolees, Bartell, Abdin and Johnson. The AMC supervisor in charge of the training program, testifying on direct examination, characterized the program’s schedule for these three employees as “ironclad.” However, on cross examination he stated that neither Abdin nor Johnson followed the schedule as planned. He further explained that Abdin was allowed to tack his days missed while on another assignment on to the end of the training schedule. He further testified that this “tacking” procedure could have been used for Bartell.
DILHR found that it was uncontroverted on the record that AMC could have released Bartell from work on his obligatory holy days “without any undue hardship on [AMC’s] business.” The circuit court reached the same conclusion, saying:
“While [the supervisor] stated that he would have had to ‘re-do the entire schedule’ to accommodate the claimant’s request for time off, he also admitted that he could have merely excused the claimant from one segment of his program and re-assigned him to that department at the end of the schedule. This procedure was followed with one of the other two trainees in the program for the convenience of the company. The record fails to show any reason why the complainant could not have been ac-*379eommodated in the same fashion. Although the claimant could have raised the problem earlier, it is clear that this delay in itself did not create any difficulties in accommodating the request for time off. The only ‘hardship’ which appears is the time it would have taken to alter the claimant’s schedule.”
Thus the record shows that AMC’s refusal to grant Bartell the same terms, conditions or privileges of employment as it granted other employees, namely time off for obligatory religious holy days, was not predicated on Bartell’s deception, or on the special nature of Bartell’s job, or on any other lawful reason. The record shows Bartell was fired because of his insistence on adhering to his creed.
This record shows no justification for AMC’s refusal to apply to Bartell its general policy of releasing employees on obligatory religious holy days. AMC’s refusal, without any justification, to accord Bartell, who was of a particular religious persuasion, the same terms, conditions or privileges of employment it accorded substantially similarly situated employees of other religious persuasions, constitutes discrimination under secs. 111.-32(5) (a) and 111.325, Stats. 1979-80. Having adopted a policy of releasing employees from work on obligatory religious holidays (when this release does not substantially interfere with job performance), AMC cannot apply this policy in a discriminatory manner which violates the Fair Employment Act. This court recognized this principle in Ray-O-Vac v. ILHR Depart., 70 Wis.2d 919, 931, 236 N.W.2d 209 (1975):
“The parties all agree that a private employer is not compelled by law to provide benefits in the case of temporary disability, and so do we. However, if he chooses to do so, it must be under a plan which does not discriminate on any basis prohibited by the fair employment law.”
*380An employer like. AMC who, without justification, denies members of one creed a privilege which it grants to members of other creeds, whether the denial arises from evil motive or bureaucratic error, violates the law. AMC’s conduct in this case cannot be characterized as a neutral, fair application of a neutral-on-its-face policy or practice. AMC directly, openly and without any business justification treated similarly situated employees of different religious persuasions differently.
The purpose of the Fair Employment Act is to prohibit employers from compelling an individual to choose between religious faith and economic survival. Sec. 111.31 (1), Stats. 1979-80. To accomplish this result the state has mandated that persons of different religious faiths as well as those of no religious faith receive fair treatment in the employment market. The Act assures employees that employment decisions will not be based on impermissible grounds such as creed. The Act is an empty guaranty unless it is invoked to halt discrimination of the kind involved here.
I conclude that AMC violated the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act, and I would therefore affirm the decision of the court of appeals. The majority reaches a contrary result because it has posed the wrong question.
II.
Even if I were to conclude that the case at bar raises the question whether refusal to accommodate constitutes discrimination, I would conclude, as did the circuit court and court of appeals, that in enacting secs. 111.31, 111.-32(5) (a), 111.325, Stats. 1979-80, the legislature intended to include within the phrase “discrimination because of creed” an employer’s refusal, without business justification, to take reasonable steps not amounting to an undue burden to accommodate an employee’s free *381exercise of religion. I view, for the reasons set forth by the court of appeals, that the statute is constitutional as so construed.
The centrality of religious freedom in the history of this country is a matter of general knowledge. Americans are a religious people. The United States of America was founded by persons seeking freedom to worship as they pleased or not to worship if they pleased. American citizens have a continuing and abiding interest in protection from religious discrimination. The Wisconsin legislature has responded to this interest by mandating that employment opportunities not be denied any person because of creed. Secs. 111.32(5) (a), 111.325, Stats. 1979-80. To accomplish this end the Wisconsin legislature has instructed the courts to construe the fair employment practices act “liberally” to accomplish the declared public policy of the state which is “to encourage and foster to the fullest extent practicable the employment of all properly qualified persons regardless of their age, race, creed, color, handicap, sex, national origin or ancestry.” Sec. 111.31(3), Stats. 1979-80.
The majority concludes that this legislative direction of liberal construction does not authorize a court “to import into the act specific provisions that the legislature omitted.” Supra,, p. 350. I agree. But I do not think that interpreting “discrimination because of creed” to include the duty to accommodate is importing into the Act specific provisions that the legislature omitted. Taking the opposite view, the majority apparently concludes that characterizing an employer’s refusal to accommodate as falling within the meaning of the statutory phrase “discrimination because of creed” is error, because such a characterization would import into the statute a specific provision, namely the duty to accommodate, that the legislature omitted. The majority does not say how it knows that the Wisconsin legislature omitted this spe*382cific provision from the meaning of the phrase “discrimination because of creed,” a legal standard which is capable of bearing several meanings and which must be applied to a multitude of fact situations. The legislature has not stated in the Act whether discrimination does or does not include the duty to or refusal to accommodate. As the majority admits, the most that can be gleaned from the legislative history is that the legislature has not enacted any bill which proposed incorporating an accommodation provision into the statute. And the majority correctly concludes that it does not believe “it would be logical or reasonable to assert that the failure of this bill to be enacted constitutes a legislative rejection of the duty to accommodate.” Supra, p. 349.
To support its conclusion the majority looks to extrinsic aids to determine the intent of the Wisconsin legislature. Thus, the majority looks to, but refuses to give weight to, DILHR’s long-standing (as of the date of this opinion) but noncontemporaneous construction of the Act. The majority reviews several federal and state court decisions in which the court had to decide whether a statutory provision similar to Wisconsin’s statute prohibiting “discrimination because of creed” encompassed a duty to accommodate. Some courts concluded the statutory phrase included the concept of accommodation and other courts reached the opposite conclusion; the result depended on which factors indicative of legislative intent that court found most persuasive. I conclude from these cases, in particular the TW A-Hardison case and the federal cases prior to the 1972 federal statutory amendment, that reasonable courts can reach different conclusions as to whether a particular legislative body intended “discrimination because of creed” to encompass a duty to accommodate.
I look to the language of and the objective to be accomplished by the Fair Employment Act to determine the legislature’s intent as to the meaning of “discrimination because of creed.” The Wisconsin legislature, un*383like Congress or other state legislatures, has set forth the objective of the Act and has given the court guidance to determine the meaning of and application of the Act. The Wisconsin legislature has directed that where there may be more than one reasonable way to interpret or apply the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act, this court is to interpret and apply the Act in the way that will “encourage and foster to the fullest extent possible the employment of all properly qualified persons regardless of their . . . creed . . . .” Sec. 111.31(3), Stats. 1979-80. Recognizing this statement of legislative policy, purpose and intent as an interpretive aid, this court has in prior cases declined to give the Fair Employment Act a “too constrictive” reading, saying:
“The Wisconsin Fair Employment Code was promulgated so as to encourage and foster to the fullest extent practicable the employment of all properly qualified persons. To accomplish this goal, the code restricted the employer’s right to discriminate against those individuals who, though female, old, handicapped or whatever, could function efficiently on the job. If the individual can function efficiently on the job, then the mere fact that he is different from the average employee as to those statutorily proscribed bases may not be used as a basis for discrimination. To effectuate this purpose, the code is to be liberally construed. Sec. 111.31(3), Stats.” Chicago, M., St. P. & P. RR. Co. v. DILHR, 62 Wis.2d 392, 397, 215 N.W.2d 443 (1974).
Giving “the terms actually used by the legislature . . . the fullest application within proper definitional guidelines that are consistent with the spirit of the legislation” (Supra, p. 351), I conclude that an employer’s refusal to make reasonable accommodation for a member of a minority faith when there is no undue hardship on the employer falls within the language of the statute barring discrimination.
This court said in Wisconsin Tel. Co. v. DILHR, 68 Wis.2d 345, 368, 228 N.W.2d 649 (1975), that “the broad purpose of the Fair Employment Act is to eliminate practices that have a discriminatory impact as well as prac*384tices which on their face amount to invidious discrimination.” I am persuaded that an employer’s refusal to make a reasonable accommodation for a member of a minority faith when there is no undue hardship on the employer has a discriminatory impact on the employment opportunity of members of minority faiths substantially similar to that resulting from overt invidious discrimination of the kind illustrated by a sign saying: “No person who obeys the tenets of a minority religion need apply.” In both situations the employer forces the employee to choose between job and creed when the creed does not adversely affect job performance. Both practices have significant discriminatory impact. Both practices violate the Act.
Perhaps the point is better illustrated by anticipating the practical effect of the majority decision. After reading the majority opinion, I tried to put myself into the position of an attorney whose client has requested her to draft a notice to be given to job applicants explaining the company’s now legalized “no accommodation” personnel policy. I drafted the following notice:
WE WANT TO EXPLAIN — WE DO NOT ACCOMMODATE
“It is our strict and unbending policy not to give employees days off for religious holy day observances. Our employees need not work on the afternoon of December 24, the day of December 25, and the afternoon of Good Friday. We know these times off coincide with the religious holy days of the majority religions in this country. We give these days off because it is customary in the United States for businesses to do so, not because it is the policy of this company to give employees days off for religious holy day observances.
“It would not be very difficult for us to allow an employee who is a member of a non-majority religious faith to take off up to 10 days a year without pay to observe their obligatory religious holy days; we would have to make adjustments in our record keeping systems, but neither our business nor our other employees would be *385seriously inconvenienced. You need not explain these facts to us. We are aware of them. Nevertheless it is our strict and unbending policy not to give employees days off for religious holy day observances.
“We do not view our policy of giving everyone time off on December 24, December 25 and Good Friday as favoring the majority religions. We do not view our policy of denying time off without pay to employees of non-majority religious faiths for their obligatory religious holy days as disfavoring minority religions. We view our ‘no accommodation policy’ as a neutral policy, neither favoring nor disfavoring persons of particular religious persuasions or of no religious persuasion.
“We support your right to the free exercise of your religion. Your right is guaranteed by the Constitutions of the United States and Wisconsin. We support the constitutions. But if you want time off to observe your obligatory religious holy days you cannot work here. Don’t ask us to make an exception for you. Our answer will be no. We hope you understand our position. We do not accommodate.”
The substance of this notice would not violate the majority’s interpretation of the state legislative proscription against discrimination because of creed. The substance of this notice is that the employer’s condition for employing members of a minority religion is that they give up their creed even though allowing them to observe their religious beliefs and practices would not cause undue burden on the employer and would not interfere with their ability to perform the job satisfactorily for the employer; the employer does not impose the same condition for employing members of a majority religion.
I do not believe that the legislature intended this court to interpret the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act in a way that would permit employers to adopt the kind of employment practice my notice sets forth. I do not think this kind of employment practice is what the legislature had in its collective mind when it said that “it is declared to be the public policy of the state to encourage and foster to the fullest extent practicable the employment of all properly qualified persons regardless of *386their age, race, creed, color, handicap, sex, national origin or ancestry. This subchapter shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of this purpose.”5
I dissent because I think the position taken by the majority is inconsistent with the Act and its statement of *387this state’s strong and long-standing public policy fostering religious equality and diversity in our pluralistic society. Fortunately the Wisconsin legislature has the opportunity to set the record straight.
I recognize that AMC and DILHR also treat this case as an accommodation case. It is to their mutual advantage to take this position. AMC has a better chance of winning if it casts the issue as discrimination by failure to accommodate rather than as discrimination by another means. Bartell apparently is no longer really interested in the case and DILHR’s real interest in pursuing this case is to get a definitive court decision on the issue of accommodation.
For a discussion of the Wisconsin Fair Employment Act, see Comment, Wisconsin Fair Employment Act: Coverage, Procedures, Substance and Remedies, 1975 Wis. L. Rev. 696, 718-721.
The Connecticut Supreme Court made this point stating:
“Since the basic claim of the plaintiff was that her employment was terminated because of discrimination against her because of *371her religion, evidence was offered as to the treatment of people of other religious faiths who were employees of the company. Those Jewish employees of Avco who were members of the bargaining unit were not generally permitted to take time off to observe Rosh Hashanah because the bargaining agreement sets forth only specific holidays. Some of these employees may be given the time off without pay, but this is a decision within the discretion of individual departmental supervisors. Yom Kippur is not a listed holiday for employees in the bargaining unit. From time to time employees of various religious beliefs requested time off for religious holidays and Avco acceded to certain of such requests on occasion, but the requests were very irregular and not for the same day for a period of sixteen weeks [as plaintiff requested].
“Article XIII, sec. 3 of the agreement between Avco and the union provides as follows: ‘Neither the Company nor the Union shall discriminate against any employee on account of race, creed, sex or national origin.’ The board of arbitration after a full hearing reached the conclusion that there was no discrimination against the plaintiff because of her religion. The language of the arbitrators is significant. ‘To put it another way, since the Company does not intend to accommodate itself to individuals schedules, as indeed it could not if it desires to continue to maintain an efficient industrial operation, it cannot accede to grievant’s request in this instance without itself being in violation of the . . . Collective Bargaining Agreement proviso. The grievant has no right or entitlement to request the Company so to act.” Corey v. Avco Lycoming Div., Avco Corp., 163 Conn. 309, 307 A.2d 155, 158, 159 (1972), cert. den. 409 U.S. 1116 (1973) (cited by the majority at p. 368, n. 13).
In Reid v. Memphis Publishing Co., 521 F.2d 512, 513, 522 (6th Cir. 1975), 468 F.2d 346, 348-349 (6th Cir. 1972) (cited by the majority at pp. 360, 362), the employer required employees to be available for work on Saturdays and “never employed a copy-reader with the understanding that he would be relieved from working on a particular day.” A Seventh Day Adventist was denied a job because he refused to agree to work on Saturday. There was no discrimination. The issue was whether the law required the employer to accommodate.
*372In Dewey v. Reynolds Metals Co., 429 F.2d 324 (6th Cir 1970), aff'd per curiam by an equally divided court, 402 U.S. 689 (1971) (cited by the majority at p. 361), the Reynolds Metals Company’s collective bargaining agreement required employees to perform all straight time and overtime required of them by the company; Reynolds Metals required work on Saturdays and Sundays but permitted employees assigned to work on the weekends to be relieved from the assignment by making arrangements for a qualified replacement. Dewey, a member of the Faith Reformed Church, refused to work on Sunday and refused to arrange for a replacement. The court held that Reynolds Metals Company had provided a fair, equitable method of distributing the workload among its employees which did not discriminate against any of them. The issue in the case was then whether the law required Reynolds Metals to accommodate.
In Riley v. Bendix Corp., 464 F.2d 1113, reh. and reh. en banc den. (5th Cir. 1972) (cited by majority at pp. 362, 363), the court found that the general company policies, the company rules and the company working conditions provided for fixed work schedules without deviation for religious practices and further found that these policies, rules and working conditions were applied uniformly and fairly with respect to all employees. The issue was then whether the law required Bendix Corporation to accommodate.
In Olin Corp. v. Fair Employment Practices, 67 Ill.2d 466, 367 N.E.2d 1267 (1977) (cited by majority at p. 368, n. 13) and in TWA v. Hardison, 432 U.S. 63 (1977) (cited by majority at p. 363), the burdens of weekend work were a matter for collective bargaining and there was no complaint that the rules set forth in the bargaining agreement were not fairly or uniformly applied. The complainants in both cases wanted to be treated as exceptions to the generally established work rules applicable to all employees. The issue in the cases was did the law require the corporations to accommodate.
In Maine Human Rts. Comm. v. Local 1361, United Paperworkers Int’l Union, 383 A.2d 369 (Maine 1978) (cited by the majority at p 365) and in Wondzell v. Alaska Wood Products, Inc., 583 P.2d 860 (Alaska 1978) (cited by the majority at p 364), it is clear that the unions permitted no exceptions to the payment of monthly union dues and that a Seventh Day Adventist was asking *373for special dispensation to refrain from payment. The issue in these cases was whether the law required the unions to accommodate.
Implicit in Rankins v. Comm’n on Prof. Comp. of Ducor, 24 Cal.3d 167, 154 Cal. Rptr. 907, 593 P.2d 852 (1979), app. dism’d, 444 U.S. 986 (1979) (cited by the majority at p. 365) and in Dept. of Civil Rts. ex rel. Mary Parks v. General Motors Corp., 93 Mich. App. 366 (1979), 287 N.W.2d 240, app. docketed, 408 Mich. 929 (1980) (cited by the majority at p. 366), is that the employer allowed no other person to be present for religious reasons during the regular scheduled work period to the extent demanded by these employees. The issue in these cases was whether the law required the unions to accommodate.
Creed is defined in Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, p. 533, as “a formulation or epitome of principles, rules, opinions, and precepts formally expressed and seriously adhered to and maintained.”
The testimony of an AMC supervisor can be read to mean that although AMC’s policy was to allow time off for observance of obligatory religious holidays this policy did not apply if it was “critical” for the job that the employee not be released. The AMC supervisor said: “Some people work on seven-day operations. If we had somebody who had to be off every Saturday and every Sunday, we’d terminate him. We could transfer him to a department where the particular days off would not be critical. A person could be transferred. It would be difficult if he were a specialist.”
The full Declaration of Policy (sec. 111.31, Stats. 1979-80) is as follows:
“111.31 Declaration of policy. (1) The practice of denying employment and other opportunities to, and discriminating against, properly qualified persons by reason of their age, race, creed, color, handicap, sex, national origin, ancestry, arrest record or conviction record, is likely to foment domestic strife and unrest, and substantially and adversely affect the general welfare of a state by depriving it of the fullest utilization of its capacities for production. The denial by some employers, licensing agencies and labor unions of employment opportunities to such persons solely because of their age, race, creed, color, handicap, sex, national origin, ancestry, arrest record or conviction record, and discrimination against them in employment, tends to deprive the victims of the earnings which are necessary to maintain a just and decent standard of living, thereby committing grave injury to them.
“(2) It is believed by many students of the problem that protection by law of the rights of all people to obtain gainful employment, and other privileges free from discrimination because of age, race, creed, color, handicap, sex, national origin or ancestry, would remove certain recognized sources of strife and unrest, and encourage the full utilization of the productive resources of the state to the benefit of the state, the family and to all the people of the state.
“(3) In the interpretation and application of this subchapter, and otherwise, it is declared to be the public policy of the state to encourage and foster to the fullest extent practicable the employment of all properly qualified persons regardless of their age, race, creed, color, handicap, sex, national origin or ancestry. This sub-chapter shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of this purpose.
“(4) The practice of requiring employes or prospective employes to submit to honesty tests without providing safeguards for the test subjects is unfair, and the use of improper tests and testing procedures causes injury to the employes and prospective employes.”

=== CASE 2226728 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:17.50387+00 ===

101 Wis. 2d 387 (1981)
305 N.W.2d 85
STATE of Wisconsin, Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
Michael KRUSE, Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner.
STATE of Wisconsin, Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
Randy PURIFOY, Defendant-Appellant-Petitioner.
Nos. 79-552-CR, 79-1414-CR.
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
Argued March 31, 1981.
Decided April 29, 1981.
*388 For the petitioners there were briefs and oral argument by William Lundstrom, of Madison, legal assistance to institutionalized persons program.
For the respondents the cause was argued by Edward S. Marion, assistant attorney general, with whom on the briefs was Bronson C. La Follette, attorney general.
Affirming 98 Wis.2d. 34, 295 N.W.2d 21 [Case No. 79-552-CR.]
Affirming 99 Wis. 2d 801, 300 N.W.2d 81 [Case No. 79-1414-CR.]
DAY, J.
This is a consolidated review of two decisions of the court of appeals. The first decision, State v. Kruse, 98 Wis. 2d 34, 295 N.W.2d 21 (Ct. App. 1980), affirmed the order of the circuit court for Dane county, Richard W. Bardwell, circuit judge. The second, State v. Purifoy, is an unpublished decision dated October 14, 1980, affirming an order of the circuit court for Milwaukee county, John E. McCormick, circuit judge. Both orders denied motions to make a sentence for another crime run concurrent with, rather than consecutive to, a commitment under the Sex Crimes Act.[1]
The cases present a single issue on appeal: Was it error for the trial court to impose a criminal sentence consecutive to commitment under the Sex Crimes Act?
We conclude that there was no error and affirm both orders.
In the case of State v. Kruse, No. 79-552-CR, the defendant was convicted of attempted rape. On July 20, 1973, Michael Kruse was committed to the Department of Health and Social Services (the department), for an indeterminate term and conveyed to Central State Hospital, *389 pursuant to sec. 975.06(2), Stats. 1973.[2] Kruse was transferred from Central State Hospital to the Mendota Health Institute (institute) on December 18, 1975. On September 17, 1976, Kruse escaped from the institute. He was later apprehended and on September 30, 1976, pled guilty to escape, in violation of sec. 946.42(3) (d), Stats. 1975. He was sentenced to a twenty-three month term to be served consecutive to the prior sex crimes commitment.
On March 2, 1979, Kruse filed a motion to modify his sentence to run concurrent with, rather than consecutive to, the commitment. On March 14, 1979, the circuit court entered an order denying the motion but reduced the sentence to eighteen months. The order was affirmed by the court of appeals on June 16, 1980. This court granted Kruse's petition for review on October 20, 1980.
In State v. Purifoy, No. 79-1414-CR, the defendant was convicted of one count of first-degree sexual assault and one count of second-degree murder on April 21, 1976. On June 21, 1976, Randy Purifoy was committed to the department for an indeterminate term and conveyed to Central State Hospital pursuant to sec. 975.06 (2), Stats. The circuit court also sentenced Purifoy to an indeterminate term of not less than five nor more than twenty-five years for the second-degree murder conviction, to run consecutive to the sex crimes commitment.
On July 31, 1979, the circuit court entered an order denying Purifoy's motion to modify his sentence to run *390 concurrent with, rather than consecutive to, the commitment. The order was affirmed by the court of appeals on October 14, 1980. This court granted Purifoy's petition to review and the case was consolidated with Kruse by order on December 8, 1980.
Both cases present essentially the same issue of statutory construction. Kruse involves the construction of secs. 946.42(4)[3] and 975.06(6),[4] Stats. 1975. Purifoy concerns the construction of secs. 973.15(1)[5] and 975.-06(6), Stats. 1975. This difference arises from Kruse's conviction for escape contrary to sec. 946.42(3) (d). The imposition of sentence for that offense is governed not by the general sentencing provision (sec. 973.15(1)), *391 but by sec. 946.42(4). Both statutes, however, provide for the imposition of a criminal sentence consecutive to another sentence. Therefore, both cases present the same issue on appeal: Does sec. 975.06(6), construed together with the sentencing statutes, authorize a trial court to impose a sentence consecutive to a sex crimes commitment?
A related issue was presented in State v. Hungerford, 76 Wis. 2d 171, 251 N.W.2d 9 (1977). In Hungerford, the defendant was convicted of indecent behavior with a child, and was committed to the department as one in need of specialized treatment and conveyed to Central State Hospital pursuant to sec. 975.06(2), Stats. He escaped, was apprehended and convicted of escape, contrary to sec. 946.42(3) (d). In imposing a one-year sentence for escape, the court ambiguously stated that the sentence was to be "consecutive" to his sex crimes commitment, but also that the sentence was to commence "as of today." Hungerford, 76 Wis.2d at 174. The circuit court, called upon to clarify its sentence, ruled that the sentence was not to be imposed consecutive to the commitment, and modified its disposition to a one week probation to be served consecutive to the commitment. Hungerford, 76 Wis.2d at 175. The state obtained a writ of error to review the circuit court's order amending sentence.
The issue in Hungerford was whether a sentence for the crime of escape under sec. 946.42(4) must be made consecutive to a commitment.
The court in Hungerford, concluded that while:
". . . sentences imposed for an escape must be consecutive to any sentence previously imposed. Because an individual committed pursuant to ch. 975 has not been sentenced, a sentence for an escape which took place while the individual was committed need not be served consecutive to the commitment." Hungerford, supra, 76 Wis.2d at 176.
*392 The court added:
"This is not to say that such a sentence could not be consecutive to the commitment; it is only a recognition that the statute does not mandate that sentences imposed under this section shall be consecutive to any sentence or commitment previously imposed." Hungerford, supra, 76 Wis.2d at 176. (Emphasis in original.)
Hungerford clearly acknowledged a trial court's discretionary authority under sec. 946.42(4), Stats., to impose a sentence consecutive to a sex crimes commitment. That conclusion is supported by the language of sec. 975.06 (6) that:
"Persons committed under this section who are also encumbered with other sentences, whether concurrent with or consecutive to the commitment, shall be received or remain at the sex crimes facility designated by the department. Such facilities may be regarded as state prisons for the purpose of beginning the other sentences crediting time served on them, and computing parole eligibility dates." (Emphasis added.)
Petitioners attempt to discredit the statement in Hungerford, contending that it is mere dictum. While the statement in Hungerford was not decisive to the primary issue presented, it was plainly germane to that issue and is therefore not dictum. Beloit Corp. v. ILHR Dept., 63 Wis. 2d 23, 31, 216 N.W.2d 233 (1974). As this court stated in Chase v. American Cartage, 176 Wis. 235, 238, 186 N.W. 598 (1922):
"It is deemed the doctrine of the cases is that when a court of last resort intentionally takes up, discusses, and decides a question germane to, though not necessarily decisive of, the controversy, such decision is not a dictum but is a judicial act of the court which it will thereafter recognize as a binding decision." (cited with approval in Will of Wehr, 247 Wis. 98, 18 N.W.2d 709 (1945).
*393 The view expressed in Hungerford is also consistent with the statutory framework governing the imposition of sentence consecutive to sex crimes commitments.
In Purifoy, secs. 973.15(1) and 975.06(6), Stats., are at issue. The petitioners contend that neither section contains express statutory authority providing for the imposition of a sentence consecutive to a commitment. Rather, the petitioners contend that a trial court's authority to impose consecutive sentences is limited by sec. 973.15(1), which provides for the imposition of a sentence consecutive to another sentence, but makes no reference to a commitment.
Petitioners rely on cases in which this court has narrowly construed a trial court's authority, pursuant to sec. 973.15(1), Stats., to impose consecutive sentences.[6] None of those cases involved a defendant committed under Ch. 975.
However, sec. 975.06(6), Stats., specifically refers to the imposition of sentences consecutive to sex crimes commitments. Sec. 973.15(1), if construed to mean that a criminal sentence can never be made consecutive to a commitment, would conflict with the language of sec. 975.06(6) which refers to criminal sentences both concurrent to and consecutive with commitment. These statutes must, therefore, be construed in pari materia and harmonized, if possible. State v. Wachsmuth, 73 Wis. 2d 318, 325, 243 N.W.2d 410 (1976).
[1]
When harmonizing inconsistent statutes, the specific governs the general and the later in time governs the earlier in time. Sigma Tau Gamma Fraternity House v. Menomonie, 93 Wis. 2d 392, 402, 288 N.W.2d 85 (1980). *394 Sec. 975.06(6) is both more specific and more recently enacted than sec. 973.15(1), and implicitly authorizes the imposition of a sentence consecutive to a commitment. Our conclusion that the legislature contemplated the imposition of a sentence consecutive to a sex crimes commitment is supported by the legislative history of sec. 975.06(6).
Sub. (6) of sec. 975.06, Stats., was created by ch. 44 of the Laws of 1973, which was introduced as Senate Bill 31. The Legislative Council's note to that bill reads in part:
"Under certain circumstances, a person may be committed under the Sex Crimes Act (Ch. 975 of the statutes) and, at the same time, be sentenced under another provision of the criminal code. If the sentence and commitment are consecutive, the inmate would first be confined at a designated sex crimes facility (state hospital) and upon parole from the commitment, be transferred to a state prison to begin serving his criminal sentence. If the sentence and commitment run concurrently, he must serve both the sentence and commitment at the state prison."
The Legislative Council's Report to the 1973 Legislature on Proposals Relating to Criminal Penalties similarly states, at page 6:
"Persons who are committed under Ch. 975 of the statutes, the Sex Crimes Law, also may be encumbered with other prison sentences which may run either concurrently or consecutively with the sex crimes commitment. For example, a person may have been committed under the Sex Crimes Law as a result of a conviction for rape. He also may have been simultaneously convicted for the theft of the woman's purse with the sentence to run concurrently. Under present law, time served in a sex crime facility may not be used in computing an inmate's parole eligibility date under the criminal sentence, since the sex crimes facility is not defined as a prison. *395 "Senate Bill 31 [LRB-944/1], creates s. 975.06(6) to provide that a sex crimes facility may be regarded as a prison for the purposes of beginning concurrent sentences and computing parole eligibility dates of consecutive sentences. In other words, the bill provides that time served in a sex crimes facility would be credited the same as time served in a state prison towards concurrent or consecutive sentences. S.B. 31 also specifically authorizes the use of a sex crime facility for a person who has other sentences which the court determines shall run concurrently or consecutively."
[2, 3]
This legislative history shows an intent to permit imposition of a sentence consecutive to a commitment. When construed together with either sec. 973.15(1), Stats., or sec. 946.42(4), we hold sec. 975.06(6) to authorize a trial court to impose a criminal sentence consecutive to a sex crimes commitment. Any other result would render that language in sec. 975.06(6) relating to consecutive sentences meaningless. A construction of a statute rendering a portion of it meaningless must be avoided. State v. Wisconsin Telephone Co., 91 Wis. 2d 702, 714, 284 N.W.2d 41 (1979).
By the Court.  The decisions of the Court of Appeals are affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Under the Act, sec. 975.01 et seq. Stats. 1975, persons convicted of sex crimes found to be in need of specialized treatment, were committed to the Department of Health and Social Services. Chapter 117, Laws of 1979 repealed, amended and recreated certain sections of the Act, providing in Section 6 that: "No person may be committed under this chapter after the effective date of this act (1979)."
[2]  "975.06. Commitment to the department . . . . (2) If, upon completion of the hearing as required in sub. (1), the court finds that the defendant is in need of specialized treatment the court shall commit him to the department. The court may stay execution of the commitment and place him on probation under ch. 973 with a condition of probation that he receive treatment in a manner to be prescribed by the court. If he is not placed on probation, the court shall order him conveyed by the proper county authorities, at county expense, to the sex crimes law facility designated by the department."
[3]  "Sec. 946.42. Escape. . . . (4) Sentences imposed under this section shall be consecutive to any sentence previously imposed or which may be imposed for any crime or offense for which the person was in custody when he escaped."
[4]  "Sec. 975.06. Commitment to the department. . . . (6) Persons committed under this section who are also encumbered with other sentences, whether concurrent with or consecutive to the commitment, shall be received or remain at the sex crimes facility designated by the department. Such facilities may be regarded as state prisons for the purpose of beginning the other sentences, crediting time served on them, and computing parole eligibility dates."
[5]  "Sec. 973.15 Sentence, terms, escapes. (1) All sentences to the Wisconsin state prisons shall be for one year or more. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all sentences commence at noon on the day of sentence, but time which elapses after sentence while the defendant is in the county jail or is at large on bail shall not be computed as any part of his term of imprisonment. The court may impose as many sentences as there are convictions and may provide that any such sentence be concurrent or that it shall commence at the expiration of any other sentence; and if the defendant is then serving a sentence, the present sentence may provide that it shall commence at the expiration of the previous sentence. If a convict escapes, the time during which he is unlawfully absent from the prison after such escape shall not be computed as part of his term. Courts may impose sentences to be served in whole or in part concurrently with a sentence being served in a federal institution or an institution of another state."
[6]  Drinkwater v. State, 69 Wis. 2d 60, 230 N.W.2d 126 (1975); Bruneau v. State, 77 Wis. 2d 166, 252 N.W.2d 347 (1977); and Guyton v. State, 69 Wis. 2d 663, 230 N.W.2d 726 (1974).

=== CASE 9741255 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:28.446932+00 ===

R. B. Burns, J.
Defendant was accused of driving the getaway car in connection with the perpetration of a robbery of Young’s Pharmacy in Albion, Michigan. Defendant denied any participation in the crime. He was tried by a jury and convicted on a charge of armed robbery, MCL 750.529; MSA 28.797.
Prior to trial, defendant moved to suppress evidence of his prior conviction of assault with intent to do great bodily harm less than murder. The trial court ruled that the prejudicial effect of this evidence would not outweigh its probative value as to defendant’s credibility; however, it further stated that because the element of assault in both the prior conviction and the armed robbery charge might cause confusion in the minds of the jurors the prosecutor would not be allowed to inquire into the nature of the prior conviction. Defendant argues on appeal that the trial court erred in *600ruling that evidence of the prior unspecified felony conviction was admissible.
The Supreme Court in People v Van Dorsten, 409 Mich 942; 298 NW2d 421 (1980), entered an order and stated, "It is improper to impeach a defendant by telling the jury only of the existence of the unnamed prior felony convictions without providing the names of the offenses. It is the nature, rather than the fact, of a prior felony conviction which the jury is to use in its evaluation of credibility.”
Reversed and remanded for a new trial.
C. J. Hoehn, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9741257 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:28.983019+00 ===

Clinton, J.
Defendant Dr. Howell G. Oldham (Oldham) applied for and was awarded unemployment compensation benefits under the Employment Security Law. Upon redetermination, a Department of Labor claims deputy found that Oldham was disqualified from receiving benefits for 7 weeks, under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 48-628(a) (Reissue 1978), because he resigned his employment “voluntarily . . . without good cause.” Oldham appealed to the appeal tribunal. Following a *664hearing, the appeal tribunal found that Oldham did not leave his employment voluntarily, but was discharged. The plaintiff, School District No. 20, County of Dawson (the Gothenburg Public School District), .and the defendant Commissioner of Labor (Commissioner) appealed to the District Court for Dawson County, which affirmed and awarded Oldham attorney fees for the appeal. The Gothenburg Public School District appeals to this court, assigning as error the finding that Oldham resigned involuntarily or with good cause, and arguing that upon de novo review this court should find to the contrary. The Commissioner appeals solely on the issue that the District Court wrongly awarded Oldham attorney fees without statutory authority to do so. We affirm in part and reverse in part.
An appeal under the Employment Security Law, Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 48-601 to 48-669 (Reissue 1978), must be heard by the District Court de novo on the record, although either party may offer additional evidence after proper notice. On appeal this court must also consider the cause de novo on the record. Powers v. Chizek, 204 Neb. 759, 285 N.W.2d 501 (1979); Glionna v. Chizek, 204 Neb. 37, 281 N.W.2d 220 (1979).
For 10 years Oldham served as superintendent of the Gothenburg Public School District. Each year in March or April the school board voted on whether to reelect the district administrators, including the superintendent, for the coming year. Reelection required an “aye” vote by at least three school board members, assuming all six were present and voting.
On February 12, 1979, Oldham and all six members of the school board attended a regularly scheduled school board meeting. After the public portion of the meeting, the school board went into executive session. During this session, France, the school board president, dismissed everyone from the room except Oldham and the school board members and initiated a conversation.
*665Although the testimony as to the precise language used in the conversation is slightly conflicting, there is no doubt of its substance and import. Oldham testified that France told him: “‘Dr. Oldham, I feel I should inform you it is extremely doubtful that you would get a majority vote for reelection for Superintendent of Schools for the coming year.’” France and Buddenberg, a school board member present at the meeting, testified that it was to the effect that Oldham possibly or probably would not receive a majority vote for reelection as superintendent. Oldham told the school board he would like to remain superintendent for another year so that, upon reaching age 55, he could sell his home in Gothenburg with more favorable tax consequences and his son could graduate from the Gothenburg High School. The other witnesses agreed that Oldham told the school board he would like to remain for another year so that his son could graduate from Gothenburg High School. At this point, according to France, Oldham, and Buddenberg, Buddenberg asked something to the effect that: “You have all heard Dr. Oldham. Because of [his son] would you change your [mind] and let him stay another year?” No one responded. Oldham testified that he then said: “‘Leonard [France], if that is the feeling of the Board, I suppose we can handle it in my office tomorrow.’” According to France and Buddenberg, Oldham offered to resign provided France would give a letter saying that it was possible he would not be reelected.
Oldham testified that he believed he had been discharged by the school board during the February 12, 1979, meeting. This belief was based in part on his experience with the school board which led him to think that they discussed his reelection before the meeting. He testified that when he had asked the school board on a couple of prior occasions whether they had discussed a particular issue he was told: “‘Yes, down at the post office.’” France denied any attempt to force Oldham’s resignation, saying that he intended *666solely to give Oldham the opportunity to resign rather than be publicly voted out later. According to France, he took this step without consulting other board members because two school board members ap.proached him before February 12th and told him that they would not vote for Oldham’s reelection.
After the meeting, according to France’s own testimony, he called Kelley Baker, attorney for the state school board, and asked whether any legal problems would result if he furnished Oldham with the above-mentioned letter. Baker responded in the negative, saying that school boards could fire superintendents at any time under state law.
The next afternoon France and Oldham met in the latter’s office. Oldham presented France with a letter stating, in part: “It appears doubtful that you will secure a majority vote to be re-elected to your position as Superintendent of the Gothenburg Schools for another term.
“Sincerely,
/s/ Leonard France
Leonard France, President
Gothenburg Board of Education”
France signed the letter and, according to Oldham, remarked: “T guess that represents the feeling of the Board of Education.’” France testified that he signed the letter only on behalf of himself and not upon authorization by the school board. Oldham then gave France a letter of resignation which said, in part: “[A]s per our verbal conversation last night at the Board meeting, I feel it to be in my best interest to inform you of my resignation.”
The school board accepted Oldham’s resignation on April 9, 1979.
Section 48-628(a) provides, in part, that: “An individual shall be disqualified for benefits:
“(a) For the week in which he has left work voluntarily without good cause, if so found by the Commissioner of Labor, and for not less than seven *667weeks nor more than ten weeks which immediately follow such week, as determined by the commissioner according to the circumstances in each case.”
In construing this language we have said: “[T]o ‘leave work voluntarily,’ . . . means to intentionally sever the employment relationship with the intent not to return to, or to intentionally terminate, the employment.” Powers v. Chizek, 204 Neb. 759, 764, 285 N.W.2d 501, 504 (1979). MacFarland, Aplnt., v. Unemploy. Comp. Bd., 158 Pa. Super. 418, 45 A.2d 423 (1946), which was cited in Powers, defined “voluntary” as meaning an employee who left of his own volition and was not discharged. A similar definition, also quoted in Powers, was that “voluntary” means that the claimant, by his or her own choice, intentionally, of his or her own free 'will, terminates the employment. Allen v. Core Target City Y. Prog., 275 Md. 69, 338 A.2d 237 (1975). See, also, 76 Am. Jur. 2d Unemployment Compensation § 59 at 956 (1975).
Powers dealt with the question of whether an employee discharged for failing to appear for work, in the belief that she had already been fired, terminated her employment voluntarily. In Powers the question arose because it was unclear whether the employee intended and acted to terminate her employment; in this case the question of voluntariness arises because it is unclear whether the employer intended and acted to terminate the employment relationship or, in other words, to discharge the employee.
Upon de novo review we hold that the District Court correctly found that Oldham did not terminate his employment voluntarily. The record shows that France, not Oldham, first raised the issue of Oldham’s reelection. Likewise, it is undisputed that Oldham desired to remain in his position as superintendent for at least another year, and told the school board of his desire. When Buddenberg asked the school board members whether they would change their minds and let Oldham stay for one more year, no one encouraged *668him to remain. It was only after this exchange that resignation was mentioned. The record is devoid of any evidence showing that Oldham had expressed a desire to resign prior to this discussion or that there was any question of misconduct, on his part, involved. It is clear that he resigned only because the school board members who had the power to reelect him intended not to do so.
Since we find that Oldham did not terminate his employment voluntarily, we need not reach the issue of whether he had • “good cause” under § 48-628(a) for his actions.
Next, we turn to the issue of attorney fees. The first mention of attorney fees in this record was at the District Court level where both Oldham and the Gothenburg Public School District sought an award of attorney fees for the appeal. The court ordered the Commissioner to pay Oldham reasonable attorney fees. The Commissioner argues that the court lacked statutory authority to do so.
This court has said many times that an award of attorney fees is erroneous unless permitted by statute or uniform practice. Suhr v. City of Seward, 201 Neb. 51, 266 N.W.2d 190 (1978); Warren v. Warren, 181 Neb. 436, 149 N.W.2d 44 (1967). Neither statute nor uniform practice permits the District Court upon appeal to order an adverse party to pay attorney fees incurred by an unemployment compensation claimant.
Oldham suggests that § 48-646 authorizes such an award. That section provides, in part, that: “Any individual claiming benefits in any proceeding before the commissioner or an appeal tribunal or his or its representative or a court may be represented by counsel or other duly authorized agent, and such counsel may either charge or receive for such services a reasonable fee to be approved by the commissioner. The commissioner may, in special cases, pay such fee from the Employment Security Administration *669Fund. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class II misdemeanor.”
In construing"a statute, we have consistently held that the language used by the Legislature should be considered to determine its intent and the words used should be given their plain meaning. Weiss v. Union Ins. Co., 202 Neb. 469, 276 N.W.2d 88 (1979); PPG Industries Canada Ltd. v. Kreuscher, 204 Neb. 220, 281 N.W.2d 762 (1979). In plain language, § 48-646 deals with the fees charged to a claimant by his own attorney, approval of such fees by the Commissioner, and payment of fees in special cases by the Commissioner. It plainly provides that the amount of any fee charged to the client by his, attorney requires approval by the Commissioner, including any fee for services in any court. The record does not show that any request was ever made to the Commissioner for approval of fees charged. Consequently, there is no showing of any special circumstances which would require payment by the Commissioner from the Employment Security Administration Fund. This statute in no way provides for an award of attorney fees by the District Court where such award was first sought on appeal by the parties and there was no issue on the appeal concerning any determination by the Commissioner as to the reasonableness of fees assessed a claimant by his own attorney or the eligibility of a claimant to have his attorney fees paid by the Commissioner under § 48-646.
We affirm the finding of the District Court that Oldham did not terminate his employment voluntarily, and reverse on the issue of attorney fees.
Affirmed in part, and in part reversed.

=== CASE 9741258 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:28.98696+00 ===

McCown, J.,
concurring in part, and in part dissenting.
I concur wifh that part of the majority opinion which holds that the claimant did not terminate his employment voluntarily. I dissent from that portion of *670the opinion disallowing the payment of a reasonable attorney fee to the defendant-claimant for the services of his attorney in the District Court.
It is clear that Neb. Rev. Stat. § 48-646 (Reissue 1978) authorizes the Commissioner of Labor to pay a reasonable attorney fee from the Employment Security Administration Fund “in special cases.” That provision is disjunctive from that portion of the statute requiring that any attorney fee charged to a claimant must be approved by the Commissioner.
Where the Commissioner of Labor appeals to the courts from an award of the appeal tribunal in favor of an unemployed claimant, unless there is some provision for the payment of reasonable attorney fees for claimants, the claimants will, in all probability, have extreme difficulty in obtaining the services of counsel to protect their awards. To require a claimant to request the Commissioner of Labor to allow a reasonable attorney fee in an appeal to the courts and have the request approved or denied before entering an appearance rather than to request it in an answer filed in the District Court exalts form over substance.
In this case it is clear that the attorney fees involved are only the fees for services in the District Court, and it is clear that the claimant prayed for such fees in his answer. It is also undisputed that the Commissioner of Labor has resisted, and still resists, the allowance of any fee for the claimant’s attorney, either in the District Court or in this court. There can be no reasonable doubt that the Commissioner has denied the payment of any attorney fee out of the Employment Security Administration Fund.
Unless a decision by the Commissioner of Labor denying a request for the payment of attorney fees from the Employment Security Administration Fund is unreviewable by the courts, it should be reviewed in this case because the Commissioner of Labor has denied the payment of attorney fees from the fund and even appealed to this court on the ground that such *671fees are not allowable. It cannot be expected that he will reverse that decision, and his exercise of discretion ought to be reviewed now rather than later or not at all.
Where the Commissioner of Labor appeals to the courts from an award of the appeal tribunal to an unemployed claimant and loses the appeal, if there is any case which could be said to be a “special case” this one would be it.
If the majority opinion holds that under the statute a court cannot set or determine a reasonable attorney fee for services of an attorney in its own court without the prior approval of the Commissioner of Labor, I cannot believe the authority of the courts is so limited.
It is unconscionable to require a successful unemployment compensation claimant to defend his award in the District Court against an appeal by the Commissioner of Labor without an allowance of attorney fees, particularly when the appeal is unsuccessful and the Commissioner of Labor has the power to allow a reasonable attorney fee in “special cases.” If the statute must be so interpreted, at least the Legislature’s attention should be called to the obvious injustice.
The District Court obviously found that this case was a “special case” and quite properly awarded a reasonable attorney fee of $700. That judgment was eminently correct and should be affirmed. I would also order the payment of an additional $700 fee for services of the claimant’s attorney in this court.

=== CASE 9741259 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:30.602879+00 ===

MARTIN, Circuit Judge.
Plaintiff was granted a divorce from defendant on the grounds of extreme cruelty. Defendant appealed from the judgment regarding the division of the property and debts and the award of alimony. We affirm.
*405The parties were married on December 27,1974. A divorce was granted on February 15, 1980. The duration of the marriage was therefore approximately five years. At the time of trial, plaintiff was thirty-eight years of age; the record does not reflect defendant’s age. Plaintiff had two children by a previous marriage, ages seventeen and fifteen.
When plaintiff and defendant were married, plaintiff owned some land in Elko, Nevada; a lot in Florida; an interest in some partnership property in California; a car; part interest in her former home in Hawaii; and a savings account of approximately $7,700. Defendant brought into the marriage some furniture and a car.
The health of the parties apparently was good. Regarding the parties’ competency to earn a living, plaintiff graduated from Sioux Falls College with a degree in social work and psychology. However, she did not work during the course of the marriage at the request of defendant, who did not want her to work as it would put him in a higher tax bracket. Defendant is a stockbroker and is presently employed as manager of the Sioux Falls office of an investment banking firm. In 1978 and again in 1979, defendant earned in excess of $50,000. Further, defendant was expected to earn for the year 1980 the sum of $38,000.
The parties had accumulated, during the course of the marriage, a home in Brandon, South Dakota, a 1975 Dodge van camper, furniture and fixtures and household goods and two certificates of deposit, the latter to be held for the benefit of plaintiff’s children. Excluding the mortgage on the home, the parties had incurred debts in excess of $35,000.
Regarding the contribution of each party to the accumulation of the said property, plaintiff, in addition to keeping house, making meals and doing the normal housewife chores, contributed $15,000 towards a down-payment on the purchase of the home and for some initial improvements on the home. Defendant basically contributed his earnings.
The record reflects several other relevant factors. As part of the divorce decree in Hawaii concerning her first marriage, plaintiff was awarded the home. The decree provided that if she did not sell the Hawaii home prior to September 1980, her two children would be awarded 100% of the net profit. If the house was sold prior to September 1980, plaintiff’s former husband was to receive 40% of the net proceeds, with plaintiff to receive the balance. In 1976, defendant insisted that plaintiff sell the house in Hawaii and retain all of the proceeds in violation of the Hawaii court order and purchase a residence in Sioux Falls with the money. At defendant’s insistence, the house was sold and plaintiff received $29,000 in net proceeds, giving her former husband none of that amount. Plaintiff’s former husband learned of the sale and started legal proceedings in Hawaii. The court in Hawaii has since entered a judgment against plaintiff in favor of the former husband for approximately $16,000. From the $29,000 realized from the Hawaii property sale, plaintiff purchased two certificates of deposit for the children in the total sum of $10,000. As stated, $15,000 of the proceeds was used towards a downpayment on the purchase of a house in Brandon and on initial improvements. Plaintiff also gave $3,000 of the proceeds to defendant to invest in the stock market. Plaintiff had earlier given defendant her $7,700 in savings to invest in the stock market. The record reflects that defendant made various purchases and transfers of stock, mainly in the high risk area, and at the timé of the trial the stocks were worthless.
After the parties purchased the home in Brandon, defendant wanted to borrow more money for improvements and talked plaintiff into borrowing more funds and using the children’s certificates of deposit as security. Plaintiff was reluctant to do this but was advised by defendant that if she loved him and trusted him, she would let him manage the money. Defendant further threatened to leave plaintiff if she refused to mortgage the certificates of deposit. In addition to this, plaintiff discovered that defendant was using construction *406loans for living expenses and to facilitate his excessive bar life and late night activities. Further, defendant refused to go to counseling.
The parties separated and then resumed living together in the summer of 1978 but again started experiencing financial problems, due mainly to defendant’s after-hours activities. Defendant refused to tell plaintiff about the finances and demanded that he be left in charge of the finances. Defendant’s conduct drove plaintiff to an attempted suicide. In November 1979, defendant advised plaintiff that he did not love her anymore and for her to go get herself an attorney and that he was not coming home.
The parties’ home in Brandon has been foreclosed upon. The trial judge ordered it to be sold. The record reflects that the home was worth approximately $80,000; deductions from that figure include a mortgage of $54,900, late charges and taxes of $2,250, a lien of $3,000, real estate fees of $6,000, and a construction loan in the amount of $12,300 secured by the children’s certificates of deposit, leaving a net profit of around $1,550. If the home should be sold for less than $80,000, there may very well be a net loss; in any event, plaintiff would not be able to recover her $15,000 investment. Regarding the other properties, plaintiff was awarded furniture and household goods and other items amounting to approximately $2,500. Defendant was awarded certain furniture and household goods as well as the 1975 Dodge van camper for a total value of $3,975. It must be stated, however, that the camper was mortgaged in the approximate sum of its value. The trial court also awarded to plaintiff the land in Port Malibar, Florida; the land in Elko, Nevada; and her interest in the California partnership property, all of which properties plaintiff brought into the marriage. Plaintiff also received the two certificates of deposit which were taken out for the benefit of her children.
The trial court also ruled that plaintiff should incur and be responsible for debts in excess of $11,000, and that defendant incur and be responsible for debts in excess of $24,000. The trial court also required defendant to pay attorney fees of $750.
In addition to the above, the trial court awarded plaintiff alimony of $750 a month, the first monthly installment to be due for the month of February 1980, and to continue until her youngest child reaches the age of eighteen or is emancipated, if that is earlier. At the time of the termination of the alimony as above indicated, the trial court will reassess the alimony situation on motion of plaintiff and as the needs and abilities of the parties dictate. As stated, plaintiff’s youngest child was fifteen at the time of the divorce.
In reviewing the division of property and the award of alimony, the trial court has broad discretion in making such provision and granting such award, and we will not modify or set them aside unless it clearly appears that the trial court abused its discretion. Hansen v. Hansen, 273 N.W.2d 749 (S.D.1979). Although a trial court has broad discretion, we have enumerated further factors which should be considered in the division of marital assets. These factors are;
[T]he duration of the marriage, value of the property, the ages of the parties, the parties’ state of health and competency to earn a living, the contribution of each party to the accumulation of the property, and the income-producing capacity of the parties’ assets. Hansen, supra, at p. 751.
Other cases holding for the same proposition include Johnson v. Johnson, 300 N.W.2d 865 (S.D.1980); Buseman v. Buseman, 299 N.W.2d 807 (S.D.1980); Cooper v. Cooper, 299 N.W.2d 798 (S.D.1980); Clement v. Clement, 292 N.W.2d 799 (S.D.1980); Michael v. Michael, 287 N.W.2d 98 (S.D.1980); and Wall v. Wall, 260 N.W.2d 644 (S.D.1977).
In addition to the above factors, fault' continues to be a consideration in making an award of alimony. Hanks v. Hanks, 296 N.W.2d 523 (S.D.1980).
*407Without enumerating each, we find the record is replete with evidence that all these factors were properly presented to and considered by the trial court. We do not believe that the trial court abused its discretion in entering its judgment regarding property division or alimony award. In making an equitable division of property, a trial court is not bound by any mathematical formula but is to make the award on the basis of the material factors in the case, having due regard for equity and the circumstances of the party. Further, and specifically regarding alimony, fault is a consideration, and one which is amply shown in this case.
Plaintiff has requested that defendant be required to pay additional attorney fees for the defense, of this appeal. We find this to be a reasonable request and require that defendant pay the additional sum of $500 for attorney fees.
The judgment of the trial court is modified to include an award of $500 to plaintiff for attorney fees on appeal. As so modified, the judgment is affirmed.
WOLLMAN, C. J., and MORGAN, J., concur.
DUNN, J., concurs specially.
HENDERSON, J., dissents.
MARTIN, Circuit Judge, sitting for FOSHEIM, J., disqualified.

=== CASE 9741261 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:30.610055+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice
(dissenting).
I would reverse and remand.
The decree of divorce, entered on February 15, 1980, provided, inter alia:
That plaintiff is entitled to alimony in the sum of $750.00 per month commencing February 1, 1980 [sic] and payable on the first of each month thereafter until plaintiff’s youngest child, Mark Lewis, reaches the age of 18 years or is emancipated, whichever occurs first. At that time the Court will reassess alimony as the needs and abilities of the parties dictate. That said alimony payments shall be paid through the Minnehaha County Clerk of Courts.
Less than one year prior to the entry of this decree, this Court stated in Price v. Price, 278 N.W.2d 455, 458 (S.D.1979):
Although we recognize that awarding alimony and child support payments are in the trial court’s discretion, we must stress that alimony and child support are separate concepts.
We also stated in Price at 459:
Inasmuch as the alimony and award fluctuated with the child support, we must remand the alimony award to the trial court for further consideration based solely upon a suitable allowance to plaintiff independent of the child support consideration.
True, plaintiff’s child, Mark Lewis, was not the child of defendant. True, defendant was not required by the decree to support plaintiff’s child. And true, defendant owed no legal obligation whatsoever to support this child. Why, then, did the trial court patently intertwine the payment of alimony with the child’s attainment of eighteen years of age or his emancipation? There is no doubt that the express monthly payment of $750 alimony, under the decree, will terminate when defendant’s stepson fulfills one of these two conditions. Such an alimony award is contrary to Price and not a factor which should be considered. In determining the amount of alimony payments, this Court has expressed the factors to be considered in Hanks v. Hanks, 296 N.W.2d 523 (S.D.1980), and Guindon v. Guindon, 256 *408N.W.2d 894 (S.D.1977). A stepson’s attainment of majority or emancipation is not one of the factors to be considered and the trial court’s judgment in this regard is oppressive, wrong, and contrary to the settled,law of this state. It appears that the trial court mixed together an alimony and property settlement award. In a circuitous way, the trial court either awarded child support unto plaintiff requiring defendant to pay support for a minor to whom he owed no legal obligation and/or provided a property settlement by making a very high monthly alimony award.
It strikes me that an alimony award of $750 per month for a marriage that lasted approximately five years is excessive and, under the circumstances of this case, constitutes an abuse of discretion. A trial court’s discretion is a judicial discretion, not an uncontrolled one, and its exercise must have a sound and substantial basis in the testimony. SDCL 25-4-44; Fink v. Fink, 296 N.W.2d 916 (S.D.1980); Hansen v. Hansen, 273 N.W.2d 749 (S.D.1979). Defendant proposed a finding of fact concerning plaintiff’s obtainment of a college degree, which required three years of college study during the five-year marriage and enabled her to secure favorable employment. No finding of any kind was entered with respect thereto as the trial court chose to ignore this critical factor. Rather, the trial court riveted in on defendant’s resources. Therefore, it must be assumed that the trial court did not consider plaintiff’s recent educational pursuits at all which most certainly bears upon “the competency to earn a living.” The majority -opinion accepts the factual proposition that “the health of the parties was good.” If, indeed, plaintiff enjoys good health and has a good education, why does she require a $750 monthly alimony award? Alimony should not be awarded for sympathy or for the able-bodied and well-educated who refuse to work. “Alimony is not a matter of right. When the wife has the ability to earn a living, it is not [proper legal policy] to give her a perpetual lien on her divorced husband’s future income.” Morgan v. Morgan, 59 Wash.2d 639, 642, 369 P.2d 516, 518 (1962). See also Young v. Young, 371 Mich. 447, 124 N.W.2d 264 (1963); Miles v. Miles, 185 Or. 230, 202 P.2d 485 (1949); Schwent v. Schwent, Mo.App., 209 S.W.2d 546 (1948); Branson v. Branson, 190 Okl. 347, 123 P.2d 643 (1942). It is good to work and the courts should not harbor those who spurn it.
It was during plaintiff’s college life, which was time framed within her married life, that she drifted into alcoholism. She graduated from Sioux Palls College in 1978 and was treated at the Mandan, North Dakota, Alcoholic Rehabilitation Center that same year. Prior to the parties’ marriage, plaintiff had lived for many years in the Orient and, from 1968 to 1974, worked in bars from Hickom AFB Club, Hawaii, to the Sky Lane Inn and Sansa Bar, Aurora, Colorado. Defendant first met plaintiff at said Sansa Bar. Six months later the parties were married. Plaintiff had suffered a previous broken marriage. In September of 1979, plaintiff attempted suicide. I question highly that defendant should solely bear the blame for this suicide attempt in light of the circumstances of plaintiff’s life prior to this marriage and the circumstances of this marriage. There is no finding of fact to buttress the majority opinion’s finding to this effect. Although plaintiff’s attempt on her own life was foiled, this dramatic episode should not be considered as a sympathy factor or any other factor in arriving at an alimony award.
Finally, I take general exception to the majority opinion’s expression that defendant caused plaintiff to refrain from employment during the marriage. For, indeed, Finding of Fact XIII duly entered by the trial court provides: “That plaintiff is unemployed and has been unemployed for years and has been unable to secure employment.”
The alimony award of $750 per month cries out for reversal; the mixing of the alimony award with the child’s emancipation and/or property award clouds the lower court’s rationale to such an extent that it deviates from the settled law of this state. I would therefore also reverse the property award so that it may be adjudicated with a *409fresh viewpoint towards equity. Lacking companions or associates in my dissent, I issue my solitary cry.

=== CASE 9741262 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:30.834932+00 ===

Per Curiam.
On April 16, 1979, defendant pled guilty to armed robbery in violation of MCL 750.529; MSA 28.797. Defendant was sentenced to a term of from 25 to 50 years imprisonment. Defendant appealed of right on August 20, 1979. On March 31, 1980, before this matter was .heard on appeal, defendant filed with this Court a motion to remand to the trial court for the purpose of completing the lower court record concerning the alleged involuntary nature of his plea of guilty. The motion was granted on May 23, 1980, and a hearing was held on July 12, 1980, to complete the lower court record. The appeal is now before our panel.
First, defendant claims that the trial court’s failure to advise defendant as to the consequences of MCL 791.233b; MSA 28.2303(3), otherwise known as 1978 Initiated Proposal B, rendered his plea of guilty involuntary. This claim is without merit. Court rules do "not require the judge to inform the defendant of all sentence consequences —only the maximum sentence, any mandatory minimum and, * * * if he is on probation or parole, the possible effect on his status as a probationer or parolee”. Guilty Plea Cases, 395 Mich 96, 118; 235 NW2d 132 (1975). A review of the completed lower court record establishes that the trial court fulfilled all of the requirements of the court rules at the plea-taking hearing. No error occurred.
The completed lower court record indicates that defendant may not have been totally aware of all of the sentence consequences of Proposal B at the *654time of offering his guilty plea. Defendant urges this Court to impose upon the trial courts the additional requirement of insuring that defendants are totally aware of all sentence consequences flowing from Proposal B. While this Court might agree that the sentence consequences of Proposal B could have some effect on a defendant’s decision to enter into a plea agreement, this Court is bound by Guilty Plea Cases, supra. Any additional requirements to be imposed on trial courts must come from the Legislature or the Supreme Court. See also People v Solomon, 104 Mich App 695; 305 NW2d 295 (1981).
Defendant’s other claim of error is likewise without merit. Defendant claims that the sentencing judge’s knowledge that defendant took a polygraph examination concerning the crime charged should disqualify that judge from sentencing defendant. However, it was defendant who testified at sentencing that he took a polygraph examination that implicated others, as well as himself, in the crime charged in hopes of gaining leniency from the sentencing judge. The sentencing judge, in fact, did specifically indicate that he was discounting defendant’s sentence because of the defendant’s cooperation with the authorities. This situation is distinguishable from the cases cited by defendant in which the sentencing court improperly relied upon knowledge of a polygraph examination which implicated the defendant in criminal activity other than that to which the defendant had pled guilty or for which he was on trial. In the instant case, the mention of the polygraph examination was only in regard to the current charge to which the defendant had already pled guilty. No error occurred.
Affirmed.
Allen and C. L. Hoehn, JJ., concurred.

=== CASE 9741263 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:30.83891+00 ===

*655M. J. Kelly, P.J.
(dissenting). The majority holds that the defendant’s guilty plea was understanding^ made, despite the trial court’s failure to apprise defendant of the Proposal B, MCL 791.233b; MSA 28.2303(3), consequences of his plea. I am unable to agree that the defendant could understandingly enter such a plea without knowledge that his minimum sentence was written in stone, unalterable by self-efforts at rehabilitation.
The facts of the present case indicate a defendant who, as a result of a prior incarceration, was aware of the "lifer law” by which a prisoner with a lengthy sentence could seek parole after ten years. Additionally, the defendant was provided a booklet entitled "Statement of Rights to Defendant” which could only have reinforced his expectations as to early parole. In pertinent part, the booklet stated:
"There are certain other crimes where if a Defendant is convicted of them, the Court must send him to prison. These are the more serious offenses of murder, armed robbery, treason and committing a felony with a gun.
"Usually, when a person is sent to prison he is released before he has served his entire sentence, but he is released on conditions that are called parole.”
In light of the mandatory sentence required for armed robbery and the minimum sentence consequences of Proposal B, the defendant herein was apparently misinformed as to the punishment he faced upon acceptance of his plea.1
Few would doubt the intent of the Supreme *656Court in promulgating GCR 1963, 785.7(l)(d), to inform a defendant of the minimum time in prison he may expect to serve. Guilty Plea Cases, 395 Mich 96, 119-120; 235 NW2d 132 (1975). In People v Mitchell, 102 Mich App 554; 302 NW2d 230 (1980), this Court applied the rule so interpreted to a case in which the sentencing judge misinformed the defendant as to the sentencing consequences of a subsequent felony-firearm conviction. MCL 750.227b(2); MSA 28.424(2X2). The Court held:
"The purpose of the mandatory sentencing rule is to apprise the defendant of the minimum time he will serve in prison so that his plea of guilty is given with full knowledge of the consequences. Guilty Plea Cases, supra, 118. We hold that, where consecutive and/or mandatory sentencing is ordered by statute, the defendant must be informed of that fact so that he has full knowledge of the true minimum time he will serve by pleading guilty. ” (Emphasis added.)
In this case, the defendant could not have been aware of "the true minimum time” he would serve unless told of the mandatory requirements imposed by Proposal B. I would reverse the defendant’s plea-based conviction and sentence and remand the case for trial._
The people contend that defendant’s presentence report adequately informed the defendant of the Proposal B considerations in his case. The report states:
*656"NOTE: This offender is convicted of an offense included in Proposal B and accordingly, the minimum term shall not be diminished by allowances for good time, special good time, or special parole.”
The record made below, however, is inconclusive as to whether defendant was given an opportunity to review the report.

=== CASE 9741264 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:31.09627+00 ===

Brodkey, J.
Roger Steidley, defendant and appellant herein, appeals to this court from a decree entered by the District Court of Scotts Bluff County, Nebraska, enjoining him from maintaining a mobile home on property located in the Village of McGrew, Nebraska. The court ordered the defendant to comply with village ordinance No. 44, a zoning ordinance, which specifies certain requirements for the installation and maintenance of mobile homes within McGrew. We reverse and remand.
McGrew, Nebraska, is a rural community of approximately 85 people located along the North Platte River 20 miles southeast of Scottsbluff. It appears that on August 5, 1976, the village board of McGrew met to organize a planning commission for the village in order to investigate and develop plans for the long-term growth of the community. The planning commission members were appointed by the village board, and a map of McGrew was forwarded to the State Office of Planning and Programming so it could aid in the completion of the project. Various work sessions followed in which the planning commission considered alternative plans for development and village regulations.
The planning commission drafted and approved a comprehensive development plan which, after a public hearing, was recommended to the village board for adoption. The certificate of the planning commission, dated May 9, 1977, and received in evidence at the trial of this matter, recites: “The Planning Commission of the Village of McGrew, Nebraska, *728hereby recommends to the Village Board of McGrew, Nebraska, the acceptance of the Comprehensive Plan and adoption by the Village Board. The Comprehensive Plan shall be known as ‘The Comprehensive Plan for McGrew, Nebraska.’ The Planning Commission held a public hearing on May 9, 1977 in the Fire Hall in McGrew, Nebraska, and by a roll call vote of 6 ayes and 0. nays voted to accept the Comprehensive Plan and recommend to the Village Board of McGrew, Nebraska.” However, as reflected by the minutes of that meeting, the actual motion made and passed by the members of the planning commission was “to pass the Comprehensive Plan of Zoning Regulations on to the Village Board. . . .” (Emphasis supplied.) The comprehensive development plan itself, entitled Community Development Plan, was introduced at the trial as exhibit 4. Exhibit 4 contains not only the comprehensive development plan, which complied in full with the requirements of such plans as set out in Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-903 (Reissue 1977), but also contains the zoning regulations which were the subject matter of ordinance No. 44, admitted as exhibit 1 at trial. Exhibit 1, however, as adopted by the Village of McGrew, was entirely a zoning ordinance and does not contain the development plan recommended by the planning commission. The minutes of the village board meeting held on July 6, 1977, indicate that the board approved by rollcall vote the proposed zoning regulations as village ordinance No. 44. The minutes do not reflect that any action whatsoever was taken with regard to that part of exhibit 4 which constituted the comprehensive development plan prepared by the planning commission.
On Sunday, July 10, 1977, 4 days after the village board adopted ordinance No. 44, defendant Steidley brought a 70-foot-long mobile home into the Village of McGrew, and placed it crosswise on three lots, each of which measured 25 feet in width and 133 feet in depth. It appears that Steidley had tied down *729and blocked the mobile home foundation, hooked up the utilities, and had placed a skirt on the backside of the home by July 12, 1977, when he was advised by William Van Pelt, chairman of the village board, that he had not positioned the mobile home in accordance with the requirements set forth in ordinance No. 44. Steidley testified, however, that he had previously been told by other members of the board that his mobile home could be placed on the lots as he had positioned it and that no ordinances or regulations had been passed with regard to its placement.
On March 3, 1978, the Village of McGrew filed a petition in the District Court of Scotts Bluff County, praying that “the Defendant be enjoined from maintaining his mobile home on the premises described herein in violation of the ordinances of the Village of McGrew and that a mandatory injunction issue requiring him to remove the same or to position the mobile home in compliance with and to construct the foundation and tie-downs for the same in compliance with the ordinances of the Village of McGrew, for the cost of this action and for such other and further relief as the Court may deem just and equitable.” In his answer, filed March 21, 1978, the defendant challenged the validity of ordinance No. 44, and the proceedings of the planning commission and village board which culminated in its enactment.
This matter came to trial on November 29, 1979. The record reveals, however, that the evening before the trial was to commence, to wit, on November 28, 1979, a special meeting of the village board of McGrew was held, at which meeting a resolution was adopted to amend the minutes of the July 6, 1977, meeting to read as follows: “A motion was made to adopt the Comprehensive Development Plan for the Village of McGrew. Motion approved by roll call vote.” At the trial, which commenced the following day, the Village of McGrew called as its first witness Katherine Teppert, who was the village clerk for the Village of *730McGrew. She testified with reference to the organization of the planning commission on August 5, 1976, and the adoption of the comprehensive plan by the planning commission and the recommendation to the village board that they accept the comprehensive plan, on May 9, 1977. She also testified with reference to the meeting held on July 6, 1977, as follows: “In July we held a meeting where we passed the Comprehensive Plan and the zoning regulations for the village and adopted them.” She was asked whether there was an error in the minutes of the meeting of July 6, 1977, and replied that there was and that the minutes should have read “Comprehensive Planning and Zoning” instead of just “Comprehensive Zoning.” She also testified that the village board had taken action to correct the minutes; and when asked when that action was taken, replied: “Last night, November 28th.” She testified as to the previous evening as follows: “We had a motion to amend the July 6th minutes and we amended them to read that the motion was made and approved to accept both the planning and the zoning regulations.” We point out that the actual minutes do not bear out this statement. As quoted above, they merely refer to adopting the “Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance.” She later testified, however, that it was her recollection that the “Comprehensive Plan was adopted by the Village.” She later identified this plan as exhibit 4, which she contended was adopted on July 6, 1977. She also identified exhibit 1, ordinance No. 44, which she stated was the comprehensive plan for the Village of McGrew regulating and restricting certain ordinances. She was specifically asked: “Is that the Comprehensive Zoning Plan?” She replied: “Yes, it is.” However, the minutes of the meeting of the village board which was held on July 6, 1977, are also in evidence in this case, and they reveal that at the meeting a motion was made and seconded to accept the “Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance for the Village of McGrew,” which *731they referred to in said minutes as “ordinance 44.” The motion was approved by rollcall vote. Nothing was specifically referred to in the minutes of that meeting with regard to that portion of exhibit 4 which constitutes the comprehensive development plan.
Following the trial, at which Katherine Teppert, the village clerk, William Van Pelt, the chairman of the board, and Roger Steidley, the defendant, testified on behalf of the plaintiff, and no witnesses testified on the behalf of the defendant, the trial court, on December 10, 1979, found generally in favor of the plaintiff and against the defendant, and ordered that the defendant be enjoined from further violations of ordinance No. 44 of the Village of McGrew and from maintaining a mobile home on the property in question unless, within 60 days of the decree, he relocated the mobile home to comply with the setback requirements set forth in ordinance No. 44, and otherwise complied with the requirements of that ordinance.
In his brief on appeal, the defendant contends that since the trial court found generally in favor of the village, it necessarily had to find against the defendant on each issue raised by the trial below. Specifically, the defendant principally assigns as error: (1) The trial court erred in finding that ordinance No. 44 was a comprehensive development plan within the meaning of § 19-903; (2) The court erred in finding that the village had adopted a comprehensive development plan prior to attempting to exercise the zoning regulations; (3) The court erred in finding that ordinance No. 44 was a valid comprehensive development plan, because the words “development plan” were not included in its title; (4) The court erred in finding that ordinance No. 44 had been validly adopted, because it was not styled as required by Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-613 (Reissue 1977); (5) The court erred in failing to find that ordinance No. 44 did not become effective until after defendant’s mobile home was placed in its present position, and (6) The court erred in failing *732to find that the ordinance had not been published as provided by law.
We begin our discussion of this matter by setting forth the applicable law governing the scope of our review on appeal. This court has held that what is in the public good as it relates to zoning ordinances affecting the use of property is, primarily, a matter lying within the discretion of the municipal body to which the power and function of zoning is committed; and that unless an abuse of this discretion has clearly been shown, it is not the province of this court to interfere. In passing upon the validity of zoning ordinances, an appellate court should give great weight to the determination of local authorities who are especially familiar with local conditions. However, in appeals from the District Court to the Supreme Court in suits in equity, on trial de novo this court will retry the issue or issues of fact involved and reach an independent conclusion as to what findings are required under the pleadings and the evidence, without reference to the conclusions reached in the District Court. Dundee Realty Co. v. City of Omaha, 144 Neb. 448, 13 N.W.2d 634 (1944); Weber v. City of Grand Island, 165 Neb. 827, 87 N.W.2d 575 (1958); Bucholz v. City of Omaha, 174 Neb. 862, 120 N.W.2d 270 (1963); J. W. Auto Parts, Inc. v. City of Omaha, 187 Neb. 624, 193 N.W.2d 281 (1971).
In order for this court to make the determination as to whether the Village of McGrew properly enacted ordinance No. 44, we must turn to the applicable statutory provisions which govern the matter before us. In this regard, Neb. Rev. Stat. § 19-901 (Reissue 1977) specifies the requirements for enacting zoning regulations as follows: “(1) For the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals, or the general welfare of the community, the legislative bodies in cities of the first and second class and in villages may adopt zoning regulations which regulate and restrict the height, number of stories, and size of buildings and *733other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population, and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes.
“(2) Such powers shall be exercised only after the municipal legislative body has appointed a planning commission, received from its planning commission a recommended comprehensive development plan as defined in section 19-903, adopted such comprehensive development plan, and received the specific recommendation of the planning commission on the adoption or amendment of zoning regulations.” (Emphasis supplied.)
It is clear from the language found in § 19-901 that a comprehensive development plan (as defined in § 19-903) must precede the adoption of any zoning regulations by the village. We note that prior to 1967, neither § 19-901 nor § 19-903 contained the requirement that a comprehensive development plan be adopted by a community prior to enacting zoning regulations; rather, the statute only required that zoning regulations be made “in accordance with a comprehensive plan.” See City of Imperial v. Raile, 187 Neb. 404, 191 N.W.2d 442 (1971). However, § 19-901 was amended in 1967, and now includes the requirement that a comprehensive development plan be adopted before the passage of any zoning regulations.
We must therefore turn to § 19-903 in order to determine whether the “Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance,” adopted by the Village of McGrew as ordinance No. 44, constitutes a comprehensive development plan. Section 19-903 states as follows: “The regulations and restrictions authorized by sections 19-901 to 19-915 shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive development plan which shall consist of both graphic and textual material and shall be designed to accommodate anticipated long-range *734future growth which shall be based upon documented population and economic projections. The comprehensive development plan shall, among other possible elements, include: (1) A land-use element which designates the proposed general distributions, general location, and extent of the uses of land for agriculture, housing, commerce, industry, recreation, education, public buildings and lands, and other categories of public and private use of land; (2) The general location, character, and extent of existing and proposed major roads, streets, and highways, and air and other transportation routes and facilities; and (3) The general location, type, capacity, and area served of present and projected or needed community facilities including recreation facilities, schools, libraries, other public buildings, and public utilities and services.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Our review of ordinance No. 44, the “Comprehensive Zoning Plan” enacted by the Village of McGrew, convinces us that it does not contain those elements of a comprehensive development plan set forth in § 19-903(1) to (3). Rather, the ordinance states on its face: “AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A COMPREHENSIVE ZONING PLAN WITHIN THE VILLAGE OF McGREW, NEBRASKA; AND WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF SAID VILLAGE, REGULATING AND RESTRICTING SIZE OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES, THE SIZE OF THE YARDS, COURTS AND OTHER OPEN SPACES, THE DENSITY OF THE POPULATION AND THE LOCATIONS AND USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND LAND FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY, RESIDENCE AND OTHER PURPOSES; ESTABLISHING SET-BACK BUILDING LINES; DIVIDING SAID VILLAGE INTO ZONING DISTRICTS AND WITHIN SUCH DISTRICTS REGULATING AND RESTRICTING ERECTION, CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, SIZE, REPAIR AND USE *735OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND LAND; PROVIDING THE PROCEDURE FOR THE ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY, PROVIDING FOR ENFORCEMENT OF SAID ORDINANCE AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR ITS VIOLATION.” (Emphasis supplied.)
We note that the above italicized language taken from ordinance No. 44 comes verbatim from § 19-901, the statutory section governing the adoption of zoning ordinances and regulations. Ordinance No. 44 obviously fails to meet the statutory requirements set forth in § 19-903, and therefore cannot be considered to be a comprehensive development plan. Therefore, inasmuch as no comprehensive development plan was adopted by the Village of McGrew prior to the enactment of ordinance No. 44, as is required by § 19-901(2), we must conclude that ordinance No. 44 was not properly adopted as a zoning ordinance by the village board and is invalid under the terms of the aforementioned statutory provisions.
We now comment briefly upon the effect of the effort of the village board of McGrew to amend the minutes of the meeting held on July 6, 1977, to show that the board also adopted the comprehensive development plan at that meeting. The minués of the meeting held on that date do not reflect that the comprehensive development plan was adopted, but show that the comprehensive zoning plan was so adopted. We again point out that the special meeting to correct the minutes of the earlier meeting was held the night before the trial in this matter was to commence, which date was approximately 2 years and 4 months after the aforementioned meeting of the village board which adopted the comprehensive zoning plan. The general rules with reference to the right of a municipal governing body to amend its minutes of previous meetings is summarized in 62 C.J.S. Municipal Corporations § 409 d at 782-83, as *736follows:
“The right of a municipal governing body to amend its minutes is very broad, at least in cases where, through inadvertence or misapprehension, a record has been made up defectively; . . . The power of the governing body to amend its minutes, however, is not unlimited or unqualified. The rule permitting an amendment of the minutes should be administered with caution, and the effect of omissions or irregularities in the proceedings of the council cannot be avoided under the guise of correction of the records.. . .
“If a correction is made in the minutes or records of a municipal governing body it should be made within a reasonable time. ... A nunc pro tunc entry may be made on the minutes of a succeeding meeting; but in order for minutes to be amended nunc pro tunc the amendment must be based on written or other sufficient data of record, which must be such as itself to furnish evidence that the particular proceedings in fact took place.” In this connection, see Beverly Land Co. v.City of South Sioux City, 117 Neb. 47, 219 N.W. 385 (1928).
The case of City of Valentine v. Valentine Motel, Inc., 176 Neb. 63, 125 N.W.2d 98 (1963), involved the question of the power of a city council to amend its minutes nunc pro tunc, after the commencement of litigation, for the purpose of complying with the requirements of the applicable annexation statutes, which among other things required that to annex such territory the resolution and vote thereon “shall be spread upon the records of the council or board.” In that case the court held that that requirement was a condition precedent which must be strictly complied with, and that the requirement that the record be kept and spread upon the records of the council at the time of its voting on the resolution was mandatory and jurisdictional in character. The court recognized the general rule that a city council may, under some circumstances, correct its own *737records, nunc pro tunc, to show the adoption of a resolution or ordinance and to record the truth of how it was voted upon; but that it may not by such action show that the separate requirement that the action be spread upon the record of the minutes of the council was performed prior to the time that the spreading upon the minutes actually took place. In its opinion, this court stated at 68-69, 125 N.W.2d at 102: “We point out that on January 8, 1962, the next council meeting following December 11, 1961, the minutes were recorded and approved ‘as written.’ Apparent is the square application of the principles above announced. A property owner in the area to be annexed, or any interested citizen inspecting this public record, would be entitled to rely on the law and facts as then represented, and act accordingly on the basis that there was no legal adoption of the annexation resolution. To permit the recording of the fact of passage at a later time and for the purposes of litigation would be to permit the violation of the disclosure requirement of the statute as a condition precedent to annexation proceedings, would affect intervening rights of interested parties, and would open up an opportunity for fraud and uncertainty as to something that the very requirement of the statute was designed to prevent.”
Also, in Payne v. Ryan, 79 Neb. 414, 417, 112 N.W. 599, 600 (1907), which case involved an application to a village board for a license to sell intoxicating liquors in the village, this court stated: “Appellee undertook to avoid the force of the record of the board of trustees relating to the attempted passage of the ordinance in question. Several days after the hearing before the village board, and after it had ordered the license to issue, a special meeting of the village board was called, and it proceeded to enter a nunc pro tunc order, whereby it caused a record to be made supplying the omissions in the record relative to the passage of the ordinance in question, notwithstanding that *73815 years had elapsed since the attempted passage of the ordinance.” The court held that under the evidence offered and adduced at the hearing the village of Exeter, at the time of the granting of the license, did not have any village ordinance authorizing the issuance of a license, and that the village board was therefore without power to issue the license.
Finally, in our recent case of State ex rel. Schuler v. Dunbar, ante p. 69, 74, 302 N.W.2d 674, 678 (1981), we stated: “The purpose of a nunc pro tunc correction is to make the record speak the truth. Its purpose is not to correct oversights or failures in the performance of mandatory acts,” citing Beverly Land Co. v. City of South Sioux City, supra; and City of Valentine v. Valentine Motel, Inc., supra.
From our examination of the record, we are convinced that the Village of McGrew did not adopt the comprehensive development plan at or prior to the meeting of July 6, 1977, as required by the statutes of this state, before the enactment of zoning regulations, and that its efforts to do so by amending the minutes of that meeting 2 years and 4 months after such meeting, on the evening prior to trial, was a valiant but futile effort to correct the deficiency in its zoning ordinance.
In view of our conclusions as expressed above, both that ordinance No. 44 was a zoning ordinance and not a comprehensive development plan, and also that no comprehensive development plan was enacted by the Village of McGrew prior to the adoption of its zoning ordinance, we need not consider other assignments of error alleged by the defendant in his brief on appeal. We conclude that the decree of the District Court, enjoining the defendant from maintaining his mobile home on the property in question, must be reversed and the cause remanded with instructions to dismiss the plaintiffs petition.
Reversed and remanded with instructions.
Clinton, J., participated on briefs.
*739Boslaugh, McCown, and Clinton, JJ., concur in result.

=== CASE 9741335 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:48.926681+00 ===

JUSTICE NICKELS, dissenting: I cannot agree that the Department of Human Rights lacks authority under the Illinois Human Rights Act to pursue charges of racial and sexual discrimination in an academic program of a public university. Therefore, I respectfully dissent. The purpose of the Act is "[t]o secure for all individuals within Illinois the freedom from discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, physical or mental handicap, or unfavorable discharge from military service in connection with employment, real estate transactions, access to financial credit, and the availability of public accommodations; and to prevent unlawful discrimination or sexual harassment in employment, discrimination in connection with real estate transactions based upon familial status and sexual harassment in higher education.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 68, par. 1 — 102(A).) Where it applies, the Act is the exclusive form of redress in Illinois for civil rights violations. Mein v. Masonite Corp. (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 1, 7. As a remedial statute, the Act should be liberally construed to effectuate its purpose. (Arlington Park Race Track Corp. v. Human Rights Comm’n (1990), 199 Ill. App. 3d 698.) Where the language of a statute is unclear, a court should consider the purpose of the enactment and the evils to be remedied. Castaneda v. Illinois Human Rights Comm’n (1989), 132 Ill. 2d 304, 318. As the majority notes, the primary purpose of statutory construction is to ascertain and effectuate the intent of the legislature. The majority finds that an academic program at a public university is not a "public accommodation” as defined by section 5 — 101(A)(1) of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 68, par. 5 — 101(A)(1)). While such a strict reading of the statute is appealing, the practical results are contrary to the purposes of the Act. Under the majority’s reasoning, the legislature "intended” to protect a student from discrimination suffered at the hands of a university cafeteria worker or bookstore employee, but not from a professor or administrator of an academic program at the same public university. I cannot agree that the legislature intended such an anomalous statutory scheme to secure the stated purposes of the Act. The majority finds support for the conclusion that the Act confers no jurisdiction to the Department of Human Rights for racial and sexual discrimination in higher education from the legislature’s enactment of article 5A in 1983. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 68, pars. 5A — 101, 5A — 102.) That article confers authority to the Department of Human Rights for claims involving sexual harassment in higher education. The majority reasons that "[h]ad higher education already been covered by the Act, a simple amendment adding sexual harassment to the Department’s jurisdiction would have been sufficient.” (159 Ill. 2d at 213.) The majority then concludes that the addition of a whole new article shows the legislature understood that no jurisdiction had yet been conferred on the Department over institutions of higher education. I agree with the appellate court that article 5A was intended as an expansion of a university official’s liability for sexual harassment, and in no way evinces a desire to limit a university official’s liability for discrimination. In the debates concerning the sexual harassment amendment, Representative Koehler stated: "[This amendment] amends the Illinois Human Rights Act to include sexual harassment in higher education as a civil rights violation. Under the Human Rights Act, discrimination on the basis of sex already constitutes a civil rights violation. However, it is important to point out that there is a distinct difference between sex discrimination, which deals with prejudice!,] and sexual harassment, which deals with a hostile environment and repeated torment.” (83d Ill. Gen. Assem., House Proceedings, May 5, 1983.) This statement shows that the General Assembly considered sexual harassment to be a separate and distinct problem from other forms of discrimination already covered by the Act. Contrary to the majority, I feel the distinctive nature of sexual harassment caused the General Assembly to provide separate treatment for sexual harassment in article 5A. In addition, I believe Representative Koehler’s statement intimates that the General Assembly already believed institutes of higher education were covered by the general provisions relating to discrimination in the Act. The majority’s limited definition of a "public accommodation” is also difficult to reconcile with the Act’s definition of civil rights violations involving public officials. Section 5 — 102(C) states: "[It is] a civil rights violation for any person on the basis of unlawful discrimination to: * * * *** Deny or refuse to another, as a public official, the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantage, facilities or privileges of the official’s office or services or of any property under the official’s care because of unlawful discrimination.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 68, par. 5 — 102(0.) Plaintiffs admit that they are public officials for purposes of the Act. The majority, however, finds that section 5 — 102(C) prohibits a public official only from discriminating in regard to a public accommodation. This reading makes most of the language in section 5 — 102(C) superfluous. Section 5 — 102(C) does not only forbid a public official from discriminating in an "accommodation.” The section goes on to prohibit discrimination in administering "advantage[s], facilities or privileges of the official’s office” as well as "services or any property under the official’s care.” The majority does not acknowledge this language. I would find that section 5 — 102(C) confers jurisdiction to the Department of Human Rights over discrimination claims against these "public officials” regarding educational "services” under the officials’ care at an institute of higher education. Therefore, I respectfully dissent. JUSTICE FREEMAN joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2226933 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:22.695344+00 ===

411 Mich. 179 (1981)
305 N.W.2d 247
PEOPLE
v.
CASEY
Docket No. 66445.
Supreme Court of Michigan.
Decided May 4, 1981.
Frank J. Kelley, Attorney General, Robert A. Derengoski, Solicitor General, William L. Cahalan, Prosecuting Attorney, Edward Reilly Wilson, Principal Attorney, Appeals, and Don W. Atkins, Assistant Prosecuting Attorney, for the people.
*180 Carl Ziemba for defendant.
PER CURIAM:
In this case we encounter a so-called "reverse writ" proceeding. Apparently, the procedure is usually a brief hearing at which the police or the prosecutor seek judicial approval for the continued detention of a citizen when, for want of probable cause, no warrant has been issued.[1] For the reasons herein stated, we hold that reverse writ proceedings are without legal effect and may not be employed to justify the detention of a citizen.
I
Defendant was convicted by a jury in Recorder's Court of armed robbery, MCL 750.529; MSA 28.797, and possession of a firearm during the commission of a felony, MCL 750.227b; MSA 28.424(2). After the Court of Appeals granted a motion to affirm, we returned the case to that Court for plenary consideration. People v Casey, 408 Mich 935 (1980). The Court of Appeals then reversed the convictions, ruling that the defendant had been illegally arrested and that a pair of inculpatory statements made by the defendant must be suppressed. People v Casey, 102 Mich App *181 595; 302 NW2d 248 (1980).[2] The Court of Appeals wrote that "the record clearly shows a causal connection between the tainted arrest and the confession" and that "[n]o intervening circumstances existed which would make either * * * [statement] admissible".
II
In plaintiff's application to this Court, it is urged that "an intervening event of significance did, in fact, occur; namely, the issuance of a `reverse writ' * * * which is an independent determination by a judicial officer [t]o permit continued detention". Thus, in the plaintiff's view, defendant's statements should be admissible upon retrial.
We disagree that the reverse writ proceeding which occurred in this case is "an intervening event of significance". It is a nullity. Its constitutional and statutory bases cannot be examined for it has none.
The United States Supreme Court has properly labelled the writ of habeas corpus "the Great Writ". Darr v Burford, 339 US 200, 203; 70 S Ct 587; 94 L Ed 761 (1950). That Court has written,
"It must never be forgotten that the writ of habeas corpus is the precious safeguard of personal liberty and there is no higher duty than to maintain it unimpaired." Bowen v Johnston, 306 US 19, 26; 59 S Ct 442; 83 L Ed 455 (1939).
We will not allow the writ to be utilized as an instrument for a citizen's detention rather than his release.[3]
*182 The principles governing the detention of a citizen may be located in a host of constitutional, statutory, and judicial sources; whether a citizen is being legally or illegally held is a determination which must be made by reference to those principles. We today neither add to nor subtract from that body of law. A detention which is otherwise illegal is not cleansed of its illegality by the issuance of a reverse writ or by the pendency of such proceedings.
Accordingly, in lieu of granting leave to appeal, we affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals. GCR 1963, 853.2(4).
COLEMAN, C.J., and KAVANAGH, WILLIAMS, LEVIN, FITZGERALD, RYAN, and BLAIR MOODY, JR., JJ., concurred.
NOTES
[1]  The Court of Appeals described the reverse writ procedure as one in which "the local police seek judicial approval for extended detention of a suspect without the issuance of a warrant". In People v Antonio Johnson, 85 Mich App 24, 250, fn 5; 271 NW2d 177 (1978), the Court of Appeals quoted a trial court opinion which had stated that a "reverse writ proceeding is informal and without any documentation. It is the local police method of seeking judicial approval for extended detention of an arrestee without benefit of a warrant". An examination of the record in this case and of a form order for a reverse writ suggests that the precise means by which a citizen is held is the adjournment of reverse writ proceedings, rather than the issuance of any such writ.
[2]  The facts of defendant's arrest and detention are set out at length in that opinion.
[3]  In his concurring opinion in Antonio Johnson, Judge N.J. KAUFMAN condemned the use of a reverse writ to accomplish "exactly what the constitutional provision protects against". In the instant case, the Court of Appeals characterized the reverse writ as being designed "to get judicial approval of an illegal confinement, precisely what Const 1963, art 1, § 12 sought to protect against".

=== CASE 9741338 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:49.944306+00 ===

OPINION OF THE COURT
Chief Judge Kaye.
In People v Kendzia (64 NY2d 331, 337), we held that a valid statement of readiness for trial under CPL 30.30 requires a communication of readiness on the record at a time when the People are in fact ready to proceed. On this appeal, *3we consider the narrow issue whether the People can validly answer ready where, wholly as a result of their own conduct defendant could not be arraigned, and thus trial could not commence, within the statutory time period.
On June 24, 1992, defendant was arrested on a felony complaint charging her with burglary in the third degree. She was arraigned in Oswegatchie Town Court and released under the supervision of the St. Lawrence County Probation Department. On December 24, 1992, a full six months after the filing of the felony complaint, the St. Lawrence County Grand Jury —as it was being discharged, after approximately 2 Vi months of service — handed up an indictment charging defendant with burglary in the second and third degrees and grand larceny in the third and fourth degrees. That indictment and 23 other indictments returned at the same time were filed that day in St. Lawrence County Court. With the indictments, the People filed notice of readiness for trial and declared readiness in all 24 cases.
On December 30, defendant sought dismissal of the indictment for failure to comply with CPL 30.30 alleging that, by the time of the scheduled arraignment — January 7, 1993 — 196 days would have elapsed from the commencement of the criminal action. The court found no excludable preindictment periods, and the People claimed no exclusion for the period between indictment and arraignment. County Court granted defendant’s motion and dismissed the indictment. The Appellate Division affirmed, noting that the timing of the People’s presentation to the Grand Jury was within the control of the People. As stated by the Appellate Division, in opposing defendant’s motion to dismiss "the People failed completely to offer any excuse or explanation for that delay, resulting in the reporting of the indictment on the last day of the period within which the People were required to be capable of bringing defendant to trial under CPL 30.30. Thus, it was the People’s unexplained laxity in obtaining an indictment that 'was a direct, and virtually insurmountable, impediment to the trial’s very commencement’ within the statutory period (People v McKenna, [76 NY2d 59,] 64)” (195 AD2d 751, 753 [Levine, J.]).
The sole question before us is whether, in the unusual circumstances presented — where, owing entirely to the People’s delay, no indictment was handed up for the full six months — the People could prior even to defendant’s arraign*4ment genuinely have declared trial readiness. We agree with both County Court and the Appellate Division that the People’s announcement of readiness was insufficient to satisfy CPL 30.30, and conclude that the indictment therefore was correctly dismissed.
CPL 30.30 requires dismissal of a felony indictment where the People are not ready for trial within six months of the commencement of the criminal action (CPL 30.30 [1] [a]). The statutory period, 183 days in this case, commenced with the filing of the felony complaint on June 24, 1992 (see, People v Sinistaj, 67 NY2d 236, 237), and expired on December 24, 1992. County Court determined that all of that time was chargeable to the People, a holding not questioned on appeal.
There is no dispute that the People made a facially sufficient declaration for the record on December 24, 1992 by serving written notice of readiness upon defense counsel and declaring readiness in open court. Appellant’s challenge centers instead on whether the People were presently ready to try this defendant at the time they made the declaration. A statement of readiness at a time when the People are not actually ready is illusory and insufficient to stop the running of the speedy trial clock (see, People v Cole, 73 NY2d 957, 958).
We have on several occasions made clear that readiness is not defined simply by an empty declaration that the People are prepared to present their direct case. Trial readiness in CPL 30.30 means both a communication of readiness by the People on the record and an indication of present readiness (Kendzia, 64 NY2d, at 337). The inquiry is whether the People have done all that is required of them to bring the case to a point where it may be tried (see, People v McKenna, 76 NY2d 59, 64-65, and n, supra). The People are not presently ready for trial, for example, where they fail to provide Grand Jury minutes necessary for resolution of defendant’s motion to dismiss (see, McKenna, 76 NY2d, at 64) or where they fail to produce an incarcerated defendant for trial (see, Cole, 73 NY2d, at 958; People v Jones, 66 NY2d 529, 539-540). Delays caused by court congestion, on the other hand, do not affect the People’s readiness (see, People v Smith, 82 NY2d 676, 678; People v Correa, 77 NY2d 930, 931; People v Brothers, 50 NY2d 413, 417; People ex rel. Franklin v Warden, 31 NY2d 498, 501-502).
Defendant could not have been brought to trial before arraignment, the process by which the court acquires jurisdic*5tian over a defendant (CPL 1.20 [9]). That is an elemental prerequisite to trial readiness. Here, the undisturbed factual finding is that the long delay was directly attributable not to defendant or court congestion, but to the People’s laxity in securing an indictment that provided a jurisdictional basis for the court to act at all. With arraignment within the statutory period impossible (see, CPL 210.10 [2]), the People’s statement of readiness for trial on December 24, 1992 was meaningless (see, Cole, 73 NY2d, at 958). In the circumstances, the People could not validly declare readiness until January 7, 1993 at defendant’s arraignment, entitling defendant to dismissal of the indictment. As the Appellate Division noted, "[pjostreadiness delay is not chargeable to the People when prosecutorial laxity merely affects the defendant’s ability to proceed to trial, but will be chargeable when such laxity, even if inadvertent, constitutes a direct impediment to commencement of the trial (see, People v McKenna, [76 NY2d, at 64]; People v Anderson, 66 NY2d 529, 536-538; Preiser, Practice Commentaries, McKinney’s Cons Laws of NY, Book 11 A, CPL 30.30, at 174)” (195 AD2d 751, 752, supra).
The nub of our disagreement with the dissent is a simple one, amply supported by our case law: that the statement "ready for trial” contemplates more than merely mouthing those words. Where the trial court and Appellate Division have found the relevant period to be entirely chargeable to the unexplained laxity of the People, the announcement of trial readiness before defendant was even brought before the court can only be an empty declaration, insufficient to satisfy CPL 30.30.
Accordingly, the order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed.

=== CASE 9741339 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:53:49.949477+00 ===

Titone, J.
(dissenting). Before the decision in this case, the People had a full six months from the filing of the first accusatory instrument (plus any excused period of delay) to prepare a felony case and declare themselves "ready” to proceed to trial. Further, under our existing decisional law, the obligation to become "ready” consisted of no more than obtaining and filing an indictment and making a record statement of present readiness (see, People v Kendzia, 64 NY2d 331; People v Colon, 59 NY2d 921; People v Sturgis, 38 NY2d 625). While the People were free to do whatever else they deemed necessary to prepare their case for trial, the case law construing CPL 30.30 neither "looked behind” a record *6readiness statement nor imposed obligations unrelated to either the preparation of the People’s case or the fulfillment of the People’s statutory duties (see, People v McKenna, 76 NY2d 59; People v Giordano, 56 NY2d 524). Now, the majority turns the case law, as well as the purpose of the statute, on its head by ruling that CPL 30.30 requires the People not only to file an indictment, ready their case and declare readiness within the statutory period but also to take those steps in time to assure that the defendant can theoretically be arraigned within that period. Under the holding of this case, the People will no longer have the full six months provided by CPL 30.30 to become ready if they choose to file their indictment as the last step in the preparation of their case. Inasmuch as that conclusion has no support in the statutory language, the case law or the legislative history, I dissent.
Like the majority, I begin with the premise that the proper inquiry under CPL 30.30 is whether the People have "done all that is required of them to bring the case to the point where it may be tried” (People v McKenna, 76 NY2d 59, 64, supra [emphasis supplied]; see, People v Cole, 73 NY2d 957, 958; People v Brothers, 50 NY2d 413, 417). However, it does not follow from that truism that the People are obliged to do everything they can to assure that other nonprosecutorial procedures necessary to trying the defendant may be accomplished within the time allotted by the statute.
It is by now commonplace to observe that in adopting CPL 30.30, the Legislature eschewed a rule that would have required the accomplishment of particular pretrial procedures within specified time periods and instead embraced a rule that demands only that the essential prosecutorial functions be completed by a designated deadline (see, Preiser, Practice Commentaries, McKinney’s Cons Laws of NY, Book 11 A, CPL 30.30, at 167-168). By holding in this case that the People’s completion of those functions within the requisite 183 days was not sufficient because the defendant could not also have been arraigned within that period, the majority has, in effect, taken a giant step toward doing what the Court refused to do in People ex rel. Franklin v Warden (31 NY2d 498, 501-502), i.e., reading CPL 30.30 as though it contained the substance of the Administrative Board’s so-called "prompt trial” rule, which the Legislature resoundingly rejected.
The majority’s assertion that the People’s readiness declaration was insufficient to satisfy CPL 30.30 here is susceptible of
*7two distinct interpretations. On the one hand, the majority writing could be construed as holding that, as an element of their pretrial readiness obligations, the People must ensure that the defendant is arraigned as well as indicted before the expiration of the CPL 30.30 period so as to secure a jurisdictional predicate for trial (cf., People v Colon, supra; People v Sturgis, supra). On the other hand, the majority’s opinion could be read as holding that the People’s otherwise valid readiness declaration was vitiated because their choice to file an indictment on the very last day of their readiness period " 'constitute^] a direct impediment to commencement of the trial’ ” (majority opn, at 5, quoting 195 AD2d 751, 752). In either event, the analysis is insupportable.
To the extent that the majority adopts the Appellate Division’s view that ensuring a prompt arraignment is part of the People’s readiness obligation (see, 195 AD2d, at 752), its holding is inconsistent with both the statute and the relevant case law. Under CPL 210.10 (2), the very statute on which the majority relies, it is the duty of the court, not the prosecutor, to set an arraignment date and arrange for an at-liberty defendant to be notified. Additionally, we have already held that delays attributable to the need to arraign the defendant do not prevent the People from becoming ready (People v Cortes, 80 NY2d 201, 213; People v Correa, 77 NY2d 930). From this holding it is readily inferable that ensuring the arraignment of the defendant is not one of the tasks the prosecution must perform before it can validly declare its readiness (see, People v Giordano, 56 NY2d 524; cf., People v Brothers, 50 NY2d 413). Just as the court’s inability to arraign the defendant does not prevent the People from becoming ready within the prescribed period, so too does that inability not prevent the People from making a valid and legitimate declaration of readiness once they have filed an indictment. Indeed, as we stated in People v Giordano (supra, at 525 [emphasis supplied]), once the People announce their readiness on the record, they have satisfied their obligation under CPL 30.30, and '[w]hatever may in fact have been the reason why the case was not reached for trial thereafter, there is no basis for dismissal pursuant to that statute.”1
*8Moreover, contrary to the majority’s repeated assertions, there was nothing "empty” or "illusory” about a readiness declaration made under these circumstances. The People declared themselves ready at a time when there was a jurisdictionally sufficient accusatory instrument filed and, accordingly, they could have proceeded to trial if all of the other, court-related conditions precedent to trial had been satisfied (cf., People v Colon, supra; People v Sturgis, supra). The fact that there was an additional impediment to the court’s acquisition of jurisdiction — i.e., the need to conduct an arraignment —is irrelevant to the legitimacy of the People’s readiness declaration, since, as previously noted, the responsibility for that aspect of jurisdiction-acquiring process rests with the court, not the prosecution.
To the extent that the majority’s holding rests on the premise that the People were "dilatory” in their case preparation and that their laxity delayed the proceeding, the analysis is equally flawed. First, the People were not "lax” or "dilatory,” at least insofar as CPL 30.30’s dictates are concerned, since they performed all of the tasks they were required to perform within the prescribed 183 days. To be sure, the People waited until the last day of the 183-day period to perform the final act of filing an indictment. However, up until the decision in this case, there was no apparent rule of law forbidding the People from using the full extent of their CPL 30.30 time or, alternatively, requiring them to perform in any particular order the various tasks collectively constituting the prosecutor’s duty. Thus, although the majority is apparently distressed about the People’s choice not to file their indictment at some earlier point in their readiness period, there is really no basis for attaching pejorative labels such as "dilatory” or "illusory” to the People’s conduct here.
Second, the delay which concerns the majority — the hiatus between the prosecutor’s readiness statement and arraign*9ment — was necessitated not by any action or inaction on the People’s part, but rather by a mandate of the Legislature that imposes a duty on the courts to give the accused advance notice of an upcoming arraignment. This case is thus clearly distinguishable from People v McKenna (supra), in which it was the People’s negligent failure to procure Grand Jury minutes for some five months that prevented the proceedings on the defendant’s CPL 210.30 motion from going forward. Here, unlike in McKenna, the People did what was required of them during the 183 days they were given and were, at worst, indirectly responsible for foreclosing the theoretical possibility of an arraignment within the statutorily prescribed period. The delay in arraignment itself was not of the People’s making.
Yet another flaw in the majority’s theory is that it, in effect, converts the specific time frames set forth in CPL 30.30 into indeterminable periods whose length can be made to depend on the existence of other durational requirements unrelated to prosecutorial readiness. As a result, the People will no longer be certain that a readiness declaration made on the 180th or even the 175th day after the filing of the first accusatory instrument will suffice. After this case, for example, the People will have to file their indictment at least two days before the end of their six-month readiness period to ensure that the defendant could be arraigned and, at least theoretically, tried within that period. In the next case, the defendant may well claim that the People were required to file the indictment even earlier, since the accused must be given a reasonable time to make motions before he can be tried and the usual battery of pretrial motions cannot be made until the indictment has been filed and the arraignment held. In any event, the majority’s holding has injected an element of uncertainty into a statutory mandate that was intended to provide clear and unambiguous deadlines for prosecutors.2
Finally, the majority’s theory is faulty because it takes *10elements of the analysis for prereadiness delay and combines them with elements of the entirely separate analysis for postreadiness delay, despite this Court’s repeated prior admonitions that those two classes of delay have very different legal consequences (People v Cortes, supra; People v McKenna, supra, at 63; People v Anderson, 66 NY2d 529). The core of the majority’s rationale is the assumption that the People were never actually ready despite their record declaration of readiness (see, majority opn, at 5). In other words, the problem in the case, as it is cast by the majority’s analysis, is an omission by the People that occurred before they made their supposedly "illusory” readiness declaration. Indeed, the majority implicitly recognizes the prereadiness character of the delay by citing People v Smith (82 NY2d 676, supra), People v Correa (supra), People v Brothers (supra) and People ex rel. Franklin v Warden (supra) in its discussion of when certain classes of delays do not affect the People’s readiness. However, rather than looking to those same cases to determine the proper disposition of this case, the majority unaccountably shifts to a line of authority and cases addressing pas ¿readiness delay (People v Jones, supra, at 539-540; People v Anderson, supra; People v Cole, supra; People v McKenna, supra; Preiser, op. cit., at 174). The analysis in those cases, however, has no bearing on this prereadiness case.
In prereadiness cases, all of the elapsed time that precedes the readiness declaration is "charged” to the People except to the extent that particular "delay” periods may be "excused” under the explicit statutory provisions. After the People’s readiness declaration, in contrast, delays by the People do not ordinarily implicate CPL 30.30 and do not require dismissal unless they constitute an actual impediment to the forward progress of the proceeding (see, e.g., People v McKenna, supra; People v Anderson, supra). Thus, in cases such as McKenna, Jones, and Cole, where the People neglected their responsibilities after they had declared readiness, it was appropriate and necessary to consider the effect of the People’s omissions on the court’s ability to commence trial. The same cannot be said in a prereadiness case such as this, where the timeliness and legitimacy of the readiness declaration itself are the only issues. The majority has reached a different conclusion only by devising a formula that, in effect, mixes apples and oranges.
*11Moreover, a close review of the analyses in two of the postreadiness cases on which the majority relies readily reveals the inapplicability of their holdings to these circumstances.3 In McKenna (supra), the forward progress of the proceedings was delayed because the People did not perform their obligation to supply the Grand Jury minutes in response to the defendant’s CPL 210.30 dismissal motion. In Jones, a delay in the proceedings was caused by the People’s failure to produce a defendant who was within their control. In both cases, the Court held that the period during which the People had not fulfilled their prosecutorial duty should be charged to the People because the proceedings could not go forward until the neglected task was completed. However, in both cases, dismissal under CPL 30.30 was deemed required only to the extent that the total period during which the People’s obligations remained unsatisfied exceeded the readiness period prescribed in CPL 30.30.
Thus, in People v McKenna, the indictment was dismissed because the five-month postreadiness period during which the People failed to produce the Grand Jury minutes, when "tacked” to the prereadiness delay periods attributable to the People, exceeded the allotted six-month period (see, 76 NY2d, at 66). Similarly, in Jones, dismissal was not required, notwithstanding the People’s trial-postponing 103-day delay in producing the defendant, because the total period of the People’s unexcused delay was less than six months (66 NY2d, at 539-540). In neither case did the Court sanction dismissal solely because inaction by the People had delayed the start of trial. Accordingly, under the McKenna-Jones formula, dismissal is required only when two conditions are present: (1) the periods of postreadiness delays to be charged against the People must be of such a nature as to prevent the proceedings from going forward (cf., People v Allen, 66 NY2d 529, 541-542) and (2) the total time during which the People failed to perform mandatory prosecutorial functions must exceed the statutory time period.
In this case, of course, application of that formula does not lead to dismissal, since only the first condition is satisfied. *12While it is unquestionably true that defendant could not be arraigned or tried until the People had performed their duty to obtain and file an indictment, it is also indisputable that, unlike in McKenna, the People here did not fail to perform that prosecutorial task within the six-month period that CPL 30.30 allows. Indeed, this case more nearly resembles People v Jones (supra), in which dismissal was not required, than it resembles People v McKenna (supra), in which a dismissal was ordered. Accordingly, whatever annoyance the majority may feel about the People’s timing, it cannot be said that the People overstepped their statutory deadline. Even assuming that the analysis for postreadiness delays has any application as to this prereadiness situation, the People, who filed an indictment and declared their readiness within the allotted 183 days, did not earn a CPL 30.30 dismissal.
Accordingly, the indictment in this case should not have been dismissed, and the courts below erred in sanctioning that result.
Judges Bellacosa, Smith and Ciparick concur with Chief Judge Kaye; Judge Titone dissents and votes to reverse in a separate opinion in which Judge Simons concurs; Judge Levine taking no part.
Order affirmed.
. To the extent that the majority opinion suggests that the holdings in People v Smith (82 NY2d 676), People v Correa (77 NY2d 930, supra), People v Brothers (50 NY2d 413, 417, supra) and People ex rel. Franklin v Warden (31 NY2d 498, supra) are limited to delays (including arraignment delays) *8occasioned by "court congestion,” its rationale is inconsistent with the language of Giordano. Further, it is legally perilous, since there exists a myriad of systemic reasons other than court congestion and prosecutorial laxity that prevent the defendant from being tried on the precise day that he is indicted. If the Court means to say that the delays resulting from these impediments are not to be handled within the Brothers-Giordano-Correa framework, it is creating a vast realm of uncertainty and raising a whole new host of questions as to what types of delays will excuse prosecutorial unreadiness and what type of delays will vitiate declared prosecutorial readiness.
. The Court’s holding leaves unclear, for example, what portion of the so-called "long” 14-day delay is properly chargeable to the People. Only 2 of those 14 days are attributable to the statutory "impossibility” of arraigning defendant because of the need to furnish advance notice (see, CPL 210.10 [2]). The remaining 12 days were, presumably, attributable to some scheduling difficulty, perhaps even to court congestion. Nothing in the Court’s writing addresses how the responsibility for this part of the delay should be allocated. The omitted analysis is critical because, as discussed below (see, at 11, infra), CPL 30.30 relief cannot be had for mere delay occasioned by prosecutorial "laxity.” Rather, dismissal under that statute is required only *10when the delay was chargeable to the People and exceeded the specified period for readiness (see, People v Jones, 66 NY2d 529, 539-540).
. The underlying facts in People v Cole (supra), the other case on which the majority relies, are not apparent from the brief writings that were published in that case (see, 73 NY2d 957; 141 AD2d 829). Accordingly, it would not be fruitful to analyze the significance of the Cole holding in this context.

=== CASE 9741265 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:31.101171+00 ===

Krivosha, C.J.,
concurring in result.
I concur in the result reached by the majority in this case. I take a moment to write a separate concurring opinion so that the basis for my action in this case may be clear. I am in full accord with the majority’s conclusion that the document considered by the village board of the Village of McGrew and approved by it at its meeting on July 6, 1977, was proposed zoning regulations and not a comprehensive development plan required to be adopted prior to the adoption of a zoning ordinance. Having reached that conclusion, I believe that the balance of the majority’s opinion is mere dictum and may in fact cause some unnecessary confusion in the future.
The majority, in reaching its conclusion that the zoning regulations were improperly adopted, cites Beverly Land Co. v. City of South Sioux City, 117 Neb. 47, 219 N.W. 385 (1928), and City of Valentine v. Valentine Motel, Inc., 176 Neb. 63, 125 N.W.2d 98 (1963). For reasons more particularly set out in my dissent in the case of State ex rel. Schuler v. Dunbar, ante p. 69, 302 N.W.2d 674 (1981), I believe that neither the Beverly Land Co. case nor the City of Valentine case is correct. They should not be followed, except with regard to those statutes which specifically provide that the manner of recording the minutes is a prerequisite to subsequent action to be taken by a governmental subdivision, such as that of an annexation. Such is not the case here. While I agree that the function of nunc pro tunc is to make the record speak the truth and not to correct oversights or failures, I do not believe that there is any time limit when such a correction may be entered. The effect of correcting the record may depend upon whether any intervening interests have accrued. That is not the same as saying that a record may not be corrected to honestly speak the *740truth. When a record is so corrected, it dates back to the date the action was taken and should not be disregarded.

=== CASE 2226740 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:18.072667+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 470 (1981)
MONTGOMERY PROPERTIES CORPORATION, Appellee,
v.
ECONOMY FORMS CORPORATION, Appellant.
No. 64771.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
May 13, 1981.
*471 William J. Koehn and Jill S. Rolek of Davis, Hockenberg, Wine, Brown & Koehn, Des Moines, for appellant.
*472 John R. Mackaman and F. Richard Lyford of Dickinson, Throckmorton, Parker, Mannheimer & Raife, Des Moines, for appellee.
Considered by REYNOLDSON, C. J., and LeGRAND, McGIVERIN, LARSON, and SCHULTZ, JJ.
REYNOLDSON, Chief Justice.
Defendant Economy Forms Corporation (EFCO) appeals from judgment entered on a jury verdict for plaintiff Montgomery Properties Corporation (MPC) in its slander of title action. MPC cross-appeals because the court, on an issue reserved to it by stipulation, refused to award MPC attorney fees as a part of its damages. We modify and affirm on condition and remand on the appeal, and affirm on the cross-appeal.
From the evidence the jury could have found the following facts. EFCO is a Des Moines-based manufacturer of steel concrete forms. This corporation owned and platted the fourteen-lot EFCO Industrial Park. Al Jennings, EFCO's executive vice president, was fully authorized by his corporation to represent it in the real estate transactions involved in this controversy.
MPC is a corporation organized for real estate development and owned by Charles Irvine and John Hart. David Frost was associated with them in a companion realty company, Montgomery Realty, which operated out of the same office. Ordinarily MPC would acquire land and build a structure for a customer that wanted to lease, not own, the premises.
MPC was negotiating to construct and lease a building to Onthank Company. Frost talked to Jennings about acquiring lots 1 and 2 in EFCO's industrial park for this purpose. Jennings testified he told Frost:
[W]e will not sell a piece of land unless we know what is going on the ground, how it is going to be used, consistent with the Industrial Park. We wanted to keep a very attractive area there. And we required . . . more setback and we required a plan . . . .
EFCO refused to sell lot 1 and the parties settled on lot 2. EFCO wanted to use the tax-saving device of a three-party trade. Consummation of the transaction lagged and in September 1977, Irvine, anxious to begin construction, telephoned Jennings with a proposal to buy lot 2 for cash. Jennings refused because EFCO would lose the tax advantage of the three-party transaction. Irvine then proposed to buy lot 2 outright, and then trade lot 2 for lot 3. Jennings objected to this because EFCO "won't have any say then as to what goes on that lot [3]." MPC had disclosed the Onthank building plans to EFCO.
The result was that MPC acquired lot 2 by deed and lot 3 under a September 23, 1977, exchange agreement involving the third-party owners of a Washington state property. This typewritten agreement was drafted by EFCO's attorney and signed by Jennings for EFCO. In this instrument EFCO warranted it would, inter alia,
perform all steps reasonably required by the attorney for Montgomery to convey good and merchantable title to Montgomery to [lot 3], free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, reservations, exceptions or modifications except as in this Agreement otherwise expressly provided, none of which will prevent the use of the property as a warehouse . . . .
(Emphasis supplied.) Another provision provided that MPC "will receive an abstract and warranty deed to [lot 3] free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, reservations, exceptions or modifications except as in this Agreement otherwise expressly provided." The same language appeared again in another provision relating to a title opinion for MPC. It was further stipulated that this agreement "supersedes any contracts or Offers to Buy and Sell Real Estate which may previously have been executed."
As a result of this three-party exchange agreement, MPC obtained a warranty deed to lot 3 without any reservations or exceptions, and EFCO acquired $5000 paid by MPC in cash, and a mortgage on lot 3 for $78,225.
*473 In the course of constructing the Onthank building on lot 2, MPC encountered difficulty in obtaining a county occupancy permit because of a drainage problem. MPC had several meetings with Jennings of EFCO relating to this situation. Ultimately, EFCO paid for the engineering and earthwork to resolve the drainage problem for a number of lots, and informed MPC its share was $8000 for the two lots. Irvine of MPC denied he ever agreed to pay $4000 per lot. However, Hart wrote a July 25, 1978, letter to Jennings in which he agreed, for MPC, to pay EFCO $4000 each for controlling water runoff on lots 2 and 3. The $4000 for lot 2 was to be paid when the occupancy permit for the Onthank warehouse was issued, and the $4000 for lot 3 was to be paid "at the time the land contract for Lot 3 has been fully performed." Irvine testified he was "hot" when he learned of this letter but "if [Hart] writes a letter saying we owe $4000, I guess I will pay it." The $8000 was never paid.
MPC eventually contracted to sell lot 3 to Sturm Freightways, Inc., for $116,515. When one of the realtors called Jennings regarding the mortgage balance, she told him the lot was to be used as a truck terminal. Jennings became angry and told the realtor that he would not let a truck terminal go in, "that they had some restrictions on the property and . . . they just weren't going to allow it." He stated he was going to do everything within his legal rights to make sure that the property was not developed without him "having the rights to approve what went on there." Jennings told another realtor he would not release the mortgage; that there was a "prior agreement."
In a subsequent conversation with Frost of MPC, Jennings stated several times he would never permit a truck terminal on lot 3 and would appeal the case to the supreme court if he had to. He said he would "screw Fisher but good as far as Lot 1 was concerned." Fisher was an Onthank employee who hoped to acquire an interest in the development of lot 3. Jennings later told Hart he would "get [them] all individually"; that he would "see [them] in hell before he released that mortgage."
September 29, 1978, MPC unsuccessfully tendered $81,388.29 to EFCO in satisfaction of its mortgage on lot 3. After MPC notified Sturm it could not complete the sale due to EFCO's refusal to release the mortgage, Sturm rescinded the purchase contract because, inter alia, "[r]estrictions on the property are substantially at variance with the original representations made," in that "[p]revious owners . . . have restricted the use of the property so as to prohibit [its use] as a truck terminal facility."
MPC paid Sturm damages of $3500 and also paid a realtor $3495 as lost commission. October 27, 1978, lot 3 was sold to Des Moines Cold Storage for $105,862 and the buyer assumed the EFCO mortgage. In connection with the closing of this transaction, EFCO's mortgage statement showed an additional lien of $8000 pursuant to a "Water run off Agreement Lots 2 & 3 Secured as open end advance." The buyer then insisted that $8000 of the purchase money be placed in escrow.
Count I of MPC's petition alleged its ownership of lot 3, its sales contract to Sturm, EFCO's assertions to Sturm and the realtors of "restrictions, reservations, and servitudes outside of the record," its refusal to release the mortgage lien, and the resulting rescission of the sale. MPC claimed $50,000 in actual damages and $50,000 in punitive damages. Count II was based on EFCO's claim, in its balance due statement submitted with respect to the sale to Des Moines Cold Storage, that its mortgage secured the additional $8000. MPC claimed $25,000 actual and $25,000 punitive damages on this count.
EFCO's answer affirmatively alleged it had "reserved the right to approve any building," and that MPC had so agreed and should be estopped to deny its oral agreement. The answer requested that the exchange agreement be reformed to incorporate the oral agreement. Finally, EFCO counterclaimed for $8000 under the oral water runoff agreement and prayed that this additional amount be declared secured by its mortgage.
*474 MPC filed a pretrial "Motion for Advance Ruling on Evidence." This motion alleged the exchange agreement was an integrated writing prepared by EFCO's lawyer that stated it superseded previous contracts, and requested that EFCO's lawyer be admonished not to inquire of witnesses as to any agreements other than those reflected in the exchange agreement and deed because any such testimony would be barred by the parol evidence rule. Trial court granted this motion.
The jury returned a verdict for $35,000 compensatory and $10,000 punitive damages on count I, and $1000 compensatory and $1000 punitive damages on count II. EFCO was awarded $8000 on its counterclaim. EFCO filed several posttrial motions. Trial court granted a remittitur motion as to count I only, granting a new trial unless MPC filed a remittitur of the count I actual damage award over and above the sum of $17,644. MPC filed the remittitur. Nonetheless, EFCO appealed and MPC cross-appealed. The issues raised by these parties are discussed below.
I. Did trial court err in excluding, on the basis of the parol evidence rule, defendant's evidence of an oral agreement concerning lot 3?
EFCO argues evidence of the alleged prior oral agreement that it was to have control over use of lot 3 should have been admitted to rebut malice in MPC's tort and punitive damage claims, and for proof on its counterclaim for reformation of the exchange agreement.
We first dispose of the reformation contention. This was an equity issue reserved to the court. See First National Bank v. Curran, 206 N.W.2d 317, 320 (Iowa 1973). The parties now agree trial court's pretrial ruling excluding evidence of the alleged oral agreement effectively disposed of the reformation claim.
It is true that ordinarily parol evidence is admissible in actions for the reformation of legal instruments so long as the evidence is relevant and material. Skubal v. Meeker, 279 N.W.2d 23, 27 (Iowa 1979); Blackman v. Folsom, 200 N.W.2d 542, 543 (Iowa 1972). But generally a writing will be reformed only if the party seeking reformation clearly and convincingly establishes that it does not express the true agreement of the parties because of fraud or duress, mutual mistake of fact, mistake of law, or mistake of one party and fraud or inequitable conduct on the part of the other. Kufer v. Carson, 230 N.W.2d 500, 504 (Iowa 1975); Thompson, Reformation of Written Instruments in Iowa, 23 Drake L.Rev. 327, 331-35 (1974).
The record made in this case clearly demonstrates none of these grounds for reformation were pleaded, nor do any of them apply. Jennings, called as a witness by MPC, testified the exchange agreement was drafted by EFCO's lawyer at his request and directions and that he then was satisfied and at the time of trial still was satisfied with the agreement. Testifying for the defense, Jennings expressed the philosophy that in his real estate transactions he had long had an aversion to "long lists of covenants" running with the real estate, and therefore adopted the practice of determining what people were going to build on the lots before selling them.
Of course this policy was not applied in the sale of lot 3. But we are satisfied that to whatever limited extent evidence was excluded in this case, it was harmless error with respect to the reformation claim. We are not required to determine whether EFCO's remedy was rescission on the ground it was induced to enter into the contract by some species of fraud or misrepresentation. See Thompson, supra, at 337. It is plain the exchange agreement expressed the true agreement of the parties, but EFCO wanted it reformed to make a new and different contract. This is impermissible. See Kufer, 230 N.W.2d at 503; Decker v. Juzwik, 255 Iowa 358, 370, 121 N.W.2d 652, 658 (1963).
We next turn to EFCO's contention this ruling prevented it from showing evidence of an oral agreement relating to the use of lot 3 that would be relevant to MPC's tort and punitive damage claims.
*475 EFCO starts from the premise that malice is an essential element of a slander of title action, Witmer v. Valley National Bank, 223 Iowa 671, 673, 273 N.W. 370, 371 (1937), and is negated if the statement was made by the defendant in good faith and if the act complained of was founded upon probable cause, or was prompted by a reasonable belief even though the statement may have been false. Guldberg v. Greenfield, 259 Iowa 873, 886, 146 N.W.2d 298, 306 (1966); Miller v. First National Bank, 220 Iowa 1266, 1269, 264 N.W. 272, 274 (1935). Similarly, EFCO points out that state of mind and intent also are relevant areas of inquiry on the question of punitive damages, citing McCarthy v. J. P. Cullen & Son Corp., 199 N.W.2d 362, 369 (Iowa 1972), and Inman v. Ball, 65 Iowa 543, 546, 22 N.W. 666, 668 (1885). It follows, EFCO argues, that its defense of good faith and reasonable belief, negating malice, was choked off by trial court's exclusion of evidence relating to the alleged prior oral agreement reserving to EFCO control over the use of lot 3.
At the outset we note trial court's ruling was carefully circumscribed and did not
exclud[e] any testimony as far as the aforesaid ruling is concerned, which may relate to admissions or actions had or occurring subsequent to the date of the so-called exchange agreement covering Lots 2 [sic] and 3 . . . any testimony concerning the statements made by representatives of the Plaintiff for [sic, or] action taken by representatives of the Plaintiff relating to any purported agreement concerning the use of the real estate, which actions or admissions occurred after September 23, 1977, may well be admissible as bearing on the issues of the good faith or lack of malice on the part of the Defendant.
EFCO successfully introduced testimony from Jennings relating to the alleged oral agreement and to various communications referring to it following execution of the exchange agreement. He testified that when he first was contacted by Frost of MPC he told him "that we will not sell a piece of land unless we know what is going on the ground, how it is going to be used, consistent with the Industrial Park." Jennings testified that after he learned of the Sturm sale he got mad and called Hart "[a]nd John probably wonders why I was mad at him because he wasn't really a party to any of the agreement, what [will] go on these properties." When Jennings was questioned about an effort to settle the controversy with Irvine, the following exchange occurred:
Q. All right. Did you discuss with Mr. Irvine the fact that you felt you had an agreement with his company, that that lot was not going to be built on without your approval?
A. Absolutely.
Q. Okay. And did he disagree with that?
A. No, he did not disagree with that.
In Irvine's cross-examination EFCO was permitted to ask Irvine if it was not a fact that Jennings, before the sale of lot 3, stated that "[o]nly if you will allow me to approve these plans for development of Lot 3, will I sell you that lot," which statement was denied by Irvine. Other of MPC's witnesses testified to statements made by Jennings following the Sturm sale that he had a prior agreement as to the use of lot 3, and that it was not to be used as a truck terminal.
We find EFCO was not "choked off" on its defense of good faith and reasonable belief. The issue ultimately was developed fully. EFCO made no offer of further proof by any witness. We are unable to find any harm to EFCO arising out of the court's ruling.
Moreover, we find the additional evidence, if there was any that does not already appear in the record, properly was excluded under the parol evidence rule.
The parol evidence rule is not a rule of evidence, but a rule of substantive law. Salsbury v. Northwestern Bell Telephone Co., 221 N.W.2d 609, 611 (Iowa 1974); Weik v. Ace Rents, Inc., 249 Iowa 510, 516, 87 N.W.2d 314, 318 (1958); 30 Am.Jur.2d Evidence § 1017 (1967). Although extrinsic *476 evidence may be admissible to explain the real meaning of the parties by the language used in a contract, Hamilton v. Wosepka, 261 Iowa 299, 306, 154 N.W.2d 164, 168 (1967), the parol evidence rule forbids the use of extrinsic evidence to vary, add to, or subtract from a written agreement, Associated Grocers of Iowa Cooperative, Inc. v. West, 297 N.W.2d 103, 109 (Iowa 1980); Pappas v. Hauser, 197 N.W.2d 607, 611 (Iowa 1972). The principle behind the rule is that
when the parties have discussed and agreed upon their obligations to each other and reduced those terms to writing, the writing, if clear and unambiguous, furnishes better and more definite evidence of what was undertaken by each party than the memory of man . . . . The rule rests upon a rational foundation of experience and policy and is essential to the certainty and stability of written obligations. It is designed to permit a party to a written contract to protect himself against perjury, infirmity of memory, or the death of witnesses.
30 Am.Jur.2d Evidence § 1016, at 151-52 (1967) (emphasis supplied). In our view this rationale does not become inapplicable simply because this slander of title action sounds in tort. MPC's claims are grounded in a written agreement between the parties, which three times assured MPC it was to have merchantable title free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, reservations, exceptions, or modifications except as otherwise agreed in the instrument. EFCO's defense is based on an alleged oral agreement, which would affect the title and nullify important provisions in the exchange agreement.
Of course, parol evidence is admissible to show a writing is not an integrated agreement. In re Eickman Estate, 291 N.W.2d 308, 312 (Iowa 1980); Fashion Fabrics of Iowa, Inc. v. Retail Investors Corp., 266 N.W.2d 22, 25 (Iowa 1978). But in neither of those cases did the contract state it superseded all previous agreements. In Eickman, there was evidence to suggest that one of the parties did not know it was to be a completely integrated contract. 291 N.W.2d at 312. In this case the instrument not only declared it superseded all previous contracts, it elsewhere disclosed its integrated character on the point here in issue by declaring EFCO retained no "liens and encumbrances, reservations, exceptions or modifications" except as disclosed in the exchange agreement.
An integrated agreement is one in which the parties adopt a writing or writings as the final and complete expression of the agreement. Kitchen v. Stockman National Life Insurance Co., 192 N.W.2d 796, 800 (Iowa 1971). Some courts have held an integration clause like the one before us reinforces application of the parol evidence rule to prevent proof of an alleged prior contract. R. G. Varner Steel Products, Inc. v. Puterbaugh, 233 Ark. 953, 955-56, 349 S.W.2d 805, 807 (1961); Fogelson v. Rackfay Construction Co., 300 N.Y. 334, 340, 90 N.E.2d 881, 884 (1950). Other cases indicate an integration clause should not be controlling on the issue of whether the written contract is the whole integrated agreement, so as to exclude parol evidence on the issue. See Luther Williams, Jr., Inc. v. Johnson, 229 A.2d 163, 165 (D.C.App. 1967); Blaha v. Schwartz, 7 Ohio Op.3d 234, 236-37 (Ct.Comm.Pl.1977). We hold in these circumstances where the handcrafted contract contains an integration clause, where the parties were sophisticated business persons represented by counsel and of equal bargaining strength, and where terms of the alleged oral agreement reasonably would be expected to be included in the exchange agreement, trial court did not err in sustaining a parol evidence rule objection, thus excluding evidence to vary its terms.
We have examined the other arguments advanced by EFCO on this issue and find them unpersuasive. In so ruling we do not endorse the concept of a limine motion to secure a pretrial ruling to exclude evidence under the parol evidence rule.
II. Were trial court's jury instructions erroneous?
EFCO argues several of trial court's jury instructions were erroneous. We ignore several complaints not raised in trial court.
*477 Both at trial and here EFCO asserts instructions 5 and 6, relating to the elements to be established by MPC on counts I and II, were erroneous in not defining special damages. EFCO relies on Restatement (Second) of Torts § 671 (1977), which addresses special damages in a cause of action for malicious prosecution, not slander of title. Moreover, instructions 5 and 6, relating to elements, were not designed to define or expand on the elements. The matter of defining the actual damages was addressed in instruction 9, which generally followed the definitions found in Restatement (Second) of Torts § 633, Comment e (1977), relating to pecuniary loss as a result of publishing an injurious falsehood causing a property sale to abort. Instruction 17 directed the jury to consider all the instructions together. We find no reversible error here.
At trial EFCO objected to instructions 5 and 7 as they related to the requirement that EFCO's publication be a "substantial factor" in bringing about Sturm's rescission of the sale. In instruction 7 the court defined "substantial factor":
The words "substantial factor" . . . do not mean that the action of the third party was determined exclusively or even predominantly by the publication of the statementit would be enough if the statement is a factor in determining the third party's decision, even though the third party is influenced by other factors without which it would not decide to act as it does.
EFCO argues the word "substantial" means something more than the above definition, citing Smith v. City of Fort Dodge, 160 N.W.2d 492, 497-98 (Iowa 1968). In Smith we were interpreting a zoning statute, and referred to the dictionary definition of "substantial." ("`That is of moment; essential; material . . . . That is such in substance or in the main . . . . Of or pertaining to the substance or main part of anything.'") Id. at 497. But we also said "substantial" is a relative and not an exact term subject to a rule of thumb, that it was susceptible of different meanings according to the circumstances of its use. Id. at 498.
More pertinent here are authorities addressing the meaning of "substantial factor" in the context of liability-creating causation of harm and damages. In Speed v. State, 240 N.W.2d 901, 905 (Iowa 1976), we approvingly cited Restatement (Second) of Torts § 431 (1977), where "substantial" is commented upon as being "used to denote the fact that the defendant's conduct has such an effect in producing the harm as to lead reasonable men to regard it as a cause," id. Comment a, and is distinguished from having "a merely negligible effect," id. Comment b. More relevant is Restatement (Second) of Torts § 632, Comment c (1977), because it defines "substantial factor" in the context of legal causation of pecuniary loss resulting from a publication of an injurious falsehood:
In order for the false statement to be a substantial factor in determining the conduct of an intending or potential purchaser or lessee, it is not necessary that the conduct should be determined exclusively or even predominantly by the publication of the statement. It is enough that the disparagement is a factor in determining his decision, even though he is influenced by other factors without which he would not decide to act as he does.
It is apparent trial court's instruction 7 adopted the Restatement definition of "substantial factor." We find no error in this instruction on the applicable law.
EFCO asserts trial court erred in instruction 8-A, which stated:
As a matter of law Lot 3 is not burdened with restrictions or reservations which would permit Defendant Economy Forms Corporation to prevent the use of Lot 3 as a truck terminal.
EFCO here argues this confused the jury, "placed before the jury a question already decided as a matter of law," and further, "the truth of defendant's assertions was essentially precluded and defendant's good faith and reasonable belief in making the statements could not be considered by the jury." These contentions go well beyond *478 any objections asserted in trial court. Moreover, our holding in division I is determinative here. References to the alleged right of EFCO to control the use of lot 3 surfaced throughout the trial. The three-party exchange agreement was in evidence. The jury was entitled to be told, and not left to speculate, whether or not EFCO retained rights in lot 3 despite the terms of the contract.
III. Were the damages awarded by the jury excessive?
The jury awarded MPC a verdict for $35,000 compensatory and $10,000 punitive damages on count I, and $1000 compensatory and $1000 punitive damages on count II. EFCO contends these awards were not supported by competent or substantial evidence, were excessive, and were the result of passion and prejudice. Trial court granted EFCO's motion for remittitur and pared the compensatory damages on count I to $17,644. MPC filed the remittitur. Because EFCO has appealed in this new trial-remittitur situation, the original judgment is reinstated. Larsen v. United Federal Savings and Loan Association, 300 N.W.2d 281, 288 (Iowa 1981); Iowa R.Civ.P. 250. Thus we review the sufficiency of evidence to support the original verdicts.
We have recognized a distinction between proof of the fact that damages have been sustained and proof of the amount of those damages. If it is speculative and uncertain whether damages have been sustained, recovery is denied. Patterson v. Patterson, 189 N.W.2d 601, 605 (Iowa 1971). If uncertainty lies only in the amount of damages, recovery may be had if there is a reasonable basis in the evidence from which the amount can be inferred or approximated.
Larsen, 300 N.W.2d at 288.
Trial court apparently arrived at the maximum compensatory damages on count I by adding the difference between the Sturm and the Des Moines Cold Storage sales to the $3500 damages MPC paid Sturm and the $3495 it paid the Sturm sale realtor. Although MPC attempted to produce some evidence it was damaged in its subsequent operations by Jennings' reckless statements, this proof fell far short of supporting a finding of further damages. We find the difficulties EFCO's unwarranted actions caused MPC, which foundationed count II, supported a compensatory award of at least $1000.
The punitive damages were justified on the basis of Jennings' malicious, reckless and wanton conduct and statements, and were well within the range of reasonableness.
We agree with trial court there was insufficient evidence to justify a verdict in excess of $17,644 as compensatory damages on count I. We therefore exercise our inherent right to order a remittitur. See id. at 289; Miller v. Young, 168 N.W.2d 45, 53 (Iowa 1969). If MPC shall file in this proceeding in district court a consent to remit all actual damages returned under count I over and above the sum of $17,644, within 30 days from the filing of this opinion, the district court judgment appealed from shall stand and shall draw interest at the statutory rates from the date of entry. If the consent to remit is not so filed, a new trial is hereby ordered.
IV. Is MPC entitled to attorney fees?
MPC asserts a successful plaintiff in a slander of title action is entitled to attorney fees as a part of its damages. The parties, by stipulation, reserved this question for the court before MPC rested its case. By posttrial motion MPC brought the issue before trial court. The motion was denied.
The question apparently is one of first impression in this jurisdiction. Ordinarily a successful party cannot recover attorney fees in Iowa in absence of a special statute, contract, or third-party action. Turner v. Zip Motors, Inc., 245 Iowa 1091, 1098, 1100, 65 N.W.2d 427, 431-32 (1954). "Unless authorized by statute, attorneys' fees generally are not recoverable [in slander of title actions] either as damages or as costs." 50 Am.Jur.2d Libel and Slander § 550, at 1068 (1970).
*479 The authorities relied on by MPC, including Glass v. Gulf Oil Corp., 12 Cal. App. 3d 412, 96 Cal. Rptr. 902 (1970); Glusman v. Lieberman, 285 So. 2d 29 (Fla.App.1973); and Summa Corp. v. Greenspun, 607 P.2d 569 (Nev.1980), also involve quiet title actions or proceedings to nullify some disparaging instrument placed on record. This is consistent with our quiet title act, which provides for a minimal attorney fee under certain conditions. See § 649.5, The Code 1981. See also Restatement (Second) of Torts § 633 (1977).
We find no good cause to depart from our standing rule that forecloses an award of attorney fees to plaintiff in this tort action.
We modify and affirm on condition, and remand on the appeal. We affirm on the cross-appeal. Costs are taxed to EFCO.
MODIFIED AND AFFIRMED ON CONDITION, AND REMANDED ON THE APPEAL; AFFIRMED ON THE CROSS-APPEAL.

=== CASE 2226741 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:18.172166+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 848 (1981)
ASSOCIATED DEVELOPERS, INC., Brookings International Life Insurance Company, Brookings Mall, Inc., Dale G. Svennes Construction Company, Inc., Gilbert Erickson and Alene Erickson, First National Bank In Brookings, Four Sisters Inc., Peter Hauff, Gene R. Hurst and Roger W. Anderson Trust, Robert A. Larkin and Janice M. Larkin, Gust M. Liebelt, Mid-Continent Developers, Inc., Paul E. Moriarty, Homer Osvog, Paul Prussman, Rose Marie Ramey, Harvey A. Schroeder and Alethea M. Schroeder, Robert S. Sexauer, the Sexauer Company, Jerald Tunheim and Patricia Tunheim, and Stuart J. Webster and Sharon H. Webster, for themselves and all other parties similarly situated, Plaintiffs and Appellants,
v.
CITY OF BROOKINGS, a Municipal Corporation, Defendant and Appellee.
No. 12939.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
Considered on Briefs November 26, 1980.
Decided May 20, 1981.
*849 James E. Kessler of Erickson & Kessler, Brookings, for plaintiffs and appellants.
Alan F. Glover of Denholm & Glover, Brookings, for defendant and appellee.
PER CURIAM.
On June 26, 1978, certain street assessments imposed by the city of Brookings, South Dakota, were declared null and void. The City was ordered to refund, with interest, any assessments paid.
After this Court affirmed the trial court judgment,[*] a dispute arose concerning the amount of interest to be paid to those property owners receiving a refund. The trial court ordered that the interest be paid at a rate of six percent per annum from the time that the assessments were paid to the City until the date of the refund. We modify.
We agree that from the date of payment until judgment the property owners are entitled to interest at a rate of six percent per annum. SDCL 54-3-5, 1975 S.D.Sess.Laws, ch. 297. At the time that this judgment was entered, however, SDCL 54-3-5 provided that interest, "in the case of a judgment... shall be ten per cent per annum." 1975 S.D.Sess.Laws, ch. 297. Effective July 1, 1980, the interest rate "in the case of a judgment" was increased to twelve percent per annum. SDCL 54-3-5, 1980 S.D.Sess. Laws, ch. 336, § 2. Consequently, the property owners are entitled to interest at a rate of ten percent per annum from June 26, 1978, until June 30, 1980, and interest at a rate of twelve percent per annum thereafter.
The order appealed from is modified.
FOSHEIM, J., deeming himself disqualified did not participate in this opinion.
NOTES
[*]  City of Brookings v. Associated Developers, Inc., 280 N.W.2d 97 (S.D.1979).

=== CASE 9741268 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:34.416347+00 ===

McCown, J.
The defendant was found guilty by a jury of robbery and use of a firearm in the commission of a felony, and was sentenced to imprisonment for not less than 8 nor more than 15 years on the robbery count and not less than 2 nor more than 3 years on the firearm count, the sentences to run consecutively.
On November 6, 1979, a Safeway store in Omaha, Nebraska, was robbed by two black males. One man approached the courtesy booth in a corner of the store with a gun and demanded all the money from the clerk in the booth. The clerk put $700 to $800 in an envelope and the robber left the store with his accomplice, who had been standing a few feet away. The man with the gun was described as being approximately 5 feet 6 inches tall and weighing approximately 140 pounds. The accomplice was described as quite a bit *798taller, 6 feet at least and perhaps 6 feet 2 inches. The robbery took approximately 3 minutes and the only evidence against the defendant was the eyewitness testimony of the clerk in the courtesy booth.
Following the robbery the clerk called the police and gave them a description of the robbers. The day following the robbery the clerk was shown a spread of approximately 8 to 10 photographs of police suspects. The clerk picked a photograph of Glen Harrington as looking like the robber, but made no positive identification. No police record was kept as to what other pictures were included in the spread, nor whether the defendant’s picture was included. On November 29, 1979, the clerk viewed a police lineup of four black males. Michael Harrington, a brother of Glen Harrington, was one of the individuals in the lineup. The clerk was unable to identify anyone in the lineup. Both Glen and Michael Harrington are approximately the same height and size as the defendant. On December 4, 1979, the clerk was again shown a spread of eight police photographs. The clerk picked one photograph as a possible suspect but could not make a positive identification. On December 19, 1979, the police held a lineup of three individuals, including the defendant. The defendant was the only short man in the lineup. The clerk immediately identified the defendant as the man with the gun who had robbed him, and identified him again at preliminary hearing and at the trial. He testified that his identification was based on his observation of the defendant at the time of the robbery.
An information against the defendant was filed and on January 10, 1980, a plea of not guilty was entered and the cause was set for trial to the next jury panel. On March 7, 1980, the defendant filed a motion to suppress all pretrial identifications of the defendant, and the motion was scheduled for hearing on March 24, 1980. On March 11, 1980, the defendant was advised that his case would be called for trial *799the following morning and suppression hearing would be held prior to the commencement of trial. The defendant made a motion for continuance which was overruled on March 12, 1980, together with the motion to suppress identifications.
Trial commenced and the State presented its case which rested entirely on the identification of the defendant by the clerk. At the conclusion of the State’s case a hearing was held in chambers outside the presence of the jury and a record made of the proceedings. The prosecutor, defendant and his counsel, and a prospective witness, Michael Harrington, and his counsel were present. At the request of the defendant, Harrington had been brought to court from the penal complex where he was incarcerated.
Harrington’s counsel stated that he had been notified a day or two previously that the defendant intended to call Harrington as a witness, and that he understood that the testimony of Harrington, if he took the stand, would incriminate him with respect to the offense for which the defendant was being tried. He also stated that Harrington was presently serving a 3-year sentence in the penal complex which began approximately 1 month before. Harrington’s counsel also stated that that sentence was the result of pleading guilty to the charge of assault in the second degree and that there was an agreement made with the prosecutor in that case that two burglaries would be dismissed, and further that Harrington would clear up some robberies in which he was a suspect. Harrington’s counsel also stated, and Harrington confirmed, that in Harrington’s discussions with the prosecutor in the assault case he admitted his guilt in the robbery for which the defendant was being tried, and was assured by that prosecutor that no prosecution would result as long as he pleaded guilty to the second degree assault.
The trial judge in this case, who had also been the judge at the time of Harrington’s guilty plea, in *800response to an inquiry by Harrington, stated that his recollection was: “If you pled guilty to that charge, no other charge would be filed. That was the agreement, as I understood it, between you and the State.”
Harrington’s counsel had advised Harrington that he was not positive whether or not the State would treat Harrington’s testifying in this case as a nullification of the agreement and file charges against Harrington based on the admissions he made on the witness stand, and that he had advised Harrington that the only way he could assure him there would be no prosecution would be for Harrington to take the fifth amendment if he was called as a witness.
The trial judge explained to Harrington that the court had nothing to say about whether the State brought a charge or not and that such decisions were entirely up to the prosecution, and advised Harrington that he could not tell him whether or not the county attorney was going to file a charge if Harrington testified. The prosecutor then stated for the record that the State would prosecute. The prosecutor stated his feeling that any agreement the prosecutor in the Harrington case made was “out the window” if Harrington took the stand in the present case and testified in open court that he committed the robbery.
Harrington then decided that he would take the fifth amendment and refuse to answer any questions. The prosecutor requested that Harrington not be sworn in front of the jury, and the court asked Harrington if he was called as a witness would he refuse to answer any questions about the robbery involved in this case, and upon receiving Harrington’s affirmative answer, stated that Harrington had invoked his constitutional privilege, and concluded the hearing.
When the trial resumed the defendant took the stand as the only witness for the defense and denied any knowledge of or participation in the crime. He also testified that he had previously been convicted of two felonies. The jury returned a verdict of guilty and this *801appeal followed.
The defendant contends that the failure to grant immunity to the witness Harrington and the actions of the prosecutor in threatening Harrington with prosecution if he took the stand and admitted committing the robbery improperly interfered with the fact-finding process and denied the defendant a fair trial. The essence of defendant’s argument in this court is that the trial judge should have granted immunity to the witness Harrington. That issue was not raised at the trial level, but even if it had been such claims for defense witness immunity have been almost uniformly rejected by the courts. See United States v. Alessio, 528 F.2d 1079 (9th Cir. 1976), cert. denied 426 U.S. 948, 96 S. Ct. 3167, 49 L. Ed. 2d 1184 (1976).
The valid basis for objection here is not that the court failed to grant Harrington immunity as a witness. Instead, the issue is whether or not the prosecution intimidated Harrington and caused him to refuse to testify as a witness. The constitutional right of a defendant to call witnesses in his defense mandates that they must be called without intimidation. A prosecutor may impeach a witness in court but he may not intimidate him in or out of court. See People v. Pena, 383 Mich. 402, 175 N.W.2d 767 (1970). The principles set out in Pena were approved in the very recent case of State v. Ivy, 300 N.W.2d 310 (Iowa 1981). In that case, although the court declined to reverse the conviction because of the absence of prejudice, the court said: “We agree with the rationale of these cases which hold it is improper to intimidate a witness. We agree, too, that, if prejudice results, a defendant is deprived of due process.” Id. at 314.
The foundational case for establishing the right of a defendant to present his own witnesses to establish a defense as a fundamental element of due process of law under the sixth amendment right to compulsory process is Washington v. Texas, 388 U.S. 14, 87 S. Ct. 1920, 18 L. Ed. 2d 1019 (1967). That case held that *802just as an accused has the right to confront the prosecution’s witnesses for the purpose of challenging their testimony, he has the right to present his own witnesses to establish a defense. This right is a fundamental element of due process of law.
Typical of cases holding that where the government has prevented a defendant’s witness from testifying freely before the jury it cannot be held that the jury would not have believed the testimony or that the error is harmless is United States v. Morrison, 535 F.2d 223 (3d Cir. 1976). In that case the prosecutor repeatedly warned a prospective defense witness about the possibility of a perjury charge if she testified falsely, where charges against her in the matter had previously been dropped when it was disclosed that she had been under 18 years old at the time. She understood that with the dropping of the charges she was free from prosecution for her role, which was not true. In that case the Third Circuit not only reversed the defendant’s conviction but held that where prosecutorial misconduct caused the defendant’s prime witness to withhold, out of fear of self-incrimination, testimony which would otherwise have been available to the defendant, due process demanded that the government at a new trial request use immunity for that witness.
The same principles which apply to prosecutorial intimidation were also applied to intimidation of a single defense witness by a judge in the case of Webb v. Texas, 409 U.S. 95, 93 S. Ct. 351, 34 L. Ed. 2d 330 (1972). In that case the Supreme Court of the United States concluded that the judge’s threatening remarks directed only at the single witness for the defense effectively drove that witness off the stand and thus deprived the petitioner of due process of law under the fourteenth amendment.
In United States v. Thomas, 488 F.2d 334 (6th Cir. 1973), the court held that the actions of the prosecutor, in gratuitously admonishing a witness of the possibility *803that he might be prosecuted for misprision of felony if he testified, constituted prejudicial error, even though evidence of defendant’s guilt was overwhelming. The court also held that the government’s later statement that the witness would not be prosecuted was not sufficient to overcome the prejudice. The court held that the action of the prosecutor involved in that case substantially interfered with any free and uninhibited determination the witness might have made as to whether to testify and, if so, the content of that testimony.
In the case at bar the record is clear that the prosecutor’s threat to Harrington caused Harrington to refuse to testify and resulted in depriving the defendant of that testimony. Courts are divided as to whether reversal is required for intimidation in the absence of a showing of prejudice. In the case at bar the prejudice is clear. Where the only real issue in the case involved the identification of the robber and a witness was prevented from testifying that he was the robber, it is difficult to imagine a clearer case of prejudice.
It is unnecessary to discuss the remaining issues raised by the defendant in this appeal.
Reversed.
Clinton, J., dissents.

=== CASE 9741270 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:36.274899+00 ===

HENDERSON, Justice.
ACTION
This is an appeal by Troy Dace (appellant) from a judgment entered pursuant to a jury verdict rendered in favor of United States Fire Insurance Company (appellee). Appellee instituted an action for declaratory judgment contending that appellant was not entitled to recover $50,000 under a fire insurance policy issued to him by appellee. Specifically, the jury found that appellant had violated the terms of the policy by setting, or causing to be set, the fire which destroyed the insured building. We affirm.
FACTS
The insured building, destroyed by fire, was purchased on a contract for deed by appellant in May of 1978 from Amby Friel and his wife, Margaret Friel. Prior to that time, appellant had been leasing the building from the Friels. As a part of the purchase agreement, appellant was required to insure the building to protect the Friels’ interest. Appellant complied by purchasing a $50,000 fire insurance policy from appel-lee in May of 1978 with a proper loss-payable clause for the Friels. According to an insurance agent employed by appellee, appellant had, however, originally requested a policy of $110,000. Appellant testified at trial that the building had been appraised at $55,000 to $60,000.
At the time of this purchase, appellant was using the building for a nightclub, pawn shop, and bookkeeping/tax consultation service. In October of 1978, appellant leased the nightclub portion of the building to Mark and Judy Javersak. The Javersaks originally purchased a $110,000 insurance policy on their portion of the building, including its contents. When the Javersaks bought the nightclub, the contents therein were owned by appellant; hence, appellant wanted them insured in his name, since the Javersaks did not really own the contents of the nightclub, but-were merely making periodic payments on them. Accordingly, if a fire occurred, appellant would sustain a substantial loss as, for all practical purposes, he still owned the nightclub and its contents. Approximately two weeks prior to the fire, an additional $20,000 insurance was placed on the building and its contents by the Javersaks. Appellant was named the insured on the resulting $130,000 policy.
During the early morning hours of January 28,1979, the building in question caught fire and was destroyed. Appellant, on the night of January 27, 1979, had gone to a movie and dinner in Rapid City, South Dakota, with Brett Horr, whom appellant had recently met while performing as a sharpshooter for students at Sturgis High School. Horr was approximately 14 years old at this time. The two returned to appellant’s trailer home in Spearfish, South Dakota, at approximately 1:00 a. nj. on the 28th of January, 1979, and thereafter retired to separate bedrooms.
Patricia Hoffman, a waitress who was working in a diner near the building, testified that she called appellant at approximately 6:00 a. m. on January 28, 1979, and told him “your place is on fire.” According to Hoffman, appellant stated he would be right down, that being the extent of the conversation.
Appellant testified that when Hoffman called, he put the telephone receiver down and checked to see if his trailer was on fire; he also looked in on Horr, but did not wake him at this time. Appellant further testified that he stepped outside the trailer, *53while still talking on the telephone via an extension cord, to again check to see if his trailer was on fire. According to appellant, after realizing that it was the nightclub/pawn shop/tax building which was ablaze, and still not dressed, he wakened Horr. Appellant testified that while Horr was dressing, he went out and started his pickup truck to warm it up, then came back in. He and Horr subsequently drove to the fire.
Horr, on the other hand, testified that when appellant awoke him, appellant was fully dressed (including a coat) and it was wet where appellant had been standing. Furthermore, Horr testified that when he and appellant left the trailer, he noticed a trace of snow on the ground which was not present when the two had arrived at the trailer.1 Horr testified that, while there was snow on the other surrounding vehicles, there was no snow on appellant’s pickup truck. Additionally, Horr testified that he was positive appellant’s pickup truck was not running when he and appellant entered it. The heater of the pickup truck came on in five to ten seconds, Horr testified, even though he thought the temperature outside was approximately 0° fahrenheit. According to Horr, the tire tracks of the pickup truck indicated that it had left the trailer, returned, then left and returned again.
Subsequent to the fire, appellee paid Margaret Friel approximately $51,000 for the damage done to the insured building, and assumed appellant’s contract for deed (permissible if arson is suspected) to avoid paying appellant due to appellee’s belief that appellant had committed arson. Ap-pellee then commenced this action by seeking a declaratory judgment against appellant.
ISSUES
I.
Was there sufficient circumstantial evidence presented to the jury to support its verdict? Our holding is yes.
II.
Did the trial court err by receiving into evidence certain out-of-court statements made by appellant as exceptions to the hearsay rule? Our holding is no.
III.
Did the trial court err by receiving into evidence the non-expert opinion testimony of Brett Horr? Our holding is no.
DECISION
I.
Appellant contends that the evidence was insufficient to support the jury’s verdict. Upon this Court’s review of the sufficiency of the evidence on appeal, the evidence and the inferences therefrom are viewed in the light most favorable to upholding the verdict of the jury. Olesen v. Snyder, 277 N.W.2d 729 (S.D.1979); Engberg v. Ford Motor Company, 87 S.D. 196, 205 N.W.2d 104 (1973). If, when so viewed, there is competent and substantial evidence to support the jury verdict, then it must stand. Olesen v. Snyder, supra; Vander Vorste v. Northwestern National Bank, 81 S.D. 566, 138 N.W.2d 411 (1965); Bentz v. Cimarron Insurance Co., 79 S.D. 510, 114 N.W.2d 96 (1962).
Appellee relied solely upon circumstantial evidence as a basis for proving that appellant committed arson. Proof of arson may be established, however, by circumstantial evidence. Raphtis v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Company, 86 S.D. 491, 198 N.W.2d 505 (1972); Quast v. Prudential Property & Cas. Co., 267 N.W. 2d 493 (Minn.1978). Appellee was required to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that appellant caused the building to burn. Raphtis v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Company, supra; Quast v. Prudential Property & Cas. Co., supra.
*54The jury was presented with two questions: 1) Was appellant’s building deliberately set on fire on January 28, 1979?; and 2) Did appellant set, or cause to be set, the fire?
Regarding the evidence that the fire had been intentionally set, the following factors were presented to the jury at trial:
William R. Dietz, a chemist with the United States Department of Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, deposed that, based on a sample of what appeared to be charred wood taken from the remnants of the fire, the debris contained an accelerant. An accelerant is a volatile hydrocarbon mixture such as gasoline or kerosene. Dietz further deposed that in his opinion the fire was not caused by faulty wiring. This statement was based upon his observations of wire samples and electrical junction boxes that were removed from the building after the fire. The expert opinion of Dietz was that the fire had been started with the aid of an accelerant.
Deputy State Fire Marshall Alvin L. Plumb testified that, in his opinion, the fire was a result of arson. Plumb based his conclusion in part upon the fact that the entrance to the building was not forcibly opened, yet the Javersaks stated that they had locked the building around 1:00 a. m. the night of the fire. Additionally and more importantly, Plumb stated that he could find no physical evidence of the fire starting by itself.
Only 3 guns were found in the debris, even though appellant had told investigators that there were 39 guns in the building. Finally, State Fire Marshall Joe Egger testified that, in his opinion, the, fire was a product of arson. There was no expert testimony to the contrary.
Next, concerning the sufficiency of evidence that appellant had set the fire or caused it to be set, in Raphtis v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Insurance Company, supra, we held that evidence of the insured’s “shaky” financial condition at the time of the fire was sufficient to prove motive for arson. Furthermore, circumstantial evidence is permissible as a means to support an inference that the insured set the fire or arranged to have it set. Quast v. Prudential Property & Cas. Co., supra. The Minnesota Supreme Court in Quast also held that evidence revealing heavy indebtedness of the insured was sufficient to establish a motive of the insured to commit arson, even though the insurer failed to demonstrate that the insured knew of or participated in the arson.
Here, the jury was presented with the following evidentiary factors on the question of whether appellant was responsible for the fire:
Brett Horr testified that, in his opinion, appellant’s pickup truck had been moved sometime during the night of the fire.2 The pickup truck’s movement, Horr testified, was indicated by its numerous tracks, lack of snow accumulation, and the almost immediate functioning of its heater when he and appellant drove to the fire.
Mark Javersak testified that appellant had told him that he (appellant) could reach any area of the building through a false ceiling. Javersak also testified that his former employee, who was also an acquaintance of appellant, had a key to a portion of the building being rented by the Javersaks.
Appellant was experiencing financial difficulties as evidenced by eight unpaid judgments against him and no personal income tax filings for 1976,1977, or 1978. Furthermore, Javersak testified that appellant had *55told him that he (appellant) kept two sets of books, one for the Internal Revenue Service and one for himself. Javersak also testified that appellant told him that he (appellant) was “skimming” money off his financial records.
Robert T. Wuttke, Jr., an insurance agent for a subsidiary agency of appellee, testified that in May of 1978 appellant requested that he increase the insurance on the building from $50,000 to $110,000. Wuttke refused to do this due to the peculiarity of the request, since the building was worth approximately $60,000.
There was a great amount of circumstantial evidence implicating appellant with arson. A jury issue was created and the jury has. spoken. We uphold the verdict on the basis that there is competent and substantial evidence to sustain it. The evidence and the inferences therefrom are viewed in the light most favorable to upholding the verdict. Olesen v. Snyder, supra.
II.
Appellant contends that the trial court erred in admitting the testimony of E. James Hood, who was legal counsel for Amby Friel prior to Friel’s death in September of 1979. Hood testified that, on April 27, 1979, Friel entered his office and told him that appellant had threatened to burn down the Friel home with Mrs. Friel in it. Appellant denied ever making this statement. Over appellant’s objection on grounds of hearsay, the trial court admitted Hood’s testimony.
Hood also testified that immediately after observing Friel talking with appellant, Friel entered Hood’s office and told Hood of appellant’s threat. As to the emotional state of Friel at this time, Hood testified that Friel was “very agitated, upset, and excited.”
SDCL 19-16-6 (Fed. Rule 803(2)) provides:
A statement relating to a startling event or condition made while the declar-ant was under the stress of excitement caused by the event or condition, is not excluded by § 19-16-4 [hearsay is not admissible], even though the declarant is available as a witness.
We hold that the trial court was correct in ruling that the testimony of Hood was admissible under this exception to the hearsay rule. Moreover, we note in the transcript that this evidence first surfaced in the cross-examination of appellant. Appellant did not then object when asked on cross-examination whether he had in fact threatened to burn down the house of Amby Friel with Friel’s wife in it. The excited utterance was then before the jury. Objections must be made immediately to allow the trial court to correct its errors. Failure to do so generally precludes appellate review. Estate of Assmus, 254 N.W.2d 159 (S.D.1977); In re Estate of Grimes, 87 S.D. 187, 204 N.W.2d 812 (1973); Chipperfield v. Woessner, 84 S.D. 13, 166 N.W.2d 727 (1969); Stark v. Stark, 79 S.D. 178, 109 N.W.2d 904 (1961).
Appellant also argues that the trial court erred by allowing Mark Javersak to testify that appellant had told him that he (appellant) kept two sets of books and “skimmed.” Prior to Javersak’s testimony, appellant had denied on cross-examination that he ever told the Javersaks that he kept two sets of books.
SDCL 19-12-5 (Fed. Rule 404(b)) provides:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to show that he acted in conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for other purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or accident.
Another common law category of permissible use of evidence of other acts that is not listed in SDCL 19-12-5 (Fed. Rule 404(b)) is impeachment. This category includes the use of evidence of prior acts to rebut a defendant’s sweeping assertion of innocence. See Wright & Graham, Federal Practice and Procedure, Evidence § 5240 (1978). Here, the testimony of Javersak *56was used to rebut appellant’s statement denying that he ever said he kept two sets of books. Accordingly, we hold that the trial court was correct in allowing this testimony of Javersak.
III.
Appellant contends that it was erroneous for the trial court to allow Bret Horr to testify that, in his opinion, appellant’s pickup truck had been moved during the interim between the time he and appellant went to bed and when they left for the fire.
SDCL 19-15-1 (Fed. Rule 701) states:
If the witness is not testifying as an expert, his testimony in the form of opinions or inferences is limited to those opinions or inferences which are
(1) rationally based on the perception of the witness and
(2) helpful to a clear understanding of his testimony or the determination of a fact in issue.
As we have previously stated under FACTS, Horr’s opinion was rationally based upon several distinct observations. Further, Horr’s opinion helped clarify his testimony for the jury. We hold that the trial court did not err in allowing Horr to give his opinion with regard to the movement of appellant’s pickup truck.
Accordingly, the judgment is affirmed.
DUNN, MORGAN and FOSHEIM, JJ., concur.
WOLLMAN, C. J., concurs specially.
. Stuart Reed, who works at the co-op weather station 'A mile from the trailer court where appellant lives, testified that on the night of the fire a trace of precipitation had fallen.
. Upon cross-examination, however, the following colloquy took place between appellant’s attorney and Horr:
Q. You’re not trying to tell the jury here today that between the time that [appellant] and you went to bed and the time that you and [appellant] got in the pickup to go to the fire that that vehicle had been moved, are you?
A. No.
On redirect examination, though, Horr stated that, in his opinion, appellant’s pickup truck had been moved. This testimonial inconsistency, we believe, stems from Horr’s confusion over the question asked of him on cross-examination. We also note that Horr states in his deposition that appellant’s pickup truck had been moved during the night.

=== CASE 9741272 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:36.570935+00 ===

REYNOLDSON, Chief Justice.
The district court reversed an order of respondent Iowa Civil Rights Commission (Commission), which found petitioner Linn Co-Operative Oil Company guilty of sex discrimination. The employer fired respondent Mary Quigley from her position as a part-time gas station attendant. The basic issue in this appeal is whether the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act (IAPA) was applicable to the district court proceeding. We find it was not, and affirm.
Quigley’s sex discrimination complaint was filed with the Commission on February 27, 1975. It was made under section 601A.7(lXa), The Code 1973, v/hich provided:
It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for any:
(a) Person ... to discharge any employee ... because of the ... sex ... of such ... employee, unless based upon the nature of the occupation.
When this complaint was filed, appeals from agency adjudications were triable de novo in district court pursuant to section 601A.10(6), The Code 1973.
The IAPA, Code chapter 17A, became effective July 1, 1975. A hearing on Quig-ley’s complaint was not held until 1977, and the Commission did not adopt the hearing officer’s findings, conclusions, and recommended order until April 1978.
Within thirty days of the Commission’s decision, the employer filed a petition in equity in district court, requesting issues raised in the Quigley complaint be reviewed de novo as provided in section 601A.10(6), The Code 1973. Notice of the petition was served personally on the Commission and Quigley.
January 30, 1979, Judge Vietor filed an order of remand for further proceedings, in which he noted the remand request was submitted “upon oral arguments of counsel.” This order characterized the proceeding as “a judicial review proceeding under the authority of Iowa Code Section 17A.19,” despite the fact review expressly was sought under the 1973 Code, not under the IAPA. Section 601A.10(5), The Code 1973, authorized a party to “move the court to remit the case to the commission ... for the purpose of adducing additional ... evidence.” But Judge Vietor apparently relied instead on section 17A.19(8) of the IAPA, which also authorizes such remand.
Upon remand to the Commission, a hearing was held at which evidence concerning employee time records was introduced. The hearing officer’s recommended decision on remand was adopted by the Commission August 9,1979. The employer then amended its petition in equity to seek judicial review of this order.
The Commission contended in district court that judicial review was governed by the IAPA, not by section 601A.10. Under the IAPA, the employer would not be entitled to de novo review and would be entitled to relief only by alleging and establishing one of the grounds specified in section 17A.19(8). None of the section 17A.19(8) grounds was alleged in the employer’s petition.
The district court held the IAPA inapplicable and, reviewing the evidence de novo, found there was no chapter 601A sex discrimination.
*731I. Applicability of the IAPA in this controversy turns on section 17A.23. In relevant part it provides:
The Iowa administrative procedure Act shall be construed broadly to effectuate its purposes. This chapter shall also be construed to apply to all agencies not expressly exempted by this chapter or by another statute specifically referring to this chapter by name; and except as to proceedings in process on July 1, 1975, this chapter shall be construed to apply to all covered agency proceedings and all agency action not expressly exempted by this chapter or by another statute specifically referring to this chapter by name.
(Emphasis supplied.) Under the above statute, the IAPA does not apply to “proceedings in process on July 1,1975.” Thus all of the Act, including its review provision, is inapplicable where a “proceeding” was commenced before the effective date of the IAPA, July 1, 1975.
To determine whether certain events initiate a proceeding, it seems logical to apply the case law existing at the time of those events. If a proceeding was “in process” prior to July 1, 1975, it obviously was a proceeding when viewed in light of pre-IAPA principles. Yet the Commission argues this determination should be made by applying the IAPA and cases interpreting it, even though that legislation did not exist at the time the complaint in this case was filed.
February 27, 1975, when Quigley filed this complaint, there were no statutes defining “contested case,” “party,” or “person.” In Estabrook v. Iowa Civil Rights Commission, 283 N.W.2d 306 (Iowa 1979), we merely determined a contested case evi-dentiary hearing was not required under circumstances the record disclosed. We did not interpret section 17A.2(2) to mean that only a “contested case” is a proceeding. Similarly, the language of section 17A.1(2) (“contested case proceedings”) is not helpful in classifying an action taken before its enactment.
In ascribing a meaning to “proceedings in process,” undefined in chapter 17A, we reject the principle that implies the phrase must be interpreted within the confines of the IAPA. Cases like Goergen v. State Tax Commission, 165 N.W.2d 782, 785 (Iowa 1969), are of little benefit because they merely restate the settled principle that all parts of the statute should be read together to determine its meaning, not that the meaning of otherwise unidentified terms must be gleaned exclusively from within the statute under scrutiny.
Other rules of interpretation are more applicable. Several of our decisions hold that when a statute contains no definition of words used, they are to be construed according to their “approved usage.” See, e. g., In Interest of Hoppe, 289 N.W.2d 613, 616 (Iowa 1980); State ex rel. Turner v. Drake, 242 N.W.2d 707, 709 (Iowa 1976); State v. Kool, 212 N.W.2d 518, 520 (Iowa 1973). An “approved usage” surely would include prior judicial interpretations. “In construing a statute we must be mindful of the state of the law when it was enacted ....” Egan v. Naylor, 208 N.W.2d 915, 918 (Iowa 1973). “We assume the legislature knew the existing state of the law and prior judicial interpretations of similar statutory provisions. We assume, too, its use of terms was in the accepted judicially established context unless there is clear evidence to the contrary.” Jahnke v. Incorporated City of Des Moines, 191 N.W.2d 780, 787 (Iowa 1971). There is no “clear evidence” in this case that the legislature intended a section 17A.23 “proceeding” to mean anything different from its meaning under the then-existing state of the law and prior judicial interpretations.
It follows that our case law antedating the effective date of the IAPA is determinative. In Iowa Civil Rights Commission v. Massey-Ferguson, Inc., 207 N.W.2d 5 (Iowa 1973), a civil rights case, we had before us a statute of limitation question arising under section 105A.9(15), The Code 1966, which later became section 601A.9(15), The Code 1973. We referred to the filing of the complaint as an administrative proceeding:
The time in which an administrative proceeding may be brought is often regulat*732ed by the statute providing for such proceeding, and a failure to comply with such statute may bar the administrative proceeding and any judicial proceeding which depends thereon.
Id. at 9-10. Our observation in Massey-Ferguson that the complaint launches a “proceeding” is supported by Parker v. Califano, 561 F.2d 320, 324, 327-28 (D.C.Cir. 1977) (under Civil Rights Act statute permitting attorney fee award “in any action or proceeding,” held, attorney fees were allowable for services leading to filing complaint under a proper broad construction of “proceeding”); United States v. Vixie, 532 F.2d 1277, 1278 (9th Cir. 1976) (an administrative investigation is a “proceeding” within the meaning of statute relating to obstructing agency proceedings); Cardinali v. Planning Board, 373 A.2d 251, 253 (Me.1977) (application for subdivision submitted prior to moratorium ordinance was encompassed within the general savings clause definition of proceeding “pending”); Banach v. State Commission on Human Relations, 277 Md. 502, 509-10, 356 A.2d 242, 247 (1976) (“The word ‘proceedings’ is a term of broad scope, encompassing both the investigative and adjudicative functions of an administrative agency.”). The provisions of the federal Civil Rights Act make it clear that filing a complaint before a state or local agency with authority to grant relief from discriminating practices is the commencement of a “proceeding.” See, e. g., Parker, 561 F.2d at 327; 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-5(c) (1976).
When the legislature enacted the IAPA it identified, for the first time in this jurisdiction, a “contested case proceeding,” and certainly recognized its limited nature. Had the legislature wanted to confine “proceedings in process” to contested case proceedings in process it easily could have used that then-familiar language in section 17A.23. We hold the filing of Quigley’s complaint triggered a proceeding that was “in process” when the IAPA became the law; consequently, under section 17A.23, the provisions of that legislation do not apply in this controversy.
II. Because the review provisions of IAPA section 17A.19 do not apply in this case, the district court properly reviewed the evidence de novo. There was ample evidence to support its finding that Quigley was not discriminated against because of her sex. A female former employee who held the same job testified females found no discriminatory practices by this employer. Quigley was hired in preference to two male applicants. It is unreasonable to speculate that this employer suddenly reversed its nondiscriminatory philosophy, expressed in its company manual, in terminating Quigley’s employment.
The evidence fully substantiated district court’s finding that Quigley was terminated because the work slacked off and because she was creating disciplinary problems. While none of the employees was blameless, she provided additional grounds. Her immediate supervisor testified:
Q. What were her failings? A. ... I remember several cold, rainy days where if we were busy, we’d have all three of us out there ... and sure, you all got wet
Q. What would Mary [Quigley] do at these times? A. Well, she would come in, sit down. I remember several times she just came in and sat down with her back to the heater and to the drive, and it was too cold to do anything, she said.
Q. She would let the rest of you do all the work? A. Yes.
Q. Because she was too cold? A. Yes, that’s what she said.
Q. Did they [other employees] complain to you about her not doing her share of the work? A. Yes, they would.
The evidence is unrefuted that after Quig-ley was fired most of the disciplinary problems ceased.
It is equally apparent the hearing officer (whose findings and order the Iowa Civil Rights Commission adopted) improperly imposed the burden of proof on the employer. The officer found Quigley had established a prima facie case by proving (1) she was a female and (2) when there was a cutback in work force she was terminated, *733and “similarly situated” males, and males with less seniority, were not terminated. Of course, district court did not find the males were “similarly situated,” in view of Quigley’s conduct. Moreover, the hearing officer found that
[t]o overcome the prima facie case Respondent [employer] had to show either that sex was a bona fide occupational qualification, that the termination was a business necessity or that Complainant [Quigley] was terminated pursuant to a rational and neutral business policy applied to all employees.
(Emphasis supplied.)
We have found no rule that thus shifts the burden of proof to the employer. Everyone is presumed to have discharged his or her duty, whether legal or moral, until the contrary is made to appear. Dorf v. Relles, 355 F.2d 488, 492 (7th Cir. 1966); Baker v. Beal, 225 N.W.2d 106, Í10 (Iowa 1975). In these cases, “[e]omplainant has [the] burden of proof, not the respondent.” Iron Workers Local 67 v. Hart, 191 N.W.2d 758, 772 (Iowa 1971). The burden of persuasion never shifts. McDowell v. Town of Clarksville, 241 N.W.2d 904, 908 (Iowa 1976).
In Texas Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. -, 101 S.Ct. 1089, 67 L.Ed.2d 207 (1981), the Supreme Court reversed the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit for utilizing the same burden-shifting technique employed by the hearing officer in the case before us. The circuit court had imposed on the employer the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence the existence of legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons for the challenged action. The Supreme Court, holding the court of appeals had misinterpreted its decision in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S.Ct. 1817, 36 L.Ed.2d 668 (1973), reiterated that a prima facie case is rebutted when the employer merely produces “admissible evidence which would allow the trier of fact rationally to conclude that the employment decision had not been motivated by discriminatory animus.” Burdine, 450 U.S. at -, 101 S.Ct. at 1096, 67 L.Ed.2d at 218 (emphasis supplied).
“The defendant need not persuade the court that it was actually motivated by the proffered reasons.” Id. at -, 101 S.Ct. at 1094, 67 L.Ed.2d at 216. The Burdine Court held:
The plaintiff retains the burden of persuasion. She now must have the opportunity to demonstrate that the proffered reason was not the true reason for the employment decision. This burden now merges with the ultimate burden of persuading the court that she has been the victim of intentional discrimination. She may succeed in this either directly by persuading the court that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the employer or indirectly by showing that the employer’s proffered explanation is unworthy of credence.
Id. at -, 101 S.Ct. at 1095, 67 L.Ed.2d at 217.
Had the hearing officer applied the case law of this jurisdiction and the rationale the Supreme Court later applied in Burdine, the officer and the district court well may have arrived at the same result.
We affirm the district court ruling that the complaint be dismissed.
AFFIRMED.
All Justices concur except McCORMICK, J., who dissents, and UHLENHOPP, J., who joins division I of the dissent and SCHULTZ, J., who takes no part.

=== CASE 9741273 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:36.57588+00 ===

McCORMICK, Justice
(dissenting).
I believe judicial review is governed by the Iowa Administrative Procedure Act. Because the employer did not allege a basis for reversal of the Commission’s decision under the IAPA, I would reverse the district court and remand for an order enforcing the agency’s decision. Even if the IAPA did not apply, I would reach the same conclusion as the Commission through de novo review.
I. Applicability of the IAPA. This case was submitted twice in district court. The first submission, to Vietor, J., resulted in an *734order of remand to the Commission for addition of employee time records to the evidence, clarification of a hearing officer finding, and review of the amended record. In its order of remand the court characterized the case as “a judicial review proceeding under the authority of Iowa Code section 17A.19.” Authority for the remand was found in section 17A.19(8) of the IAPA. After amendment of the record, the Commission affirmed its prior order, and the case was submitted again in district court.
It was only in the second submission, to Schultz, J., that the court held the IAPA was inapplicable and reviewed the evidence de novo. On the merits, the court found the Commission failed to sustain its burden of proof on the discrimination charge. As a result, the court reversed the Commission and dismissed Quigley’s complaint. In this appeal, the Commission contends the court erred in the second submission in holding that judicial review was not governed by the IAPA.
The question of the applicability of the IAPA is addressed in the statute itself. In relevant part, section 17A.23 provides:
The Iowa Administrative Procedure Act shall be construed broadly to effectuate its purposes. This chapter shall also be construed to apply to all agencies not expressly exempted by this chapter or by another statute specifically referring to this chapter by name; and except as to proceedings in process on July 1, 1975, this chapter shall be construed to apply to all covered agency proceedings and all agency action not expressly exempted by this chapter or by another statute specifically referring to this chapter by name.
(emphasis added). Under this provision, the present action was subject to the IAPA unless it was a “proceeding in process on July 1, 1975.”
Because the polestar in statutory interpretation is legislative intent, the issue is what the legislature intended these words in the IAPA to mean. No definition of proceeding in process is given. Thus section 4.1 is applicable:
In the construction of statutes, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the general assembly, or repugnant to the context of the statute: ...
2. Words and phrases. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the context and the approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases, and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law, shall be construed according to such meaning.
The word “proceeding” is not technical, nor has it acquired a peculiar meaning in law. See Eldridge City Utilities v. Iowa State Commerce Commission, 303 N.W.2d 167 (Iowa 1981). Our task, therefore, is to construe proceedings in process “according to the context and approved usage of the language.” The inquiry is not what “proceedings in process” might mean in some other context but what the term means as used in section 17A.23 of the IAPA. See Hanover Insurance Co. v. Alamo Motel, 264 N.W.2d 774, 778 (Iowa 1978) (“Issues of statutory construction cannot be resolved from isolated words taken out of context.”).
In section 17A.23 the legislature directed a broad construction of the statute to effectuate its purposes. The remedial and beneficial purposes of the IAPA are stated in section 17A.1(2). Independent of the mandated broad construction of the statute, we have recognized that “[a]n ameliorative change should be extended to every case in which it properly can apply.” State v. Wiese, 201 N.W.2d 734, 737 (Iowa 1972). Section 17A.23 makes the IAPA applicable in all cases, with tightly-drawn exceptions. Proceedings in process are among the exceptions. Because the exceptions must be construed narrowly, proceedings in process must be construed narrowly.
This issue was analyzed in Bonfield, The Iowa Administrative Procedure Act: Background, Construction, Applicability, Public Access to Agency Law, The Rulemaking Process, 60 Iowa Law Rev. 731, 758 (1975):
*735[W]here such an exemption from the IAPA is found to exist, it should be construed narrowly by the agencies and the courts. Exemptions from a comprehensive code like the IAPA implementing very important public policies should always be read narrowly in order to maximize the underlying general legislative purposes. This is particularly so where those basic purposes are to secure as much uniformity of minimum administrative procedure as is feasible, and as much fairness in all administrative proceedings as is feasible, consistent with other important conflicting values. In light of prior discussion, the section 23 exemption for “proceedings in process on [the IAPA’s] effective date,” which is July 1, 1975, should also be read narrowly. It should, therefore, exclude from the IAPA only those particular rulemaking proceedings actually commenced prior to that date by submission of the rule under current Chapter 17A to the Legislative Rules Review Committee and Attorney General, or actually commenced by taking the first prescribed formal step under another statute specifying additional or substitute rulemaking procedures for an agency. Similarly, that section 23 phrase should be read narrowly to cover only those particular contested case proceedings actually commenced prior to July 1, 1975, by filing the equivalent of the section 12(1) notice; and only those judicial review proceedings actually commenced prior to July 1, 1975, by the filing of notice adequate for that purpose under prior law.
(emphasis added). A “section 12(1) notice” is the written notice of hearing, whose delivery constitutes “commencement of the contested case proceeding.” § 17A.12(1) (emphasis added). I agree with Professor Bonfield’s analysis of legislative intent in section 17A.23.
We have recognized that the investigative stage which follows the filing of a complaint under chapter 601A is not a contested case. Estabrook v. Iowa Civil Rights Commission, 283 N.W.2d 306, 311 (Iowa 1979) (“The commission’s probable cause function is not a section 17A.12 contested case because the Constitution does not require an evidentiary hearing.”). In the present situation, the section 17A.12(1) notice was not served upon the employer until November 1977. Because the contested case proceeding did not commence until then, it was not “in process” on July 1,1975. Thus the IAPA governed the proceeding.
This conclusion is supported by the legislature’s indication in other provisions of chapter 17A as to what constitutes a “proceeding.” These provisions constitute part of the context in which section 17A.23 must be construed. See Osborne v. Edison, 211 N.W.2d 696, 697 (Iowa 1973). The term “proceeding” in the IAPA is used to embrace the formally-initiated rulemaking process and cases which have reached the adversary stage. In section 17A.1(2), the statute provides: “This chapter is meant to apply to all rulemaking and contested case proceedings and all suits for the judicial review of agency action that are not specifically excluded from this chapter or some portion thereof by its express terms or by the express terms of another chapter.” (emphasis added). In addition, one of the purposes of the act is “to increase the fairness of agencies in their conduct of contested case proceedings....” Id. (emphasis added). Furthermore the statute provides: “ ‘Contested case’ means a proceeding including but not restricted to ratemaking, price fixing, and licensing in which the legal rights, duties or privileges of a party are required by Constitution or statute to be determined by an agency after an opportunity for an evidentiary hearing.” § 17A.2(2) (emphasis added).
Because the IAPA was applicable to the contested case proceeding, the judicial review provisions of section 17A.19 were the exclusive means for obtaining review of the Commission’s order. See Jackson County Public Hospital v. Public Employment Relations Board, 280 N.W.2d 426, 428-29 (Iowa 1979); Salsbury Laboratories v. Iowa Department of Environmental Quality, 276 N.W.2d 830, 833-35 (Iowa 1979); Kerr v. Iowa Public Service Co., 274 N.W.2d 283, 287-88 (Iowa 1979).
*736This, of course, does not end the inquiry. We have recognized that the label attached to the district court petition is not determinative “if the instrument, its filing and other procedural steps met section 17A.19 requirements.” Neumeister v. City Development Board, 291 N.W.2d 11, 13 (Iowa 1980). Under Neumeister, the district court does not acquire jurisdiction of a petition for judicial review unless file-stamped copies of the petition are mailed by the petitioner to all parties named in the petition within ten days of the petition’s filing as required by section 17A.19. The record in this case shows copies of the petition were personally served rather than mailed. This in itself would require reversal of the district court. For present purposes, however, I will assume the district court had jurisdiction of the employer's petition.
The fact remains that the petition did not attack the Commission’s order on a ground specified in section 17A.19(8). See § 17A.19(4)(d). The employer merely sought a different result based on de novo review. The sufficiency of the evidence ground in section 17A.19(8)(f) was not urged. Therefore no basis was alleged upon which relief could be obtained under the IAPA. Furthermore, no claim can be made that any ground provided in section 17A.19(8) was tried by consent of the parties. Instead, the employer rested entirely on its contention it was entitled to a de novo trial pursuant to section 601A.10(6). I would conclude that the employer’s petition did not meet section 17A.19 requirements. Therefore I would not decide whether the substantial evidence test was satisfied in this case. Instead I would reverse the district court and remand for an order enforcing the Commission’s decision pursuant to its petition for such an order under section 601A.15, The Code 1975.
II. The result upon de novo review. Even if our review were de novo, I could not concur in the findings of the court. I would hold that the employer discriminated against Quigley on the basis of her sex in violation of section 601A.7(l)(a), The Code 1973.
It is difficult to discern what legal standard the district court or this court used in determining Quigley did not prove her case. This court has not delineated principles governing proof of an employment discrimination complaint under the Iowa Civil Rights Act. Because the court has given persuasive effect to federal cases interpreting comparable provisions of Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, I assume the court will adopt the federal principles governing proof of employment discrimination. See Cedar Rapids Community School District v. Parr, 227 N.W.2d 486, 492-93 (Iowa 1975); Wilson-Sinclair Co. v. Griggs, 211 N.W.2d 133, 139 (Iowa 1973).
Two types of employment discrimination cases have been recognized under the federal statute. One type is based on a theory of disparate treatment, and the other is based on a theory of disparate impact. Disparate treatment cases involve claims that the employer treats an employee or employees less favorably than others based on race, color, religion, sex or national origin. See International Brotherhood of Teamsters v. United States, 431 U.S. 324, 335 n.15, 97 S.Ct. 1843, 1954, 52 L.Ed.2d 396, 415 (1977). In contrast, disparate impact cases involve claims that facially neutral policies of the employer have a proscribed discriminatory effect. See Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U.S. 424, 430-31, 91 S.Ct. 849, 853, 28 L.Ed.2d 158, 164 (1971). Different principles govern these two types of cases. Because the present case is based on allegations of disparate treatment, only the principles which govern that kind of case are relevant here.
The elements of a prima facie case of disparate treatment are listed in McDonnell-Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S.Ct. 1817, 36 L.Ed.2d 668 (1973). To establish a prima facie case of racial discrimination in hiring, the Court said a complainant is required to offer evidence:
(i) that he belongs to a racial minority; (ii) that he applied and was qualified for a job for which the employer was seeking applicants; (iii) that, despite his qualifications, he was rejected; and (iv) that, af*737ter his rejection, the position remained open and the employer continued to seek applicants from persons of complainant’s qualifications.
Id. at 802, 93 S.Ct. at 1824, 36 L.Ed.2d at 677.
Thus, in order to make a prima facie case of disparate treatment in discharge, a complainant is required to present evidence (1) that he belongs to a group protected by the statute; (2) that he was qualified for the job from which he was discharged; (3) that he was terminated; and (4) that, after his termination, the employer hired a person not in complainant’s protected class or retained persons with comparable or lesser qualifications who are not in the protected group. See Lujan v. State of New Mexico Health and Social Services Department, 624 F.2d 968, 970 (10th Cir. 1980). Evidence supporting these elements creates an inference that the employer’s acts, “if otherwise unexplained, are more likely than not based on the consideration of impermissible factors.” Furnco Construction Co. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 577, 98 S.Ct. 2943, 2949-50, 57 L.Ed.2d 957, 967 (1978).
The burden of persuasion does not leave the complainant. However, a prima facie case creates a “presumption” of discrimination which, if believed, will require a finding of discrimination. Texas Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine, - U.S. -, 101 S.Ct. 1094, 67 L.Ed.2d 207 (1981). If the employer desires to dispel this presumption, he must produce evidence showing “some legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason” for the challenged action. McDonnell-Douglas Corp., 411 U.S. at 802, 93 S.Ct. at 1824, 36 L.Ed.2d at 668. Thus the distinction between burden of persuasion and burden of production becomes relevant. See McDonnell v. Town of Clarksville, 241 N.W.2d 904, 908 (Iowa 1976). We have no reason for finding that the hearing officer or Commission misunderstood this distinction in the present case. If Quigley established a credible prima facie case, it was incumbent on the employer to make a “showing,” that is, to produce evidence, to refute it:
This evidentiary relationship between the presumption created by a prima facie case and the consequential burden of production placed on the defendant is a traditional feature of the common law. “The word ‘presumption’ properly used refers only to a device for allocating the production burden” .... Usually, assessing the burden of production helps the judge determine whether the litigants have created an issue of fact to be decided by the jury. In a title VII case, the allocations of burdens and the creation of a presumption by the establishment of a prima facie case is intended progressively to sharpen the inquiry into the elusive factual question of intentional discrimination.
Burdine, - U.S. at -, n.8, 101 S.Ct. at 1094, 67 L.Ed.2d at 207. See also Ligons v. Bechtel Power Corp., 625 F.2d 771, 773 (8th Cir.), cert. denied, - U.S. -, 101 S.Ct. 400, 66 L.Ed.2d 246 (1980).
Once the employer has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its action, the complainant has the burden of persuading the trier of fact that the reason was merely a pretext for discrimination. See McDonnell-Douglas Corp., 411 U.S. at 805, 93 S.Ct. at 1826, 36 L.Ed.2d at 679. Pretext can be shown through cross-examination or additional evidence. Burdine, - U.S. at -, 101 S.Ct. at 1095, 67 L.Ed.2d at 207. This determination bears on the employer’s motive. The complainant has the burden of ultimately establishing that the prohibited conduct was a factor in the challenged action. Satz v. ITT Financial Corp., 619 F.2d 738, 746 (8th Cir. 1980).
Against this background, I believe a de novo review of the record in this case requires findings that Quigley met her burden to make a prima facie case, the employer articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for discharging her, and Quigley demonstrated that this reason was pretex-tual. As a result, I would hold that the Commission was correct in its sex discrimination finding and order.
Because sex discrimination is prohibited by the statute, Quigley was in a protected *738group. She adduced substantial evidence that she was qualified for and performing her job. She was discharged, and after her discharge her job was filled by a male. Moreover, she offered testimony that another part-time employee with similar qualifications was retained. Thus, she established a prima facie case of discrimination.
The employer articulated two reasons for the discharge. The first was an annual slackening of sales. The other was poor job performance and misconduct. Although the first reason is a questionable basis for discharge as opposed to layoff, the second reason is a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for discharge.
The fighting issue is whether, under the whole record, the reasons for Quigley’s discharge were pretextual. More particularly, the issue is whether she met her burden to prove her sex was a factor in her firing.
Quigley was selected and hired by Kenver Scott, the station manager, as a part-time station attendant. During her tenure, the station was staffed in the evening by Scott, Mark Fishel, the assistant manager, and two other part-time employees, Mike Lange and Mike Hay. Scott drew up the work schedule. Two part-time employees worked each evening, usually under Fishel. After 7 p. m. rush hour, one part-time employee would help clean up the station, including the restrooms, and then leave. The other part-time employee remained until closing.
The first articulated reason for Quigley’s discharge, a seasonal slackening of business, was admittedly advanced by Scott to avoid a confrontation with her in the presence of a customer. Moreover, it was a basis for layoff rather than discharge, and her position was filled approximately one and one-half months later.
As to the second reason, the record shows she was guilty of poor job performance and misconduct. The employer’s problem is that no basis exists for differentiating Quigley’s poor performance from that of the other station personnel. No formal workrules or disciplinary policies existed. All employees, including Scott and Fishel, engaged in misconduct which affected their performance. It included bickering and arguing, throwing each other over a railing behind the station, putting each other’s cigarettes out, and playing waiting games to stall going out on the drive to assist customers. The part-time employees all had to be reminded to perform their assigned duties. Moreover, neither Scott nor Fishel remembered complaining to Quigley concerning her job performance. Scott admitted he had no first-hand knowledge of her performance.
The events which actually led to Quig-ley’s discharge do not seem to be in dispute. Scott was concerned about the constant bickering and arguing. Fishel, an active participant in those events, recommended Quigley be fired. Without further inquiry, Scott prepared a work schedule omitting her. She happened to see the schedule. When she asked Scott about it in the presence of a customer, he told her she was being laid off because of slow sales. Later he admitted he was firing her, alleging poor job performance. Both Scott and Fishel acknowledged that the arguing and bickering may have resulted from friction based on the male employees’ reluctance to work with a female. Neither had any reason to believe Quigley initiated the arguments.
Despite a record which shows Quigley’s job performance and conduct could not be differentiated from that of other employees, she was singled out for discharge. Even though misconduct is a proper basis for discharge, a discharge for misconduct cannot be discriminatory. McDonald v. Santa Fe Transportation Co., 427 U.S. 273, 283, 96 S.Ct. 2574, 2580, 49 L.Ed.2d 493, 502 (1976) (“The Act prohibits all ... discrimination in employment, without exception for any group of particular employees, and while crime or other misconduct may be a legitimate basis for discharge, it is hardly one for ... discrimination.”). Discipline must be meted out equally to employees who engage in misconduct. Worthy v. United States Steel Corp., 616 F.2d 698, 702-03 (3d Cir. 1980).
Principles governing proof of discrimination are based on recognition that discrimi*739natory motive will rarely be boldly announced or readily apparent. See Wilson-Sinclair Co., 211 N.W.2d at 140. Based upon the circumstances surrounding Quig-ley’s discharge, Scott’s failure to investigate her performance, and the absence of any disciplinary action against the other employees engaging in similar conduct, I would find Quigley proved that her sex was a factor in the employer’s singling her out for discharge.
UHLENHOPP, J., joins division I of this dissent.

=== CASE 9741274 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:37.471879+00 ===

White, J.
Plaintiff, Lynette Lum, the natural mother of Ruby Nohelani Lum, a child born out of wedlock on November 21, 1979, brought an action in habeas corpus in the District Court for Box Butte County, Nebraska, alleging that a relinquishment signed January 15, 1980, in favor of Dennis R. and Virginia M. Mattley, *790a married couple, was void because it was obtained by threats, coercion, and fraud and that the best interests of the child required that the plaintiff mother regain custody. Dennis R. and Virginia M. Mattley answered, admitting custody and denying all other allegations of the petition. The trial court found for the defendants. Plaintiff appeals.
Plaintiff assigns two errors: (1) That the trial court erred in determining that, while a natural mother may revoke her relinquishment and consent to adoption at any time prior to the adoption, the right is subject to the court’s determination that the return of the custody to the natural mother is in the best interests of the child; and (2) That the trial court erred in not holding that a natural mother who has relinquished custody is entitled to return of the child’s custody before adoption absent an affirmative finding of unfitness.
We note the absence of a bill of exceptions. Under our cases, where there is no bill of exceptions the court is limited to a sole question: whether the pleadings support the judgment of the trial court. Pauley v. Scheer, 168 Neb. 343, 95 N.W.2d 672 (1959); Bednar v. Bednar, 146 Neb. 726, 21 N.W.2d 438 (1946).
The trial court in its findings held that the relinquishment was voluntary and that plaintiff was neither coerced nor subjected to duress. The plaintiff does not question those findings here and they will not be further discussed.
Implicit in the question of whether the pleadings support the findings of the court is the determination of the extent of the right, if any, of a parent, after a valid relinquishment to a private person has been executed and custody delivered, to revoke the relinquishment and compel the delivery of the child.
The District Court here found that the relinquishment signed by plaintiff was made knowingly, intelligently, and voluntarily, without threats, coercion, fraud, or duress. In addition, the relinquish*791ment form appears to be valid on its face. Thus, we find that the relinquishment of parental rights and consent to adoption form signed by plaintiff is valid.
Under Nebraska law, our focus now shifts to the best interests of the child in determining the right to custody. The rule in Nebraska is that a natural parent “can, by agreement, surrender the custody of his infant children to another, so as to make the custody of that other legal, and he cannot thereafter repudiate such agreement and retain the custody of the children, unless he can show a clear breach of the agreement, or an abuse of the child, or that the best interest of the child requires it.” State v. Nebraska Children’s Home Society, 94 Neb. 255, 263, 143 N.W. 203, 206 (1913). In the wake of a valid relinquishment, then, it is incumbent upon the petitioner to show that the best interests of the child require that it be returned to her custody.
We are convinced that this is the proper rule to follow in cases such as the present one. In Contreras v. Alsidez, 200 Neb. 773, 775, 265 N.W.2d 452, 453 (1978), a habeas corpus action in which there had been no voluntary relinquishment of parental rights, we noted that: “‘When a controversy arises as to the custody of a minor child between a parent and a third person, the custody of the child is to be determined by the best interests of the child with due regard for the superior rights, as between the parties, of a fit, proper, and suitable parent.’”
However, by the terms of the valid relinquishment in the present case, petitioner has voluntarily terminated her own parental rights, including “the superior rights ... of a fit, proper, and suitable parent.” Thus, petitioner’s parental rights are no longer in issue here and the parties now stand on an equal footing with respect to determining custody. The rule of State v. Nebraska Children’s Home Society, supra, properly shifts our focus now to the best interests of the child. The party demanding that custody be *792changed naturally must bear the burden of affirmatively demonstrating that “the best interests of the child require” that she regain custody.
The rule’s focus on the child’s best interests recognizes that it is the child who will bear the brunt of the impact of revoking a valid relinquishment, by being uprooted and shifted from home to home. To focus instead upon any “right” of a relinquishing parent to change her mind would ignore the fact that parental rights are no longer an issue after a valid relinquishment and would further abrogate our responsibility to the best interests of the child. Even parental rights which are fully intact are not inalienable because of the “paramount interest” of society in the protection of the child’s best interests. State v. Duran, 204 Neb. 546, 554, 283 N.W.2d 382, 387 (1979). Where, as here, parental rights are no longer at issue, the best interests of the child can be our only concern in determination of custody. Thus, the trial court was correct in requiring that petitioner make an affirmative showing that the child’s best interests require her return to petitioner, and the assignments of error are without merit.
The trial court made detailed findings with respect to the best interests of the child requiring custody to remain with the prospective adoptive parents. In the absence of a bill of exceptions, those findings must be taken as correct.
The determination by the District Court in this habeas corpus case does not in any fashion control the proper exercise of the jurisdiction of the county court in the adoption proceeding itself.
The judgment of the District Court in this habeas corpus action is affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9741275 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:37.476389+00 ===

Krivosha, C.J.,
dissenting.
I find that I must dissent from the majority in this case. We have today decided the case of Kellie v. *793Lutheran Family & Social Services, ante p. 767, 305 N.W.2d 874 (1981). In the Kellie case we held that if the adoption involved a licensed agency a natural parent could revoke an earlier executed relinquishment of her child if done before the adopting agency had accepted full responsibility for the child as required by statute. In doing so, we said at 772, 305 N.W.2d at 877: “Basic principles of offer and acceptance, as well as the statute, dictate that result.”
In the instant case, we have now, in effect, held that while what we said in Kellie may be true with regard to a licensed agency, the situation with regard to a private placement is otherwise. I think the distinction is not valid.
The obvious intent of the statute with regard to the licensed agency is to ensure that the licensed agency accepts'the responsibility of caring for the child once the child’s custody is taken by the agency. Even if the agency is unable to find an appropriate home and adoptive parents for the child, it will remain responsible for the child.
Why do we require something less when dealing with a private adoption? If, as the majority in Kellie has suggested, principles of contract such as “offer and acceptance” apply, then why should we not also impose principles of contract such as “mutuality”? Under the majority view in this case, if the proposed adoptive parents change their minds prior to the time that the county court enters an order approving the adoption, the proposed parents incur no liability or responsibility and, at their option, may either return the child to the natural parent or turn the child over to the state as a child without parent or home. How can the natural parent, on the one hand, be bound while the adoptive parent, on the other, is without any binding obligation? I would hold that the natural parent in a private placement has the right to withdraw the relinquishment until the county court has approved the adoption and made the adop*794tive parents responsible for the child. I am not unmindful of the fact that this would introduce a measure of uncertainty into the private placement as opposed to the certainty of the licensed agency. That, in and of itself, may not be such a bad result for either the natural parents who are giving up their child or the child itself, both of whom should be assured that under any circumstance the person or entity selected by the natural parents will remain legally responsible for the child until another person or entity is approved by the county court. I would have found for the appellant and held that the attempt to revoke the relinquishment was effective.

=== CASE 2226755 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:18.736904+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 904 (1981)
209 Neb. 41
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Larry D. EBBERSON, Appellant.
No. 43684.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
May 22, 1981.
*905 James S. Jansen, Omaha, for appellant.
Paul L. Douglas, Atty. Gen. and G. Roderic Anderson, Asst. Atty. Gen., for appellee.
*906 Heard before KRIVOSHA, C. J., and BOSLAUGH, McCOWN, CLINTON, BRODKEY, WHITE, and HASTINGS, JJ.
McCOWN, Justice.
The defendant was found guilty by a jury of robbery and use of a firearm in the commission of a felony. He was sentenced to 10 to 15 years' imprisonment on the robbery count and 5 to 10 years' imprisonment on the firearm count, the sentences to be served consecutively.
On the morning of February 1, 1980, at approximately 12:40 a.m., two black males entered a Kwik Shop at 50th and Grover Streets in Omaha, Nebraska. One of the men pointed a shotgun at an employee and ordered him to open the cash register. The man carrying the gun was described by the employee as about 5 feet tall, wearing a green jacket, black gloves, and a hat. The other man was described as approximately 5 feet 6 inches tall, also wearing a hat. The taller of the two men emptied the cash register. The gunman then ordered the employee to open the safe and the tall man took the contents of the safe, which included a green moneybag with a lock, a blue moneybag, and some rolls of change. The robbers left the store and ran north. The employee immediately called the police.
At approximately the same time two police officers in a cruiser were just leaving Interstate 80 at the 42nd Street exit. At that point Interstate 80 runs generally east and west. Grover Street is also an east-west street, a very short distance to the north of Interstate 80 in that area. The officers received a broadcast over police radio that a robbery had just occurred at the Kwik Shop at 50th and Grover Streets. The broadcast described the robbers as two small black males armed with a shotgun. The officers immediately drove north on 42nd Street to the intersection of 42nd and Grover Streets, which was 8 blocks east of the Kwik Shop, and parked their cruiser in a lot on the northwest corner of that intersection. Forty-second Street is the first north-south arterial street east of 50th Street which has an entrance to Interstate 80.
Within a minute after the officers parked the cruiser, they observed an automobile approaching the intersection from the west on Grover Street. The car stopped at the traffic signal at the intersection of 42nd and Grover Streets. The car was under a street light approximately 30 feet from the officers. The windows of the car were steamed up, except that the driver's window was rolled down and the passenger window in the front seat was covered by a plastic trash bag. The officers observed two black males in the front seat of the automobile and the driver appeared to be short. The car turned north on 42nd Street and the officers followed it and stopped the car.
The officers asked the driver to produce his driver's license and registration. One of the officers noticed a movement in the rear seat, turned on his flashlight, and observed two individuals and a green coat which was bundled up on the back seat. He returned to the cruiser to request more information over the radio as to the description of the suspects, and was advised that one of the suspects had been wearing a khaki or green-colored jacket and black gloves. With this information the officers asked the occupants to get out of the car. Another police officer had arrived on the scene by that time and the officers found a green army field jacket and a pair of black gloves on the back seat. They also found a shotgun, a green and a blue moneybag, and some rolls of change on the floor. The defendant and the other suspects were placed under arrest. The evidence at trial established that the amount taken in the robbery was approximately $1,300 and the amount seized from the car was almost exactly the same amount.
The employee of the Kwik Shop was unable to identify the defendant at trial, but one of the other suspects testified as a witness for the State and testified that he and the defendant were the two robbers.
The jury found the defendant guilty on both counts and he was sentenced to 10 to 15 years' imprisonment for robbery and 5 to *907 10 years' imprisonment for use of a firearm in the commission of a felony, the sentences to be served consecutively.
The defendant's principal contention on appeal is that the District Court erred in failing to sustain the defendant's motion to suppress the physical evidence obtained from the automobile. The defendant asserts that the police officers had no adequate cause to make the initial investigative stop of the automobile. The argument is that because there was no evidence that the automobile was violating any traffic regulations, there was, therefore, no objective manifestation that the defendant had been engaged in any criminal activity and the investigative stop of the automobile was unjustified. The assignment of error is predicated on the investigative stop and not on the search.
Police officers have statutory authority to "stop any person in a public place whom he reasonably suspects of committing, who has committed, or who is about to commit a crime ...." Neb.Rev.Stat. § 29-829 (Reissue 1979).
This court has essentially interpreted the scope of the statute to be coextensive with the requirements of the fourth amendment. In State v. Booth, 202 Neb. 692, 276 N.W.2d 673 (1979), we held that a police officer may in appropriate circumstances and in an appropriate manner approach a person for the purpose of investigating possible criminal behavior even though there is no probable cause to make an arrest.
The test of whether an investigative stop is justified is whether the police officer has a reasonable suspicion founded upon articulable facts which indicate that criminal activity has occurred or is occurring and that the suspect may be involved. See State v. Anderson, 204 Neb. 186, 281 N.W.2d 743 (1979).
The U.S. Supreme Court has addressed the standards that must be met in an investigatory stop to satisfy the requirements of the fourth amendment in United States v. Cortez, ___ U.S. ___, 101 S. Ct. 690, 66 L. Ed. 2d 621 (1981). The court held that an investigatory stop must be justified by objective manifestation that the person stopped is, has been, or is about to be engaged in criminal activity. In determining what cause is sufficient to authorize police to stop a person, the totality of the circumstances the whole picturemust be taken into account.
Police officers must have a particularized and objective basis for suspecting the person stopped of criminal activity. The assessment of the totality of circumstances includes all of the objective observations and considerations, as well as the suspicion drawn by a trained and experienced police officer by inference and deduction that the individual stopped is or has been or is about to be engaged in criminal behavior. See, Brown v. Texas, 443 U.S. 47, 99 S. Ct. 2637, 61 L. Ed. 2d 357 (1979); Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 99 S. Ct. 1391, 59 L. Ed. 2d 660 (1979).
In the case at bar, the armed robbery was reported to the police immediately after it occurred and the police officers involved were only a short distance away on the first major north-south arterial east of the robbery scene. Their observation point was 8 blocks from the robbery scene and they knew that Grover Street was one of the few thoroughfares to the east from the robbery site. At that time of night there was little traffic on Grover Street. The automobile approached from the direction of the robbery site within minutes after the robbery, and there were two black males in the front seat and the driver appeared to be short. In the totality of the circumstances these experienced police officers knew that criminal activity had occurred and had a reasonable suspicion, founded upon articulable facts, to conclude that the persons in the automobile might be involved in that activity. The District Court, at the hearing on the motion to suppress, reached that conclusion on the facts and that determination was not clearly erroneous.
The defendant also contends that the trial court erred in overruling defendant's motion for a mistrial. During cross-examination *908 of the employee of the Kwik Shop, the defendant's counsel asked him whether or not one of the investigating officers had been in the store and chatted with the employee about the case. The employee responded: "No. He just said that they got a really good case against them."
An objection was interposed and a motion for mistrial was made. The objection was sustained and the jury was instructed to disregard the answer given, and the motion for mistrial was overruled. The answer was invited by defendant's counsel, and even if it had been wholly unresponsive it was clearly not so prejudicial as to require a new trial. Ordinarily, when an objection to improper evidence is sustained and the jury is instructed to disregard it, such an instruction is deemed sufficient to prevent prejudice. See State v. Dittrich, 191 Neb. 475, 215 N.W.2d 637 (1974).
Defendant's remaining assignments of error are without merit.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 9741277 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:40.867157+00 ===

Beasley, J.
(concurring). I concur in the result. People v McClain, 402 Mich 824; 260 NW2d 287 (1977), rev’g 81 Mich App 84; 264 NW2d 1 (1977), and which appears to reverse People v Bencheck, 360 Mich 430; 104 NW2d 191 (1960), is another one-sentence order included under the section entitled "Actions on Applications for Leave to Appeal from the Court of Appeals”.
Where, as here, and as in People v Van Dorsten, 409 Mich 942 (1980), rev’g 96 Mich App 356; 292 NW2d 134 (1979), these brief orders appear to reverse long established precedent, I do not believe the Supreme Court intends that we treat them as precedent. I would anticipate that where the Supreme Court desires to change the direction of the law, it will do so in a full opinion reciting reasons.
For this reason, I join with the majority and disregard McClain, supra.1_
Other panels of this Court have attempted to reconcile the contrary results in People v Bencheck, supra, and People v McClain, supra. See, People v Hatcher, 83 Mich App 307; 268 NW2d 389 (1978), People v Price, 85 Mich App 57; 270 NW2d 707 (1978), People v Bentley, 94 Mich App 19; 287 NW2d 355 (1979).

=== CASE 9741278 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:44.103944+00 ===

DUNN, Justice.
This is an appeal by Neal D. Johansen (appellant) from an order which modified a judgment of divorce to provide for child support. We affirm.
Ellen A. Johansen (appellee) and appellant were granted a divorce on October 6,' 1978, by way of a judgment entered in the Family Division of County Court, Murray County, Minnesota. Appellee was given custody of their one minor child, but the judgment left open the question of child support for future court proceedings. Paragraph XII of the Minnesota judgment provides:
That respondent [Ellen A. Johansen] is capable of and has the means to adequately provide for the support of the minor son, the custody of whom has been awarded to respondent, and accordingly, the award of support is not presently required; however, at any time the respondent shall find herself in need of assistance in this regard, she may apply to this Court or any Court of Competent jurisdiction for relief in the form of an amended decree with respect to child support.
Soon thereafter, appellee and child moved to Vermillion, South Dakota, where she enrolled in the University of South Dakota. Appellant moved to Gillette, Wyoming, where he is employed as a grocery store manager.
By way of an affidavit and motion filed in a South Dakota circuit court in October of 1979, appellee sought implementation of the Minnesota judgment which allowed for a future determination of child support. Appellant was personally served in Gillette with an order to show cause. He does not dispute the validity of such service. A hearing on the order to show cause was held in Vermillion on November 16, 1979. Appellant did not personally appear, but his counsel made a special appearance on his behalf and moved to dismiss the action for lack of personal jurisdiction. The circuit court dismissed appellant’s motion, made findings of fact and conclusions of law, and entered an order which modified the Minne*385sota judgment to provide for child support of $300 per month.
The sole issue raised on appeal is whether a South Dakota court has jurisdiction over a nonresident so that it can modify a foreign judgment of divorce to provide for child support where the only contact the nonresident has with South Dakota is that it is the domicile of the child. We hold that the South Dakota court does have such jurisdiction.
Our holding, as was that of the circuit court, is grounded upon SDCL 15-7-2(7), which states:
Any person is subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of this state as to any cause of action arising from the doing ... of any of the following acts:
(7) Failure to support a minor child residing in South Dakotaf.]
Appellant advances a circular argument which leaves one stranded in a classic “Catch 22.”1 Appellant urges that before the South Dakota courts may exert jurisdiction over him, SDCL 15-7-2(7) requires that there be a failure to support his minor child. The Minnesota court, however, did not impose a duty to furnish child support and actually found that there was no need for child support at that time. Therefore, appellant argues that he has not failed to support his child unless the Minnesota judgment is modified. But for a South Dakota court to modify that judgment it must have jurisdiction over appellant. This returns us to our starting point that a failure to support is needed for jurisdiction and that failure can only arise if the Minnesota judgment is modified, which cannot be done without jurisdiction. Admittedly, appellant’s argument is ingenious and interesting; however, it is not compelling.
Although we find no specific statutory authority imposing a duty of support upon this appellant,2 nor is there a court order for support (other than the one herein appealed from), “[these are] not exclusive; common law duties exist.” Kelley v. Iowa Department of Social Services, 197 N.W.2d 192, 199 (Iowa 1972), appeal dismissed 409 U.S. 813, 93 S.Ct. 170, 34 L.Ed.2d 69 (1972). Statutes “granting courts the right to provide for child support payments, [do] not abrogate the common law duty on the part of either parent to support [his] children.” Ex Parte Holloway, 490 S.W.2d 624, 628 (Tex.1973). See Lutz v. Lutz, 508 S.W.2d 955 (Tex.1974). It should be noted that the judgment here did not abrogate appellant’s common-law duty to pay child support. It simply found that “support is not presently required,” leaving the appellee free to apply for relief from any court of competent jurisdiction when needed.
We feel that a minor child has an inherent right to support from its natural parents. Ebel v. Brown, 70 Mich.App. 705, 246 N.W.2d 379 (1976).
[A] father’s duty to support his minor children rests upon not only moral law but legally upon the voluntary status of parenthood which the father has assumed. A divorce terminates only the relationship of husband and wife, and does not affect in any manner the parental relations or duties.
Krause v. Krause, 58 Wis.2d 499, 507, 206 N.W.2d 589, 594 (1973) (footnote omitted). See Niesen v. Niesen, 38 Wis.2d 599, 157 *386N.W.2d 660 (1968). This court, in equally eloquent terms, has stated:
At common law the principal duties of parents to their children consisted of their maintenance, protection and education, imposed by principles of natural law and affection laid on them by nature herself by their bringing them into the world[.]
State v. Zobel, 81 S.D. 260, 269, 134 N.W.2d 101, 106 (1965). See Matthews v. Matthews, 71 S.D. 115, 22 N.W.2d 27 (1946). The number of jurisdictions recognizing this common-law obligation of support are legion. See Pleasant v. Washington Sand & Gravel Co., 262 F.2d 471 (C.A.D.C.1958); Southern California Edison Co. v. Industrial Acc. Com’n, 92 Cal.App. 355, 268 P. 415 (1928); Vicino v. Vicino, 30 Conn.Sup. 49, 298 A.2d 241 (1972); Nielsen v. Nielsen, 93 Idaho 419, 462 P.2d 512 (1969); Kelley v. Iowa Department of Social Services, supra; Kinsella v. Kinsella, 181 N.W.2d 764 (N.D.1970); Lynch v. Armbruster, 7 Ohio App.2d 1, 218 N.E.2d 624 (1966); Lutz v. Lutz, supra; In re Custody of Miller, 86 Wash.2d 712, 548 P.2d 542 (1976); Lizotte v. Lizotte, 15 Wash.App. 622, 551 P.2d 137 (1976). See generally S. L. W. v. Alaska Workmen’s Compensation Board, 490 P.2d 42 (Alaska 1971). Consequently, we hold that a common-law duty to support one’s minor child exists which is separate and distinct from any statutory obligation or divorce decree.
Even though we hold that appellant is obligated to support his minor child, we still must address the merits of the jurisdictional question. In Ventling v. Kraft, 83 S.D. 465, 471, 161 N.W.2d 29, 32 (1968) (footnotes omitted), we set forth the following oft-repeated jurisdictional formula:
Some courts in the consideration of the matter and in passing on similarly worded statutes have said three rules can be drawn from a combined reading of the foregoing cases against which future litigation of a like nature may be tested. These rules are: (1) The nonresident defendant must purposefully do some act or consummate some transaction in the forum state. ... (2) The cause of action must be one which arises out of, or results from, the activities of the defendant within the forum.... (3) The assumption of jurisdiction by the forum state must not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice. In the determination of the latter, consideration should be given to the quality, nature and extent of the activity in the forum state, the relative convenience of the parties, the benefits and protection of the laws of the forum state afforded to the respective parties, and the basic equities of the situation.
All of these elements must be satisfied in order to exercise personal jurisdiction over appellant.
In Miller, supra, the Supreme Court of Washington engaged in a similar analysis of this jurisdictional formula. Therein, the mother of four minor children sought an order to grant her child support and permanent custody of the children. The father was a nonresident. The trial court held that it lacked personal jurisdiction over the father.
On appeal, the Washington Supreme Court applied the same jurisdictional factors as we must.3 Therein, they stated:
The first requirement is met because the father purposefully has failed to support his children since he delivered them to their mother in December 1974. The failure of a nonresident to perform his duty or obligation as imposed by law to support his natural children, whether they be domiciled or merely resident in this state, constitutes a tortious act as that term is contemplated by RCW 4.28.-185(l)(b).
*387The next issue, one of general fairness, concerns the second element of [the] jurisdictional formula. It requires that the cause of action arise from or be connected with the ... act. . . .
In determining whether the respondent is accorded the “fair play and substantial justice” requirement of the . . . jurisdictional formula, this must be considered in context with and cannot be divorced from the nature of the underlying controversy which evoked this litigation. One also must keep in mind that the welfare of the children is the paramount concern, coupled with the secondary interests of the parents and the state in the resolution of this issue.
Miller, 86 Wash.2d at 719, 548 P.2d at 547 (emphasis in original).
As in Miller, the first element of the jurisdictional formula has been fulfilled. That element requires that appellant purposefully do some act in South Dakota. Here, appellant has purposefully failed to support his minor child who resides in South Dakota. Unlike the Washington Court, our route to jurisdiction is shortened by our long-arm statute, which specifically lists nonsupport as grounds for jurisdiction; thus, we need not engage in the analysis of tort concepts as was done in Miller.
The second element of the jurisdictional formula has also been complied with. That element requires that the cause of action arise from appellant’s activities within the forum state. This presents little problem because the cause of action is a direct result of appellant’s purposeful activity within the state, to-wit: nonsupport of his child.
Finally, the requirement of fair play and substantial justice militates against denial .of jurisdiction. Miller states that the welfare of the child is the paramount concern. Public policy demands that this child receive its inherent right of support. Moreover, denial of jurisdiction would place an onerous burden upon appellee. She would be required, at great expense and inconvenience, to return to Minnesota or proceed to Wyoming to seek support for this child. Were it not for the public policy requiring support of the child, this might be a very close question; however, the presence of such public policy, which the legislature recognized as sufficient to support jurisdiction in SDCL 15-7-2(7), tips the scales of fair play and substantial justice decidedly in favor of sustaining jurisdiction.
Since we hold that appellant had a common-law duty to support his children separate and distinct from the Minnesota judgment of divorce, this duty was sufficient to bring appellant within purview of the long-arm statute. Thus, we affirm the circuit court’s order that provides for child support.
Accordingly, the order appealed from is affirmed.
MORGAN and HENDERSON, JJ., concur.
WOLLMAN, C. J., and FOSHEIM, J., dissent.
. Appellant’s argument is amazingly similar to the circular argument in J. Heller’s “Catch-22” at 45-46 (1955), which gives rise to the phrase:
... Catch-22, ... specified that a concern for one’s own safety in the face of dangers that were real and immediate was the process of a rational mind. [A pilot who] was crazy ... could be grounded. All he had to do was ask; and as soon as he did, he would no longer be crazy and would have to fly more missions. [A pilot] would be crazy to fly more missions and sane if he didn’t, but if he was sane he had to fly them. If he flew them he was crazy and didn’t have to; but if he didn’t want to he was sane and had to....
. Since this is not a divorce action in its current posture, we must look for statutory authority other than that contained in SDCL ch. 25-4. SDCL 25-7-7 provides that: “The parent entitled to the custody of a child must give it support .... ” This would seem to indicate that appellee would have the primary duty of support because she has custody of the child.
. The jurisdictional formula stated in Ventling v. Kraft, 83 S.D. 465, 161 N.W.2d 29 (1968), as shown at 83 S.D. 471, 161 N.W.2d 32 (n. 9), is at least partially based upon the Washington cases of Tyee Const. Co. v. Dulien Steel Products, Inc. of Wash., 62 Wash.2d 106, 381 P.2d 245; and Callahan v. Keystone Fireworks Manufacturing Co., 72 Wash.2d 823, 435 P.2d 626 (1967). We find comfort in the fact that in In re Custody of Miller, 86 Wash.2d 712, 548 P.2d 542 (1976), the Washington Court applies the Tyee jurisdictional formula in a case similar to ours and reaches the same conclusion as we reach herein.

=== CASE 9741280 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:44.370241+00 ===

*895OPINION OF THE COURT
Memorandum.
The order of the Appellate Division should be affirmed, with costs.
The infant plaintiff, injured on July 13, 1988 by an oncoming car while riding his bicycle on Palmer Road in the Town of Schodack, brought suit against the Town, claiming negligent failure to maintain the roadside vegetation which had allegedly obscured the driver’s view of plaintiff. The Town pleaded as an affirmative defense that plaintiff had failed to comply with Town Law § 65-a, which requires as a condition precedent to suit that the Town had written or constructive notice of the allegedly dangerous condition prior to the accident. Plaintiff demonstrated at trial that the Town had constructive notice of the dangerous condition on Palmer Road as a result of two recent inspections.
After both parties had rested, counsel for the Town — himself having just discovered Schodack Town Code § 154-1 — requested that the trial court take judicial notice of that local law, which requires, in actions against the Town, that written notice of the dangerous condition be received prior to the accident. The court reserved decision on defendant’s motion to dismiss the complaint for failure to comply with the local law (see, CPLR 4401) and charged the jury that the Town would be liable if it had either actual or constructive notice of the defective condition. The jury returned a verdict for plaintiff, which the court set aside in granting defendant’s motion to dismiss on the ground that plaintiff had not satisfied the written notice requirement of the local law. The Appellate Division reversed and reinstated the verdict, holding that the Town should not be permitted to rely on the local law.
In the limited circumstances presented, we agree with the Appellate Division that plaintiff’s verdict should be reinstated. While the Town insists that it was not required to assert the local law notice requirement, a quite different scenario unfolded here precisely because of the action the Town did take. In its answer the Town pleaded Town Law § 65-a as an affirmative defense, and it stood by silently for more than two years as plaintiff successfully countered the defense by establishing constructive notice before the jury. We find persuasive plaintiff’s argument that the Town’s failure to assert its own local law in the circumstances presented deprived plaintiff of the opportunity to demonstrate that the Town had received *896written notice of the condition or to challenge the procedural regularity of the local law.*
Addressing the dissent, CPLR 4511 (a) is not determinative here. The purpose of that statute is to relieve parties of the burden of proving the substance of the enumerated laws (see, Alexander, Practice Commentaries, McKinney’s Cons Laws of NY, Book 7B, CPLR 4511, at 22; Legislative Studies and Reports, McKinney’s Cons Laws of NY, Book 7B, CPLR 4511, at 24; see also, Pfleuger v Pfleuger, 304 NY 148, 152). It does not obligate trial courts to take judicial notice of laws without regard to other considerations.
Moreover, Sega v State of New York (60 NY2d 183) is inapposite. In Sega, plaintiff did "not argue that she could have negatived the defense posed by [the newly raised statute] through the presentation of other evidence” (Sega, 60 NY2d, at 193). Plaintiff here asserts that he could have negatived the defense.

=== CASE 9741281 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:44.374197+00 ===

Simons, J.
(dissenting). At the time of this accident, the Town of Schodack, as permitted by section 65-a of the Town Law, had enacted legislation providing that no action could be maintained against the Town for personal injuries or damages sustained as the result of an unsafe or defective highway unless the Town had received written notice of the defect prior to the accident (see, Schodack Town Code § 154-1). Under settled law, such notice was a condition precedent to a successful action: Plaintiff was necessarily required to discover the notice requirement before commencing the action and then plead and prove compliance (see, Fullerton v City of Schenectady, 285 App Div 545, affd 309 NY 701). The Town, on the other hand, had no burden on the issue, and any reference to notice in its answer was gratuitous (see, Cipriano v City of New York, 96 AD2d 817).
Plaintiff concededly failed to discover the local law before instituting this action, and failed to plead and prove that the Town had prior written notice. Nonetheless, the majority has sustained a judgment entered in plaintiff’s favor. It contends that the "Town’s failure to assert its own local law in the circumstances presented deprived plaintiff of the opportunity to demonstrate that the Town had received written notice of the condition or to challenge the procedural regularity of the local law.” (Majority mem, at 895-896.) It cites not a single legal authority to support its premise that the Town’s conduct here provides a basis for sustaining plaintiff’s judgment. There are a number of reasons why it does not.
First, plaintiff’s duty to research the applicable notice law and to ascertain that proper notice had been given to the Town should have been met by plaintiff before the commence-*897merit of legal action. Thus, any "failure” by the Town to assert its local law in its answer, after legal action had commenced, had no bearing on what plaintiff did or failed to do to prepare his case. The Town certainly did not "deprive” plaintiff of the opportunity to do the necessary legal research. Nor can it be seriously suggested that the Town "induced” plaintiff to forgo his legal research. The research in question should have been completed before litigation was commenced, not after the Town had answered the complaint.
Second, the majority’s rationale is based on the erroneous idea that the Town failed in a duty to assert its own local law. But the Town had no obligation to plead the notice requirement in its pleadings or to shoulder the burden of proving a lack of legally required notice (see, Cipriano v City of New York, 96 AD2d, at 817, 818, supra). Manifestly, the Town’s legal counsel had no duty to research the law for plaintiff or assist him in proving the case against his client, and plaintiff could not justifiably rely on the Town to do so.
Nor is it relevant that defendant moved to dismiss at the end of the case after asking the trial court to take judicial notice of the applicable local law. The motion was manifestly timely and appropriate (cf., Fahey v County of Ontario, 44 NY2d 934).
In the final analysis, this appeal raises nothing more than a simple question of judicial notice: Can a court take judicial notice of a local law after the parties have completed their evidence, as the Town requested the court to do here? Under CPLR 4511 (a), "Every court shall take judicial notice without request * * * of all local laws and county acts” (see also, Municipal Home Rule Law § 52). Judicial notice may be taken at any point in the litigation. Indeed, we have held that judicial notice of a law may be taken not only after the close of the evidence, as was done here, but even after judgment, during appellate review, and we did so notwithstanding the fact that the losing party never had notice at trial that the statute was to be invoked to defeat the claim (see, Sega v State of New York, 60 NY2d 183, 190, n 2, 192). The majority today denies to this trial court the power that it and "every court” is required to exercise as a matter of statutory law.
In sum, plaintiff had the responsibility to prepare and prove his cause of action and he failed to do so because his investigation of the Town’s local laws was either incomplete or inadequate. While that failure may be understandable, plaintiff *898cannot rely on the Town’s conduct to excuse it. Nonetheless, the majority has sustained his judgment without offering any legally cognizable reason for ignoring his failure to prove his case.
Accordingly, I dissent and vote to dismiss the complaint.
Chief Judge Kaye and Judges Titone, Bellacosa and Ciparick concur; Judge Simons dissents and votes to reverse in an opinion in which Judge Smith concurs; Judge Levine taking no part.
Order affirmed, with costs, in a memorandum.

=== CASE 9741282 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:45.892065+00 ===

JUSTICE RAKOWSKI delivered the opinion of the court: This appeal arises from an accident sustained by Ofelia Gonzalez (claimant) on July 5, 1988. The claimant filed an application for adjustment of claim pursuant to the Workers’ Compensation Act (Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 48, par. 138.1 et seq. (now codified, as amended, at 820 ILCS 305/1 et seq. (West 1992))) against Textile Maintenance (employer). Farmers Insurance Group (Farmers) appeared at the arbitration hearing as an additional respondent and disputed coverage for the claimant’s July 5, 1988, accident, asserting that there had been effective cancellation of the policy on June 7, 1988. In addition to the coverage dispute, the employer argued that the Industrial Commission (Commission) did not have jurisdiction to interpret its insurance policy with a third party. The Commission affirmed the arbitrator’s finding on the coverage issue and also concluded that it was authorized by the Act to interpret insurance policies between the employer and a third party. On administrative review, the circuit court confirmed the decision of the Commission. The issues on appeal are: (1) whether the Commission has jurisdiction to construe, interpret, and rule on the language of a workers’ compensation insurance policy between the employer and the insurance company; (2) whether the notice of cancellation complied with the Illinois Insurance Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 73, par. 755.14 (now 215 ILCS 5/143.14(a) (West 1992))), the Act, and the employer’s workers’ compensation policy; and (3) whether the trial court properly interpreted Farmers’ workers’ compensation policy when it applied the 10-day, rather than the 60-day, cancellation date. At the arbitration hearing, the claimant testified that on July 5, 1988, she caught her left hand in a shirt sleeve press and sustained burns to four fingers. She was hospitalized for a short time and skin grafts were applied to the burned areas. She subsequently returned to work on August 24, 1988, and was paid 73 h weeks temporary total disability by Farmers prior to its notice of cancellation being acknowledged by the National Counsel of Compensation Insurance (NCCI). NCCI is an agent of the Commission whose function is to compile and monitor insurance information for the Commission. The claimant also incurred $10,388.40 in medical expenses which have not been paid by the employer or Farmers. Bonnie Ropp testified for Farmers that she had been employed with the insurance group since 1977. In June 1988 she was working as commercial account and records supervisor and was responsible for supervising the billing and maintenance of policies and custody and care of the individual customer files. She stated that Farmers was composed of a number of companies. Truck Exchange Insurance (TEI) and Mid-Century Insurance Company (MCI) were the two workers’ compensation carriers. Ropp stated that she handled matters for both companies. According to Ropp’s testimony, she sent the employer a "Notice of Cancellation” on May 25, 1988, because of the nonpayment of premiums. It was subsequently established that the notice identified MCI as the issuing company even though the company which issued the policy was TEI. (MCI did not become the employer’s workers’ compensation insurance carrier until August 1988.) The notice did contain the correct policy number, cancellation date, and the statement that the payroll information and premium payment were overdue. The post office stamp with the date of mailing was also on the notice. Although the employer notified Farmers in February 1988 that its address changed from Schaumburg, Illinois, to Hoffman Estates, the first notice was sent to the employer on February 10, 1988, at the Schaumburg address. This notice requested payroll information by March 5, 1988. After mailing the notice of cancellation to the employer on May 25, 1988, Ropp sent a similar notice to NCCI. Penny Fettis of NCCI acknowledged receipt of the notice of cancellation for the nonpayment of premiums. The notice was to take effect on June 7, 1988. Pursuant to section 4(b) of the Act, coverage would be provided for 10 days after this date, until June 17, 1988. A notice that the policy was actually cancelled was mailed to the employer on June 16, 1988. The policy was subsequently reinstated on a prospective basis as of July 21, 1988, when the required payroll information and premiums were received. Therefore there was a lapse in coverage between June 17, 1988, and July 21, 1988. (The date of the claimant’s accident was July 5, 1988.) The employer first contends that the Commission did not have jurisdiction to determine disputed insurance coverage issues between an employer and the insurer of its workers’ compensation policy and that it acted outside the scope of its authority. An administrative agency is a creature of statute and has no general or common-law powers. (Abatron, Inc. v. Department of Labor (1987), 162 Ill. App. 3d 697, 700, 515 N.E.2d 1336.) Any authority claimed by the agency must arise from the express language of the statute or be incident to the authority conferred by the legislature. (Abatron, Inc., 162 Ill. App. 3d at 700, 515 N.E.2d at 1338.) The primary rule of statutory construction is to ascertain and give effect to the legislative intent. In re Marriage of Logston (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 266, 277, 469 N.E.2d 167. The Commission is an administrative agency which was created by legislative enactment for the purpose of administering the Act. (Michelson v. Industrial Comm’n (1941), 375 Ill. 462, 466, 31 N.E.2d 940.) The title of the Act provides that it is an Act to "promote the general welfare of the people of this State by providing compensation for accidental injuries or death suffered in the course of employment.” Section 18 of the Act provides: "All questions arising under this Act, if not settled by agreement of the parties interested therein, shall, except as otherwise provided, be determined by the Commission.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 48, par. 138.18 (now 820 ILCS 305/18 (West 1992)).) The Act provides an exclusive remedy for the resolution of all issues arising out of employment related injuries. Robertson v. Travelers Insurance Co. (1983), 95 Ill. 2d 441, 447, 448 N.E.2d 866.  The issue arising out of the claimant’s injury in the case sub judice was the coverage dispute between the employer and its workers’ compensation carrier and which party was liable for the treatment of claimant’s injuries. Section 4(g) of the Act provides: "In the event the employer does not pay the compensation for which he or she is liable, then an insurance company, association or insurer which may have insured such employer against such liability shall become primarily liable to pay to the employee, his or her personal representative or beneficiary the compensation required by the provisions of this Act to be paid by such employer. The insurance carrier may be made a party to the proceedings in which the employer is a party and an award may be entered jointly against the employer and the insurance carrier.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 48, par. 138.4(g) (now 820 ILCS 305/4(g) (West 1992)).) This provision indicates that the Commission has the authority and jurisdiction to determine who is legally bound to pay workers’ compensation claims. (See Koontz v. Pepsico, Inc. (1987), 153 Ill. App. 3d 152, 505 N.E.2d 1126.) In Koontz, the appellate court held that the Commission had exclusive jurisdiction to review and interpret an alleged guarantee agreement entered between the employer and his former parent company to determine who was legally bound to pay workers’ compensation benefits. The employees had brought a declaratory judgment action against the former parent company, alleging that under a guarantee agreement it was required to pay benefits. The appellate court affirmed the trial court’s dismissal of the employees’ claim based on the ruling that the issues raised in the employees’ request for declaratory relief should first be addressed before the Commission. In Franklin Hospital v. Industrial Comm’n (1986), 139 Ill. App. 3d 907, 487 N.E.2d 1243, while jurisdiction was not at issue, the Commission did decide whether there was effective cancellation of the policy by the insurer.  We find the employer’s reliance on Meyer v. Buckman (1955), 7 Ill. App. 2d 385, 129 N.E.2d 603, unpersuasive. In that case, a homeowner tried to avoid his contractual obligation by arguing that the mover failed to get workers’ compensation coverage. The court held that the Commission did not have jurisdiction over the regulation of a private contract between two parties, one of whom was not under the Act. However, in this case the issue is a dispute as to whether the employer or its workers’ compensation carrier is liable for the payment of claimant’s benefits. In view of the applicable statutory provisions and relevant case law, we conclude that the Commission did have jurisdiction to rule on the coverage dispute between Farmers and the employer. We also note that the result is consistent with a recent decision of the second district, Employers Mutual Cos. v. Skilling (1994), 256 Ill. App. 3d 567. The employer next contends that Farmers’ workers’ compensation policy with the employer was in effect at the time of the claimant’s accident because the notice of cancellation was not in compliance with the Elinois Insurance Code, the Act, and the terms of Farmers’ policy.  We first note that the construction of insurance policies and related documents is a question of law for the courts to decide. (Hartford Insurance Co. v. Jackson (1990), 206 Ill. App. 3d 465, 469, 564 N.E.2d 906; Ledbetter v. Allandslee (1987), 153 Ill. App. 3d 163, 167, 505 N.E.2d 1051.) In addition, ambiguities in the policy or related documents must be resolved in favor of the insured and against the insurer who drafted it. (Murphy v. Peterson (1984), 129 Ill. App. 3d 952, 473 N.E.2d 480.) An insurance company is held to a strict standard when it attempts to cancel a policy for the nonpayment of a premium. (Conley v. Ratayzcak (1980), 92 Ill. App. 3d 29, 34, 414 N.E.2d 500.) Furthermore, a notice of cancellation must conform to the provisions of the insured’s policy and the Elinois Insurance Code. (Horan & Co. v. Republic Insurance Group (1988), 175 Ill. App. 3d 735, 737, 530 N.E.2d 275; Ledbetter, 153 Ill. App. 3d at 169, 505 N.E.2d at 1055.) The applicable provision of the Elinois Insurance Code (Insurance Code) states in relevant part: "No notice of cancellation of any policy of insurance to which Section 143.11 applies, shall be effective unless mailed by the company to the named insured, at the last mailing address known by the company. The company shall maintain proof of mailing of such notice on a recognized U.S. Post Office form ***. A copy of all such notices shall be sent to the insured’s broker if known, or the agent of record.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 73, par. 755.14 (now 215 ILCS 5/143.14(a) (West 1992)). In addition, section 4(b) of the Act provides in relevant part: "The insurance so certified shall not be cancelled or in the event that such insurance is not renewed, extended or otherwise continued, such insurance shall not be terminated until at least 10 days after receipt by the Industrial Commission of notice of the cancellation or termination of said insurance ***.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 48, par. 138.4(b) (now 820 ILCS 305/4(b) (West 1992)). Farmers claims that it mailed a notice of cancellation to the NCCI in compliance with section 4(b) of the Act and that under the Act it is not required to give notice to the employer of an impending cancellation of its policy or take any affirmative action except to notify the Commission. However, assuming, arguendo, that there was compliance with section 4(b) of the Act, this section does not replace an insurer’s obligations under the Insurance Code or the terms of its own policy. In the case sub judice, Farmers’ employee, Bonnie Ropp, testified that Farmers was made up of a number of insurance companies including TEI and MCI, which are the two companies providing workers’ compensation insurance. Ropp acknowledged that the notice of cancellation identified MCI as the issuing company rather than TEI, which was the company which issued the workers’ compensation policy for which the premium was due. In addition, the notice of cancellation which was allegedly sent to the employer was mailed to its last known address in Hoffman Estates but bore the wrong zip code. The zip code on the notice was 60172 rather than the correct zip code, which was 60195. On June 16, 1988, a final notice of cancellation was sent to the employer which again had the wrong zip code and indicated that MCI rather than TEI was the issuing company. Therefore, the cancellation notices did not comply with the requirements of the Insurance Code.  The cancellation notices also did not comply with the terms of TEI’s policy where MCI rather than TEI was identified as the company canceling. The relevant part provides: "If we cancel because you do not pay all premium when due, we will mail the Notice of Cancellation at least 10 days before the cancellation is to take effect.” In a single sentence of its brief, Farmers claims that the employer waived its argument that the notice of cancellation bore the wrong zip code because it failed to raise the issue at the arbitration hearing. However, Farmers has failed adequately to argue this issue or to cite any authority. Therefore, the argument is without merit. County of Cook v. Renaissance Arcade & Bookstore (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 123, 145, 522 N.E.2d 73; Environmental Protection Agency v. Pollution Control Board (1986), 115 Ill. 2d 65, 71, 503 N.E.2d 343.  Applying the strict standard of compliance to the facts of this case, we conclude that TEI’s workers’ compensation policy with the employer was in effect on the date of the claimant’s accident. Because of our conclusion, we have not addressed the employer’s argument regarding the issue of whether 10 days or 60 days was proper notice. The judgment of the circuit court confirming the Commission’s determination that it had jurisdiction to review the coverage dispute between the employer and its workers’ compensation insurance carrier is affirmed. The judgment of the circuit court confirming the Commission’s decision that there had been effective termination of the insurance policy at the time of the claimant’s injury is reversed. Affirmed in part and reversed in part. WOODWARD, SLATER, and RARICK, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741283 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:45.896061+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE McCULLOUGH, specially concurring: I agree with the conclusion of the majority that the Commission did have jurisdiction to rule on the coverage dispute between Farmers and the employer. I also agree that the compensation policy was in effect at the time of the claimant’s accident but do not agree with the majority’s reasons for finding that there was no proper cancellation in compliance with the Illinois Insurance Code, the Act, and the terms of the Farmers policy. I agree with the argument of Farmers that there was no testimony from any witness regarding the accuracy or inaccuracy of the zip code number of the address used to notify the respondent of the cancellation. The parties argue in their briefs the effect of the cancellation notice, which was respondent’s exhibit No. 6, and the effect of Textile’s exhibit No. 5. The record is clear that Farmers admits that Bonnie Ropp, an employee of Farmers, testified Textile’s exhibit No. 5 went out with Farmers exhibit No. 6, the cancellation notice. Farmers’ exhibit No. 5 as shown in the record is a second request for the payment of workers’ compensation insurance. The form requested that payroll information and a determination of the premium be made by Textile and that it be submitted to Farmers on or before July 6, 1988, which is one day after the accident incurred by the claimant on July 5, 1988. It is inconsistent, to say the least, for Farmers to send a notice of cancellation along with a second request for payroll information and for a premium payment to be due on or before July 6, 1988, one day after the date of injury, July 5, 1988. As the majority indicates, the insurance company is held to a strict standard when it attempts to cancel a policy for the nonpayment of a premium. The cancellation notice and the second request for payment referred to above point out ambiguities which must be held against Farmers. The cancellation notice had no effect, because, if Textile had forwarded its premium pursuant to the second request on July 6, 1988, the insurance would still be in effect. Apparently by the two notices sent by Farmers, it desired to both cancel the insurance and to continue its effectiveness if the premium was paid by the date shown. The result reached by the majority is correct.

=== CASE 9741284 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:46.443066+00 ===

OTIS, Justice.
The United States District Court for the District of Minnesota has certified the following question to this court, in conformity with Minn.Stat. § 480.061(3) (1980): “Is the United States Jaycees ‘a place of public accommodation’ within the meaning of Minn.Stat. § 363.01 Subdivision 18?” We answer in the affirmative.
The case and question arise from a dispute between a national organization and two of its local affiliates. Their dispute concerns an admittedly unequal granting of the privileges of membership. The national organization has settled on a policy that admits women to membership, but with the proviso that women shall not be accorded privileges that are full and equal to those accorded to men. The policy is effected by a distinction in the kinds of membership offered. Individual membership is offered to men, ages 18 to 35, in exchange for annual membership dues. Associate individual membership [hereafter “associate membership”] is offered to a business concern, association, group or individual not qualified by the by-laws to be an individual member. The annual dues charge is a few dollars less than the charge for an individual membership. Women, by definition, may be offered only associate membership.
The difference in the dues charged for those memberships is small; the difference in the privileges accorded is considerable. Associate members are not allowed to stand or be nominated for office; they are not allowed to vote in such elections, nor vote on any other matters of decision in the local, state, or national organizations; and, though women are allowed to participate in many of the programs of the organization and contribute their time and effort toward making those programs successful, women are not allowed to be the recipients of any of the numerous achievement awards given by the local, state and national organizations. The awards and the prestige are restricted to men. Men continue to receive awards even when, after age 35, they can only purchase the otherwise same associate membership as women.
This membership policy has not met with the approval of the organization’s Minneapolis and St. Paul chapters. In 1974, the Minneapolis chapter began to allow women to purchase individual memberships, and accorded them privileges that were full and equal to those accorded to men. In 1975, the St. Paul chapter made the same change. The national organization, however, voted down an amendment to its by-laws that would have allowed individual memberships to be sold to women. The organization decided, instead, to set up a “pilot membership program”. Local chapters in five states could let women purchase individual memberships. Only three of the affiliated state organizations voted to let their local chapters try the pilot program. The affiliated state organization in Minnesota voted not to try it. In June 1978, the president of the national organization ordered the pilot programs terminated. The national organization repeated its rejection of the proposed change in its policy of letting women purchase only an associate membership, costing a few dollars less but worth much less than *766the individual memberships that men could buy.
By letter, the national organization advised the Minneapolis and St. Paul chapters of its imminent plans to vote on whether to revoke their respective charters because those Minnesota chapters had violated the organization’s by-laws by continuing to let women purchase individual memberships. On the previous day, December 14,1978, the Minneapolis and St. Paul chapters brought before the Minnesota Department of Human Rights a charge of sexual discrimination against the national organization. They alleged violations of Minn.Stat. § 363.-03(3), (6) (1980). The commissioner of the department investigated and found probable cause that there was a violation. The department attempted without success to conciliate the matter.
On October 9, 1979, a State Hearing Examiner found the national organization in violation of Minn.Stat. § 363.03(3) (1980), the pertinent part of which reads:
It is an unfair discriminatory practice:
To deny any person the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and accommodations of a place of public accommodation because of race, color, creed, religion, disability, national origin or sex.
The Examiner held that the national organization discriminated unfairly on the basis of sex by refusing to let women purchase individual memberships. He enjoined the national organization from such discrimination in any of its chapter affiliates within Minnesota, and from taking sanctions against any of them for selling individual memberships to women.
The national organization responded with a petition for review of the Examiner’s order to the Ramsey County District Court, and commenced an action, in the United States District Court for the State of Minnesota, for the purpose of reserving determination of federal constitutional claims arising from the application of Minn.Stat. § 363.03(3) (1980). The federal district court, in an attempt to expedite a decision of the pivotal issue, certified to this court the question of whether this national organization is a “ ‘place of public accommodation’ within the meaning of Minn.Stat. § 363.01, Subdivision 18?”
Legislative guidance
In Minn.Stat. § 363.01(18) (1980) the legislature expressed its own special and unusually broad definition of the term “place of public accommodation": “a business, accommodation, refreshment, entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the public.” The legislature defines a term only because it intends in some measure to depart from the ordinary sense of that term. Thus, there is a presumption that we are not to substitute the literal, ordinary meaning of “place of public accommodation” for the definition the legislature has provided.
The legislature has, moreover, cautioned us against narrowly construing any of the provisions of Minn.Stat. § 363.03 (1980). It has broadened the term “place of public accommodation” to mean “a business * * * facility of any kind * * * whose goods * * [and] privileges * * * are sold, or otherwise made available to the public”. Minn.Stat. § 363.01(18) (1980). It has also expressly required a broad construction of all provisions of the statute by order of Minn.Stat. § 363.11 (1980) which reads, in pertinent part: “The provisions of this chapter shall be construed liberally for the accomplishment of the purposes thereof.” Minn.Stat. § 363.12 (1980) states those purposes to be “to secure for persons in this state, freedom from discrimination * * To understand accurately what those purposes here require in a construction of Minn.Stat. § 363.01(18) (1980), wé must review the history of that provision and of Minn.Stat. § 363.03(3) (1980) whose key term it defines.
Legislative history
In 1885, ten years before the United States Supreme Court put its imprimatur on the “separate but equal” fiction justify*767ing the Jim Crow laws, the legislature of the State of Minnesota chose a different course, that of “full and equal” privileges, as it enacted this statute:
That all persons within the jurisdiction of the state of Minnesota shall be entitled to the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of inns, public conveyances on land or water, theatres and places of public amusements, restaurants and barber shops, subject only to the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all citizens of every race and color, regardless of any previous condition of servitude.1
In 1897, the legislature broadened the scope of the statute by increasing the number and kind of enumerated sites on which a person would be held to have violated the statute if that person excluded
any other person within the jurisdiction of the state of Minnesota, on account of race, color or previous condition of servitude, from the full and equal enjoyment of any accommodation, advantage, facility or privilege, furnished by innkeepers, hotel keepers, managers or lessees, common carriers or by owners, managers or lessees of theaters or other places of amusement, or public conveyance on land or water, restaurants, barbershops, eating houses, or other places of public resort, refreshment, accommodation or entertainment, or
Denies, or aids or incites another to deny any other person because of race, creed or color, or previous condition of servitude, the full and equal enjoyment of any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of any hotel, inn, tavern, restaurant, eating house, soda water fountain, ice cream parlor, public conveyance on land or water, theater, barbershop or other place of public refreshment, amusement, instruction, accommodation or entertainment, * * *.2
We note that the legislature intended the statute to be applied to both fixed sites (e. g., hotels and restaurants) and mobile sites (e. g., public conveyances). Such sites were not to be limited to those enumerated, but were to include “other places of public * * refreshment * *
This court held, in 1898, that the anti-discrimination statute had not been violated when a saloon keeper refused to sell a glass of beer to a former slave, solely because of that customer’s race and color. Rhone v. Loomis, 74 Minn. 200, 77 N.W. 31 (1898). Within a year the legislature overruled that narrow construction with an amendment that added “saloons” to the enumerated list of fixed and mobile sites.3
In 1905, the legislature simplified the statute, deleting enumerated kinds of managers (e. g., hotel keepers), retaining most of the enumerated kinds of fixed and mobile sites and the broadly inclusive provision as to “other places of refreshment, entertainment, or accommodation.” Minn.Rev. Laws (1905) ch. 55, § 2812.4 In 1943 the legislature again extended the scope of the statute, amending it to prohibit discrimination based on “national origin or religion.”5
In 1965, the legislature split the anti-discrimination in public accommodations statute, leaving in one statute the description of what constituted prohibited discrimination, Minn.Stat. § 327.09 (1965), and shifting the actual prohibition to subdivision 3 of a new, unfair discriminatory practices stat*768ute, Minn.Stat. § 363.03 (1965)6 Thus, Minn.Stat. § 363.03(3) (1965) read: “Public accommodation : (1) It is unfair discriminatory practice for any person to engage in an act forbidden by Minnesota Statutes 1961, Section 327.09.” In 1967, the legislature revised subdivision 3; instead of prohibiting acts forbidden by Minn.Stat. § 327.09 (1967), it now had its own description of unfair discrimination that it prohibited within a scope far broader than that of the other statute, still in force, to which it had originally been attached and to which it had subsequently referred.7 The broadening of that scope is best seen by a comparison of the two statutes. The older retained statute, Minn.Stat. § 327.09, (1967) reads:
No person shall be excluded, on account of race, color, national origin, or religion from full and equal enjoyment of any accommodation, advantage, or privilege furnished by public conveyances, theaters, or other public places of amusement, or by hotels, barber shops, saloons, restaurants, or other places of refreshments, entertainment, or accommodations.
The newer statute, Minn.Stat. § 363.03(3) (1967), reads:
Public accommodations. It is an unfair discriminatory practice:
To deny an individual or group of individuals the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and accommodations of a place of public accommodation because of race, color, creed, religion, or national origin.
Both statutes prohibit the discriminatory denial of the full and equal enjoyment of advantages and privileges of certain kinds of sites. The older statute enumerated some of those kinds of sites, fixed and mobile. The new statute expanded that scope; it added to the prohibitions the discriminatory denial of the full and equal enjoyment of goods, services, and facilities; it encompassed more than the previous kinds of sites, for the legislature used not an enumerated list, but one broadly inclusive term —“place of public accommodation” — and the legislature defined that term to mean: “a business * * * facility of any kind * * * whose goods * * * [and] privileges * * * are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the public.” Minn.Stat. § 363.01(18) (1967).
Thus, while the older statute contemplated only certain fixed and mobile sites, the new statute encompasses a “business facility of any kind,” whether fixed or mobile. While the older statute concentrated on the kinds of sites where discrimination would be prohibited, the new statute focuses on conduct in which discrimination would be prohibited and thus speaks not of a business facility where goods and privileges are offered, but rather, of “a business * * * facility of any kind * * * whose goods * * * [and] privileges are * * * offered, sold, or otherwise made available to the public.” Minn.Stat. § 363.01(18) (1967) (emphasis added). The question for decision is whether that statutory definition encompasses the national organization now before this court. We turn to examine that organization.
Characteristics and practices of the national organization
Our examination of the national organization (and its local affiliates) proceeds along three lines set out in Minn.Stat. § 363.01(18) (1980): (1) is the national organization a business in that it sells goods and extends privileges in exchange for annual membership dues?; (2) is the national organization a public business in that it solicits and recruits dues paying members but is unselective in admitting them?; and (3) is the national organization a public business facility in that it continuously recruits and sells memberships at sites within the State of Minnesota? The record before us clearly reveals that the answers to those questions are affirmative.
We address first whether the national organization is a business. The national *769organization urges this court to draw a distinction between an organization’s internal activities (e. g., membership dues) and its external activities (e. g., inviting the public to participate in the organization and the activities it conducts). With this distinction the national organization contends that membership in it is equivalent to ownership of the organization; it then concludes that ownership, or a share of ownership of an organization, is beyond the scope of Minn.Stat. § 363.01(18) (1980), for that subdivision concerns only the goods and privileges offered or sold to the public by a business, and does not concern its ownership.
To be substantiated, the analogy would have to be borne out, in the record, by the way the national organization regards its current and prospective members, i. e. as its present and potential owners, rather than as its customers. The record before us reveals a national organization that regards its members more as customers than as owners. The national organization’s Officers’ & Directors’ Guide 1978-79 refers to members as the officers’ “customers.” (Exhibit 6, p. 27). The national organization’s Recruitment Manual has this preface to its recommended sales approach to prospective members: “JAYCEES, THE PRODUCT you are selling, is outstanding from any angle. Jaycees is the ‘best value’ you can get.” (Exhibit 24, p. 5) (emphasis in original). The Recruitment Manual cautions that “[o]nce a young man becomes a member, the responsibility to deliver the goods you sold him begins.” (Exhibit 24, p. 1). The national organization’s Regional Director’s Handbook 1977-78 discusses “How to Sell Jaycees” and reminds the directors to “Know your product.” (Exhibit 44, p. 21).
The product being sold is membership in an organization whose aim is the advancement of its members. Thus, the national organization’s Chapter President’s Management Handbook 1977-78 reminds the presidents of their responsibility to ensure that those holding individual memberships “will indeed have a slight edge in life over the non-Jaycee * * (Exhibit 2, p. 36). This “edge” that members obtain takes several forms. The president of the national organization, in letters published in Future (the official publication of the organization), maintains that it is “the greatest young men’s leadership-training organization * * Future, Jan.-Feb. 1979, at 4 (Exhibit 55); Future, March-April 1979, at 5 (Exhibit 54). The organization asks business firms to pay the dues of individual memberships for a number of their employees; the fact that firms often do so suggests that those employees are viewed by their firms as receiving an edge, and that may help them when they are considered for promotion. Those holding individual memberships and who become officers in the organization thereby receive enhanced leadership experience and enjoy the enhanced privileges and advantages of making contacts with others, often business contacts. In this regard we note that the national organization has successfully sued under the trade-mark laws to have one of its disaffiliated chapters enjoined from infringing on its name and from engaging in unfair competition with the national organization, United States Jaycees v. San Francisco Junior Chamber of Commerce, 513 F.2d 1226 (9th Cir. 1975); the concurring opinion of Judge Ely observed that “it seems clear that the term ‘Junior Chamber of Commerce’ does refer to the specific source of a ‘product’ (the National/Jaycees) * * Id.
By virtue of its sale of individual memberships (with the accompanying goods and privileges) the national organization is a business.
Is the national organization a public business? The national organization contends that it is a private organization; its brief cites three decisions by Circuit Courts of Appeal and claims that these upheld the non-public character of the national organization. See New York City Jaycees, Inc. v. United States Jaycees, Inc., 512 F.2d 856 (2d Cir. 1975); Junior Chamber of Commerce v. Missouri State Junior Chamber of Commerce, 508 F.2d 1031 (8th Cir. 1975); Junior Chamber of Commerce of Rochester, *770Inc. v. United States Jaycees, 495 F.2d 883 (10th Cir.) cert. denied, 419 U.S. 1026, 95 S.Ct. 505, 42 L.Ed.2d 301 (1974). Those decisions, however, are inapposite. In each of them the issue was whether the national organization’s receipt of federal funds and its status as a tax exempt organization constituted state action sufficient to subject it to scrutiny under a federal constitutional standard. All three circuit courts answered that question in the negative. To hold, however, that by such activities the national organization is not an entity of state action is far from holding that it is a private organization, and, in fact, gives no insight to the construction of the statute in controversy.
The national organization contends that the most relevant reported case is the Oregon Supreme Court’s decision that Cub Scouts were not within the definition of a “place of public accommodation,” and, therefore, could exclude girls from membership. Schwenk v. Boy Scouts of America, 275 Or. 327, 551 P.2d 465 (1976). Because of its reasoning, the decision is irrelevant to the present controversy. The Oregon Supreme Court conceded that the Boy Scouts of America may not be a “distinctly private” club so as to come within the Oregon statute’s exemption of private clubs. 275 Or. at 335, 551 P.2d at 469.8 The court relied almost entirely on the statute’s legislative history that showed that there was some doubt as to whether the Y.M.C.A. and the Y.W.C.A. were “places of public accommodation.” The court reasoned, then, that by analogy the Oregon Public Accommodation Act was not intended “to include the Boy Scouts of America, at least to the extent of requiring it to accept applications by girls for membership.” 275 Or. at 336, 551 P.2d at 469. The statute in controversy here has a quite different legislative history. Therefore, the Supreme Court of Oregon’s decision in Schwenk provides neither analogy for nor insight into the question before this court.9
There are, however, cases that provide criteria for deciding, in the context of a public accommodation statute, whether a group is private or public. See Nesmith v. Young Men’s Christian Association, 397 F.2d 96 (4th Cir. 1968); Cornelius v. Benevolent Protective Order of Elks, 382 F.Supp. 1182 (D.Conn.1974); Wright v. Cork Club, 315 F.Supp. 1143 (S.D.Tex.1970). Two criteria tend to be used: (1) the selectiveness of the group in the admission of members, i. e., standards and a formal procedure by which membership is restricted; and (2) the existence of limits on the size of the membership. See Nesmith, 397 F.2d at 102; Cornelius, 382 F.Supp. at 1203; Wright, 315 F.Supp. at 1153.
The national organization would have us disregard these clear standards, or to observe, instead, that Minn.Stat. § 363.01(18) (1980) makes no mention of size as a criterion. Thus, it argues to apply such a test would leave officers of small organizations wondering whether their group has become *771too big to avoid the criminal penalties of the statute.
The national organization’s contention lacks merit. A public organization can avoid criminal penalties by simply not engaging in prohibited, unfair discrimination. Private associations and organizations— those, for example, that are selective in membership — are unaffected by Minn.Stat. § 363.01(18) (1980). Any suggestion that our decision today will affect such groups is unfounded.
We, therefore, reject the national organization’s suggestion that it be viewed analogously to private organizations such as the Kiwanis International Organization. Instead, we look at what this national organization is by itself. The record before us reveals a national organization that strives for growth, especially in “individual memberships”; it is unselective in those to whom it sells its memberships; selectiveness occurs only in the privileges and benefits it accords to those holding one kind of membership rather than another.
Counsel for the national organization contended, in oral argument, that a process of “natural selection” operates to make its membership selective. We find that process unexplained, unsupported, and unpersuasive. We find, in fact, that the national organization encourages continuous recruitment and discourages the use of any selection criteria. More than 80% of the national officers’ time is devoted to spurring on the sale of memberships. The Regional Director’s Handbook 1977-78 advises: “Don’t set membership goals for chapters. Let them set their own (as long as they plan an increase in membership).” (Exhibit 44, p. 14) (emphasis in original). The national organization’s Committee Chairman’s Workbook, in its instructions on how a chairman should present a project for his board’s approval, proclaims that “Jaycees are in the People business — not the project business” (Exhibit 43, p. 2) (emphasis in original) and advises the chairman to emphasize and link “Publicity Value and Recruitment Value. If your project will get the chapter’s name in the paper and will possibly result in a few new members for the chapter, be sure that these facts ‘headline’ your presentation. It’s sure to ‘perk up their interest’ in your project.” (Exhibit 43, p. 5). More than half of the organization’s individual and group achievement awards are conditioned, in part, upon recruitment achievement. (Exhibit 76). The organization encourages record breaking performance in selling memberships, e. g., most in a year by one person (348), most in a month (134), most in a lifetime (1,586). (Exhibit 70, p. 20). This continuous concern for growth undercuts the national organization’s claim to be a private organization.
Most important, though, is the absence of selection criteria. This is evinced by the national organization’s Officer & Directors’ Guide 1977 — 78 which advises that the emphasis in recruitment be on quantity rather than quality: “What is your obligation as Jaycees? Is it to only recruit a chosen few who * * * are deemed to be quality members? * * * How you sign up a member is not nearly as important as what you do with that member once he has been inducted.” (Exhibit 52, p. 21). According to Lowell Larson, the Executive Director for the affiliated organization of Minnesota, the national organization does not publish anything with respect to criteria that local chapters should use to select their members; there is, instead, an emphasis on soliciting memberships from “as many people and as diverse as possible.” (Hearing Transcript, p. 112). Mr. Larson further testified that, to his knowledge, there has never been a rejection of any application for membership. (Hearing Transcript, p. 135). By virtue of its unselective, vigorous sale of memberships, the national organization is a public business.
We pass to the last and seemingly most difficult question: Is this national organization a public business facility ? The national organization contends that only if it were to “establish a business at a physical location within the State of Minnesota, and invite the patronage of the general public * * * ” would that “place” or “facility” constitute a place of public accommodation un*772der Minn.Stat. § 363.01(18) (1980). Brief for Appellant at 17. That argument substitutes a literal, ordinary definition of “place of public accommodation” for the one enacted by the legislature. The history of the anti-discrimination statutes shows that the scope of the older statute, still in force, Minn.Stat. § 327.09 (1980), concentrated on locations and encompassed both fixed and mobile sites. The newer statute, in controversy here, Minn.Stat. § 363.01(18) (1980), focuses on the conduct of a “business facility of any kind.” We are not persuaded by analogies to hotels, restaurants, and “hot tamale stand[s]”. Brief for Appellant at 17.
Food and lodging do not exhaust the category of a “business * * * facility of any kind * * * whose goods, * * * privileges, [and] advantages are * * * sold or otherwise made available to the public.” Minn. Stat. § 363.01(18) (1980) (emphases added). Leadership skills are “goods,” business contacts and employment promotions are “privileges” and “advantages,” and each site in the State of Minnesota where the sale of those “goods” is solicited, promoted, and consummated is unquestionably a “business facility.”
If we were to look for a fixed site of the national organization’s “business facility” we would find it in the affiliated state organization’s headquarters in Chaska, Minnesota, where the state organization’s officers devote much of their time to promoting the solicitation and sale of memberships by the local chapters.
If we were to look for mobile sites of the national organization’s “business facilities” we would find them in the sometimes door-to-door, company-to-company solicitation of members for the organization, and we would find them in the oft-shifted sites at which the affiliated local chapters hold meetings during part of which a sales approach is usually made to prospective members invited to the meeting for that purpose. See Future, March-April 1979, at 24 (“Many chapters use refreshments as a means to get [membership] prospects to the meeting, * * * if that is the only way — use it.” quoting New Recruitment Manual (Exhibit 54)). A variety of enterprises that serve the public do not extend their goods and privileges from the same physical location (e. g. electricians, locksmiths, learning-at-home courses), and often they do not own or lease the sites at which they offer their goods and privileges. Cf. First National Bank v. Dickinson, 396 U.S. 122, 137, 90 S.Ct. 337, 345, 24 L.Ed.2d 312 (1969), (holding that an armoured car picking up merchants’ cash boxes and checks is a branch bank, a place of business, under § 7 of the McFadden Act.)
An instructive analogy can be found in a decision by the New Jersey Appellate Division that held Little League to be a “place of public accommodation.” National Organization for Women v. Little League Baseball, Inc., 127 N.J.Super. 522, 318 A.2d 33, aff’d mem., 67 N.J. 320, 338 A.2d 198 (1974). Unlike the new statute in the instant case, the New Jersey statute does not provide a brief definition of “place of public accommodation”; instead, it enumerates 65 varieties of such places.10 Little League *773was not one of the enumerated varieties. The New Jersey court considered a broad construction of “place” to be appropriate because “the statutory noun ‘place’ (of public accommodation) is a term of convenience, not of limitation.” 127 N.J.Super. at 531, 318 A.2d at 37. The court then observed that the “place,” in the. case of Little League, is the ball field. Presumably the court was not unaware of the fact that Little League often does not own the real estate on which its ball fields are located, for as the court noted:
[W]e discern nothing in the statute or its underlying purposes to persuade us that what would otherwise be a place of public accommodation is any less so because its management and sponsorship is by a nonprofit or membership organization rather than a commercial enterprise, or because it does not have exclusive use of possession of the site of its operations.
Id. at 531-32, 318 A.2d at 38.
The national organization before this court attempts to distinguish the Little League case on two grounds. First, it argues that Little League dominates organized baseball for children, whereas this national organization does not dominate the field of organized community services. That distinction is irrelevant to the question of what constitutes a “place of public accommodation,” because no insight into that question can be drawn from the concept of such domination.
The national organization’s second basis for distinguishing Little League is that Little League, by making extensive use of local community owned facilities, thereby engaged in discrimination on public property and thus involved a unit of government. The New Jersey court did not decide the case on, or even mention that as a basis for its decision. Again, the distinction does not detract from the significant fact that the New Jersey Supreme Court held that a “place of public accommodation” or a “facility” is less a matter of whether the organization operates on a permanent site, and more a matter of whether the organization engages in activities in places to which an unselected public is given an open invitation.
The question, therefore, of what constitutes a “facility,” or more precisely, a “public business facility” turns ultimately on whether the organization invites only a screened and selected portion of the public, or whether, instead, it has a standing, open invitation to an unscreened, unselected, and unlimited number of persons from the general public. Little League did little screening except to age and sex, and the New Jersey Supreme Court affirmed a decision that Little League constituted a “place of public accommodation.” By contrast, the national organization before this court does even less screening because it admits women to associate membership, and therefore, it has given an open invitation to virtually anyone to become a dues paying individual or associate member.
The meeting place to which that un-screened, unselected, and unlimited number of persons is invited, constitutes as we see it a public business facility.
We have discussed the term “facility” with regard to sites, both fixed and mobile. We acknowledge, however, that courts in other jurisdictions have construed the term more liberally, and have done so since the late Nineteenth Century — a time when this state’s anti-discrimination statute was new and included mention of “facilities.” Thus, in 1898, the Supreme Court of Montana had to decide whether money raised by a tax levied, under a statute, for the purpose of *774furnishing “additional school facilities” could be used to pay salaries of teachers; the question depended upon the scope of the expression “additional school facilities” as employed in the statute. The court rejected a narrow interpretation that would have limited such “facilities” to inanimate objects. State ex rel. Knight v. Cave, 20 Mont. 468, 52 P. 200, (1898). As the court observed,
[t]hat which aids, assists, or makes more easy the acquisition of knowledge is a convenience and an advantage, and is clearly a “facility.” Books, maps, globes, and charts are facilities to the imparting of knowledge. * * * But the meaning of the word is not limited to inanimate bodies or things. Men are often facilities. Without a crew to man his vessel, the master of a ship would not have the necessary facilities. A school with a complement of pupils in every room, but lacking teachers, would certainly not have facilities to carry on educational work. * * * Parents often remove their families to a place with good school or educational facilities, the chief reason actuating them being the quality of teachers, and not the mere inanimate advantages. * * * Teachers are the means of imparting knowledge to pupils, and are therefore educational facilities.
20 Mont. at 475-76, 52 P. at 203 (emphasis added). Accord, Nekoosa-Edwards Paper Co. v. Railroad Commission of Wisconsin, 193 Wis. 538, 547, 213 N.W. 633, 636 (1927) (“facilities” includes human agencies) (“We see no difficulty in holding that the switch engine with its crew * * * constitutes a facility * * *.”); see Cheney v. Tolliver, 234 Ark. 973, 977, 356 S.W.2d 636, 634 (1962).
We need not decide whether “facilities” should be construed to include persons. What we decide here is that an organization engaged in the business of seeking to advance its members and to add to their ranks by assiduously selling memberships in this state is a “public business facility.” In more familiar terms, such an organization has more than the “minimum contacts” to qualify as doing business in this state, and its facilities are anywhere it promotes, solicits, and engages in the sale of memberships on an unselective basis. We have discussed this question, for the most part, without reference to the prohibited kind of discrimination involved in this case. The certified question does not ask us to weigh the merits of this organization’s business policies. If the national organization now before this court were conducting its business by discriminating on the basis of race, prohibited in Minnesota since 1885, we would have no difficulty holding that its activity was prohibited; the fact that the discrimination in this case is based on sex, prohibited in Minnesota since 1973,11 in no way alters our decision and its grounds. The answer to the certified question is affirmative.
. Act of March 7, 1885, ch. 224, § 1, 1885 Minn.Laws 295, 296.
. Act of April 23, 1897, ch. 349, §§ 2-3, 1897 Minn.Laws 616 (emphases added).
. Act of March 6, 1899, ch. 41, § 1, 1899 Minn. Laws 38, 38-39.
. Minn.Rev.Laws ch. 55 (1905) provided in pertinent part that: “No person shall be excluded, on account of race or color, from full and equal enjoyment of any accommodation, advantage, or privilege furnished by public conveyances, theaters, or other public places of amusement, or by hotels, barber shops, saloons, restaurants, or other places of refreshment, entertainment, or accommodation.”
.Act of April 23, 1943, ch. 579, § 7321, 1943 Minn.Laws 831, 832.
. Act of May 21, 1965, ch. 585, 1965 Minn.Laws 854; Act of May 21, 1965, ch. 586, 1965 Minn. Laws 854.
. Act of May 25, 1967, ch. 897, § 14, 1967 Minn.Laws 1932, 1938.
. The pertinent statute reads:
(1) A place of public accommodation, subject to the exclusion in subsection (2) of this section, means any place or service offering to the public accommodations, advantages, facilities or privileges whether in the nature of goods, services, lodgings, amusements or otherwise.
(2) However, a place of public accommodation does not include any institution, bona fide club or place of accommodation which is in its nature distinctly private.
Or.Rev.Stat. § 30.675 (1979).
. Cf. Graham v. Kold Kist Beverage Ice, Inc., 43 Or.App. 1037, 607 P.2d 759 (1979) (construing Or.Rev.Stat. § 30.675 (1979)), decided since Schwenk, and holding that “a corporation engaged in the wholesale business of selling commercial equipment at wholesale for use in retail stores * * * ” is not engaged in the sale of goods “to the public” and is, therefore, not a “public accommodation.” Id. at 1042, 607 P.2d at 762. The wholesaler had agreed to sell its ice machines to plaintiff Graham and then refused when it discovered that he was black. The decision relies on Schwenk. If Graham is not reversed by the Oregon Supreme Court, then there is yet another reason for this court to find Schwenk an inapposite analogy; under Minn.Stat. § 363.01(18) (1980) one could not argue that a wholesaler was not a “public accommodation,” for it undoubtedly would be a “business” — and would be guilty of violating the statute if it so engaged in racial discrimination. Schwenk is, therefore, of dubious value in deciding the present case.
. The pertinent statute reads:
“A place of public accommodation” shall include, but not be limited to: any tavern, roadhouse, hotel, motel, trailer camp, summer camp, day camp, or resort camp, whether for entertainment of transient guests or accommodations of those seeking health, recreation or rest; any producer, manufacturer, wholesaler, distributor, retail shop, store, establishment, or concession dealing with goods or services of any kind; any restaurant, eating house, or place where food is sold for consumption on the premises; any place maintained for the sale of ice cream, ice and fruit preparations or their derivatives, soda water or confections, or where any beverages of any kind are retailed for consumption on the premises; any garage, any public conveyance operated on land or water, or in the air, any stations and terminals thereof, any bathhouse, boardwalk, or seashore accommodation; any auditorium, meeting place, or hall; any theatre, motion-picture house, music hall, roof garden, skating rink, swimming pool, amusement and recreation park, fair, bowling alley, gymnasium, shooting gallery, billiard and pool parlor, or other place of amusement; any comfort station;, any dispensary, clinic or hospital; any public library; any kindergarten, primary and secondary school, trade or business school, high school, academy, college and university, or any educational institution under the supervision of the *773State Board of Education, or the Commissioner of Education of the State of New Jersey. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to include or to apply to any institution, bona fide club, or place of accommodation, which is in its nature distinctly private; nor shall anything herein contained apply to any educational facility operated or maintained by a bona fide religious or sectarian institution, and the right of a natural parent or one in loco parentis to direct the education and upbringing of a child under his control is hereby affirmed; nor shall anything herein contained be construed to bar any private secondary or post-secondary school from using in good faith criteria other than race, creed, color, national origin or ancestry, in the admission of students.
N.J.Stat.Ann. § 10:5-5(1) (West Sup. 1980).
. Act of May 24, 1973, ch. 729, § 3, 1973 Minn.Laws 2158, 2164.

=== CASE 9741286 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:47.037942+00 ===

DISCIPLINARY ACTION
PER CURIAM.
The Respondent, Jacob A. Atanga, is charged in this proceeding with professional misconduct under the Rules of Professional Responsibility. The Disciplinary Commission of this Court asserts that Respondent violated Ind.Professional Conduct Rule 3.4(c), by knowingly disobeying an obligation of a tribunal when he failed to appear at a scheduled hearing; violated Prof.Cond.R. 8.4(d), by engaging in conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice; and violated Prof. Cond.R. 8.2(a), by making a statement with reckless disregard as to its truth or falsity concerning the qualifications or integrity of a judge.
As provided under IndAdmission and Discipline Rule 23, a Hearing Officer conducted a hearing on the above-noted charges and, now, has tendered for this Court’s approval his findings of fact and conclusions. Respondent petitions this Court for review of the Hearing Officer’s report. The Respondent and the Commission have submitted briefs on their respective positions.
Respondent challenges several conclusions recommended in the Hearing Officer’s report and the findings of fact underlying such conclusions. This Court is not bound by the recommended facts and conclusions. Our review is de novo on the record. In re Levinson (1992), Ind., 604 N.E.2d 599; In re Smith (1991), Ind., 579 N.E.2d 450. Respondent’s challenges to the tendered findings of fact will be considered in this process of review.
Upon consideration of the matters which are before this Court for review, we now find that Respondent immigrated to the United *1255States from Ghana, West Africa when he was seventeen years old; he was thirty-six years old when he completed law school and had been practicing law for two years when the events in this case occurred. Respondent is a sole practitioner. He has office space and the partial service of a receptionist in the office of another lawyer in Indianapolis.
On October 29,1991, in Tippecanoe Superi- or Court 1, Kim L. Lucas was charged and pled not guilty to dealing in cocaine and for being an habitual offender; Lucas requested a public defender and the omnibus hearing was set for December 16, 1991. Respondent entered his appearance for Lucas on November 12, 1991, and filed a motion to reduce bond. This motion was set for hearing on November 14, 1991. At this hearing, Respondent learned that his client also was facing a proceeding for the revocation of probation under a 1989 conviction for robbery. The revocation hearing had been scheduled by former counsel for Lucas and Deputy Prosecuting Attorney Norris Wang for hearing on December 6, 1991. Both criminal matters were before the same judge of the Tippecanoe Superior Court, the Honorable Donald C. Johnson.
Upon being advised of existence of a proceeding for the revocation of probation, Respondent entered his appearance. At the November 14, 1991, hearing on the dealing/habitual for bond reduction, Respondent and Deputy Prosecuting Attorney Timothy Kern, by agreement, rescheduled the probation revocation hearing for December 4,1991, at 2:30 p.m. The change was necessitated by a conflict in Respondent’s schedule; he had a firm commitment to represent another individual at a hearing in Marion County.
On November 22,1991, Respondent filed a motion in the dealing/habitual case to have his client transported to a doctor in Lafayette for medical attention. Three days later, on November 25,1991, Wang orally moved at an ex parte hearing to reschedule the probation revocation proceeding back to December 6th in that the State’s toxicologist witness had been previously subpoenaed for that time and was not available on December 4, 1991. The oral motion was granted and the hearing was scheduled for December 6,1991, at 3:00 p.m. The motion to transport Lucas was also set for this time. The clerk was directed to send a copy of the order to Respondent and to the defendant, Lucas. The judicial event was recorded in the Chronological Case Summary (CCS) for the Dealing/habitual case, but was not entered in the CCS for the probation revocation proceeding.
On December 4, 1991, Wang appeared in the probation revocation proceeding, without prior notice to Respondent, and orally moved that the revocation hearing be rescheduled to December 6th. This motion was granted and the clerk was directed to forward a copy of the order to Respondent. This judicial event was recorded in the CCS for the probation revocation proceeding. Additionally, the court reporter telephoned the receptionist in Respondent’s office and informed her of the decision of the court. On December 5, 1991, Respondent filed a petition for a thirty day continuance by reason of the conflict he noted in the prior hearing. The continuance was denied and the court reporter telephoned this information to Respondent. Respondent told the court reporter that he would not appear because of the previously noted conflict. About fifteen minutes later the trial judge telephoned Respondent who again stated that he could not attend the December 6th hearing. The judge told Respondent that if he did not appear, he (the judge) would hold the Respondent in contempt.
On December 6, 1991, Respondent did not appear. Lucas declined to continue without counsel and the hearing was aborted. The trial court judge found that the Respondent was “duly notified” and entered an order for Respondent to appear at 12:00 p.m. on December 16, 1991, “to show cause why he should not be held in contempt for his failure to appear.” This order was delivered to Respondent’s office by certified mail on December 9, 1991. Respondent did not appear on December 16,1991, as ordered and a writ of attachment was issued by the trial court. Again, the motion for transportation was continued at the request of Respondent’s client. Respondent did have a conflicting setting in Marion County at 1:30 p.m. in a matter critical to the welfare of his client and family.
*1256Respondent was arrested at his office on December 19, 1991, and held in the Marion County jail overnight. The next morning he was transported to Tippecanoe County where he was fingerprinted, photographed, and provided prisoner attire. Personal effects were confiscated at that time. A local attorney, at the request of others, appeared for Respondent. Respondent was advised by his attorney that if he offered an apology, “everything would be okay.” Respondent’s attorney also stated that the trial judge wanted Respondent’s client present so she could observe the proceedings. Respondent agreed to the requests of the trial court.
The hearing was conducted in an auxiliary courtroom at the jail. The judge, deputy prosecutor, Respondent’s client, the court reporter, onlookers from the prosecuting attorney’s office and several reporters were present at the hearing. Respondent apologized through his attorney and promised to faithfully attend all future hearings called by the court. The court accepted the apology and purged Respondent from contempt on the condition that he pay the transportation costs. Following the contempt proceeding, while Respondent was still wearing his jail assigned clothing, the court heard the motion to transport his client for medical consultation. The court granted the motion to transport on the condition that no costs would be paid by the county. The petition to revoke probation and the omnibus hearing on the Dealing/Habitual case were rescheduled for future dates.
The following day the Lafayette Journal & Courier published a factual account of the contempt hearing. Several days after the article, Respondent was contacted by the volunteer editor of the Graffiti Times, a monthly publication of the local chapter for the American Civil Liberties Union, having a circulation between 5,000 to 10,000 in the area. An interview was conducted and the following matter appeared in the January 1992 issue of the Graffiti Times:
“Atanga made no effort to hide his feelings about Johnson. He said, T think he is ignorant, insecure, and a racist. He is motivated by political ambition.’ Antanga considers that the errors and omissions in the record are part of a systematic effort to confuse the defense and to cover up the Judge’s actions. He emphasizes that the situation in Johnson’s court is very different from the norm. Most judges are intelligent, hard-working, fairminded men and women, he says, but in Johnson’s court, the Judge is part of the prosecution. He mentioned the many functions that Deputy Prosecutor Wang performs for the Judge and the Judge’s willingness to grant virtually automatic continuances for the prosecution, but none for the defense. Atanga made light of the time he spent in jail and what he considers Johnson’s obvious attempt to humiliate him. Atanga says that he will not be intimidated by Johnson’s ‘Judicial Tyranny;’ instead his ‘determination to fight for the constitutional rights of my client has only been increased.’”
The article in the Graffiti Times accurately reflected the comments made by Respondent during his interview with the editor.
The Hearing Officer concluded that the Respondent violated the Rules of Professional Conduct as charged in the complaint filed in this matter. As noted above, Respondent challenges the Hearing Officer’s conclusions in this regard. Respondent’s contentions will be addressed under each of three alleged rule violations presented in the complaint.
Respondent is charged with violating Prof.Cond.R. 3.4(c) of the Rules of Professional Conduct, which provides that a “lawyer shall not knowingly disobey an obligation under the rules of a tribunal except for an open refusal based on an assertion that no valid obligation exists.” Respondent argues that he was not aware of the hearings on December 6 and 16, 1991. Also, Respondent asserts that the conduct of the other participants, opposing counsel and the court, justifies his actions with regard to these hearings.
This Court finds that there was sufficient notice of the hearings. Respondent was aware of the December 6th hearing; he filed a motion to continue the hearing and was told by the court reporter and trial judge that the matter would be heard as scheduled. The notice for the December 16th hearing was delivered by certified mail to his office. An attorney cannot allege the lack of notice *1257by reason of the internal methods of communication in his office. Respondent’s failure to attend the hearings was intentional.
The conduct of the other participants is troubling. The procedure employed by the Tippecanoe Superior Court in the Lucas ease does not represent contemporary jurisprudence in this state. There was good reason for Respondent to view with alarm the sequence of events leading to the rescheduling of the hearing for a date known by the court to be unacceptable for defense counsel. Clearly, Respondent was forced to represent his client in a very difficult environment.
When confronted with situations of this nature, a lawyer is forced to make decisions and weigh alternatives. The primary concern, of course, must always be the faithful representation of his client. But an attorney must also understand that the administration of justice dictates that the court must ultimately have the final word on the scheduling of events in that tribunal. No matter how difficult the situation may be for the individual practitioner, the option to knowingly disobey the directive and not attend the proceeding does not belong to the attorney. Accordingly, we conclude that Respondent violated Prof.Cond.R. 3.4(c).
Respondent is also charged with engaging in conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice thereby violating Prof. Cond.R. 8.4(d). The failure of Respondent to attend the above-noted proceeding necessitated the rescheduling of the cases. His deliberate acts constituted a violation of this rule.
Lastly, Respondent is charged with violating Prof.Cond.R. 8.2(a) by making a statement that he knew to be false or with reckless disregard as to its truth or falsity concerning the qualifications or integrity of a judge of the Tippecanoe Superior Court. During the course of the hearing of this matter, the Commission narrowed their focus of this alleged violation to the “reckless disregard” prohibition. The Commission did not attempt to demonstrate that the Respondent intentionally made a statement known to be false. As noted above, the Hearing Officer concluded that Respondent’s statements to the Graffiti Times were made with reckless disregard as to their truth or falsity.
Respondent does not raise a first amendment constitutional challenge to this charge of professional misconduct. Instead, Respondent expresses his perceptions of unfairness in his treatment in the Tippecanoe Superior Court and requests this Court to “examine the roots of this matter.” Respondent further argues that at the hearing of this disciplinary matter he was precluded from introducing evidence to establish the truth of his public accusations. Respondent cites no authority on point.
As presented to this Court, the question is one of state of mind and conduct. What did Respondent know at the time he made the statements about the Tippecanoe Superior Court? Did he have a basis upon which to make statements concerning the Court? Did the statements he made challenge the qualifications or integrity of the judge? Were the statements reckless in light of his knowledge and experience?
During the course of the proceedings in this case, Respondent introduced witnesses and attempted to have them cite their opinions as to the qualifications of Judge Johnson. There was no foundation established that these witnesses presented information to the Respondent which he employed in forming conclusions before his public statements. The witnesses’ testimony was properly deemed to be irrelevant by the Hearing Officer.
The record presented in this case indicates that Respondent had reason to complain about the trial court’s administration of the Lucas case. The Tippecanoe Superior Court engaged in procedures that were unusual, at best. Ex parte communication between the prosecution and the court, without notice to opposing counsel of record, should not be done as matter of course. Jailing an attorney for failure to appear due to a conflict of schedule is also a questionable practice, albeit within the sound discretion of the trial court. And having an attorney appear in jail attire with his client creates a definite suggestion of partiality. *1258The record in this case also indicates that Respondent was informed by his counsel of a general assessment of the Judge in the local legal community. He was told that Judge Johnson was particularly stern in criminal matters. Local counsel referred to Judge Johnson as “Maximum Time.”
Some of the comments made by Respondent to the Graffiti Times are related to the events which had occurred in the case and matters specifically known to the Respondent. Had Respondent confined his comments along these lines, there could be no finding of “reckless disregard.” But Respondent went further; Respondent chose to criticize the court and Judge Johnson as an institution. Respondent stated that Judge Johnson was “ignorant, insecure, and a racist.” These comments clearly draw disfavor to the integrity of the court and there is no basis upon which to conclude that the comments were anything else but reckless.
In light of the above considerations, we now conclude that by referring to Judge Johnson as “ignorant, insecure, and a racist,” Respondent made a statement with reckless disregard as to its truth or falsity concerning the qualifications or integrity of the judge of the Tippecanoe Superior Court. This conduct violated Prof.Cond.R. 8.2(a).
It is now the duty of this Court to assess an appropriate discipline for the misconduct found in this case. The Hearing Officer recommends no particular discipline, but states that Respondent has already been adequately punished for his contempt of court. We will consider the Hearing Officer’s assessment as mitigation in this matter.
Respondent’s professional misconduct is directed toward the administration of justice. Courts cannot function if trial attorneys believe they have the right to deny their authority. Equally, the judicial institution is greatly impaired if attorneys choose to assault the integrity of the process and the individuals who are called upon to make decisions. This court must preserve the integrity of the process and impose discipline on those who cannot adhere to professional standards in this regard.
It is, therefore, ordered that, by reason of the professional misconduct found in this case, the Respondent, Jacob A. Atanga, should be and hereby is suspended from the practice of law for a period of thirty (30) days beginning August 1,1994. After the completion of this period of suspension, Respondent shall be automatically reinstated to the practice of law.
Costs of this proceeding are assessed against Respondent.
SHEPARD, C.J., concurring and dissenting with opinion.
SULLIVAN, J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 9741288 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:47.046648+00 ===

SULLIVAN, Justice,
dissenting.
I respectfully dissent. The sanction imposed by the court is grossly disproportionate to the alleged misconduct.
The court suspends Mr. Atanga from the practice of law for several ill-advised decisions that he made during the course of a kafkaesque series of events. Approximately one year after being admitted to the bar, Mr. Atanga traveled to Lafayette to represent without charge an indigent, troubled young woman for whom no local representation was apparently available. After Mr. Atanga agreed to represent the woman in another matter (also without charge), the judge granted his request to schedule the next hearing so that it did not conflict with a previously scheduled court appearance in Indianapolis. The day before the Indianapolis hearing, the judge called Mr. Atanga and, countermanding his earlier entry, ordered Mr. Atanga to be in Lafayette the next day. When Mr. Atanga did not appear the next *1259day or at the subsequently scheduled contempt hearing, he was arrested in Indianapolis, placed in the Marion County jail overnight, transported to Lafayette the next day, fingerprinted, photographed, had his belongings confiscated, dressed in prison garb and, while so dressed, hauled into court not only to defend himself against contempt charges but also to represent his client, who had also been brought to court. At this hearing, a full complement from the local press corps was present.
The sanction imposed by the majority today is unjust for three reasons: First, it rests on insufficient findings of fact. Second, it is grossly disproportionate to the offense alleged. And, third, it fails to take into account substantial mitigating factors.
While Mr. Atanga makes legitimate arguments as to why he failed to attend either of the hearings that he is charged with missing, I agree with the hearing officer that this conduct did violate Indiana Professional Conduct Rules 3.4(e) and 8.4(d). However, I also agree with the hearing officer that the contempt sanctions imposed by the trial judge were sufficient sanction for these violations. The majority appears to agree. Therefore, the sanction at issue is that attributable to Mr. Atanga’s published comments in the Graffiti Times. These comments were found to violate Professional Conduct Rule 8.2(a), which provides that “[a] lawyer shall not make a statement that the lawyer knows to be false or with reckless disregard as to its truth or falsity concerning the qualifications or integrity of a judge, adjudicatory officer or public legal officer, or of a candidate for election or appointment to judicial or legal office.”1
In order to sanction Mr. Atanga for a violation of Professional Conduct Rule 8.2(a), the Disciplinary Commission was required to prove each element of the alleged violation by clear and convincing evidence. Ind.Admission and Discipline Rule 28(14)(f). In its de novo review, the majority relies on the hearing officer’s findings and conclusions to satisfy itself that this requirement was met. In my view, neither the hearing officer’s findings and conclusions nor the record itself demonstrates that the Commission met its burden of proof by clear and convincing evidence.
In his findings, the hearing officer characterizes Mr. Atanga’s remarks as “derogatory” and as “criticism.” This is an insufficient factual basis upon which to find that Mr. Atanga’s remarks were made with “reckless disregard as to [their] truth or falsity concerning the qualifications or integrity of a judge of the Tippecanoe Superior Court.” Likewise, I do not believe that such an inference can be drawn from the excerpt from the Graffiti Times included in the findings. None of these findings establish recklessness in any way. The Commission argues that Mr. Atanga had no verification for his statements prior to making them and they were therefore reckless. But unless a finding of fact is made that Mr. Atanga had no prior verification for his statements, such an argument should not be the basis for a conclusion *1260of recklessness and should not be the basis for discipline. I also note that the hearing officer makes no finding or conclusion that the Commission has proved the charges against Mr. Atanga by clear and convincing evidence. While adherence to this standard may probably be assumed, it would be better practice to have it specifically set forth.
In analyzing the appropriate sanction for lawyer misconduct, this court relies heavily upon the American Bar Association Standards for Imposing Lawyer Sanctions (“Standards”). E.g., In re Burchett (1994), Ind., 630 N.E.2d 205; In re Hanley (1994), Ind., 627 N.E.2d 800; In re Pitschke (1994), Ind., 627 N.E.2d 440. While by no means disposi-tive, the Standards provide a good measure of the proportionality of any particular sanction to the alleged misconduct. Standard 7.0 is applicable to the alleged misconduct in this case. That Standard provides as follows:
7.0 Violations of Other Duties Owed as Professional
7.1 Disbarment is generally appropriate when a lawyer knowingly engages in conduct that is a violation of a duty owed to the profession with the intent to obtain a benefit for the lawyer or another, and causes serious or potentially serious injury to a client, the public, or the legal system.
7.2 Suspension is generally appropriate when a lawyer knowingly engages in conduct that is a violation of a duty owed as a professional, and causes injury or potential injury to a client, the public, or the legal áystem.
7.3 Reprimand is generally appropriate when a lawyer negligently engages in conduct that is a violation of a duty owed as a professional, and causes injury or potential injury to a client, the public, or the legal system.
7.4 Admonition is generally appropriate when a lawyer engages in an isolated instance of negligence that is a violation of a duty owed as a professional, and causes little or no actual or potential injury to a client, the public, or the legal system.
Standards for Employing Lawyer Sanctions § 7.0 (American Bar Association, 1992).
Assuming Mr. Atanga did violate Professional Conduct Rule 8.2(a), that violation was clearly no more than an isolated instance that caused little or no actual or potential injury. The statements made by Mr. Atanga that are the subject of this proceeding appear at the very end of a long story covering parts of three pages in an obscure newsletter. For these statements of Mr. Atanga even to be read, an individual would first have to secure a copy of the Graffiti Times and read through 81 column inches of text, making two page jumps along the way, before getting to Mr. Atanga’s comments. Publication of these statements in such an obscure place cannot possibly cause injury. Publication of the majority’s opinion will, in all likelihood, get far more attention.
This court has repeatedly held that in disciplinary cases it is appropriate to consider factors in mitigation. In re Reed (1992), Ind., 599 N.E.2d 601; In re Roche (1989), Ind., 540 N.E.2d 36. Yet despite the presence of significant mitigating factors in this case, the majority ignores them altogether. A mitigating factor of some weight is the indignity to which Mr. Atanga was subjected in being required to represent his client in court while , wearing prison garb. Cf. In re Turner (1994), Ind., 631 N.E.2d 918, 920 (Shepard, C.J., dissenting). It is of greater weight that Mr. Atanga was respectful and deferential to the court in every way throughout the contempt proceeding and that he made no comments whatsoever to the news media which had been rounded up to cover the event. His comments came only some time later, after they had been solicited by the editor of an extraordinarily obscure newsletter. It should also not be left out of the balance that Mr. Atanga is a relatively new lawyer, In re Burton (1993), Ind., 625 N.E.2d 457, In re Matz (1990), Ind., 560 N.E.2d 66, and that he has, moreover, no prior record of disciplinary action. In re Schreiber (1994), Ind., 632 N.E.2d 362.
Entitled to much greater weight still is Mr. Atanga’s considerable record of service to both bar and community. In re Lebamoff (1994), Ind., 630 N.E.2d 560. In the very best tradition of our profession, Mr. Atanga devotes considerable time and effort to the *1261representation of indigent clients. Indeed, it was his highly commendable response to a request to represent an indigent, troubled young woman in Lafayette that gave rise to the unfortunate events in this case. Corollary to this is the fact that suspending Mr. Atanga from the practice of law for any period of time will deprive many Hoosiers who are financially unable to secure counsel of the benefit of Mr. Atanga’s representation. Furthermore, Mr. Atanga has been actively involved in service to the bar and currently serves as the president-elect of the Marion County Bar Association, an organization that makes a significant contribution to the legal profession not just in Indianapolis, but throughout the state.
Because the sanction imposed by the majority is not supported by sufficient evidence of misconduct, because it is disproportionate to the alleged misconduct, and because it fails to take into account significant mitigating factors, I dissent.
. The language used to describe the elements of the alleged offense and the Commission’s burden of proof here are identical to those necessary for a public figure to maintain a cause of action for defamation. In a defamation suit brought by a public official, the First Amendment requires the plaintifffpublic official to show that in publishing the defamatory statement the defendant acted with actual malice. New York Times v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254, 84 S.Ct. 710, 11 L.Ed.2d 686 (1964). Actual malice is present when the defendant acts with knowledge that the defamatory statement was false or with reckless disregard of whether it was false or not. Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U.S. 323, 94 S.Ct. 2997, 41 L.Ed.2d 789 (1974). The actual malice element must be shown by clear and convincing evidence. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 106 S.Ct. 2505, 91 L.Ed.2d 202 (1986). While these principles are most familiar in defamation actions against news media, e.g., Indianapolis Newspapers, Inc. v. Fields (1970), 254 Ind. 219, 259 N.E.2d 651, they apply with equal force in defamation actions against non-media defendants, e.g., Heeb v. Smith (1993), Ind.App., 613 N.E.2d 416. While In re Terry (1979), 271 Ind. 499, 394 N.E.2d 94, holds that we do not analyze charges of lawyer misconduct in the same way as charges of libel or defamation, that holding may be ripe for reexamination in light of the exalted constitutional status given "political speech" in Indiana by Price v. State (1993), Ind., 622 N.E.2d 954, petition for reh'g pending. If the obscenity Colleen Price screamed at an Indianapolis police officer constituted "popular comment on public concerns [that] should not be restrained,” Id. at 961, so too for Mr. Atanga's comments here.

=== CASE 9741289 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:47.296181+00 ===

Per Curiam.
The defendant, Jerry G. Ohler, was convicted by a York County District Court jury of a violation of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-508(1) (Reissue 1979), possession of burglary tools, a felony, and of a violation of Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-511(1) (Reissue 1979), possession of stolen property, a misdemeanor. Ohler further was found to be an habitual criminal pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. § 29-2221 (Reissue 1979). He was fined $500 for the misdemeanor and was sentenced to a term of 15 years in *743the Nebraska Penal and Correctional Complex for the felony. Defendant’s motion for a new trial alleged that the verdict was not sustained by the evidence, was contrary to law, and that there were irregularities in the proceedings preventing him from having a fair trial. In this court he assigns as error the action of the trial court in overruling his motion' to suppress evidence seized as the result of a warrantless search and in overruling his motion for a new trial. In his brief, Ohler argues only the overruling of his motion to suppress. He makes no claim that the evidence, if properly admitted, did not sustain his conviction. We affirm.
The defendant was arrested on May 3,1979, in a common areaway or alley located behind several business establishments in York, Nebraska. Ohler had entered several of the businesses through the rear door service entry and made contact with several proprietors and employees. One proprietor testified that Ohler had inquired whether the U.P.S. man had been there; another proprietor testified that Ohler told her that he had just come by to say “hello” and, after some conversation, he said he was looking for a lady with a little child. After the conversation about the U.P.S. man, the proprietor of the drugstore became suspicious and called the police department.
Police Sergeant Ronald Dickerson received the call which described the defendant, and he went to the area where he saw a man matching that description walking toward him in the alley, carrying a cardboard box under his arm. Sergeant Dickerson identified himself and then asked the man for identification. The man put his box down onto the ground and presented the officer with a card identifying himself as Jerry G. Ohler. Shortly thereafter, the chief of police, Franklin D. Valentine, arrived on the scene and, after some conversation, told Ohler that some incidents had occurred 1 to 3 months earlier in which a man had been going around asking the same questions which Ohler had asked on this date and that Ohler matched the description of that *744individual. Valentine then told Ohler that, due to the circumstances, he would like Ohler to accompany them down to the police department to check it out further, and Ohler agreed to accompany the officers.
Sergeant Dickerson then asked Ohler what was in the box that he had placed on the ground. Dickerson testified at the preliminary hearing as follows: “Q. And what if anything did he tell you. A. He didn’t tell me anything and I opened the — Q. He didn’t make any response at all when you asked him what was in the box. A. Well, he didn’t tell me what was in the box he just said it was something, that he had found the box up the alley. Q. And what was - what happened next. A. Well, I asked him if he had any objections if we looked in the box to see what he had. He was coming out from a store. Q. What was his response? A. Well, as far as I remember he said that he didn’t make any objections. ” (Emphasis supplied.)
The sergeant then opened the box and inside saw two pairs of men’s boots which appeared to be new. Ohler was asked if he had a sales slip for the merchandise. The reply was in the negative, and Ohler further explained that he had found the boots near a trash receptacle down the alley. He then took the officers down to where he purportedly found the boots. At that time the officers placed the defendant under arrest for possession of stolen property or theft by unlawful taking. Ohler was patted down for weapons and when he opened his jacket the officer found a spatula with a wooden handle tucked into the waist of his pants. It was bent and had some zigzag marks on it.
Following the arrest, defendant was taken to police headquarters and his automobile was impounded. A search warrant was secured for a search of the car, based on an affidavit of Police Officer Michael Rathje. The affidavit set forth information regarding incidents which occurred in January of 1979 involving a burglary of the Sugar Plum Tree store of a sack of cash and checks. Another incident involved a burglary in an *745apartment in the city of York of a large amount of jewelry. The affidavit stated that a man suspected of committing both acts matched the description of a man who had been entering a number of businesses in downtown York in January asking questions and using the same excuses for entering the rear of the store as did the man whom the police had in custody for possession of the stolen boots. The warrant was to search Ohler’s car for a black knee-length coat worn by the man in January, one briefcase, and the jewelry stolen from the apartment.
The search uncovered such items as bent and scratched knives, skeleton keys, penlight flashlights, a screwdriver, a sledge hammer, and a steel punch. At trial, experts testified that these items could be and frequently were used as burglary tools.
After the preliminary hearing and prior to trial, Ohler’s attorney filed a motion in limine and a motion to suppress all evidence held by the State, alleging that the evidence was obtained by an illegal search and seizure of defendant’s person and vehicle. The motion recited that the search was made before defendant was placed under arrest; that the search was made without the consent of defendant; that no probable cause existed for the search, seizure, and arrest; and that defendant has standing to complain that the search was illegal. By stipulation of the parties the search warrant and affidavit and the transcript of the preliminary hearing were admitted as evidence on the motions. No further evidence was adduced at the hearing. We further note that the defendant not only did not testify at the preliminary hearing nor at trial, but neither was any other evidence presented by the defense to contradict the State’s witnesses.
The trial court overruled the motion to suppress and the defendant has assigned that action as error. We note initially that there were two separate searches and seizures to which the motion to suppress applies. The first search was of the defendant’s box and person in *746which the police seized two pairs of boots and the spatula with the wooden handle. The second search and seizure was of the defendant’s automobile in which police seized the burglary tools. If, as the defendant contends, the initial search and seizure and arrest were illegal, it is possible that the second search and seizure, although pursuant to a warrant, could be tainted as fruit of the poisonous tree.
We must determine whether the disputed search and seizure infringed an interest of the defendant which the fourth amendment was designed to protect. Rakas v. Illinois, 439 U.S. 128, 99 S. Ct. 421, 58 L. Ed. 2d 387 (1978). “The interest protected was defined by Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347, 88 S. Ct. 507, 19 L. Ed. 2d 576 (1967), where the Supreme Court held that the capacity to claim the protection of the fourth amendment depends not upon a property right in the invaded place, but upon whether the person who claims the protection of the amendment has a legitimate expectation of privacy in the invaded place.” State v. Vicars, 207 Neb. 325, 329, 299 N.W.2d 421, 425 (1980). The question we must answer is whether governmental officials violated any legitimate expectation of privacy held by the defendant. Rawlings v. Kentucky, 448 U.S. 98, 100 S. Ct. 2556, 65 L. Ed. 2d 633 (1980).
The evidence reveals that the defendant consented to the search of the cardboard box. The defendant cannot assert any expectation of privacy in an area in which he gave governmental officials the permission to inspect. “Whether or not consent to search was freely and intelligently given is a question of fact to be determined from the totality of all the circumstances surrounding it.” State v. French, 203 Neb. 435, 439, 279 N.W.2d 116, 119 (1979). The State presented evidence that the defendant consented to the search of the box. The defendant did not contradict that testimony, either directly or indirectly, nor was it challenged as being involuntary or coerced. We believe that the State has met its burden.
*747Since we have determined that the search of the box and seizure of the boots were lawful, the subsequent arrest of the defendant was based upon probable cause and therefore legal. There was no “poisonous tree” to taint the search, pursuant to warrant, of the defendant’s car and the seizure of the burglary tools. The trial court was correct in overruling the motion to suppress the evidence.
The lawful owner of the boots identified them as having come from her store, and she further testified that she had not given permission to the defendant to have them in his possession. The tools taken from defendant’s car were described by expert testimony to be burglary tools. This evidence was clearly sufficient to support the jury’s verdict of guilty as to both crimes. This court will not interfere with a conviction based upon evidence unless it is so lacking in probative force that as a matter of law it can be said that it is insufficient to support a verdict of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Booth, 202 Neb. 692, 276 N.W.2d 673 (1979).
The judgment and sentence of the District Court were correct and are affirmed.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9741290 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:47.301238+00 ===

Brodkey, J.,
concurring in result.
While I concur in the result reached by the majority of the court, I must strongly disagree with the grounds upon which the majority opinion is based, to wit, that the search by the police of the unsealed and partially opened cardboard box carried by the defendant and placed by him upon the ground prior to the search was a valid “consent search” pursuant to the voluntary and uncoerced consent and permission of the defendant. Of the various available grounds for affirming the conviction of the defendant in this case, the one selected by the majority of the court is, in my opinion, by far the weakest, and not sustained by the record. There are, however, several other valid grounds not mentioned or referred to in the majority opinion upon which de*748fendant’s conviction can and should be sustained, as hereinafter discussed.
The sole and only basis for the conclusion of the majority that the defendant gave his consent to a search of the box is the following testimony of Officer Dickerson given at the preliminary hearing in this matter, as follows: “Q. And what was -- what happened next. A. Well, I asked him if he had any objections if we looked in the box to see what he had. He was coming out from a store. Q. What was his response? A. Well, as far as I remember he said that he didn’t make any objections.” (Emphasis supplied.) It should be noted, however, that when Officer Dickerson testified at the trial regarding the incident, he made no mention of the foregoing alleged consent to search, but only testified that he had asked the defendant what was in the box, but that the defendant did not tell him, and also that the box was partially opened and “we looked inside.” He was then asked: “Do you remember testifying back at the Preliminary Hearing, don’t you, in this matter? A. Yes, sir. Q. And I believe that on approximately page fifty-three of the Preliminary Hearing testimony, I believe the question was asked, ‘What, if anything, did he tell you?’ This is after you had stopped him. Then you stated in response, ‘He didn’t tell me anything and I opened the --’ Then you just stopped and the question came back. ‘He didn’t make any response at all when you asked him what was in the box? Answer: Well, he didn’t tell me what was in the box, he just said it was something.’” Officer Dickerson also testified that he was in uniform at that time. Chief of Police Valentine of York, Nebraska, who was also present at the time of the questioning, testified at the trial with reference to the defendant Ohler as follows: “I asked him if that was his box and he stated it was, and at that time, there was another sergeant present, which was Sergeant Leach and he opened the box up and it had two pair of boots in it.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Even assuming, however, that it was Officer *749Dickerson who had the conversation with the defendant immediately prior to the time that he searched the cardboard box, it is clear from the foregoing testimony that the officer, who was in uniform, did not directly and positively testify that the defendant had given him his consent to search the box, but merely testified that “as far as he could remember” the defendant did not make any objections.
“Consent to search is not to be lightly inferred, but should be shown by clear and convincing evidence, and any consent must be voluntary and uncoerced, either physically or psychologically. The government has the burden of proving the alleged consent. And it has been said that courts do not look with favor on the practice of substituting consent for the authorization of a search warrant.” 68 Am. Jur. 2d Searches and Seizures § 46 at 699 (1973). It is the general rule that “when statements of accused clearly indicate that the search or seizure is made with his voluntary consent he will be held to have waived his rights under the guaranty. Where, however, the surrounding circumstances show that they were not voluntarily made, the courts have generally regarded statements which ostensibly indicated invitation or consent to search as being involuntarily made, and hence not constituting consent or waiver.” 79 C.J.S. Searches and Seizures § 62 at 821-22 (1952). See, also, note 89 at 822 of the above citation, where particular statements are set out which have been held by the courts not to constitute waiver or consent.
The case of State v. French, 203 Neb. 435, 279 N.W.2d 116 (1979), cited in the majority opinion for the proposition that whether or not consent to search was freely and intelligently given is a question of fact to be determined from the totality of all the circumstances surrounding it, is actually and factually more in support of the position of the defendant with reference to his alleged consent to search than it is authority for the State. That case involved the search of the house of the *750defendant by two deputy sheriffs, Earhart and Anderson. While Deputy Earhart led the defendant into the open and handcuffed him and put him in the police car, the defendant heard Deputy Anderson break open the kitchen door. While the defendant was sitting in the police car handcuffed he was asked for permission to go into the house, although no purpose for such entry was suggested. The defendant responded: “‘Well, yeah. It won’t make any difference anyway.’” In its opinion the court stated at 440, 279 N.W.2d at 119: “Even if Deputy Earhart might have believed, at that point, that the defendant had given voluntary, knowing, and intelligent consent to enter the house, Earhart discovered very shortly thereafter that Deputy Anderson had already broken into the house without any authorization whatever. Deputy Earhart was sufficiently uncertain about the consent situation, in view of the circumstances, that he returned to the defendant and said: ‘You would have given us consent anyway, wouldn’t you?’ The defendant answered: ‘No.’ Earhart confirmed that answer on cross-examination.” In that opinion we stated at 441, 279 N.W.2d at 120: “It was neither reasonable nor justifiable for them to conclude that they had the voluntary and intelligent consent of the defendant to make a search. The search was unreasonable. The motion to suppress should have been granted.” In this case, notwithstanding the fact that the trial court apparently found that the defendant, by the single ambiguous statement set out above, had consented to the search of the box in question, I believe that the evidence introduced was clearly not sufficient to establish by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant intended to waive his constitutional immunity to an illegal search and seizure.
However, even assuming arguendo that this court could conclude from the foregoing evidence, without straining its credulity, that the foregoing ambiguous statement allegedly made by the defendant was sufficient to constitute a consent to search the cardboard *751box, I am of the opinion that the majority of this court might better and should have based its opinion on other and stronger existing grounds, primarily that the defendant’s fourth amendment rights were not violated for the reason that he did not have a legitimate expectation of privacy in the unsealed, partially opened cardboard box. The law is now well settled, and is so recognized in the majority opinion, that the capacity to claim the protection of the fourth amendment depends not upon a property right in the invaded place, but upon whether the person who claims the protection of the amendment has a legitimate expectation of privacy in the invaded place. See, Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347, 88 S. Ct. 507, 19 L. Ed. 2d 576 (1967); Rakas v. Illinois, 439 U.S. 128, 99 S. Ct. 421, 58 L. Ed. 2d 387 (1978); Case Note, 13 Creighton L. Rev. 653 (1979); Case Note, 58 Neb. L. Rev. 1123 (1979). On June 25, 1980, the Supreme Court of the United States in United States v. Salvucci, 448 U.S. 83, 100 S. Ct. 2547, 65 L. Ed. 2d 619, expressly overruled the case of Jones v. United States, 362 U.S. 257, 80 S. Ct. 725, 4 L. Ed. 2d 697 (1960), which case had held that defendants charged with crimes of possession were entitled to claim “automatic standing” to challenge the legality of the search which produced the evidence against them, without regard to whether the defendants had an expectation of privacy in the area or premises searched or the property seized. In Salvucci, the Supreme Court held, inter alia, that defendants charged with crimes of possession may only claim the benefits of the exclusionary rule if their own fourth amendment rights have been violated. In Rawlings v. Kentucky, 448 U.S. 98, 100 S. Ct. 2556, 65 L. Ed. 2d 633 (1980), a case announced the same day as Salvucci, the court held that a defendant charged with the crime of possession has the burden of proof in establishing that he has a legitimate expectation of privacy in the area searched or the article seized. It is clear from the existing authorities that the defendant did not sustain his burden of proof that he had a legitimate expectation of privacy in the cardboard box *752which was searched and the articles contained therein which were seized by the York city police. The courts have differentiated between various types of containers which are entitled to an “expectation of privacy,” regardless of their location or the right to possess them. In United States v. Chadwick, 433 U.S. 1, 97 S. Ct. 2476, 53 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1977), the court noted that “luggage is intended as a repository of personal effects,” and that the defendants, by placing their property in a locked footlocker, “manifested an expectation that the contents would remain free from public examination.” Later, in Arkansas v. Sanders, 442 U.S. 753, 99 S. Ct. 2586, 61 L. Ed. 2d 235 (1979), the court stated that certain containers such as luggage, suitcases, or footlockers were “inevitably associated with the expectation of privacy,” and because of their recognition in society as a repository for personal effects, their presence in a car or having fallen into public hands does not alter the reasonableness of an expectation that they will not be opened by the police. The court also held in that case that not all containers, packages, or parcels deserve the full protection of the fourth amendment, and differentiated their fourth amendment treatment from that associated with personal luggage. An excellent and exhaustive review of the cases differentiating the types of containers which will be afforded the protection of the fourth amendment against unreasonable searches and seizures and indicating the types to which the “expectation of privacy” standard will apply is found in the recent case of People v. Maldonado, 76 App. Div. 2d 691, 431 N.Y.S.2d 580 (1980). With reference to the type of container involved in the instant case, the court in Maldonado had the following to say at 696, 431 N.Y.S.2d at 583:
“More troublesome are cases which involve searches of containers which are neither luggage nor have any of the attributes thereof. The courts, with the notable exception of the California Supreme Court in People v Dalton (24 Cal 3d 850, cert den sub nom. California *753v Dalton, 445 US 946 [wherein the warrantless search of a large metal box and a ‘Longine’ box was deemed to be unlawful]), have generally upheld searches of unsecured boxes (United States v Neumann, 585 F2d 355; State v Kahlon, 172 NJ Super 331), paper bags (United States v Ross, _F2d_ [DC Cir, TAMM, J., April 17, 1980]; United States v Vento, 533 F2d 838; Clark v State, 574 P2d 1261 [Alaska]; Webb v State, supra [dictum]), and other receptacles such as: plastic bags (United States v Gooch, 603 F2d 122; Flynn v State, 374 So 2d 1041 [Fla]), a closed but unlocked toolbox (Wyss v State, 262 Ark 502), a covered paper cup People v Diaz, 101 Cal App 3d 440) and an ice chest (State v Heberly, 120 Ariz 541).
“On the other hand, several courts have invalidated searches of nonluggage type containers which are locked (People v Dalton, supra [metal box]), zippered (People v Belton, 50 NY2d 447 [zippered pockets of a jacket found in a car during a warrantless search of the vehicle]; United States v Markland, 489 F Supp 932 [an insulated bag]), taped (United States v Dien, 609 F2d 1038 [cardboard box]; People v Spencer, 74 AD2d 77 [cardboard box]), or fastened shut (People v Rinaldo, 80 Ill App 3d 433 [large box with metal straps]).
Among the cases cited in Maldonado, supra, is United States v. Neumann, 588 F.2d 355 (8th Cir. 1978), in which the court considered a warrantless search of a department store box and stated at 360-61: “This court is of the opinion that the warrant requirement in Chadwick should not be extended to the facts of this case. There is simply an insufficient expectation of privacy in an unsecured cardboard box sitting in plain view in the passenger compartment of an automobile. The arresting officers merely lifted the lid of the box and discovered a large quantity of pills.” The court in Maldonado also stated at 700, 431 N.W.S.2d at 585: “While a box of this sort is commonly used to transport *754recently purchased clothing, it is hardly comparable to personal luggage which securely encases varied articles of a personal nature. Like the department store box in Neumann, the ‘Ripley Howard’ box was discovered in plain view on the floor of the automobile, and could be opened by merely lifting a lid.”
We note in passing, however, that if the defendant in this case would have sealed the cardboard box, or would have securely tied or fastened it in some manner, thereby manifesting a special expectation of privacy, the search by the police would have required the issuance of a search warrant under the law above quoted.
I also think that the majority opinion in this case might well have found that the search in question was one incident to an arrest, notwithstanding the fact that the defendant was arrested after the search was accomplished. The fact is, however, that the arrest was almost contemporaneous with, and immediately followed, the search of the box and the “pat down” of the defendant in which a spatula was discovered on his person. In Rawlings v. Kentucky, 448 U.S. 98, 100 S. Ct. 2556, 65 L. Ed. 2d 633 (1980), the U.S. Supreme Court stated at 111: “Where the formal arrest followed quickly on the heels of the challenged search of petitioner’s person, we do not believe it particularly important that the search preceded the arrest rather than vise versa.”
Finally, I point out that the actual search of the defendant’s car, during which the burglary tools were discovered, was done pursuant to a validly issued search warrant. While it conceivably may be argued that this violated the “fruits of the poisonous tree” doctrine, this is entirely conjectural, and I am far from convinced that it did. If it be concluded that a search, and the resulting evidence recovered in such search, was valid and did not constitute the “fruits of the poisonous tree,” then such evidence would clearly be sufficient in itself to sustain the conviction of the defendant.
*755For all of the above stated reasons, I can only concur in the result reached by the majority of this court in its opinion, and strongly believe that the opinion should have been based upon other grounds than it was.

=== CASE 2226778 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:19.326879+00 ===

636 N.E.2d 850 (1994)
264 Ill. App. 3d 331
201 Ill. Dec. 418
Lori J. BLOMQUIST, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
Samantha KENT, Defendant-Appellee (Allied American Insurance Company, Garnishee Defendant-Appellant).
No. 1-92-1083.
Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, First Division.
May 9, 1994.
Rehearing Denied July 14, 1994.
*851 Moss & Hillison, Chicago (Gregory R. Spelson, of counsel), for garnishee defendant-appellant.
Abrams & Ament, P.C., Wheeling (Edward R. Jordan, of counsel), for appellee.
Presiding Justice CAMPBELL delivered the opinion of the court:
Garnishee Defendant-Appellant, Allied American Insurance Company, (Allied), appeals from the October 3, 1991, order of the trial court entering judgment in favor of Samantha Kent, the defendant in a personal injury damage action, for the use of plaintiff, Lori Blomquist, against Allied, for $10,000 plus costs. Allied further appeals from the February 5, 1992, order of the trial court: (1) denying Allied's motion to compel plaintiff to produce a document for inspection; and (2) denying Allied's post-trial motion to reconsider. On appeal, Allied contends that: (1) the trial court erred in entering judgment against it, where evidence at the garnishment hearing revealed that Allied never received notice of plaintiff's lawsuit; (2) the trial court erred in admitting certain hearsay evidence at the hearing; and (3) the trial court erred in denying Allied's post-trial motion to compel plaintiff to produce evidence admitted during the garnishment hearing.
The record contains the following relevant facts. On June 4, 1991, plaintiff filed an "Affidavit of Garnishment (Non-Wage)" alleging that on April 25, 1991, plaintiff obtained a judgment of $10,000 plus costs and interest against defendant. On July 8, 1991, Allied filed a "No Funds" answer, along with "Affirmative Matters," alleging that defendant failed to comply with a condition of the applicable Allied insurance policy, by failing to forward to Allied every demand, notice, summons or other process, and by failing to provide Allied with actual notice of plaintiff's complaint.
A garnishment hearing commenced on October 3, 1991. The record reveals that no court reporter was present at the hearing, and that the proceedings were not transcribed. Instead, the parties submitted on appeal a "Report of Proceedings" which was certified by the trial court on June 26, 1992. In addition, the parties included in the record on appeal an "Agreed Statement of Facts," which, subject to a few paragraphs that are not agreed upon, represents the parties' recollection of the proceedings.
The agreed facts are as follows. At the hearing, on October 3, 1991, Allied argued that plaintiff had the burden of proof to establish that Allied was obligated to pay the judgment entered against the defendant. The trial court ruled that the burden of proof was upon Allied. Neither the defendant nor the defendant's attorney appeared at the hearing.
*852 Allan Zussman, an adjuster for Allied, testified that Allied had not received any notice of plaintiff's lawsuit until served with the garnishment action.
On cross-examination, Zussman testified that Valerie Makowski, another Allied adjuster, worked on the file extensively, and that the file contained several pieces of correspondence between plaintiff's counsel and Makowski. Plaintiff's counsel recalls that Zussman testified that he saw Allied's file in this matter for the first time to prepare for his testimony on October 3, 1991. Allied's counsel denies that Zussman ever made such a statement.
Zussman identified an original letter and Notice of Attorney's Lien from plaintiff's counsel to defendant dated March 16, 1989. He further testified that Allied received the letter from defendant. Plaintiff's counsel asked Zussman if the file contained a letter from plaintiff's counsel to Makowski dated September 11, 1990. Zussman stated that he could find no letter from plaintiff's counsel to Makowski dated September 11, 1990, and stated that Allied never received the letter.
Plaintiff's counsel stated that the September 11, 1990, letter was a letter he had written and mailed on that day to Makowski, along with a copy of the summons and complaint. Plaintiff offered into evidence exhibit 1, a copy of the September 11, 1990, letter. Plaintiff's counsel was not sworn in as a witness.
Allied objected to exhibit 1 being received as evidence arguing that: (1) it was hearsay; (2) no foundation had been laid to authenticate the document; and (3) no foundation had been laid to establish that exhibit 1 was actually sent to Allied. The court overruled these objections and admitted exhibit 1 into evidence.
Plaintiff's counsel recalls that thereafter, Allied failed to cross-examine plaintiff's counsel regarding exhibit 1. Allied's counsel recalls that she was not given the opportunity to cross-examine plaintiff's counsel.
In subsequent post-trial proceedings, Allied argued that it was deprived of the opportunity to cross-examine plaintiff's counsel at the October 3, 1991, hearing. At that time, the trial court offered to Allied's counsel the opportunity to cross-examine plaintiff's counsel regarding exhibit 1. Allied argued that no evidence had been presented to contradict Zussman's testimony that defendant never provided any notice to Allied of plaintiff's lawsuit.
Following arguments, the trial court found that there was sufficient credible evidence to establish that Allied had actual notice of the pending litigation. The trial court then entered judgment in favor of defendant, for the use of plaintiff, and against Allied for $10,000 plus costs and interest.
On October 18, 1991, Allied filed a motion to compel the plaintiff to produce the original copy of the alleged letter of September 11, 1990, and also requested leave to file a motion to reconsider the trial court's order of October 3, 1991.
On February 5, 1992, the trial court denied both Allied's motion to compel and motion to consider.
Allied filed a timely notice of appeal on March 6, 1992.
Initially, Allied contends that the trial court erred in entering judgment against it because the evidence at the garnishment hearing revealed that defendant never received notice of plaintiff's original lawsuit. Allied essentially suggests that the trial court's decision is contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence.
A verdict is against the manifest weight of the evidence where the opposite conclusion is clearly evident or where the findings are unreasonable, arbitrary, and not based upon the evidence. Upon review, this court may not reconsider the evidence or reassess the witnesses' credibility or demeanor. Horace Mann Insurance Company v. Brown (1992), 236 Ill.App.3d 456, 465, 177 Ill. Dec. 690, 603 N.E.2d 760.
Allied relies on Sowinski v. Ramey (1976), 36 Ill.App.3d 690, 344 N.E.2d 635, and Johnson v. R & D Enterprises (1982), 106 Ill. App. 3d 496, 62 Ill. Dec. 261, 435 N.E.2d 1233. In Sowinski, the evidence at trial showed that the insured failed to cooperate with the insurer to provide information necessary for *853 the insurer's investigation and management of a claim. The court held for the garnishee, finding the garnishee had established by a preponderance of the evidence all affirmative defenses raised in its pleadings, including that of noncooperation. In Johnson, the court found that "where an insured has breached policy conditions, a garnishment action generally will not lie." Johnson, 106 Ill.App.3d at 500, 62 Ill. Dec. 261, 435 N.E.2d 1233.
The cases cited by Allied are unpersuasive. Allied has not shown that the evidence at the hearing revealed that the defendant failed to cooperate in the investigation or that she breached the policy conditions relevant in the present case.
The record in the present case shows that Allied failed to establish its affirmative defense that it did not receive notice of plaintiff's lawsuit. Allied submitted one witness, Zussman, on its behalf at the garnishment hearing. Zussman testified that he did not work on the file relevant to the plaintiff's accident claim, but rather reviewed the file only to prepare to testify on October 3, 1991. Zussman testified that another Allied adjuster, Makowski, worked on the file extensively, and that the file contained several pieces of correspondence between plaintiff's counsel and Makowski. Zussman identified from the file an original letter and Notice of Attorney's Lien from plaintiff's counsel to defendant dated March 16, 1989, and stated that Allied received the letter from defendant. Zussman further testified that he could not find in the file a letter from plaintiff's counsel to Makowski dated September 11, 1990. Based on this testimony, the trial court determined that Allied had notice of plaintiff's original lawsuit against defendant. Allied has thus failed to show that the decision of the trial court was against the manifest weight of the evidence.
Next, Allied contends that the trial court erred in admitting into evidence at trial, plaintiff's exhibit 1, a copy of a letter dated September 11, 1990, written by plaintiff's counsel and sent to Makowski, allegedly attaching plaintiff's summons and complaint. Allied argues that exhibit 1 was improper hearsay, for which no foundation was laid. Allied further argues that plaintiff's counsel was not deemed a witness in the proceeding, and was not sworn under oath, and therefore his "testimony" regarding exhibit 1 was improper. We note that plaintiff's exhibit 1 is not included in the record on appeal.
A letter introduced for the sole purpose of showing that the letter was sent to and received by a party is not hearsay. (Fandrich v. Allstate Insurance Company (1974), 25 Ill.App.3d 301, 322 N.E.2d 843.) In the present case, plaintiff introduced into evidence a copy of a letter dated September 11, 1990, to show that the original was sent to Allied. Allied has cited no authority in support of its contention that an attorney must be sworn under oath in order to describe an exhibit to the court.
From the facts available, exhibit 1 was properly admitted to impeach the credibility of a witness on cross-examination. (See Frisch v. International Harvester Company (1975), 33 Ill.App.3d 507, 338 N.E.2d 90.) The record shows that Zussman testified on cross-examination that Makowski worked extensively on the file, and that the file contained correspondence between plaintiff's counsel and Makowski. Zussman further identified an original letter and Notice of Attorney's Lien from plaintiff's counsel to defendant dated March 16, 1989, and stated that Allied received the letter from defendant. Plaintiff then showed Zussman exhibit 1, a copy of the September 11, 1990, letter, and Zussman insisted that the original was not in the file. Under the circumstances, exhibit 1 was properly considered by the trial court.
Finally, Allied contends that the trial court erred in denying its post-trial motion to compel plaintiff to produce the original copy of the September 11, 1990, letter, admitted into evidence as plaintiff's exhibit 1 during the garnishment hearing. Allied has failed to cite any authority in support of this contention, and therefore has waived this issue for review by this court. In re: Marriage of Olbrecht (1992), 232 Ill.App.3d 358, 173 Ill. Dec. 661, 597 N.E.2d 635.
*854 For the reasons stated, we therefore affirm the judgment of the trial court.
Affirmed.
O'CONNOR and MANNING, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9741291 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:48.174863+00 ===

JUSTICE TULLY delivered the opinion of the court: After a jury trial, defendant Joseph Rogers was convicted of attempted first degree murder, aggravated battery, and armed violence. (111. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, pars. 8 — 4, 12 — 4, 33A — 2.) Defendant was sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment for attempted first degree murder. Defendant appeals the judgment of conviction. We affirm. The State presented the following sequence of events at trial: On September 2, 1987, Chicago police department detectives Thomas Keough, John Duffy, and Michael McDermott went to the single-story home of Patricia Jackson at 10353 South Crandon, Chicago, Illinois. Keough rang the doorbell and Jackson’s 14-year-old nephew, Steven Cannon, who also lived in the house, answered the door at approximately 12:30 p.m. Keough identified himself and asked Cannon if the house was the Jackson residence, to which Cannon said yes. Keough told Cannon that the police were looking for defendant. Cannon then invited Keough and McDermott in, led them to a rear bedroom and pointed out the sleeping defendant. In the bedroom, the detectives saw defendant lying under a blanket which was pulled up to his eye level and covered his hands. It was at this point the two detectives, now joined by Duffy, first drew their guns, awakened defendant and identified themselves. The police brought defendant into the dining room, handcuffed him, sat him at a table, informed him of his Miranda rights, and told him that he was being arrested for the shooting of Antoine Page. Defendant indicated he understood his rights and agreed to talk with the police. At approximately 12:45 p.m., the police took defendant directly from the Jackson residence to the Area Two police station and placed him in an interview room, handcuffed to a ring on the wall. At 3:15 p.m., Duffy and Assistant State’s Attorney Don Jonker went into the interview room, uncuffed defendant, and sat him at a table. Jonker identified himself to defendant as an assistant State’s Attorney and informed defendant of his rights. Defendant indicated that he understood his rights. During the 15- or 20-minute interview, defendant gave only an oral statement. Defendant never stated that he did not wish to talk or that he wanted to make a phone call or speak to an attorney. The defendant contends that the following occurred: At the Jackson residence, a detective pointed a gun at Cannon’s chest and asked where defendant was. After Cannon answered, the officers, without permission, went to the back room to get defendant. Furthermore, Cannon believed he had no choice but to allow the police entry. Defendant was in a back bedroom watching television with the door locked. Defendant heard a knock at the door, opened it, and saw the three detectives. Two of the three detectives came in the room and pointed guns at defendant’s head. The third detective handcuffed defendant. In the dining room, the police told defendant that he was under arrest. Defendant contends that, while in the house, he was not given Miranda warnings or told why he was under arrest. However, Cannon testified that the police did, in fact, give defendant his Miranda warnings. It was at this point that defendant had a "slight conversation” with Duffy. The police then, according to defendant, took him to the fourth district police station and then to the Area Two police station, where they placed him in various rooms and handcuffed him to the wall. At 3:15 p.m., Duffy came into the room with Jonker who, only in the midst of questioning defendant, read the Miranda warnings to defendant. Defendant asked Jonker if he could make a telephone call to a lawyer. Jonker told defendant that he could make the telephone call only after the interview was done and continued questioning defendant. Before trial, defendant moved to quash his warrantless arrest and suppress subsequent statements, contending such statements were tainted fruit of an illegal arrest and made absent Miranda warnings. The trial court found that the police did not have guns drawn at the Jackson residence when Cannon answered the door; Cannon was sufficiently mature and streetwise to be capable of consenting to the police entry and had, in fact, consented to the police entry, rather than merely acquiescing to police authority; and Cannon led the detectives to defendant and pointed him out to them. Accordingly, the trial court denied the motion to quash arrest. The trial court further found that Duffy and Jonker both gave defendant Miranda warnings prior to interviewing him, and that he understood these warnings and chose to waive his rights. The court found that defendant did not request an attorney. Therefore, the court denied the motion to suppress statements subsequent to arrest. Defendant made four additional pretrial motions. The first was a motion to allow evidence of complainant Page’s alleged gang affiliation. The court granted the motion to the extent that gang affiliation related to interaction of the complaining witness and defendant. The second motion was to allow evidence of Page’s alleged drug sales and usage. This motion was granted as to drug usage, but denied as to sales. Thus, defendant would be permitted to bring out the specific instance of Page allegedly giving defendant cocaine to sell. The third was a motion in limine to keep out evidence of extra-indictment crimes. The evidence in question was a police report which contained a statement allegedly made by defendant, just before allegedly shooting Page, that "I have just killed somebody:” The motion was denied. Defendant then asked the trial court for a limiting instruction. The trial court indicated it would consider an instruction if and when such evidence came in. The fourth motion was to exclude defendant’s prior conviction for voluntary manslaughter. The trial court denied this motion. At trial, the State presented the following chronology of the events of September 2, 1987, leading up to the shooting of Antoine Page: On the night in question, at about 3 a.m., Page received a phone call from a friend who had arranged a party and invited Page to come to his house, which was two blocks away. A short time later, Page began to walk to the friend’s house and heard gunshots. Two minutes later, Page saw defendant running from a housing project into a prairie area across the street. Page recognized defendant as a neighborhood acquaintance. Page called to defendant, "Joe, come here.” Defendant initially continued running but then approached Page. Standing two feet from Page, defendant stated that he had just shot someone and threatened, "You called my name and I’m going to shoot you now.” Page was unarmed and no one else was in the area. Page told defendant to quit playing around. Defendant drew closer to Page and then shot him in the face. Page ran a couple of houses down to the home of a friend, Mark Jones. Page knocked on the door but no one answered. At this point, Page was bent over, bleeding from the mouth and nose. He then felt a blow to the back of his head from a hard object, sensed someone behind him, and heard a click. Page ran into a gangway, and looking back, saw defendant running away. Page ran home and told his mother that he had been shot. Later, Page told the police that defendant had shot him. Page was eventually taken to a hospital where a .22 caliber bullet was removed from his left nasal cavity. Defendant presented the following sequence of events leading up to the shooting of Page: Defendant joined the "El Rukn” street gang in 1980 or 1981. He quit the gang in 1984. From that point on defendant was harassed by the "Vice Lords” street gang, the neighborhood El Rukn affiliate, specifically Page, Jones, Othen McCahey, and two other individuals known as "Chico” and "Shabaz.” On February 20, 1985, in an unrelated matter, defendant was convicted of voluntary manslaughter. After defendant was released from prison in 1986, Page came to defendant’s house and announced that he had "protected” defendant’s family from the El Rukns while defendant was incarcerated. Page told defendant that he expected to be paid for this protection. On September 1, 1987, Page told defendant that he wanted defendant to sell some packets of cocaine for him as a final payment on defendant’s obligation to Page for protecting defendant’s family. Defendant testified that at approximately 2 a.m. on September 2, 1987, he received a telephone call from a woman named Fifi, who told him that she had been arguing with her boyfriend and wanted defendant to come and pick her up. Defendant went to Fifi’s residence, rang the doorbell several times, to which no one answered, and then decided to return home. On his way home, defendant saw Page, Jones, Chico, and another person sitting in an automobile. Page called to defendant, but defendant continued walking. Defendant looked over his shoulder and saw the four individuals get out of the car. Defendant then ran to the Trumbull Park housing project and hid. Later, Page and Jones found him. Jones had a rifle and Page had a handgun pointed at the unarmed defendant’s chest. Page and defendant argued over the money defendant was to have collected for selling Page’s cocaine. Page ordered defendant into a prairie five feet away. Defendant refused to move and kicked Page. The two fell to the ground and struggled over Page’s gun. The gun went off and defendant ran away. At trial, the jury found defendant guilty of attempted first degree murder, aggravated battery, and armed violence. The trial court entered a verdict of guilty for attempted first degree murder. After the trial was over, but before sentencing, defendant was being transported to the courthouse from jail with Gary Fisher, a member of a street gang called "The Disciples,” a rival of the Vice Lords. Fisher told defendant that he knew Page, knew Page was a Vice Lord, and was willing to testify to that fact. Subsequently, Fisher executed an affidavit to that effect. At trial, Page denied that he was or ever had been a member of a gang. We first turn to defendant’s contention that the trial court erred in denying his motion to quash his arrest and suppress the statements resulting from such arrest, thus violating his rights under the fourth amendment of the United States Constitution and article I, sections 2 and 6, of the Illinois Constitution. (U.S. Const., amend. IV; HI. Const. 1970, art. I, §§ 2, 6.) In order to decide whether defendant’s arrest and the statements derived from it were proper, we must review the trial court’s finding that Cannon was capable of consenting to the police’s entering the Jackson residence. Defendant contends that 14-year-old Cannon was not capable of consenting to the police search but instead was bowing to police pressure or authority. We start from the principle that a trial court’s determination that a search was consensual is a factual matter entitled to deference upon review by this court. Where the evidence on the issue is in conflict, a reviewing court will accept the finding of the trial court unless it is clearly unreasonable. (People v. DeMorrow (1974), 59 Ill. 2d 352, 320 N.E.2d 1.) The burden the State had to carry in this instance was to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that in light of the totality of the circumstances, Cannon voluntarily allowed the detectives to enter the Jackson residence. (People v. Branham (1985), 137 Ill. App. 3d 896, 484 N.E.2d 1226.) There is no per se rule that precludes a minor child from giving consent to a search by the police; age alone is not an automatic barrier to capacity to consent. Age is but one factor considered by a court; others are: the time of the intrusion; whether there was some initial refusal or resistance to the search; and whether the minor had knowledge of a right to refuse. People v. Swansey (1978), 62 Ill. App. 3d 1015, 379 N.E.2d 1279.  Here, the trial court rejected the idea that Cannon merely submitted to police authority or acquiesced out of fear of the police. The search at issue in this case occurred at 12:30 p.m., not an unreasonable hour of the day. There is nothing in the record to indicate that Cannon in any way resisted or refused the police’s request. Furthermore, the trial court specifically found Cannon sufficiently mature and streetwise to consent. Thus, we conclude that there was no manifest error by the trial court in finding that Cannon had the capacity to consent. Accordingly, the trial court did not err in denying defendant’s motion to quash his arrest.  We now examine the issue of whether the trial court erred in allowing the admission of defendant’s post-arrest statements into evidence. Assuming, arguendo, that defendant’s post-arrest statements were tainted, it is nevertheless irrelevant, as such statements were introduced by the State not in its case in chief, but rather in rebuttal for the purpose of impeachment. Evidence obtained in violation of Miranda or the fourth amendment, so long as such evidence is not coerced, can be properly admitted to rebut previous inconsistent testimony of a defendant. The constitutional protections guaranteed by the fourth amendment and Miranda cannot be "perverted into a license to use perjury by way of a defense, free from the risk of confrontation with prior inconsistent utterances.” (Harris v. New York (1971), 401 U.S. 222, 226, 28 L. Ed. 2d 1, 5, 91 S. Ct. 643, 646.) Furthermore, the trial court instructed the jury that such statements could only be considered for the purpose of deciding the weight to be given defendant’s testimony. Consequently, the State’s introduction of defendant’s statements in rebuttal for impeachment purposes was not improper. Defendant next urges that the trial court erred in allowing testimony of extra-indictment offenses into evidence. He argues that such testimony unfairly prejudiced him and that this error was compounded by the trial court’s failure to give the jury a limiting instruction. Statements made by a defendant which illustrate, explain, or interpret by way of collateral criminal acts, which are interwoven with the criminal transaction for which the defendant is being tried, are admissible as a part of the res gestae of the underlying criminal transaction. Such statements are admissible even if they tend to suggest prejudicial outside crimes of the defendant. The prejudicial effect of such evidence outweighing its probative value is a decision within the discretion of the trial court. (People v. Calcaterra (1966), 33 Ill. 2d 541, 213 N.E.2d 270, cert. denied (1966), 385 U.S. 7, 17 L. Ed. 2d 8, 87 S. Ct. 65; People v. Glover (1988), 173 Ill. App. 3d 678, 527 N.E.2d 968.) We believe the res gestae doctrine is directly applicable to defendant’s statements to Page regarding another shooting.  The fact that defendant made statements about another shooting to Page, regardless of their basis in fact, is highly probative of defendant’s state of mind, which the defense placed in issue in this case under the theory of accident or self-defense. Moreover, these statements about another shooting and defendant’s need to shoot Page demonstrate an intent of defendant to shoot Page and defendant’s initiation of the conflict. Therefore, we find that the trial court did not commit error in admitting these statements and denying the motion in limine. Additionally, we note that the evidence at issue was not "other crimes” evidence as defendant suggests, and, therefore, we find a limiting jury instruction need not have been tendered to the jury and, thus, no error was committed by the trial court in this regard. We next turn to defendant’s argument that the trial court abused its discretion in allowing defendant’s testimony to be impeached by his prior voluntary manslaughter conviction. Defendant contends the conviction’s probative value was outweighed by its unfair prejudice to him. Additionally, defendant contends that the trial court exacerbated this perceived error in not allowing in the circumstances of the conviction. Section 6 of "An Act to revise the law in relation to criminal jurisprudence” (111. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 155 — 1) provides, in pertinent part: "No person shall be disqualified as a witness in any criminal case *** by reason of his or her having been convicted of any crime; but such *** conviction may be shown for the purpose of affecting the credibility of the witness.” The appellate court in People v. Hall (1983), 117 Ill. App. 3d 788, 453 N.E.2d 1327, cert. denied (1984), 467 U.S. 1228, 81 L. Ed. 2d 878, 104 S. Ct. 2683, outlined the abuse of discretion standard set forth by the Illinois Supreme Court in People v. Montgomery (1971), 47 Ill. 2d 510, 268 N.E.2d 695, as follows: "In People v. Montgomery [citation], the supreme court held that a defendant’s prior convictions may be admitted for impeachment purposes at the trial court’s discretion if (1) the prior offense was punishable by imprisonment in excess of one year or involved dishonesty, and (2) if either the conviction or release from confinement occurred within the preceding 10 years. The Montgomery court further stated that once the first two prerequisites are met, the court must then balance the prejudicial effect of the prior conviction on the jury against its probative value. As a guide to the balancing process, the Montgomery court suggested that the following factors be considered: (1) nature of the crime; (2) nearness or remoteness of the prior crime; (3) the subsequent career of the person; and (4) whether the crime was similar to the one charged.” Hall, 117 Ill. App. 3d at 798.  In the case at hand, the initial prerequisites of Montgomery have been met, i.e., the prior voluntary manslaughter conviction was punishable by imprisonment in excess of one year (111. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 9 — 2) and both the conviction and the release occurred within the preceding 10 years. Consequently, testimony regarding the prior voluntary manslaughter conviction was admissible unless its probative value was substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. Thus, we must now apply Montgomery’s four remaining factors. The first factor is the nature of the crime. It has been held that a prior conviction for manslaughter introduced against a defendant is not an abuse of discretion and bears directly on the credibility of his evidence supporting his justification for killing. (People v. Evans (1981), 92 Ill. App. 3d 874, 416 N.E.2d 377.) We believe that defendant’s previous conviction is very probative of his credibility given the nature of the offense in this case and the defenses of accident and self-defense put forward by defendant. The second factor is nearness or remoteness of the crime. "It is well established that recency between release and arrest reflects negatively on defendant’s likelihood of being rehabilitated, and, in turn, impacts on his credibility.” (Hall, 117 Ill. App. 3d at 799.) Here, it was only approximately one year from defendant’s release to the time of the shooting of Page. In our opinion, this short a period of time clearly impacts on defendant’s credibility. The third factor is that of the subsequent career of a defendant. In the case at hand, this factor is not relevant, one way or another, due to the relatively short period of time between defendant’s release from prison until the time of the shooting. The fourth factor is whether the crime a defendant was convicted of was similar to the one charged. While the similarity between the two crimes is a factor, we believe the trial court properly weighed it and found the prejudice insufficient to exclude the evidence. Moreover, the trial court’s tendering of a jury instruction compensated for any prejudice which might have occurred in its absence. We perceive no error in the trial court’s denial of defendant’s motion to exclude his prior conviction for voluntary manslaughter. We further find that defendant waived his contention that the trial court erred in not allowing into evidence the circumstances of his conviction by failing to raise it in his post-trial motion "and, therefore, it cannot be urged as [grounds] for reversal on review.” People v. Young (1989), 128 Ill. 2d 1, 38, 538 N.E.2d 453, cert. denied (1990), 497 U.S. 1031, 111 L. Ed. 2d 798, 110 S. Ct. 3290. The next argument advanced by defendant on appeal is that the trial court erred in declining to grant him a new trial based on allegedly newly discovered evidence that Page perjured himself by denying his gang membership. Defendant urges that newly discovered evidence, Fisher’s affidavit, is material to the issue of whether Page was the aggressor. In the frequently cited opinion of People v. Baker (1959), 16 Ill. 2d 364, 158 N.E.2d 1, the Illinois Supreme Court succinctly summarized the criteria to be considered in reviewing a trial court’s denial of a motion for a new trial. The court there stated: "A motion for a new trial on the ground of newly discovered evidence is addressed to the discretion of the trial judge and denial thereof will not be disturbed upon review in the absence of a showing of an abuse of discretion. [Citation.] To warrant a new trial, the new evidence must be of such conclusive character that it will probably change the result on retrial, that it must be material to the issue but not merely cumulative, and that it must have been discovered since the trial and be of such character that it could not have been discovered prior to trial by the exercise of due diligence. [Citations.]” Baker, 16 Ill. 2d at 373-74.  Applying this standard, there was no abuse of discretion by the trial court in denying defendant’s motion for a new trial. Fisher’s affidavit is insufficiént to constitute the difference between conviction and acquittal. Even if Fisher were to testify, he could add nothing new. Defendant himself testified that Page was a gang member. New evidence which merely corroborates testimony that was given on a noncritical fact is not a basis for granting a new trial. People v. Leonhardt (1988), 173 Ill. App. 3d 314, 527 N.E.2d 562. Defendant next claims that he was denied a fair trial when evidence allegedly relevant to his theory of defense was excluded by the trial court. Defendant assigns error to the trial court having precluded him from presenting two lines of evidence: (1) evidence of threats made by Page and allegedly other fellow gang members which would establish Page’s aggressive and violent character and, consequently, defendant’s fear of him; and (2) evidence that Jones, while in the courthouse, threatened Frank Rogers, defendant’s brother, that should he testify at defendant’s trial, Jones would shoot him. We begin our discussion of this issue by noting that it is established law that each party is entitled to present evidence relevant to his theory of the case. (People v. Molsby (1978), 66 Ill. App. 3d 647, 383 N.E.2d 1336.) However, it is also settled law that: "A trial court may reject offered evidence on grounds of irrelevancy if it has little probative value due to its remoteness, uncertainty or its possibly unfair prejudicial nature. [Citations.] The admission of evidence is within the sound discretion of the trial court, and its ruling should not be reversed absent a clear showing of abuse of that discretion.” People v. Ward (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 443, 455-56, 463 N.E.2d 696.  In reviewing the present case in light of the above-mentioned principles, we find no abuse of discretion by the trial court with regard to his first line of evidence. The trial court properly excluded only irrelevant evidence. In fact, the record reveals that defendant was permitted to call witnesses at trial to evidence Page’s alleged gang membership and aggression towards defendant. In addition, defense counsel thoroughly cross-examined and re-cross-examined Page along this line. Additionally, we find defendant’s suggestion that he should have been permitted to present evidence of gang violence not involving Page, as relevant to defendant’s state of mind, untenable. Such evidence would have been too remote to be relevant. We find defendant’s argument with regard to Jones’ alleged threats against defendant’s brother also unconvincing. Defendant’s argument is that although the threat did not come from Page, the threat can be attributed to him, thus showing his "consciousness of guilt” if he did not disapprove of or oppose the act. As the trial court stated, even if Page stood next to Jones while Jones made the alleged threat, this demonstrates nothing more about Page than mere presence. Furthermore, given the diiFering versions of what actually occurred, it would take a side trial just to determine the satellite issues raised by this alleged occurrence. Accordingly, the trial court correctly found this evidence to be too attenuated to be admissible and properly excluded it. We next consider defendant’s assertion that the trial court abused its discretion by refusing three of defendant’s tendered jury instructions in the following three areas: (1) accidental shooting; (2) intoxication of the victim; and (3) limiting consideration of defendant’s statements to Page regarding extra-indictment offenses as "other crimes” evidence. We note that we have already disposed of the argument regarding "other crimes” evidence in the context of our discussion of extra-indictment offenses above. Additionally, as defendant failed to include his claim of error regarding the alleged intoxication of Page at the scene of the crime in his post-trial motion, it is deemed waived. (People v. Enoch (1988), 122 Ill. 2d 176, 186, 522 N.E.2d 1124, cert. denied (1988), 488 U.S. 917, 102 L. Ed. 2d 263, 109 S. Ct. 274.) Thus, we need only examine defendant’s contention with regard to the trial court’s refusal of the accidental shooting instruction.  An instruction on accident is inappropriate where a jury is instructed on the elements of the crime and that the State has the responsibility of proving defendant’s mens rea. (People v. Spaulding (1979), 68 Ill. App. 3d 663, 679, 368 N.E.2d 469.) Here, the trial court instructed the jury on the mental states of intent and knowledge necessary to find defendant guilty of first-degree murder, attempt, battery, aggravated battery, and armed violence as well as the State’s burden of proof. Thus, by definition, the jury could not have found defendant guilty had it determined that the shooting of Page was the result of an accident, as he would necessarily not possess the requisite mens rea. Under these facts, an instruction on accident would have been unnecessary, and, therefore, the trial court correctly refused the instruction.  Defendant next submits that the State failed to prove him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. After a careful review of the record, we believe that there is ample evidence from which the jury could have concluded that Joseph Rogers shot Antoine Page without serious provocation. The jury choose to believe the State’s version of the shooting. While defendant’s story is quite different, it is the function of the jury to determine the credibility of witnesses and resolve conflicts. (People v. Jordan (1960), 18 Ill. 2d 489, 165 N.E.2d 296.) A court of review will disturb a finding of guilt only where the evidence is unreasonable, improbable, or so unsatisfactory as to justify a reasonable doubt of a defendant’s guilt. (People v. Crews (1967), 38 Ill. 2d 331, 231 N.E.2d 451.) In the instant case, the evidence leaves no reasonable doubt of defendant’s guilt.  Finally, defendant argues that, in the aggregate, the errors assigned by him require reversal. However, as we have shown above, defendant’s claims individually lack substance; therefore, it follows that they cannot collectively have force. In light of the foregoing, the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County is affirmed. Affirmed. RIZZI, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9741292 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:48.180255+00 ===

PRESIDING JUSTICE GREIMAN, specially concurring: Like an entombed vampire, every now and again "Count Res Gestae” moves the cover of his coffin and begins to circulate in the world of litigators and judges, promising them that they no longer must provide rational analysis or appropriate explanations for exceptions to the hearsay rule. Instead, they need only mutter "res gestae” to cover a multitude of sins. Traditionally, the phrase "res gestae” was used to describe words which accompanied the key litigated fact, such as the murder, collision or other occurrence which was the specific subject of the action. However, use of the term grew to allow words accompanying any relevant act or condition admitted into evidence. 2 J. Strong, McCormick on Evidence § 268, at 207 (4th ed. 1992). During the last 70 years, every major commentator has criticized the notion of res gestae because of its imprecision. E.g., 2 J. Strong, McCormick on Evidence § 268, at 206-08 (4th ed. 1992); M. Graham, Cleary & Graham’s Handbook of Illinois Evidence § 803.2, at 549 (4th ed. 1984); 6 J. Wigmore, Evidence § 1745, at 191-93 (Chadbourn rev. ed. 1976); Morgan, A Suggested Classification of Utterances Admissible as Res Gestae, 31 Yale L.J. 229 (1922). Our supreme court rejected res gestae more than 30 years ago in People v. Poland (1961), 22 Ill. 2d 175, 174 N.E.2d 804. (See also Rockford Clutch Division, Borg-Warner Corp. v. Industrial Comm’n (1967), 37 Ill. 2d 62, 224 N.E.2d 830, and this court’s most recent comment in Kellman v. Twin Orchard Country Club (1990), 202 Ill. App. 3d 968, 560 N.E.2d 888.) The Poland court believed that reliance upon this concept failed to contribute to an understanding of the problems of hearsay and further inhibited any reasonable analysis. Poland, 22 Ill. 2d at 178. The court’s more recent comment on res gestae appeared in People v. Tye (1990), 141 Ill. 2d 1, 18, 565 N.E.2d 931, where the court concluded that: "At trial, defense counsel did not specifically invoke the excited utterance exception to the hearsay rule, relying instead on the more general, and disapproved, res gestae concept.” (Emphasis added.) Despite decades of uniform criticism of the use of res gestae, the majority has elected to let the res gestae vampire out of its coffin. I would hope that this concurring opinion can be the equivalent of a stake in the heart of res gestae and that the coffin lid may be securely fastened. Otherwise, I concur in the result.

=== CASE 2226788 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:19.551503+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 775 (1981)
STATE of Minnesota, Respondent,
v.
Michael James PARK, Appellant.
No. 81-177.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
May 13, 1981.
C. Paul Jones, Public Defender, Mary C. Cade, Asst. Public Defender, Minneapolis, for appellant.
Warren Spannaus, Atty. Gen., St. Paul, Robert F. Carolan, County Atty., Mark N. Lystig, Asst. County Atty., Hastings, for respondent.
Considered and decided by the court en banc without oral argument.
SHERAN, Chief Justice.
This is an appeal by a criminal defendant from a sentence imposed by the trial court for the offense of unauthorized use of a motor vehicle, to which defendant pled guilty in exchange for the dismissal of a theft charge. Based on the severity level of the offense (one) and defendant's criminal history score (five), the presumptive sentence was 21 months stayed. The trial court instead sentenced defendant to 21 months in prison and ordered the sentence to run consecutively to a previously imposed prison term of 1 year and 1 day. We affirm the trial court's refusal to stay execution but we reverse the order making the sentence consecutive.
Defendant's first felony conviction was for unauthorized use to which he pled guilty in Dakota County in August 1979. The trial court placed him on probation for 3 years with the first 90 days to be spent in the workhouse and with defendant being entitled to early release if he enrolled in some treatment program for his chemical dependency problem. Also pursuant to the plea agreement the court dismissed a reckless *776 driving charge growing out of defendant's driving at speeds between 80 and 90 miles-per-hour during the police chase which led to his arrest.
Defendant's next felony which led to conviction was another unauthorized use which occurred in Scott County in January 1980. His third one was for possession of marijuana in Scott County in April 1980.
His fourth one, the one with which we are directly concerned, involved the taking of a motorcycle in Dakota County in August 1980. Defendant was charged with unauthorized use and theft but was allowed to plead guilty to unauthorized use, with the theft charge being dismissed.
Defendant was sentenced in Scott County on October 10, 1980 to a year and a day in prison for the drug offense and to 3 years extended probation for the unauthorized use. Thereafter, he was sentenced for the unauthorized use in Dakota County to the term he is now appealing, the 21-month executed consecutive prison term. Subsequently, the stay of imposition of sentence for the 1979 conviction was revoked and defendant was sentenced to a term of a year and a day to run concurrently with the prior sentence for the Scott County offenses.
In refusing to grant a stay of the 21-month prison term the trial court relied on evidence establishing defendant's unamenability to probation. This evidence included the strong recommendation of the probation officer, evidence of defendant's serious chemical dependency problem, evidence that defendant refused to accept that he had a problem or needed treatment, evidence that he completely failed to cooperate on his earlier adult probation, and the evidence that defendant was already serving a prison term for the Scott County offense.
In ordering the sentence to be consecutive, the court stated, "The reason for the consecutive sentence is I find no good reason to make it concurrent, Counsel."
Each case must be considered on its own and the mere fact that the agent who prepared the presentence investigation report states that the defendant is not amenable to probation does not necessarily justify departing from the stayed sentence and sending defendant to prison. However, in this case, the evidence, including the recommendation of the agent, was such that the trial court was justified in concluding that the circumstances were compelling enough to warrant departure and the court therefore did not err in refusing to stay execution. State v. Garcia, 302 N.W.2d 643 (Minn.1981).
On the other hand, we hold that the record did not justify the decision to make the sentence consecutive. Section II.F. of the Sentencing Guidelines specifies the circumstances which justify imposition of a consecutive sentence. None of those circumstances was present here. Under the circumstances, the decision to make the sentence consecutive was a departure. But the trial court did not give any justification for this departure. Accordingly, the order making the sentence consecutive must be reversed. State v. Bellanger, 304 N.W.2d 282 (Minn.1981).
Affirmed as modified.

=== CASE 9741293 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:53.842961+00 ===

Per Curiam.
The Court of Appeals has held that the Prison Overcrowding Emergency Powers Act, 1980 PA 519,1 unconstitutionally contravenes the Governor’s exclusive commutation power under Const 1963, art 5, § 14. We conclude that the Court of Appeals erred in so holding, and we reverse.
I
1980 PA 519 had its genesis in the Joint Legislative/Executive Task Force on Prison Overcrowding. This task force was convened by the Governor, the Speaker of the House, and the Senate Majority Leader on January 29, 1980, in recognition of the fact that "Michigan is in the midst of a crisis in its prison system”; what was sought was "the most effective but cost-efficient response to this crisis”.2 The task force responded on June 24, 1980, with 14 recommendations, the last of which recommended a statute such as 1980 PA 519:
"To protect the interests of the State and to prevent *187major disruptions or federal court intervention in our prison system, the Task Force recommends the enactment of a series of 'last-resort’ statutory mechanisms that would reduce the prison population to its rate capacity upon a gubernatorial declaration of a State of Emergency in the prisons.”3
The task force explained its recommendations in these terms:
"Since 1975, Michigan’s prisons have been continuously overcrowded by as many as 2,000 prisoners over the system’s rated capacity. As a result of this population pressure, the Department has been forced to house prisoners in areas not designed for housing, e.g., recreation and treatment areas and garages. This restricts the availability of rehabilitative and diversionary activities and only serves to aggravate the normally high tension levels found in an institutional environment.
"These living conditions create a situation that invites judicial intervention — a situation occurring on a large scale across the country. In fact, as of April 1, 1980, 19 states were operating their prison systems wholly or partially under court order, and 13 others were facing litigation on the conditions of confinement. Virtually all of this judicial action has occurred since 1974. And, if the anticipated Congressional authorization for the U.S. Justice Department to initiate or become involved in litigation on behalf of state inmates occurs, the instances of judicial intervention are likely to increase at a more rapid pace. A federal court order generally establishes the acceptable conditions that must be met by the state within a specified period of time, regardless of the costs involved or the ability of the state to meet those costs.
"A second implication of an overcrowded prison system, perhaps the most dangerous and costly, is that of prison riot and disruptions. Since January 1, 1980, there has been a major prison riot and a series of minor prison disruptions across the nation. Although, with the *188exception of the New Mexico riot, they have not been serious, they do indicate the prevailing mood of the prison population in this country: unrest. It is the result of this unrest, in terms of human suffering as well as dollars and cents, that a humane society must take every possible step to avoid.
"The Task Force has recommended a realistic course of action for the State to follow in seeking to address these possibilities. However, even the most timely action on these recommendations will not guarantee that one or both of these possibilities will not come to fruition. Therefore, the Task Force is recommending the immediate passage of a mechanism designed to provide a progressively radical course of action to reduce Michigan’s prison population. A decision to invoke the provisions of this legislation would be a last ditch effort called into play only if other legislative and executive efforts to reduce prison population do not result in the elimination of overcrowding.”4
The called-for legislation was introduced as HB 6049 on September 17, 1980, and approved by both Houses. The Governor signed the enactment on January 26, 1981.
In the sections relevant to this litigation, 1980 PA 519 calls for the corrections commission to request the Governor to declare a state of emergency whenever prison population exceeds available bed space for 30 consecutive days;5 for the Governor to declare the emergency within 15 days thereafter, unless he finds the commission erred; and on this declaration, for the Director of the *189Department of Corrections to reduce the minimum terms of those prisoners who have established minimum terms by 90 days.6 Further reductions occur until population is reduced to 95% of capacity.7
II
On March 30, 1981, the corrections commission notified the Governor that the prison population had exceeded its capacity for 30 consecutive days and requested a declaration of emergency. The declaration has not been made. On April 8, 1981, the Oakland County Prosecutor filed a complaint for declaratory judgment in Oakland Circuit Court which sought a judgment declaring 1980 PA 519 unconstitutional. An order was entered in the circuit court which restrained the Department of Corrections and its director from reducing the minimum terms of sentences under 1980 PA 519. The circuit court then entered an order vacating its temporary restraining order and dismissing the prosecutor’s complaint. The prosecutor prevailed, however, on appeal to the Court of Appeals. That Court enjoined the Department of Corrections and its director from implementing 1980 PA 519; it said:
*190"1980 PA 519 is unconstitutional. The statute impermissibly grants to the Department of Corrections the power to reduce minimum sentences, in contravention of the Governor’s exclusive power to commute sentences under Const 1963, art 5, § 14. Once a valid minimum sentence is imposed by the sentencing court pursuant to the Indeterminate Sentence Act, MCL 769.8; MSA 28.1080, not even that court can change the sentence because the power to commute is lodged in the executive branch of government. See, for example, Moore v Parole Board, 379 Mich 624, 642; 154 NW2d 437 (1967) (opinion by Adams, J.).”
We granted leave to appeal from this order.
Ill
Const 1963, art 5, § 14 provides:
"The governor shall have power to grant reprieves, commutations and pardons after convictions for all offenses, except cases of impeachment, upon such conditions and limitations as he may direct, subject to procedures and regulations prescribed by law. He shall inform the legislature annually of each reprieve, commutation and pardon granted, stating reasons therefor.”
The Convention Comment discloses that the only change from the predecessor in the 1908 Constitution was deletion of treason as an offense for which the Governor did not have the authority to reprieve, commute, or pardon. There was, however, some rephrasing. Instead of the current provisions "the governor shall have power”, Const 1908, art 6, § 9 provided that "he may grant”.
"He may grant reprieves, commutations and pardons after convictions for all offenses, except treason and cases of impeachment, upon such conditions and with such restrictions and limitations as he may think *191proper, subject to regulations provided by law relative to the manner of applying for pardons. Upon conviction for treason, he may suspend the execution of the sentence until the case shall be reported to the legislature at its next session, when the legislature shall either pardon or commute the sentence, direct the execution of the sentence or grant a further reprieve. He shall communicate to the legislature at each session information of each case of reprieve, commutation or pardon granted and the reasons therefor.”
We have jealously guarded the Governor’s prerogative under this constitutional provision. For example, in People v Freleigh, 334 Mich 306; 54 NW2d 599 (1952), we reviewed a statute through which the Legislature had granted to a sentencing judge the power to vacate a prior sentence and impose a lesser sentence in light of an enactment giving a sentencing judge discretionary sentencing power in place of previous mandatory sentencing restrictions. We said that this statute violated art 6, § 9:
"The constitution by implication forbids the judiciary to commute a sentence. It does not enable the legislature to pass a law that will infringe upon the exclusive power of the governor to commute a sentence.” 334 Mich 310.
In People v Fox, 312 Mich 577; 20 NW2d 732 (1945), the question was whether the sentencing judge had the power to subsequently amend his sentence. We said no:
"To hold with defendant under the circumstances of this case that the court has power to amend a sentence after the prisoner has served a part of it would infringe upon the exclusive power of the governor under the Constitution to commute sentence.” 312 Mich 581-582.
*192In re Casella, 313 Mich 393; 21 NW2d 175 (1946), involved an alleged parole violator who sought a judicial determination on the question of whether he had violated parole. We said that courts may not interfere with the performance of the administrative parole function. In People v Cook, 147 Mich 127; 110 NW 514 (1907), we also emphasized that parole was not a judicial matter. In Freleigh, we summarized our holdings in Cook and Casella as follows:
"We only held that such release by parole was not a commutation of the sentence as such parolees remained under the surveillance of the prison authorities and upon violation of the parole would be returned to the prison to serve the balance of the sentences without any deduction of the time during which they had been released on parole.” 334 Mich 309.
In Cook we said that a parole does not involve an executive act:
"The design of the indeterminate sentence law is to reform criminals and to convert bad citizens into good citizens, and thus protect society. In order to accomplish this result, the theory is that, when the prisoner has shown by his conduct that he may turn from his criminal career, he should have an opportunity, under favorable circumstances, to make the test. He is in prison for a definite time. Any release therefrom is a favor to him. Such release does not necessarily involve a judicial or an executive act. The release of a prisoner under the old law before the expiration of his term of imprisonment for good behavior has never been held an interference with judicial or executive power.
"The paroled prisoner is regarded as still under the control of the prison authorities. When the prisoner applies for his parole, he applies under the provisions of the law, agrees to its terms, and fully understands that for the misconduct provided in the statute he may be taken back to serve out his term of sentence. This *193power of recall is lodged in the warden, subject to review by the board of pardons. The prisoner applies for and obtains his release upon those terms, and no other. They are of the very essence of the indeterminate sentence law.” 147 Mich 132.
We remain steadfast in our support of the Governor’s exclusive power under art 5, § 14. We do not, however, believe that art 5, § 14 compels the result reached by the Court of Appeals. The Legislature too has a role in establishing the length of sentence, and it has not intruded on the Governor’s power with 1980 PA 519.
In People v Cummings, 88 Mich 249; 50 NW 310 (1891), we had held that a statute which provided for indeterminate sentences and the release of prisoners under such sentences was unconstitutional because it gave the prison board authority to exercise either the judicial power to determine the term of imprisonment of a defendant or the pardoning power exclusively vested in the Governor. In response to the Cummings decision,8 the 1901 Legislature proposed and, in the November 1902 election, the people ratified an amendment to the constitution giving the Legislature the power to provide for indeterminate sentences and for the detention and release of persons imprisoned under such sentences:
"The legislature may, by law, provide for the indeterminate sentences, so called, as a punishment for crime, on conviction thereof, and for the detention and release of persons imprisoned or detained on said sentences.”9
*194In considering the instant claim — that a law providing for the release of persons imprisoned under indeterminate sentences impermissibly infringes the Governor’s commutation power — we must bear in mind that the circumstances which prompted the adoption of what is currently Const 1963, art 4, § 45 indicate that it was intended to give the Legislature a power which we had previously held was constitutionally and exclusively vested in the judiciary and the executive. As the Court said of § 45’s predecessor just five years after it was adopted:
"If that amendment to the Constitution took away any of the power which had theretofore been lodged in the judiciary or the executive, the people exercised a right inherent in them to adopt a constitutional amendment taking away from, or adding to, the powers of either of the departments of government.” Cook, supra, 132.
If 1980 PA 519 falls within the authorization of § 45, the question of its infringement on the Governor’s commutation power is obviated since such infringement or sharing of the commutation power as exists has been constitutionally authorized. Similarly, while it may be possible to distinguish release on párole, when the parolee remains subject to the supervision of and possible recall by the parole board, from release on unconditional pardon or commutation of sentence, and thereby conclude that the executive power has not been infringed,10 it is unnecessary to do so if the statute is a proper exercise of the power granted by § 45.11
*195We are of the opinion that 1980 PA 519 is within the authority granted the Legislature by Const 1963, art 4, § 45, and thus that the statute is constitutional regardless of whether the release of prisoners under the statute is properly characterized as a commutation. Whether it is sound policy to vest the functional equivalent of the commutation power in the Legislature, acting through the parole board, or whether it is sound policy to remedy prison overcrowding by releasing prisoners are questions which can be resolved only in the political forum. 1980 PA 519 embodies the judgment of the Legislature and the Governor; this Court has no authority to review that judgment beyond assessing its constitutionality.
Section 45 authorizes the Legislature to "provide for indeterminate sentences” and to provide for the "release of persons imprisoned or detained under [indeterminate] sentences”. Whether 1980 PA 519 is viewed as "providing] for indeterminate sentences” in a manner which retroactively amends an earlier provision for indeterminate sentences or as "providing] for the release of persons imprisoned or detained under [indeterminate] sentences”, the legislation is within the terms of the constitutional grant of authority.
Our decision in Freleigh, on which the plaintiff relies, is distinguishable in a manner which clarifies why 1980 PA 519 is within the authority granted in Const 1963, art 4, § 45. In Freleigh, the *196Court reviewed a statute which authorized a sentencing judge to review a prior sentence and to vacate that sentence and impose a lesser sentence if, in the court’s judgment, such lesser sentence might have been imposed had a statute giving the sentencing judge discretionary sentencing power instead of the previously effective mandatory sentencing restrictions been in effect at the time of original sentencing. The Court concluded that the statute was an unconstitutional infringement upon the governor’s commutation power.
The statute considered in Freleigh, unlike 1980 PA 519, did not "provide for * * * release of persons imprisoned or detained under indeterminate sentences” (emphasis supplied) since, as the Court there observed, the statute had "retroactive effect upon sentences which were mandatory”.12 1980 PA 519 not only has effect only on indeterminate sentences but also has only the limited effect of changing the period of indeterminacy — the period during which the parole board has authority to act. The statute reviewed in Freleigh, on the other hand, authorized the court to vacate the prior sentence entirely and to impose a new sentence. Finally, the Court notes that while Const 1963, art 4, § 45, then Const 1908, art 5, § 28, does not contain language so limiting its effect, it appears from the antecedents prompting the section’s adoption that the people contemplated that effect would be given to the section through a parole board or similar agency, as 1980 PA 519 does, rather than through the judiciary, as the statute in Freleigh did.
The legislative history available to us demonstrates that a commutation in derogation of the Governor’s power was not intended; instead this legislation was part of a broad-based effort at *197correctional reform.13 The purpose of the instant legislation is to reduce the intolerable level of overcrowding which characterizes Michigan’s prison system. As part of a broad-based effort at correctional reform, it was intended to deal with a systemwide problem. Although the retroactive reduction of minimum sentences because of prison overcrowding has consequences similar to commutation, it derives from a wholly separate constitutional grant of power. The legislation was within the constitutional grant of authority to the Legislature in art 4, § 45 to "provide for * * * release of persons imprisoned or detained under such sentences”. Further, the Legislature has done nothing to directly interfere with the Governor’s function; he remains free to pardon or commute the sentences of individual prisoners as he, in his discretion, feels the circumstances warrant.
We have considered the other issues raised by the plaintiff in the Court of Appeals and found them without merit.
We reverse the Court of Appeals judgment and affirm that of the circuit court. The clerk is directed to issue the Court’s judgment order forthwith, in accordance with GCR 1963, 866.3(c).
Coleman, C.J., and Kavanagh, Levin, Fitzgerald, Ryan, and Blair Moody, Jr., JJ., concurred.
MCL 800.71 et seq.; MSA 28.1437(1) et seq.
Report of the Joint Legislative/Executive Task Force on Prison Overcrowding (June 24, 1980), p i.
Ibid., p iii.
Ibid., p 22.
"The commission shall request the governor to declare a state of emergency in the state’s prisons whenever the population of the prison system exceeds the rated design capacity for 30 consecutive days. In making the request, the commission shall certify the rated design capacity and current population of the prison system and that all administrative actions consistent with applicable state laws and the rules promulgated under those laws have been exhausted in an attempt to reduce the prison population to the rated design capacity.” MCL 800.73; MSA 28.1437(3).
"Unless the governor finds within 15 calendar days of the commission’s request under section 3 that the commission acted in error, the governor shall declare a prison overcrowding state of emergency within that 15 days and the minimum sentences of all prisoners who have established minimum prison terms shall be reduced by 90 days by the director of the department of corrections.” MCL 800.74; MSA 28.1437(4).
“If the actions under section 4 do not reduce the population of the prison system to 95% of the rated design capacity within 90 days of the date of the declaration of the prison overcrowding state of emergency, the minimum sentences of all prisoners incarcerated in state prisons on that date who have established minimum prison terms shall be reduced by 90 days by the director of the department of corrections.” MCL 800.75; MSA 28.1437(5).
Freleigh, supra, p 308; Cook, supra, p 131.
Const 1850, art 4, § 47 as amended in 1902, currently Const 1963, art 4, § 45:
"The legislature may provide for indeterminate sentences as punishment for crime and for the detention and release of persons imprisoned or detained under such sentences.”
See People v Cook, supra; In re Casella, supra; but see People v Cummings, supra, p 256:
"In any event, this parole system is as obnoxious to the Constitution as an unconditional release by the board would be; and, if they have the power to release on conditions, those conditions may be made so trifling as in fact to be no conditions at all.”
1980 PA 519 is similar in effect to, and identical in terms of the *195power exercised by, the Legislature’s enactment of a "good time” statute, 1857 PA 99, as first enacted, and later a "special good time” law, 1933 PA 252 (the Legislature gave this statute retroactive effect). These operate effectively to reduce the prisoner’s minimum term, as 1980 PA 519 does, by making him or her eligible for parole at an earlier date. What difference exists between the "good time” statutes and 1980 PA 519 is essentially in the factors justifying reduction of the prisoners’ minimum terms: in the one case good behavior, in the other prison overcrowding. Yet, as the Court said in Cook, supra, and Casella, supra, release by parole is not a commutation.
Freleigh, supra, p 309 (emphasis supplied).
This was not the only task force recommendation acted on by the 1980 Legislature. It also, for example, enacted legislation outlining a site selection process for correctional facilities (1980 PA 303) and placed before the people at the November election a proposal to increase the income tax, with the increase earmarked for prison construction.

=== CASE 9741294 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:53.848184+00 ===

Williams, J.
(concurring in part; dissenting in part). This Court is called upon to decide whether or not the Prison Overcrowding Emergency Powers Act, 1980 PA 519, approved by the Governor, *198January 26, 1981, unconstitutionally contravenes the Governor’s exclusive power of commutation under Const 1963, art 5, § 14.
The Legislature presumably acted under the specific power granted them to provide for indeterminate sentences. Const 1963, art 4, § 45 provides:
"The legislature may provide for indeterminate sentences as puriishment for crime and for the detention and release of persons imprisoned or detained under such sentences.”
1980 PA 519 in § 4 provides:
"Unless the governor finds within 15 calendar days of the commission’s request under section 3 that the commission acted in error, the governor shall declare a prison overcrowding state of emergency within that 15 days and the minimum sentences of all prisoners who have established minimum prison terms shall be reduced by 90 days by the director of the department of corrections.” MCL 800.74; MSA 28.1437(4).
Under art 4, § 45 there should be no question but that the Legislature could prospectively provide for an indeterminate sentence based upon the conditions of release specified in 1980 PA 519, § 4. See People v Cook, 147 Mich 127, 131; 110 NW 514 (1907), upholding the constitutionality of the indeterminate sentencing act, 1905 PA 184. In this manner a sentencing judge would know that any sentence imposed was liable to future 90-day reductions under act 519, much as this same judge can anticipate later "good time” or "special good time” reductions. That being the case, there is no constitutional infirmity in a prospective application of 1980 PA 519 because it does not interfere with the Governor’s power to commute after judicial sentencing.
*199The problem actually raised in this case, however, is whether 1980 PA 519 can constitutionally require the Governor to declare a state of emergency, thus setting in motion the process resulting in the reduction of the sentences of persons who were sentenced before that act went into effect and whose sentences therefore obviously were not conditioned upon this legislation. The Legislature, as shown by the task force study, was concerned with finding an emergency solution for a lingering condition. In other words, this Court must determine whether the Legislature has the power to mandate the reduction of certain minimum sentences already judicially imposed. It does not for two reasons.
First, art 4, § 45 contemplates prospective legislation only. It provides in pertinent part: "The legislature may provide for indeterminate sentences as punishment for crime and for the detention and release of persons imprisoned or detained under such sentences”. Do the emphasized words mean that § 45 intended that the Legislature may release by reduction of sentence persons already judicially sentenced? While superficially such an interpretation is arguable, closer analysis compels an opposite conclusion. Importantly, the section pertinently reads: "The Legislature may provide * * * for the detention and release”. Obviously the powers of "detention” and "release” must be read together, and the Legislature could therefore not provide for "release” where it could not analogously provide for "detention”. In other words, since it is obvious that the Legislature was not authorized by § 45 to increase the detention of persons by legislation enacted after their judicial sentencing, then also it could not shorten the actual term of sentence. As a consequence, it must *200be assumed that § 45 was intended to be construed prospectively, as a retrospective construction runs contrary to other constitutional provisions.
Second, it is basic statutory interpretation that a statute will not be construed in a way that would make it unconstitutional. Construing art 4, § 45 as done in the preceding paragraph, interpreting 1980 PA 519 as mandating that the Governor shall reduce sentences, imposed at a time when there was no condition of that sentence that it might be reduced because of prison overcrowding, invades the Governor’s right of commutation. Art 5, § 14 provides:
"The governor shall have power to grant reprieves, commutations and pardons after convictions for all offenses, except cases of impeachment, upon such conditions and limitations as he may direct, subject to procedures and regulations prescribed by law.”
It is clear that § 4 of 1980 PA 519, retroactively mandating a 90-day reduction of minimum sentences, would usurp the Governor’s exclusive power of commutation unless it were part of the Legislature’s power of indeterminate sentencing, which this opinion has just held it is not where it is retroactive. As a consequence, to maintain the constitutionality of the statute, it is held that the § 4 90-day reduction of sentences imposed before the approval date of 1980 PA 519 is discretionary rather than mandatory as far as the Governor’s action is concerned. Viewed in this manner, the retroactive application of 1980 PA 519 is a procedural device for bringing to the Governor’s attention prison overcrowding problems which may be relieved through the discretionary exercise of the chief executive’s commutation power.
It may be argued that the phrase in art 5, § 14, *201which provides that the Governor’s commutation power is "subject to procedures and regulations prescribed by law”, permits such a law as 1980 PA 519 to infringe on this power. However, that phrase serves only to channel the way in which a Governor exercises his or her discretion to grant commutation, rather than requiring him or her to in fact exercise or not exercise that power with respect to any particular subject.
In conclusion it is held that art 4, § 45 permits 1980 PA 519 to be constitutional with respect to sentences judicially imposed subsequent to January 26, 1981, the date of act 519’s approval by the Governor; however, with respect to sentences imposed prior thereto, 1980 PA 519 is constitutional only insofar as the Governor’s actions which trigger sentence reductions are discretionary rather than mandatory.

=== CASE 9741295 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:54.36815+00 ===

McCown, J.
*756This is a proceeding to terminate the parental rights of an unmarried father. The District Court terminated the father’s parental rights and the father has appealed.
James Witherspoon was born December 18,1976. His mother and his father, the appellant here, were unmarried. The parents lived together for some undisclosed period of time after the birth of the child, but the relationship was a stormy one, and by sometime early in 1978 they were living apart and the son remained with his mother. The father provided some support for the son during the time they were living together but did not furnish any support after the mother and father separated.
The mother had an older child by a different father and had severe psychological, drug, and alcohol problems. On June 2, 1978, the mother called the police and asked them to pick up the children because she thought she was about to have a nervous breakdown. Thereafter the county attorney filed a petition under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 43-202(1) (Reissue 1978) to have the children declared homeless and without proper support. The children were placed in the temporary custody of Douglas County Social Services for temporary foster care. The only child involved in the present appeal is James.
On August 30, 1978, an adjudication hearing was held. The juvenile court found that James was the son of the appellant and found that James was homeless or destitute and without proper support through no fault of his parents within the meaning of § 43-202(1). The court retained custody in the Douglas County Social Services and granted the parents reasonable rights of visitation.
On October 3,1978, a review hearing was had. At that time the appellant was living with a sister in Omaha and was employed and earning an income of $950 per month. The appellant proposed that he be given custody of James and stated that he could keep the child at his sister’s home. The juvenile court ordered James’ custody *757to remain as previously ordered and also ordered that the appellant become involved in counseling at the Family Services on a regular basis and pay child support in the sum of $40 per month. The court also made extensive orders with respect to the mother.
On March 26, 1979, the juvenile court held another review hearing. The appellant had not paid any child support as ordered, nor had he attempted to comply with the order for counseling at Family Services. The appellant testified that his employer had reduced his hours and that he had no money left to pay child support. The juvenile court ordered appellant to participate in a positive parenting group on a weekly basis, to find and maintain adequate independent housing, and to maintain an adequate source of income for himself and his son. The court also ordered that he maintain regular visitation and pay child support of $40 per month.
On November 15, 1979, the State filed a motion to terminate the parental rights of both the mother and the father under Neb. Rev. Stat. § 43-209(6) (Reissue 1978). The mother executed a voluntary relinquishment and her parental rights were terminated on February 21, 1980.
Hearings were held on January 10 and February 5, 1980. The evidence for the State established that the appellant had failed to make any child support payments, had failed to attend parenting classes, did not obtain adequate housing independent from his sister, and had failed and refused to cooperate with the court services officer. There was also evidence that the appellant had quit his job because he did not receive a promotion he desired. The appellant’s evidence was that he had various bills for which his wages were being garnished, that he had been unable to obtain other employment, and that he had failed to attend parenting classes because he already knew how to take care of children.
Following the hearings the matter was taken under advisement by the juvenile court, and on March 3,1980, *758the appellant applied to the court for custody of James upon the ground that he had been offered a job in Louisiana where he had relatives who would assist in raising James. He admitted on cross-examination that he had failed to comply with the previous orders of the court. On March 6, 1980, the juvenile court denied the application for custody and terminated the parental rights of the appellant. This appeal followed.
The appellant contends that § 43-209(6) is unconstitutionally vague. This court has previously held that the statute meets constitutional standards. See, State v. Metteer, 203 Neb. 515, 279 N.W.2d 374 (1979); State v. Souza-Spittler, 204 Neb. 503, 283 N.W.2d 48 (1979).
The right of custody and control creates a duty of care and support. State v. Logan, 204 Neb. 204, 281 N.W.2d 753 (1979). In the case at bar the appellant stipulated in the original proceeding that James was without proper support. The court entered an order requiring the appellant to pay $40 per month child support. For more than a year, even while he was regularly employed, appellant completely failed to comply with that order as well as with the other orders of the court. While the appellant was fully aware of what was required of him in regard to his basic parental responsibilities, he failed to make even a good faith effort to comply. Under such facts the appellant is in no position to challenge the statute as unconstitutionally vague. One to whose conduct a statute clearly applies may not successfully challenge it for vagueness. State v. Shiffbauer, 197 Neb. 805, 251 N.W.2d 359 (1977).
The appellant contends that parental rights may be terminated only upon presentation of clear and convincing evidence, and that the evidence is not clear and convincing that the appellant is unfit or that he has forfeited his parental rights. The right of a parent to maintain the custody of his or her child is a natural right subject only to the paramount interest which the public has in the protection of the rights of a child. In a proceeding to terminate parental rights under § 43-209(6), *759there must be a determination that the child is one described in subsection (1) or (2) of § 43-202, and that reasonable efforts, under the direction of the court, have failed to correct the conditions leading to that determination. In re Interest of Kimsey, ante p. 193, 196, 302 N.W.2d 707, 709 (1981).
We have repeatedly held that in such cases the best interests of the child are paramount and that parental rights may be forfeited by substantial, continuous, and repeated neglect of a child and a failure to discharge the duties of parental care and protection. State v. Jenkins, 198 Neb. 311, 252 N.W.2d 280 (1977).
In the case at bar the evidence was clear and convincing and the trial court did not abuse its discretion in entering its order terminating the parental rights of the appellant.
Affirmed.
Clinton, J., participating on briefs.

=== CASE 2226954 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:23.121209+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 747 (1981)
Dean SPRENGER et al., Appellants,
v.
Sol J. JACOBS et al., Respondents.
No. 51136.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
January 9, 1981.
Peter W. Brown, Ann Bartsch, Legal Aid Society of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, for appellants.
Robert Alfton, City Atty. and Edward C. Vavreck, Sr., Asst. City Atty. for the City of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, for respondents.
Heard, considered and decided by the court without oral argument.
AMDAHL, Justice.
This is an appeal from an order of the district court of Hennepin County denying plaintiffs' motion for temporary injunction and quashing a temporary restraining order previously issued.
On February 15, 1980, defendant Jacobs, Director of Housing Inspections for the City of Minneapolis, issued, pursuant to Minneapolis, Minn., Code of Ordinances § 244.1450 (1976), orders condemning as "unfit for human habitation and dangerous to life and health" buildings at 1801-1813 Elliot Avenue South and ordering tenants to vacate the premises within three days. The plaintiffs, tenants of the three buildings, on the same date appealed, in accord with Minneapolis, Minn., Code of Ordinances § 242.60 (1976), the orders to the Housing Board of Appeals. Defendant Jacobs informed plaintiffs that the city would proceed to enforce the vacation orders despite the appeal. On February 18, plaintiffs sought and obtained a temporary restraining order from the district court.
On February 19, the controversy came on before a judge on plaintiffs' motion for temporary injunction enjoining defendants from enforcing the condemnation orders during pendency of plaintiffs' appeal to the Housing Board of Appeals. On February 22, the court issued its order dissolving the temporary restraining order and denying the motion for a temporary injunction.
On February 24, a three-member panel of this court considered plaintiffs' request for a stay of defendants' condemnation order pending a decision on the merits of their petition for a writ of prohibition and/or appeal from the district court order. By order dated February 25, 1980, this court denied the requested relief but retained "jurisdiction of all issues raised or to be raised by the petition for a writ of prohibition or appeal."
On February 28, the defendant Jacobs reinspected the premises and, finding that some improvements had been made which eliminated the hazards and dangers which had rendered the buildings uninhabitable, vacated the condemnation and eviction orders. Defendants argue that the vacating of the condemnation orders have mooted the case and assert that the "questions and issues herein are further rendered moot because of the fact that the last of the tenants left the premises in early June, 1980 and the middle building in this complex of *748 three was boarded up on or about June 26, 1980, as the other two buildings had been boarded up at an earlier date."
Plaintiffs do not controvert the facts that all the tenants had left the buildings and all the buildings were boarded up by early June 1980. Plaintiffs state that "defendant having vacated the condemnation order, plaintiffs-appellants have no actual need for a temporary injunction to preserve the status quo. In addition, the exact facts surrounding these exact buildings and conditions are unlikely to recur. Therefore, plaintiffs-appellants will not press in this appeal for confirmation of the right they had to a temporary injunction * * *." Plaintiffs, however, argue that "the other issues raised on appeal, namely the jurisdiction of the Minneapolis Housing Board of Appeals to hear plaintiffs' appeal of defendant's condemnation order, the legitimacy of the district court's findings of fact, and other procedural issues argued herein, are still very worth deciding in that their decision in favor of plaintiffs-appellants would require a remand to district court for correction. In addition, these issues continue to be of serious interest to plaintiffs and others similarly situated."
It is well settled that if, pending an appeal, an event occurs which makes a decision unnecessary, the appeal will be dismissed as presenting a moot question. In re Village of Savage v. Minnesota Municipal Commission, 288 Minn. 340, 180 N.W.2d 925 (1970); State ex rel. Meldahl v. Tahash, 278 Minn. 51, 153 N.W.2d 147 (1967).
A decision on the merits here would accomplish nothing as there are no existing orders whose enforcement would be stayed if the order of the trial court were reversed. The condemnation orders having been vacated, there is nothing to stay.
In effect, we are asked to pass on the merits of the trial judge's denial of a temporary injunction as a precedent in future cases of this kind. In Works v. Tiber, 169 Minn. 172, 173, 210 N.W. 877, 878 (1926) Justice Dibell tersely observed: "[w]e make precedents only as incident to the determination of actual controversies." That observation still controls today and mandates the following disposition of this matter.
The issues on appeal having become moot, the appeal is dismissed.

=== CASE 9741296 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:54.372214+00 ===

Krivosha, C.J.,
dissenting.
I continue to believe that we are using “overkill” in these cases coming before us involving the termination of parental rights. While we concede that before parental rights may be terminated there must be clear and convincing evidence to support the need for such drastic action, we nevertheless continue to terminate rights on evidence which I believe to be less than clear and convincing. See, dissent of Krivosha, C.J., In re Interest of Goodon, ante p. 256, 303 N.W.2d 278 (1981); In re Interest of Cook, ante p. 549, 304 N.W.2d 390 (1981).
As noted by the majority in this case: “The evidence for the State established that the appellant had failed to make any child support payments, had failed to attend parenting classes, did not obtain adequate housing independent from his sister, and had failed and refused to cooperate with the court services officer.” While, to be sure, the failure of appellant to pay child support is not worthy of praise and requires the court to take appropriate action, the failings of the appellant herein *760appear to be not dissimilar to those of others found within our society whose parental rights are not terminated.
Moreover, appellant’s failure to attend parenting classes and his failure and refusal to cooperate with a court service officer may be contrary to the court’s order. The record, however, fails to disclose how that failure has in fact affected the child. Finally, I am unable to ascertain what error was committed by the appellant sufficient to terminate parental rights by reason of his failing to obtain adequate housing independent from his sister. I know of no rule of law or reason which suggests that a child is adversely affected by living with other members of the family so long as such housing is adequate for all.
The record does support the view that the appellant could perform better as a parent and that the child probably will be better cared for by another family with greater education and income. That, however, is not the criteria which we should use in terminating parental rights. I would have continued to supervise the care of the child but would not have terminated parental rights.

=== CASE 2226811 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:42:20.046461+00 ===

305 N.W.2d 347 (1981)
Susan K. CARLSON, Respondent,
v.
FLOUR CITY BRUSH COMPANY and American Mutual Insurance Company, Respondents,
Flour City Brush Company and Aetna Insurance Company, Relators.
No. 51434.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
May 8, 1981.
*348 Robert G. Gubbe, Minneapolis, for relators.
C. E. Hektner, Minneapolis, for Carlson.
E. Michael Forde, Minneapolis, for Flour City Brush Company, et al.
Considered and decided by the court en banc without oral argument.
AMDAHL, Justice.
Certiorari on the relation of Aetna Insurance Company to review a decision of the Workers' Compensation Court of Appeals directing equal apportionment of liability for medical expenses, disability compensation, retraining benefits and attorneys fees awarded employee between Aetna, the employer's compensation carrier prior to January 1, 1978, and American Mutual Insurance Company, the employer's carrier after that date. We have concluded that the record does not permit apportionment.
In October 1978, employee filed a claim petition against the employer and American Mutual, alleging that she had sustained a personal injury in January 1978, described as degeneration of the L5-S1 disc and related back problems for which she sought disability compensation. On the petition of American Mutual, Aetna was joined as a party and both insurers denied liability.
The evidence at the compensation hearing established that employee, who worked for the employer from 1972 through February 5, 1978, performed work requiring repetitive bending, turning and lifting. During her first years of employment she lifted cartons weighing from 60 to 80 pounds, later lifting boxes weighing up to 25 pounds. She testified that she had never previously injured her back, but began to have pain in her low back and legs about the beginning of November 1977. She went to her family physician, Dr. Patrick Barrett, on November 16, December 7 and December 12, 1977, because of these complaints and received heat treatments. He referred her to Dr. James Priest, a board-certified orthopedist, who saw her on December 13, 1977, diagnosed her problem as a degenerative disc at the L5-S1 level, and prescribed a back brace which she obtained and wore until she terminated her employment.
On January 16, 1978, when employee bent over to pick up a carton, she felt severe pain in her low back which radiated into her legs. She returned to Dr. Priest the following day. His findings were essentially as they had been before, but he advised her to quit work. She did so on February 7, 1978, and was fitted with a body cast the following day which she wore for several months. Dr. Priest performed a spinal fusion to stabilize employee's back in July 1978, but she testified at the hearing that she still has *349 pain in her back and left leg, cannot sit or stand for a prolonged period, and cannot lift more than 15 pounds.
Dr. Priest expressed the opinion that employee's work each day between 1975 and the day she terminated her employment had involved continuing moderate aggravations of a pre-existing degenerative process. He also said that the work incident of January 16, 1978, was certainly an aggravation of her back condition. Although employee testified that her back condition had worsened in January even before this incident, Dr. Priest could not say whether her work in January 1978 had been a substantial contributing cause to her need for surgery.
Another orthopedic surgeon, Dr. David B. Johnson, diagnosed employee as having a herniated disc syndrome secondary to a degenerated disc at the L5-S1 level. He estimated that she has a 25% permanent partial disability of the back, but also held the opinion that her work activities had nothing to do with her condition because the symptoms she developed were due merely to temporary aggravations.
Dr. Virgil Lundquist, a general surgeon, agreed with Dr. Priest that employee's work aggravated her pre-existing degenerative condition, which he thought was probably congenital, and that each day employee worked constituted an aggravation of her condition. Dr. Lundquist thought the incident on January 16, 1978 was a significant contributing aggravation. He also agreed that employee has a 25% permanent partial disability and apportioned responsibility for it, as well as her temporary total disability, medical expenses and need for retraining, 25% to her work activities prior to the incident of January 16, 1978 and 75% to that incident.
On this evidence, the compensation judge made findings, subsequently adopted by the Court of Appeals: that employee had sustained an injury to her lumbar back during the period from 1975 to December 31, 1977 which had manifested disability on November 16, 1977 when she first went to Dr. Barrett; that as a result of this injury, she had been temporarily totally disabled on that date and on December 7 and December 12, when she returned to Dr. Barrett, and on December 13, when she had first consulted Dr. Priest; and that on January 18, 1978, she had sustained a second injury to her lumbar back.[1] He further found that as a combined result of both injuries she incurred specified medical expenses, was temporarily totally disabled until January 1, 1979, has a 25% permanent partial disability of the back, and requires retraining (which she had begun January 2, 1979). He determined that employee was entitled to compensation for 4 days of temporary total disability occurring between November 16 and December 13, 1977, which he directed Aetna to pay, and also awarded her medical expenses, disability compensation, retraining and attorneys fees, for which he apportioned liability 25% to Aetna and 75% to American Mutual.
On appeal by American Mutual, the Court of Appeals rejected the compensation judge's apportionment and apportioned liability equally between the insurers for all disability compensation due after January 16, 1978, and for employee's medical expenses, retraining and attorneys fees, on the grounds that employee "had disability and was unable to work on a number of occasions" while Aetna was the insurer and that justice dictated equal apportionment.
We agree that apportionment of liability between or among successive employers or insurers is equitable when the record furnishes a reasonable basis for determining the extent to which compensable work injuries sustained in the employ of different employers or during the periods successive insurers are on the risk, contribute to the employee's disability. In this case, however, the record does not furnish support for the finding that employee sustained a personal injury between 1975 and December 31, 1977. This injury was the *350 result of the cumulative effect of employee's daily work activities on her degenerative condition, and both medical experts who expressed the opinion that these activities had aggravated that condition said that each day employee worked constituted an aggravation. She worked through February 5, 1978, and there is no evidentiary support for a finding that the injury occurred prior to that date. While logically it could be argued that employee sustained a personal injury on each day she worked because of the aggravation to her condition resulting from that day's work, the only rule capable of practical application is that injuries resulting from repeated trauma or aggravations of a pre-existing condition result in a compensable personal injury when their cumulative effect is sufficiently serious to disable the employee from further work. The four isolated days in November and December 1977 on which employee sustained temporary total disability, although manifestations of disability related to her back condition, do not establish that she then sustained a compensable injury since she continued to work, albeit with a back brace after December 13. See Minn.Stat. § 176.121 (1980).
In finding that employee sustained a personal injury between 1975 and December 31, 1977, the Court of Appeals has ignored its own decisions holding that a personal injury which is the consequence of repeated minor trauma or aggravations does not occur until the employee is forced to stop working. Thus, in Jensen v. Kronick's Floor Covering Service, 29 W.C.D. 61 (1975), involving disability from carpal tunnel syndrome, the Court of Appeals refused to apportion liability between two employers. Recognizing that the disability which had resulted from repetitive minute trauma, could logically be classified as either a personal injury or occupational disease, the court added that if it was a personal injury, "it occurred when the ultimate breakdown occurred," id. at 66, and if an occupational disease, there was "only one occupational disease and one disablement," which occurred when the employee was required to stop work. Id. at 67. This court, while recognizing that equitable apportionment might be applicable in some instances of disability from repetitive minute trauma, affirmed. Jensen v. Kronick's Floor Covering Service, 309 Minn. 541, 245 N.W.2d 230 (1976).
Similarly, in Prouty v. City of Duluth, 29 W.C.D. 550 (1977), the Court of Appeals found that an employee required by his work to sit for prolonged periods sustained a personal injury at the time when his position caused such an increase of pain and symptoms in his previously impaired back that it disabled him from working. Again, in Gilmore v. Little Jack's Steak House, 32 W.C.D. 4 (1979), a bartender who developed contact dermatitis over a period in which he worked for several employers was finally required by the condition to give up this work. The Court of Appeals refused to apportion liability for retraining, saying:
There is no basis for apportioning liability to prior employers as an occupational disease since the employee was not disabled from performing the substantial and material part of his duties as a bartender prior to his last employment with Little Jack's Steak House . . . . There was no basis for apportioning liability to former employers as a personal injury since the employee's ultimate breakdown and disability and need for removal from the occupation as a bartender did not occur until November 5, 1976.[2]
Id. at 9.
Finally, in Michels v. American Hoist & Derrick, 269 N.W.2d 57 (Minn.1978), this court affirmed the Court of Appeals' denial of an apportionment claim based upon its finding that the employee sustained only nondisabling injuries to his back due to minute trauma during the period in which the first insurer furnished coverage. The situation here is essentially the same since *351 employee did not sustain compensable disability during the period in which Aetna furnished coverage.
In Michels we stated in dictum that equitable apportionment might be available in cases involving repetitive trauma when substantial and uncontroverted medical testimony permits a precise allocation of responsibility between or among different employers or insurers for the employee's disability. That test also does not permit apportionment here. The expert testimony with respect to apportionment cannot realistically be viewed as uncontroverted since Dr. Johnson, in denying the existence of a causal relationship between employee's work and her present condition, in effect also denied that apportionment could be made. Moreover, even Dr. Lundquist, the only expert to attempt apportionment, was reluctant to do so. At one point he prefaced his opinion with, "maybe, if I had to pick numbers," and at another point, he admitted his reluctance to apportion responsibility "because basically the reason for her trouble is this incident [of January 16] in my opinion." We do not believe that his opinion, so qualified, furnishes substantial support even for the apportionment made by the compensation judge. It clearly did not support the Court of Appeals' apportionment of liability equally between the insurers. Nor do we find the employee's testimony sufficient to support either apportionment.
We conclude that the decision under review must be reversed insofar as it directs apportionment of liability among the insurers and awards compensation to employee for temporary total disability for the 4 separate days in 1977. The decision is otherwise affirmed.
Employee is allowed $200 attorneys fees.
Reversed in part, affirmed in part.
NOTES
[1]  There is some confusion as to the exact date of the injury. It appears from the record to have occurred on January 16, 1978, the date stated in the majority opinion of the Court of Appeals.
[2]  The insurer upon whom liability was imposed did not challenge the refusal to apportion liability although it sought review by this court of the retraining award. Gilmore v. Little Jack's Steak House, 292 N.W.2d 14 (Minn.1980).

=== CASE 9741299 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:52:58.682607+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN delivered the opinion of the court: The issue presented in this appeal is whether a claim for employment discrimination may be brought directly under article I, section 17, of the Illinois Constitution (111. Const. 1970, art. I, §17). FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND Plaintiff, Cathy Baker, is a former employee of a tavern business owned by defendant Grace Miller, doing business as Miller’s Metropole, and managed by Richard Yeast (hereinafter referred to collectively as defendants). The tavern employs fewer than 15 employees. On June 24, 1991, defendant Yeast discharged plaintiff from her duties as bartender at the tavern. Subsequently, plaintiff filed a two-count complaint in the circuit court of McLean County against defendants seeking to recover damages for employment discrimination. In count I of her complaint, plaintiff alleged that she was terminated from her employment, in violation of article I, section 17, of the Illinois Constitution (Ill. Const. 1970, art. 1, §17), because she is female. Count II realleges the allegations in count I and additionally alleges that plaintiff was discharged from her employment by defendant Yeast. Each count sought compensatory damages in "an amount greater than $15,000” and punitive damages in the amount of $20,000. Defendants filed a motion to dismiss the complaint. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 110, par. 2 — 615.) In their motion, defendants asserted that the plaintiff could not maintain a direct action under article I, section 17, of the constitution. Further, defendants asserted that the "hiring and promotion practices” language contained in article I, section 17, of the constitution does not extend to an employer’s termination and discharge practices. Following a hearing on the motion, the trial court granted defendants’ motion and dismissed the complaint with prejudice. The appellate court affirmed (242 Ill. App. 3d 44), and we granted plaintiff’s petition for leave to appeal (134 Ill. 2d R. 315). The Chicago Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, Inc., and Willie Pridgett, an interested private citizen, were granted leave to file an amicus brief in support of plaintiff. For the reasons which follow, we now affirm. DISCUSSION Article I, section 17, of the Illinois Constitution provides: "All persons shall have the right to be free from discrimination on the basis of race, color, creed, national ancestry and sex in the hiring and promotion practices of any employer or in the sale or rental of property. These rights are enforceable without action by the General Assembly, but the General Assembly by law may establish reasonable exemptions relating to these rights and provide additional remedies for their violation.” (Emphasis added.) Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §17. The first clause of section 17 broadly grants to Illinois citizens the right to be free from discrimination in housing and employment. The second clause makes clear that the provision is self-executing; no implementing legislation is necessary to sustain a cause of action for section 17 discrimination. Also included in that clause, however, is an express grant of authority empowering the legislature to "establish reasonable exemptions” relating to the rights guaranteed. Discrimination of the type prohibited by section 17, if committed by government, is prohibited by the due process and equal protection clauses of the fourteenth amendment and the comparable provisions in the 1970 Constitution. (Ill. Ann. Stat., 1970 Const., art. I, §17, Constitutional Commentary (Smith-Hurd 1971).) Section 17 supplements the equal protection clause in that it provides a constitutional right for persons to be free from discrimination committed by private persons. Ill. Ann. Stat., 1970 Const., art. I, §17, Constitutional Commentary (Smith-Hurd 1971). The guarantees provided by article I, section 17, are implemented by the Illinois Human Rights Act (Act) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, par. 1 — 102(F)). The Act provides a comprehensive scheme to "secure for all individuals within Illinois the freedom from discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, physical or mental handicap, or unfavorable discharge from military service in connection with employment, real estate transactions, access to financial credit, and the availability of public accommodations.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, par. 1 — 102(A).) Further, the Act created a uniform procedure for the enforcement of its substantive provisions, replacing the Fair Employment Commission, the Department of Equal Employment Opportunity, and the Human Relations Commission with one agency responsible for the investigation of all alleged civil rights violations, the Department of Human Rights. Davis & Murphey, The Illinois Human Rights Act: Revision of Illinois Law Concerning Discrimination in Employment, 69 Ill. B.J. 218 (1980). Article 2 of the Act, which governs employment discrimination claims, is relevant to our discussion here. Under the Act, it is a civil rights violation "[f]or any employer to refuse to hire, to segregate, or to act with respect to recruitment, hiring, promotion, renewal of employment, selection for training or apprenticeship, discharge, discipline, tenure or terms, privileges or conditions of employment on the basis of unlawful discrimination.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, par. 2 — 102(A).) "Employer” under the Act includes: "[a]ny person employing 15 or more employees within Illinois during 20 or more calendar weeks within the calendar year of or preceding the alleged [civil rights] violation.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, par. 2 — 101(B)(1)(a).) As a corollary, ”[e]mployee” under the Act does not include "[^Individuals employed by persons who are not 'employers’ as defined by [the] Act.” (Emphasis added.) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, par. 2 — 101(A)(2)(b).) Finally, section 8 — 111(C) of the Act provides: "Except as otherwise provided by law, no court of this state shall have jurisdiction over the subject of an alleged civil rights violation other than as set forth in [the] Act.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, par. 8 — 111(C). ANALYSIS We begin our analysis with a statement of the applicable standard of review. On appeal from a dismissal for failure to state a cause of action, the reviewing court’s sole task is to determine whether the allegations in the complaint are sufficient to set forth a cause of action for which relief may be granted. People ex rel. Fahner v. Carriage Way West, Inc. (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 300, 308. The parties agree that where the Act provides coverage, it is the exclusive remedy for employment discrimination. (Mein v. Masonite Corp. (1985), 109 Ill. 2d 1, 7.) Therefore, a covered employee may not bring a private cause of action to recover damages for a violation of his rights under article I, section 17. (See Ritzheimer v. Insurance Counselors, Inc. (1988), 173 Ill. App. 3d 953, 960-61 (and the cases cited therein).) Because defendants here employed fewer than 15 employees, there is no contention that plaintiffs gender discrimination claim is cognizable under the Act. The issue here is whether article I, section 17, of the constitution will support a direct cause of action for a gender discrimination claim for those persons "not covered” under the Act. Subordinate to that issue is whether "discharge” is included within the meaning of section 17’s "hiring and promotion practices.” It is plaintiffs contention that she is a person "not covered” under the Act, and, therefore, she has a direct cause of action under section 17. She offers the following analysis in support of her contention. The Act defines a "civil rights violation” as prohibited conduct by an "employer.” Because defendants employed fewer than 15 persons, they are not, by the Act’s definition, "employers,” and their alleged discriminatory conduct does not constitute a "civil rights violation.” Therefore, the Act does not apply. Plaintiff maintains that where the Act does not apply, a complainant may seek redress for a violation of any common law and constitutional rights directly in the courts. We reject plaintiffs analysis. Whether a plaintiff may seek redress for employment discrimination directly under section 17 of the constitution presents, simply, a question of statutory construction. The dispositive issue is whether the legislature has exempted small employers from discrimination claims. As we stated, the Act is the implementing legislation for section 17. (See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, par. 1 — 102(F).) Therefore, in our analysis, we must insure that any construction of the Act is in harmony with the letter and spirit of section 17. (See Farwell v. Cohen (1891), 138 Ill. 216, 257 (Magruder, C.J., dissenting).) To the extent necessary, we also construe section 17. Further, because section 17 provides the foundation for the Act, we begin our analysis there. Generally, the rules of statutory construction are applicable to the construction of a constitutional provision. (People ex rel. Chicago Bar Association v. State Board of Elections (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 513, 526, citing Coalition for Political Honesty v. State Board of Elections (1976), 65 Ill. 2d 453, 464.) As with statutory construction, this court must construe a constitutional provision so as to effectuate the intent of the drafters. (People v. Turner (1964), 31 Ill. 2d 197, 199.) The best indication of the intent of the drafters of a constitutional provision is the language which they voted to adopt. (Caryn v. City of Moline (1978), 71 Ill. 2d 194, 200.) And so it is with statutory construction. (See In re Marriage of Logston (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 266, 277.) Where the statutory language is clear and unambiguous, it will be given effect without resort to other aids for construction. (People ex rel. Baker v. Cowlin (1992), 154 Ill. 2d 193, 197.) As for construing the constitution, while the " 'true inquiry concerns the understanding of the meaning of its provisions by the voters who adopted it, still the practice of consulting the debates of the members of the convention which framed the constitution has long been indulged in by courts in determining the meaning of provisions which are thought to be doubtful.’ ” Board of Education, School District No. 142 v. Bakalis (1973), 54 Ill. 2d 448, 461-62, quoting People ex rel. Keenan v. McGuane (1958), 13 Ill. 2d 520, 527. There is no question that the drafters of section 17 granted the legislature authority to enact "reasonable exemptions” from the guarantees provided by section 17. The committee made it clear, however, that any legislative exemption must be reasonable and could not undermine the substance of the right to freedom from discrimination. (Gertz, The Unrealized Expectations of Article I, Section 17, 11 J. Marshall J. of Prac. & Proc. 283, 292 (1978).) Delegate Lewis Wilson, a member of the Bill of Rights Committee, explained as follows: "We felt that the legislature should be empowered to provide for reasonable exemptions here where the balancing would be the other way around, if you please, and where in these situations we felt that the greater value lies in a freedom of choice on the part of the employer or, for example, on the part of a person furnishing the housing. Now, let me give you an idea of some of these possible exemptions which we feel are reasonable and which the legislature would be empowered to enact. *** For example, the right of religious organizations to employ or provide housing for members of their own faith only. *** Another example of a reasonable exemption would be that relating to small employers — employers, that is, of small numbers of employees. Just what this number would be, I don’t know, of course; but in all these areas it was the committee’s feeling that the relationship between landlord and tenant or between employer and employee was of such an intimate and personal nature that the greater value there lies in leaving a freedom of choice to the landlord or to the employer, as the case might be. Hence, we have provided that the legislature may enact, these exemptions. It’s not required to do so, but it has the — has the power under the clause to do so.” (Emphasis added.) 3 Record of Proceedings, Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention 1592-93. In his prefatory remarks, Delegate Wilson noted the committee’s recognition that the fashioning of a bill of rights is a job of balancing and trying to evaluate competing interests. "Sometimes these are the interests of one private citizen versus the interests of another private citizen.” Delegate Wilson stated that, therefore, the committee felt that the legislature should be empowered to make reasonable exemptions. 3 Record of Proceedings, Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention, 1592. The express grant of authority to create reasonable exemptions, as well as the section 17 drafters’ supporting rationale, clearly indicate a recognition and acceptance that section 17 guarantees could be subject to limitation. Therefore, we reject any suggestion that the constitutional drafters did not intend that employees of small employers might possibly be left without a remedy for a violation of section 17 guarantees. Had the drafters intended otherwise, they simply would not have provided for "reasonable exemptions.” That said, we turn our attention to whether the legislature made such "reasonable exemptions.” The Act does not expressly state that small employers are exempted from its coverage. We note, incidentally, that section 2 — 104 of the Act, which is titled "Exemptions,” expressly provides that certain conduct, such as giving preferential treatment to veterans, giving professionally developed ability tests, or establishing an educational requirement, is not prohibited under the Act. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, pars. 2 — 104(A)(2), (A)(4), (A)(6).) However, no such express provision is made for classes of employers which could permissibly be exempted. Instead, the Act simply defines "employers” as those persons employing 15 or more people and, further, defines a "civil rights violation” as discriminatory conduct by an "employer.” Consistent with the constitutional grant of authority to exempt certain classes of employers, and because the Act is the implementing legislation for section 17, however, we read the Act as implicitly exempting, by definition, small employers from section 17 claims. The court in Ritzheimer v. Insurance Counselors, Inc. (1988), 173 Ill. App. 3d 953, however, held that while the legislature may have had the power to limit or eliminate claims for gender discrimination against small employers, the fact remains that it did not do so. "Nothing in the Illinois Human Rights Act suggests that small employers should be left to discriminate as they wish.” Ritzheimer, 173 Ill. App. 3d at 962-63. The court in Ritzheimer apparently viewed any non-express exemption as constituting no exemption. We disagree. We know of no rule of construction, and plaintiff points to none, which recognizes only express exemptions. On the contrary, the enumeration of one thing in a statute implies the exclusion of all others. (See Burke v. 12 Rothschild’s Liquor Mart, Inc. (1992), 148 Ill. 2d 429, 442.) Although no statute may be construed more broadly than its express language and reasonable implications (Insull v. New York Word-Telegram Corp. (1975), 172 F. Supp. 615, 628), that which is implied in a statute is as much a part of it as that which is expressed (United States v. Jones (1975), 204 F.2d 745, 754). Implicit in the Act’s definition of those employers who are subject to discrimination claims is that employers of fewer than 15 employees are exempt from such claims. Therefore, contrary to plaintiff’s contention, she is "covered” under the Act. We recognize that the rule expressio unius est exclusio alterius is not a rule of law, but a rule of statutory construction which may be overcome by a strong indication of contrary legislative intent. (Sulser v. Country Mutual Insurance Co. (1992), 147 Ill. 2d 548.) However, we believe that our interpretation of the Act is wholly supported by and consistent with the legislative intent. As previously stated, the Act expressly provides that it was implemented to secure the rights "established by section 17 of the constitution.” The Act’s express and unqualified purpose to implement section 17 evidences a legislative intent to give effect to the letter and spirit of section 17. Obviously, in enacting the Act, the legislature was cognizant of those exemptions deemed reasonable by the constitution’s drafters, as well as their reasons for permitting such exemptions. That being the case, we find it unlikely that the legislature ignored the drafters’ sentiments concerning the "intimate and personal nature” of small employer-employee relationships. Clearly, the implementing legislation was intended to abrogate any right of action other than as provided for in the Act. See Davis & Murphey, The Illinois Human Rights Act: Revision of Illinois Law Concerning Discrimination in Employment, 69 Ill. B.J. 218 n.6 (1980); see also Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, par. 8 — 111(C). The legislative debates to the Act, as recited in Dilley v. Americana Healthcare Corp. (1984), 129 Ill. App. 3d 537, 546, provide an additional measure of support for our conclusion. There the court recited the comments of then State Representative Braun as follows: "[Senate Bill 1377] repeals the existing civil rights authority and replaces that authority but abandons certain existing rights regarding testing standards, discrimination by contractors, protections extended to the handicapped, private right of action, delay by respondents, damages by willful discrimination. It creates a new exemption for discrimination by private clubs, religious corporations, and others.” (Emphasis added.) 81st Ill. Gen. Assem., House Debates, November 8, 1979, at 97, quoted in Dilley, 129 Ill. App. 3d at 546. Although small employers are not mentioned in the comments as one of the exempted classes, it is significant that religious corporations are noted as exempted. Religious corporations, along with small employers, are a class of employers which the section 17 drafters included as permissible exemptees. As with small employers, the Act does not expressly exempt religious corporations but, instead, includes them in its definition of who is not an employer. (See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, par. 2 — 101(B)(2).) Nevertheless, we view, as did apparently Representative Braun, that the Act exempts religious corporations from section 17 claims. Additionally, it is noteworthy that the comments mention, without qualification, the abandonment of a private right of action. We find additional support for our conclusion in the application of another of the rules of statutory construction. The rule, as generally stated, provides that in construing statutes, courts presume that the General Assembly, in passing legislation, did not intend absurdity, inconvenience or injustice. (Harris v. Manor Healthcare Corp. (1986), 111 Ill. 2d 350, 363.) We have considered the likely results of a construction of the Act which would permit a direct action under section 17. In that regard, we note that the Act provides that its purpose is to protect the citizens of this State against unfounded charges of unlawful discrimination. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, par. 1 — 102(H).) Under the Act, once a claim of discrimination is filed with the Department of Human Rights, the Department is mandated to conduct an investigation to determine the meritoriousness of a claim prior to filing a complaint with the Human Rights Commission. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, par. 7A — 102.) It would be unjust for the legislature to devise a mechanism designed to shield large employers from the burdens and costs of defending against a private lawsuit in which it may ultimately be determined that the claims are unfounded and yet leave small employers, who can least afford it, to fend for themselves. Further, the remedies provided under the Act are extensive, including actual damages, back pay, the provision of fringe benefits which may have been denied and "make whole relief.” (See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, pars. 8A — 104(B), (C), (J).) Noticeably absent is any provision for punitive damages. Again, it seems an unjust result that the legislature would limit the nature of the damages available against large employers and leave small employers at risk to pay potentially bankrupting sums, including punitive damages. Finally, under the Act, a charge that a civil rights violation allegedly has been committed must be filed within 180 days. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, par. 7A — 102.) This requirement has been held to be jurisdictional. (See Faulkner-King v. Department of Human Rights (1992), 225 Ill. App. 3d 784.) Direct claims against small employers would not be subject to the limitations of a 180-day filing requirement. (See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 110, par. 13 — 205 (civil actions not otherwise provided for shall be commenced within five years after cause of action accrued).) As is apparent, any construction of the Act which would permit a private cause of action under section 17 creates an obvious injustice to small employers. We therefore believe that it was the intent of the legislature to exempt small employers from discrimination claims. Plaintiff would no doubt argue that a construction of the Act which leaves employees of small employers without a remedy for employment discrimination is, likewise, unjust. Such a construction comports, however, with the section 17 drafters’ attempt to balance the competing interests in accommodating the intimate relationships and personal choices involved in the small employer-employee relationship against preventing discrimination. Notably, in its report on the various antidiscrimination proposals, the Bill of Rights Committee stated: "[F]cw would approve an anti-discrimination provision that absolutely prohibited the kind of indirect discrimination involved in providing housing exclusively to the aged members of certain religious or ethnic organizations, or women’s groups. Persons might also be permitted some discrimination in employment or rental relationships that are on so small a scale and under circumstances so intimate that they are of a highly personal nature.” 6 Record of Proceedings, Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention 68-69. In support of her argument that direct action was intended by the section 17 drafters, plaintiff invites our consideration of that portion of the debates concerning the self-executing clause of section 17: "MR. S. JOHNSON: Delegate Wilson, I’d like to ask you two or three questions about this self-enacting provision. Exactly how would that work? Supposing — supposing I had a grievance against someone and no remedy was found in statute law; how would I file a charge and what would happen after that? MR. WILSON: Well, if we are right — and I think we are right about this, Mr. Johnson — that this provision does create a right and the legislature has not set up any procedure, the courts are not powerless to find a remedy and to establish a remedy.” (Emphasis added.) (3 Record of Proceedings, Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention 1597.) Delegate Wilson additionally commented: "This is what courts are doing all the time. You know there is no statutory definition, for example, of due process of law. The courts are — decide what is due process of law, and they decide this; and this has been the genius, of course of the English common law. They decide this on a case-by-case basis *** whether or not there has been discrimination within the purview of this *** constitutional provision.” 3 Record of Proceedings, Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention 1597. Plaintiffs argument that the drafters intended that a plaintiff be able to pursue a remedy directly under section 17 is not wholly incorrect. The self-executing provision is clearly an attempt to defeat any claim of unenforceability of section 17 rights. However, we believe that the provision is operational only in the absence of implementing legislation — where "the legislature has not set up any procedure.” The committee comments to section 17 suggest that, in the absence of implementing legislation, there is an obvious question as to how the courts will fashion remedies for violations of section 17. (Ill. Ann. Stat., 1970 Const., art. I, § 17, Constitutional Commentary, at 673 (Smith-Hurd 1971).) Further, Delegate Gertz, chairman of the Bill of Rights committee, citing the constitutional commentary, offers that the self-executing provision was included to avoid the effects of Dorsey v. Stuyvesant Town Corp. (1949), 209 N.Y. 512 (holding that a general civil rights provision in New York’s constitution did not outlaw racial discrimination in housing in the absence of legislative action). (Gertz, The Unrealized Expectations of Article I, Section 17, 11 J. Marshall J. of Prac. & Proc. 283, 294 n.57 (1978).) Finally, we find significant Delegate Wilson’s response to a question concerning the General Assembly’s role in controlling excessive penalties. Delegate Wilson stated: "The provision gives the General Assembly the right to establish exemptions, the general nature of which I referred to in my remarks, and also to establish procedure and remedies.” (Emphasis added.) 3 Record of Proceedings, Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention 1597. In our view, the self-executing provision simply makes clear that inaction by the legislature, or repeal of any implementing legislation, would not serve to defeat the substantive rights guaranteed by section 17. However, the self-executing provision does not operate where the General Assembly has acted. (See Mein, 109 Ill. 2d 1.) Incidentally, in the absence of legislative action, it is unclear how the section 17 drafters’ public policy concerns with respect to the intimacy and personal choice involved in the small employer-employee relationship would have been actualized. Under our construction of the Act, however, those concerns are accommodated. For these reasons, we conclude that the Act implicitly exempts small employers from a section 17 claim. By such exemption, employees of small employers are "covered” under the Act. Because the Act is the exclusive remedy for employment discrimination claims (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1991, ch. 68, par. 8 — 111(C)), employees of small employers may not bring a direct action under section 17. In light of our holding today, we expressly reject Ritzheimer, 173 Ill. App. 3d 953. Our determination that a direct action under section 17 is precluded renders resolution of the subordinate issue, whether discharge is included in the phrase "hiring and promotion practices,” unnecessary. CONCLUSION The Human Rights Act provides a broad array of antidiscrimination protections. Clearly, the Act was designed to afford greater protections and to alleviate those gaps in protection which existed under the former employment discrimination statute, the Fair Employment Practices Act. The current Act provides a comprehensive and systematic mechanism for the investigation and disposition of discrimination claims. As properly construed, however, the Human Rights Act precludes a remedy for employees of small employers for employment discrimination. This construction is, nonetheless, supported by the constitutional debates. And, in our review, we are constrained to do no more than interpret the law. Any attempt to broaden or narrow the scope of the Act is necessarily a matter for the legislature. Plaintiff has not stated a cause of action upon which relief may be granted. For all of the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment of the appellate court. Affirmed.