=== CASE 9738354 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:50:54.715489+00 ===

On Petition for Rehearing
Sullivan, J.
Appellant Alderman’s Petition for Rehearing asserts ten separate specifications of error in the decision and opinion heretofore issued December 27, 1972. See Alderman v. Bailey (1972), 154 Ind. App. 632, 291 N.E.2d 92. We deem two of the specifications worthy of comment in this opinion on rehearing.
Appellant Alderman first claims that:
“The Court erred in affirming the judgment for punitive damages and in holding that appellee’s (Mrs. Bailey’s) evidence of ‘malice or oppressive conduct’ was not precluded by her failure to plead fraud with specificity since such evidence solely involved acts relating to the original sale of the truck and was not related to the wrongful act of conduct complained of in Mrs. Bailey’s amended complaint.”
Implicit in Alderman’s contention is the assumption that the only evidence which could prompt an award of punitive *658damages was evidence with respect to the original sale of the truck and with respect to negotiations prior to that sale. Such is not the case. The plaintiff alleged that it was the refusal to redeliver the truck by defendant-Alderman after it had been brought in for repair -which was malicious and oppressive. The jury was under the circumstances, entitled to so find.
It is true that evidence relative to defendant’s state of mind at and prior to the sale does not directly bear upon the defendant’s state of mind at the time defendant failed to return the vehicle to plaintiff, the latter time being the controlling and crucial time as fixed by the complaint with respect to the allowance of punitive damages. This is not to say however, that such evidence is inadmissible. Evidence as to defendant’s state of mind at and prior to sale might well justify a reasonable inference that such malice and oppressive conduct constituted a continuous state of mind and but a single course of conduct — that the entire transaction was a single transaction culminating in the oppressive and malicious refusal of defendant to return plaintiff’s truck.
Alderman secondly claims:
“The Court erred in upholding the trial court’s implied warranty instruction and in holding that the jury could have refused to give force and effect to Alderman’s disclaimer of implied warranties since (a) the validity of such a disclaimer is a question of law for the court to determine . .
The narrow question involved in this portion of the Petition for Rehearing is whether the trial court determined that Alderman’s disclaimer was sufficient or insufficient to disclaim all implied warranties. This being so, it is not necessary to ascertain whether the court’s determination of the “conspicuousness” of the disclaimer was a question of law or a question of fact.
In its instructions to the jury, the trial court gave an implied warranty instruction. It did not give an instruction *659concerning the effectiveness of Alderman’s disclaimer provision. The failure to instruct on disclaimers was proper since the effectiveness of a disclaimer is “for decision by the court” and not for decision by the jury. IG 1971, 26-1-1-201(10), Ind. Ann. Stat. §19-1-201(10) (Burns 1964 Repl.). It must be and is by us assumed that because the trial court gave an implied warranty instruction it deemed the disclaimer to have been not so 'conspicuous as to exclude such a warranty.
The following language however from our December opinion was unfortunate and we now recognize that it could produce an erroneous procedural effect:
“The jury might well have found that the purported exclusion or disclaimer was not sufficiently conspicuous so as to meet the requirements of the Uniform Commercial Code provision above quoted in that it was located at the extreme bottom of the reverse or second page of the contract, which page did not require nor contemplate a signature by the purchaser. See Rehurek v. Chrysler Credit Corp. (1972), Fla. App., 262 So. 2d 452. It was, therefore, not inappropriate for the jury to have found the existence of an implied warranty of fitness not excluded by the written contract executed by the parties.” (Emphasis supplied) (291 N.E.2d 92, 102).
In view of the consideration given herein to the “conspicuousness” question, we now substitute the following language for the first sentence of the above-quoted passage:
“It might well have been found by the court that the purported exclusion or disclaimer was not sufficiently conspicuous so as to meet the requirements of the Uniform Commercial Code provision above quoted in that it was located at the extreme bottom of the reverse or second page of the contract, which page did not require nor contemplate a signature by the purchaser.”
Appellant Alderman’s Petition for Rehearing is denied.
Buchanan, P.J., concurs; Lowdermilk, J., concurs (participating by designation).
Note. — Reported at 294 N.E.2d 617.

=== CASE 9738364 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:14.89593+00 ===

COLER, Justice
(dissenting).
I would affirm the judgment based on the jury verdict. While I agree that, having submitted the case to the jury, the trial court erred in failing to give the requested jury instruction on concurrent negligence, I do not find from a review of the record that the appellants have met the burden of proof required to show that *311the error was prejudicial. The jury was adequately instructed as to the duty of the defendant rancher, proximate cause and contributory negligence.
It is uncontroverted that George A. Landrum II, the driver of the Volkswagen of an unidentified vintage, proceeding from the Keystone Wye, on a downhill grade of a four-lane highway, pushed the vehicle to its top speed for a distance of three-quarters of a mile to one mile. Although young Landrum testified that the top speed was 60 miles an hour, the jury, weighing that testimony, was not bound by his opinion as to the speed obtained, as no witness looked at the speedometer. This court, in Dwyer v. Christensen, 1958, 77 S.D. 381, 92 N.W.2d 199, summarized our rules relative to prejudicial error and stated:
“Error may not be presumed on an appeal. Hardman v. Lasell, 55 S.D. 176, 225 N.W. 301. Plaintiff having alleged error must affirmatively establish the existence of such by the record. Kent v. Dakota Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 2 S.D. 300, 50 N.W. 85. It is incumbent upon appellant to show not only error but error prejudicial to him. To show such prejudicial error an appellant must establish affirmatively from the record that under the evidence the jury might and probably would have returned a different verdict if the alleged error had not occurred.” Dwyer v. Christensen, supra, at 385, 92 N.W.2d at 201.
Not every error in the failure to give instructions constitutes prejudicial and, therefore, reversible error. It is only when the instruction is on a legal question of such importance as applied to the facts in the individual case that it can be held to be prejudicial. Miller v. Baken Park, Inc., 1970, 84 S.D. 624, 175 N.W.2d 605.
Considering the admitted contributory negligence which was more than slight, I do not see the record establishing the possibility that “the jury might and probably would have returned a different verdict if the alleged error had not occurred.” Dwyer v. Christensen, supra.

=== CASE 2215533 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:02.611238+00 ===

665 N.E.2d 40 (1996)
In the Matter of E. Kent MOORE.
No. 79S00-9406-DI-576.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
May 15, 1996.
*41 E. Kent Moore, Robert S. Laszynski Laszynski & Moore, Lafayette, for Respondent.
Donna McCoy Spear, Staff Attorney, Indianapolis, for the Indiana Supreme Court Disciplinary Commission.
DISCIPLINARY ACTION
PER CURIAM.
The respondent, E. Kent Moore, has been charged with engaging in conduct intended to disrupt a tribunal, committing a criminal act which adversely reflects on his fitness as a lawyer, and engaging in conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice.[1] In accordance with Ind.Admission and Discipline Rule 23, a Hearing Officer was appointed; a hearing was conducted; and the Hearing Officer has tendered his report to this Court. The respondent now petitions the Court for review of the Hearing Officer's report. Both parties have filed briefs relating to the petition for review.
This Court's review in disciplinary cases is de novo in nature and involves consideration of the entire record submitted in the case. In re Robak, 654 N.E.2d 731 (Ind. 1995); In re Blackwelder, 615 N.E.2d 106 (Ind.1993). The Hearing Officer's report, being a product of direct observation of witnesses, is given appropriate emphasis, but this Court is the final arbiter of disputed facts and ultimately determines all factual and legal conclusions. In re Robak, supra.; In re Levinson, 604 N.E.2d 599 (Ind.1992); In re Gemmer, 566 N.E.2d 528 (Ind.1991).
Applying the above-noted standard of review, this Court now finds that on December 17, 1993, the respondent, representing a father and grandparents seeking visitation rights, appeared in the Tippecanoe Circuit Court for a hearing before the judge. Prior to the scheduled hearing, the respondent and opposing counsel met with the judge in chambers to discuss the resolution of issues before the court. During the meeting, opposing counsel suggested that the respondent was not being truthful. As the respondent and opposing counsel were leaving the chambers, the respondent told opposing counsel that he was offended by his comment and took opposing counsel's tie in his hand. After the respondent released the tie, opposing counsel called the respondent a "son of a bitch." The respondent struck opposing counsel with one blow causing him to fall back onto a table in the judge's chambers. The judge ordered the attorneys out of his office and thereafter recused himself from the case.
In his petition for review, the respondent challenges factual and legal conclusions offered by the Hearing Officer. The respondent asserts that at the time the above-noted contact took place between the respondent and opposing counsel, the court was not in session. Building on this rickety premise, the respondent concludes that his conduct was not intended to disrupt a tribunal. The respondent further asserts that his conduct was a "simple battery" and not a "violent" act; therefore, the criminal act in this case did not adversely reflect on the respondent's fitness as an attorney. Lastly, the respondent argues that since the judge recused himself, the hearing was not delayed, and the *42 parties settled the case in the end, the conduct of the respondent was not prejudicial to the administration of justice.
This Court finds little merit to the arguments offered by the respondent. The respondent is attempting to diminish the totality of the circumstances by artfully isolating the components. We do not embrace this analytical approach in disciplinary matters. This Court assesses disciplinary misconduct on the totality of the circumstances found in the case.
Evidence should not be weighed in fragmentary parts, but rather viewed as a whole to see or understand the pattern which it presents. It has been said that test is not to be applied to isolated items, but rather to the probative force of all the items when put together. In re Pawlowski, 240 Ind. 412, 165 N.E.2d 595 (1960).
The fact that the parties had concluded their discussion before the trial court judge does not mean that the responsibility for professional decorum before a tribunal automatically ceased. The significant facts are that immediately after concluding discussion in chambers of a case pending before the judge, the respondent grabbed and struck opposing counsel thereby knocking him over a table in the judge's office. When the crucial events occurred, the respondent was before a tribunal. See, In re McClure, 652 N.E.2d 863 (Ind.1995). Accordingly, we find that the respondent intentionally disrupted a tribunal and, accordingly, violated Ind. Professional Conduct Rule 3.5(c).
The respondent is also charged with violating Prof.Cond.R. 8.4(b) by engaging in a criminal act that adversely reflects on his honesty, trustworthiness, or fitness as a lawyer in other respects. As noted in the Comment to this rule, "although a lawyer is personally answerable to the entire criminal law, a lawyer should be professionally answerable only for offenses that indicate lack of those characteristics relevant to law practice." There must be a nexus between the criminal act and one of the three personal qualities set forth in Prof.Cond.R. 8.4(b), to-wit: honesty, trustworthiness, or fitness as an attorney. In re McClure, supra; In re Stults, 644 N.E.2d 1239 (Ind.1994). The respondent's attempt to somehow characterize the battery in this case as inconsequential misses the point. Again, the totality of the circumstances establishes that respondent struck an opposing counsel while exiting from a conference in a judge's chambers. The force of the blow knocked opposing counsel across a table in the office. We find no difficulty in concluding that the requisite nexus is present. The respondent's conduct clearly and unequivocally reflected adversely on his fitness as an attorney. The respondent violated Prof.Cond.R. 8.4(b).
The respondent raises a "no harm, no foul" defense to the charge that striking opposing counsel in chambers was conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice. He argues that the judge recused himself, the case was not delayed, and the parties ultimately agreed. This defense, however, ignores the full level of obligation owed by lawyers to the administration of justice. Former Chief Justice Burger described the role of an attorney in the administration of justice as follows:
As an officer of the court, a member of the bar enjoys singular powers that others do not possess; by virtue of admission, members of the bar share a kind of monopoly granted only to lawyers. Admission creates a license not only to advise and counsel clients but also to appear in court and try cases; as an officer of the court, a lawyer can cause persons to drop their private affairs and be called as witnesses in court, and for depositions and other pretrial processes that, while subject to the ultimate control of the court, may be conducted outside courtrooms. The license granted by the court requires members of the bar to conduct themselves in a manner compatible with the role of courts in the administration of justice. In re Snyder, 472 U.S. 634, at 644-45, 105 S. Ct. 2874, at 2881, 86 L. Ed. 2d 504 (1985).
As set forth in the Rules of Professional Conduct, the administration of justice includes the resolution of a case by an orderly procedure. See, Howell v. State Bar of Texas, 843 F.2d 205 (5th Cir.1988). The respondent's conduct in the present case clearly *43 fails to meet reasonable expectations in this regard. Conduct, as found in this case, violates Prof.Cond.R. 8.4(d). In re McClure, Supra. Accordingly, we find that the respondent engaged in conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice and violated Prof.Cond.R. 8.4(d).
It is now the duty of this Court to assess an appropriate discipline for the misconduct found in this case. The Hearing Officer has recommended a period of suspension, and the respondent argues for a reprimand. This Court is not bound by the Hearing Officer's recommendation for discipline. In re Robak, Supra. Our ultimate determination of sanction is determined by consideration of factors such as: the nature of the misconduct; actual or potential injury flowing from the misconduct; the state of mind of the respondent; the duty of this Court to preserve the integrity of the profession; the potential injury to the public in permitting the respondent to continue in the profession; and matters in mitigation; extenuation, or aggravation. In re Cawley, Jr., 602 N.E.2d 1022 (Ind.1992); In re Wells, 572 N.E.2d 1290 (Ind.1991). The respondent's conduct in this case seriously threatened the orderly administration of justice. As an officer of the Court, the respondent has been entrusted with the duty of providing effective representation in a responsible manner. By striking opposing counsel, Respondent grossly failed to meet his duty. His conduct undermines public confidence in and respect for the legal system. When misconduct of this level is found, this Court must impose discipline that demonstrates our abhorrence for such conduct and preserves confidence in the integrity of the legal profession. The respondent's conduct warrants a period of suspension.
Accordingly, in light of the violations of Prof.Cond.R. 3.5(c), 8.4(b), and 8.4(d) found in this case, the respondent, E. Kent Moore, is hereby suspended from the practice of law for a period of sixty (60) days beginning June 15, 1996. Upon completion of this period of suspension, the respondent will be automatically readmitted to the practice of law.
Costs of this proceeding are assessed against the respondent.
NOTES
[1]  Professional Conduct Rule 3.5(c) provides that a "lawyer shall not engage in conduct intended to disrupt a tribunal."
Professional Conduct Rule 8.4(b) provides that "it is professional misconduct for a lawyer to . . . commit a criminal act that reflects adversely on the lawyer's honesty, trustworthiness or fitness as a lawyer in other respects."
Professional Conduct Rule 8.4(d) provides that "it is professional misconduct for a lawyer to . . . engage in conduct that is prejudicial to the administration of justice."

=== CASE 2215544 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:02.751208+00 ===

218 Cal. App. 2d 422 (1963)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
EMANUEL WELCH, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 3436.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
July 18, 1963.
Jack Lee Burford, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, and Doris H. Maier, Assistant Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
PIERCE, P. J.
On a charge of robbery, the court found defendant guilty of second degree robbery. Defendant appealed.
Upon defendant's request an attorney was appointed to represent him on the appeal. This attorney has advised the court that after reviewing the record, he is of the opinion there are no valid grounds for an appeal. After an independent review of the record, we reach the same conclusion.
[1] On September 24, 1962, at approximately 10 a. m., prosecution witnesses, Dodgson, Stewart and Lowery, were having coffee at Cooper's Doughnut Shop at 2d and "K" Streets in Sacramento, when defendant, who had been in and out of the shop that morning, walked into the shop again, approached Dodgson, grabbed him by the neck, took his wrist watch and ran from the place. Dodgson described him to a police officer as "a very large colored man," and accompanied the officer on a tour of the vicinity. Defendant was apprehended on the street shortly thereafter. After he had been identified by Dodgson as the person who took his watch, the *423 police searched defendant and found the watch, with the wristband broken, in his pocket.
Defendant was not only identified by Dodgson, but also by Lowery and Stewart.
Defendant, testifying on his own behalf, denied he had taken the watch from Dodgson, and testified that he had bought the watch for one dollar from a white man who had approached him on the street earlier that morning, and that the wristband broke when he tried to put it on. Earlier, when defendant had told this story (separately), to both the police officer and the district attorney, he had stated it was Dodgson who had sold him the watch. Testifying, he said it was not Dodgson but another.
Robbery is the felonious taking of personal property in the possession of another, from his person or immediate presence, and against his will, accomplished by means of force or fear. (Pen. Code,  211.) It is sufficient if there is evidence of either force or fear. Here the taking of the watch "snatched" from Dodgson is sufficient evidence of force. (See e.g., People v. Jefferson, 31 Cal. App. 2d 562 [88 P.2d 238]; People v. Reade, 197 Cal. App. 2d 509 [17 Cal. Rptr. 328].)
Judgment is affirmed.
Schottky, J., and Friedman, J., occurred.

=== CASE 2215547 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:02.792156+00 ===

218 Cal. App. 2d 657 (1963)
PASCAL DISTEFANO, Plaintiff and Appellant,
v.
CHARLES W. HALL et al., Defendants and Appellants.
Civ. No. 19502.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. One.
July 26, 1963.
Vogel & Martin, Cyril Viadro and Bernard J. Vogel, Jr., for Plaintiff and Appellant.
Reeser, Farrow, Barton & Barton and Harold R. Farrow for Defendants and Appellants.
MOLINARI, J.
All of the parties to this litigation have appealed from the judgment in an action brought to foreclose a mechanic's lien. In essence, there are three appeals: by plaintiff; by defendants Charles W. Hall and Dorothea Fabian (hereinafter referred to as Hall); and by defendants Carl L. Dozier and Winifred Dozier (hereinafter referred to as Dozier).
Statement of the Case.
Plaintiff filed an action against Hall and Dozier for the foreclosure of a mechanic's lien upon certain real property.  [fn. 1] The complaint alleges that plaintiff, as a licensed general contractor, entered into a written contract with Hall and Dozier to furnish and deliver materials and perform labor in the construction of an apartment house building; that he furnished labor and materials in the construction thereof to the value of $158,458.05, of which only $30,000 was paid, leaving a balance due in the sum of $128,458.05; that said agreement provided for the payment of reasonable attorney's fees in the event suit was brought to enforce its terms; that the sum of $5,000 is a reasonable attorney's fee; and that a claim of lien was duly and timely recorded.
Dozier answered by way of general denial. Hall also answered by way of a general denial and, in addition, filed a counterclaim wherein it was alleged that Hall and Dozier had entered into a written agreement with plaintiff whereby the latter agreed to supervise the construction of a 22-unit apartment house in accordance with plans and specifications furnished by Hall and Dozier, whereby plaintiff agreed to make good for any loss or damage for defective workmanship, and whereby it was agreed that if any party was required to bring an action to enforce the terms of the contract the losing party was to pay to the successful party his costs and reasonable attorney's fees. The counterclaim alleged that plaintiff negligently supervised the construction of the building so as to cause said building to be completed in a defective *661 manner in that neither the roof nor exterior walls of said building were weathertight; and that as a proximate result of plaintiff's negligent performance of his contractual duties the interior of said structure and the contents thereof were damaged by the elements in the amount of $30,000. It was also alleged in said counterclaim that the sum of $6,000 is a reasonable amount for attorney's fees to be allowed in the action. Hall's answer was subsequently amended to allege two additional defenses, by way of counterclaim, designated as second separate and third separate defenses, respectively. The substance of the second defense is as follows: that plaintiff falsely, maliciously and with intent to defraud, represented to Hall and Dozier that the said apartment building could be built for a total labor cost of 75 cents per square foot, exclusive of the labor to be expended by subcontractors and exclusive of the labor necessary to construct the foundations of said building; that in truth and in fact it was impossible to construct an apartment house in conformity with the plans and specifications for less than 90 cents, exclusive of the items excluded; that Hall and Dozier believed said representations and in reliance thereon entered into the aforementioned agreement; that in said agreement it was provided that plaintiff was to receive a fee of $8,000 for his services in personally supervising the construction of said building, and the sum of $4,872 for the construction of the foundation for said building as an independent subcontractor; that subsequently plaintiff falsely induced Hall and Dozier to execute the last paragraph of said agreement with reference to additional work on "extras" desired by the latter so as to allow plaintiff to expend labor cost without limitation; that in his bill of particulars plaintiff alleged the labor cost for the construction of said building to be $31,000, exclusive of the labor of subcontractors, but including the labor expended for the foundation; and that the reasonable value of said labor is not in excess of $16,650. The third separate defense is substantially in the same form as the second defense, excepting that it alleges that in said agreement plaintiff agreed that the labor costs would not exceed $14,000; that said labor costs exceeded the sum of $30.000; and that the reasonable value of said labor is not in excess of $16,500. A bill of particulars, demanded of plaintiff, was furnished and filed showing itemizations totaling $141,516.53  [fn. 2] less credits of $60,285.11,  [fn. 3]*662 leaving a claimed balance due of $81,231.42.
Subsequently, and approximately one month later, plaintiff furnished and filed an amended bill of particulars showing itemizations totaling $178,661.12  [fn. 4] less credits in the sum of $105,148.75,  [fn. 5] leaving a claimed balance due of $73,512.37. A bill of particulars was demanded from Hall but none was furnished. A jury trial was demanded by Hall and Dozier.  [fn. 6]
At this posture the proceedings were such that the cause should have proceeded to trial before a jury on all issues with the exception of the equitable issue as to whether or not plaintiff had recorded a valid mechanic's lien and whether he was entitled to a foreclosure of said lien. The parties, however, stipulated that the question of attorneys' fees should be determined by the trial court and not by the jury. The cause proceeded to trial before a jury and a verdict was returned in favor of plaintiff and against Hall for $28,500. Judgment was thereupon entered upon the verdict.  [fn. 7] Thereafter, and *663 without the taking of any further evidence, the trial court made its findings of fact and conclusions of law. The substance of the said "Findings of Fact" is as follows: that plaintiff is a licensed building contractor in this state; that Hall is the owner of the land therein described; that plaintiff entered into a written agreement with Hall and Dozier whereby plaintiff agreed to furnish labor and materials and to erect an apartment house for said defendants upon said land, according to certain plans, for a sum equal to the actual cost to plaintiff for materials and supplies used in said construction, plus the sum of $8,000 as compensation for services in supervising the construction of said building; that plaintiff supervised the construction of said building, supplied labor, furnished materials therefor, and completed and finished said building; that the balance due from "defendants to plaintiff under said written contract, after deducting all credits and all sums as and for damages sustained by defendants as alleged in their answer and counterclaim is the sum of $128,500.00";  [fn. 8] that in addition to the said sum of $28,500 there is still due and owing for materials and labor used and furnished in the construction of said building the sum of $14,843.85 "for which defendants herein are solely responsible and obligated to pay any amount or portion of said sum"; that the sum of $4,000 is a reasonable sum to be awarded as and for plaintiff's attorney's fees; and that plaintiff filed for record a lien and notice of lien provided for by law. From these findings of fact the court concluded that plaintiff is entitled to a judgment against Hall for $28,500, together with $4,000 attorney's fees, and that he is entitled to foreclose his lien upon the real property described in his complaint "in the sum found due to him." The court below further concluded that plaintiff "is in no way obligated to pay" the aforementioned sum of $14,843.85, and that said obligation was the sole responsibility of "defendants herein." Judgment was thereafter entered in accordance with said findings of fact and conclusions of law. It should be here noted that the said verdict, judgment on *664 the verdict, findings and conclusions, and the trial court's judgment do not make any reference to any adjudication for or against Dozier. We shall hereafter allude to this circumstance in our discussion of Dozier's appeal.  [fn. 9]
The Facts
A written agreement entitled "Building Contract," reciting that it was made on March 10, 1958, was entered into by and between Hall and Dozier, who are designated therein as "Owners," and plaintiff, who is therein called the "Contractor." At the trial each of the parties introduced in evidence his copy of said agreement.  [fn. 10] Each copy was in typewritten form with the signatures of the parties appearing on the last page thereof and at the end of the typewritten portion. On the last page of each copy of said agreement and below the aforesaid signatures there is an undated handwritten addendum also signed by all of the parties to the agreement. This addendum reads as follows: "Contrary to any promises hereinabove stated, Owners shall pay to Contractor the actual costs to Contractor for all labor, materials and other proper charges for the work to be performed in accordance with this agreement, in addition to the sum of $8,000.00 as referred to in Paragraph Seven (7) of this Agreement." It is undisputed that this addendum was executed at or about the same time as the typewritten portion of the said agreement. *665 The testimony at the trial, however, was in conflict with respect to paragraph 5(c) of the agreement which reads as follows: "Actual costs to the Contractor for wages of all laborers, carpenters and other employees who actually perform services upon the property herein, not to exceed Fourteen Thousand ($14,000.00) Dollars. Contractor has estimated said labor cost at Fourteen Thousand ($14,000.00) Dollars, or less, and the performance of this contract at a labor cost of Fourteen Thousand ($14,000.00) Dollars, or less, is a material condition of this contract."
The copy of the said agreement introduced in evidence by plaintiff shows two lines drawn through said paragraph 5(c) in the form of an "X" with the word "out" on the margin of the agreement opposite said paragraph, and the signatures "C. W. Hall" and "Pascal Distefano" under the word "out." None of these marks or writing appears on the copy introduced in evidence by Hall. Paragraph 8 of said agreement has lines in ink drawn through each typewritten sentence thereof on each of the copies with four separate initials opposite said paragraph.  [fn. 11] This paragraph reads: "It is agreed that the Eight Thousand ($8,000.00) Dollar fee shall be paid, if possible, from loan secured by Chattel Mortgage on the rugs, and on a loan against the swimming pool. Contractor agrees that Owners shall have a reasonable time, after completion, in which to apply for and secure said loans." All of the parties, signatory to the contract, who testified at the trial,  [fn. 12] were in accord that paragraph 8 was deleted at *666 the time the agreement and the addendum thereto was executed. Plaintiff testified that paragraph 5(c) was stricken at the same time. In this regard, plaintiff testified that he objected to both paragraphs 5(c) and 8 and that the addendum in the handwriting of his attorney was executed because of said objection. When queried as to why paragraph 5(c) was not stricken out on Hall's copy plaintiff testified that Hall did not desire it stricken as he wanted to present his copy to a lending institution and it would facilitate the obtaining of a $25,000 loan if paragraph 5(c) remained in the agreement. Both Hall and Dozier testified that the addendum was executed because paragraph 8 was being deleted, but that paragraph 5(c) remained untouched at the time the agreement and the addendum were executed by all of the parties to the contract.  [fn. 13] Dozier testified, moreover, that he did not know paragraph 5(c) had been stricken out until he was so informed at the trial. Hall testified that paragraph 5(c) was not stricken at the time his copy of the agreement was submitted to the bank for loan purposes and that it was not stricken out some seven months after the contract was executed (in September), and at about the time Dozier withdrew from the project. Hall stated that paragraph 5(c), which contained the $14,000 labor cost limitation, was stricken out at plaintiff's request and in consideration of plaintiff's advance to Hall of monies with which to pay off a loan secured by the land on which the apartment was being erected. Hall testified that he agreed to the striking of paragraph 5(c) in order to obtain the advance but that he did so upon plaintiff's oral representations, that while the labor costs would be in excess of $14,000 they would not exceed that sum by more than $1,000 or $2,000.  [fn. 14] Plaintiff admitted the advance by him to pay off said loan on the land but denied that paragraph 5(c) was stricken as a consideration therefor or in relationship thereto. He denied further that he made the representations as to the labor cost as testified to by Hall.
Plaintiff testified at the trial that he was to act in the capacity of a general contractor upon a time and material basis plus a fee of $8,000. He stated that he got all the bids from *667 subcontractors and that he submitted them to Hall and Dozier for approval. It was his testimony that he expended $27,996.51 for labor and $37,322.62 for materials making a total of $65,319.13 to which sum was to be added his fee of $8,000 making a total of $73,319.13. He stated that he had been paid a total of $33,936.55 on account, leaving a balance due him in the sum of $39,382.58. He also testified that at the time of the filing of the complaint the sum of $32,379.79 was due and owing to the subcontractors, and that while he did not then know the amounts that were still due the subcontractors, he should recover the aggregate thereof as he was primarily indebted therefor as the general contractor who had incurred the obligations.
Hall testified that he and Dozier had originally started to build the apartment as owners with the aid of subcontractors of which plaintiff was one; that certain difficulties were encountered, whereupon plaintiff was engaged to act as superintendent, to take care of the bids from subcontractors and to "run the whole job for us." Both Hall and Dozier testified that plaintiff told them, at or about the time they engaged him and prior to the execution of the aforementioned agreement, that he could build the apartment at a labor cost of about 75 cents per square foot, exclusive of the labor supplied by subcontractors.
Hall and Dozier did not offer any evidence in dispute or in contradiction of the material and labor costs claimed to have been incurred or expended by plaintiff, excepting a discrepancy of $205.30 in the labor costs. Mr. Hannibal, Hall's accountant, also testified that, assuming the labor and material items were incurred by plaintiff as claimed by him, the balance due would be $38,882.58, or $500 less than that claimed by plaintiff. According to Hannibal, this sum of $500 represented a payment made on account for which plaintiff failed to give credit. Plaintiff conceded that he did receive an additional sum of $500 from Hall, but claimed that he gave it back to Hall as a personal loan.
The testimony disclosed that when Hall and Dozier did not have the monies to pay the subcontractors and materialmen these were advanced by plaintiff. Hannibal testified that at the time the complaint was filed the amount due subcontractors and materialmen was in excess of $35,000, but that the balance due at the time of trial was $10,189.41. It was Hannibal's testimony that since the filing of the complaint Hall had paid or satisfied the obligations due subcontractors *668 and materialmen, excepting said sum of $10,189.41, either by cash payments or in the form of promissory notes executed in favor of said subcontractors and materialmen, and that the said obligations for which promissory notes were given amounted to $11,130.01. Hall testified further that at plaintiff's urging he procured the withdrawal of Dozier from the project in September of 1958, and that he and plaintiff orally agreed with Dozier that the latter would not be held responsible for anything connected with the building project "then or in the future." Dozier testified to the same effect. This was not denied or contradicted by plaintiff. The record discloses that Dozier gave a quitclaim deed of their interest in the property to Hall, and that a written indemnity agreement was executed by Hall holding Dozier harmless in said building transaction. Plaintiff was not a party to said indemnity agreement. Testimony was adduced from Hannibal that based upon measurements given him by Hall he computed the labor cost as incurred by plaintiff in the construction of said building to be $1.80 per square foot. A general contractor, Wayne F. Huff, testifying for defendants, stated that the labor costs for said building should have been between 93 and 95 cents per square foot; and a general contractor, Olaf M. Sundahl, testifying for plaintiff, testified that, according to the plans and specifications for said building as reviewed by him, the labor cost should have amounted to $24,747.80, exclusive of extra work, but that this cost could have been one-third higher because of the manner in which the building was constructed, particularly because the engineering specifications were completed after the plans were drawn rather than prior thereto. Further testimony was adduced by Hall as to the extent of the supervision exercised by plaintiff and also as to the time spent by the latter on the job site. In rebuttal plaintiff denied that he had represented that the labor cost would be 73 cents per square foot, or any other sum, and that he at no time quoted a price to Hall or Dozier as to the cost of construction.
Plaintiff's theory, in summary, as disclosed by his presentation of the evidence and his argument to the jury, is that he was engaged by Hall and Dozier as a general contractor on a time and material basis for the labor and materials furnished by him personally, plus a fee of $8,000, and plus the sums due subcontractors and materialmen. Accordingly, at the time of trial plaintiff claimed the balance of $39,382.58 due him personally, plus the sums which were still due and *669 owing to subcontractors and materialmen. In his argument to the jury counsel for plaintiff argued that this sum amounted to all of the obligations which had not been paid in cash to such subcontractors and materialmen. These amounted to the sum of $21,319.42, which consisted of two categories: the sum of $10,189.41  [fn. 15] referred to as "open accounts," and the sum of $11,130.01  [fn. 16] represented by the promissory notes given by Hall to several of such subcontractors and materialmen. While counsel for plaintiff did not state the total amount of his demand in exact figures, the essence of his argument, based upon the evidence adduced, is that plaintiff was entitled to recover the total sum of $60,702.  [fn. 17]
Although Hall had alleged in his answer that the reasonable value of the labor cost was not in excess of $16,650, he took the position at the trial, and his counsel so argued to the jury, that he was entitled to an offset of $17,247.52 on account of the labor expense, i.e., the amount by which the labor cost exceeded the sum of $14,000. It was Hall's contention that the $14,000 labor cost limitation was still a part of the contract, and that the deletion of paragraph 5(c), which provided for said limitation, in September 1958, was procured by plaintiff's fraud. The $17,247.52 reduction was claimed on two theories, both of which presupposed the $14,000 labor cost limitation. The first is based upon negligence, in that plaintiff negligently failed to supervise the construction properly and thus allowed the labor cost to run up to $31,247.52. The second theory is predicated upon damages for fraud, in that plaintiff procured the cancellation *670 of the paragraph placing a $14,000 limit on the labor cost by fraud, thus causing Hall to be damaged in the amount by which the labor cost exceeded the sum of $14,000.  [fn. 18] Hall contended, further, that plaintiff had not given him credit for the aforesaid payment of $500. He also urged that plaintiff was not engaged as a general contractor, but merely in a supervisory capacity as an agent for Hall and Dozier. Accordingly, argued Hall, plaintiff was not entitled to recover the amounts due subcontractors and materialmen as these were his obligations. Hall's counsel argued to the jury, moreover, that under the evidence plaintiff was not entitled to the $8,000 fee because he not only failed to supervise properly, but because he did not supervise at all.  [fn. 19] In summary, it was Hall's position that there should be deducted from the sum of $39,382.58, personally expended by plaintiff, the following sums: the claimed excess labor cost in the sum of $17,247.52; the $8,000 fee; and the said $500 payment, or a total of $25,747.52, leaving a balance due plaintiff in the sum of $13,635.06.
Dozier was represented at the trial by the same counsel who represented Hall. Dozier's main contention is that he was released from the building contract by plaintiff and that accordingly he is not indebted to plaintiff. This contention was not resisted by plaintiff at the trial, nor is any error claimed on this appeal, by either plaintiff or Hall, that the judgment rendered does not include Dozier as judgment debtor. *671
The Building Contract
[1] In the course of the trial before the jury considerable extrinsic evidence was presented by the respective parties and was received without objection, relative to the negotiations and circumstances surrounding the execution of the said agreement, the addendum thereto, and the cancellation and deletion of paragraph 5(c). No contention is made by any of the parties that the parol evidence rule was violated. The parol evidence was not introduced to vary or add to the contract, but in aid of its interpretation. In view of conflict in the evidence as to whether or not paragraph 5(c) was in the building contract when it was executed, the meaning of the language of the contract became uncertain and doubtful when read in the light of the addendum. Parol evidence was, therefore, properly introduced in aid of its interpretation, and the question of its meaning became one of fact. (Walsh v. Walsh, 18 Cal. 2d 439, 444 [116 P.2d 62]; MacIntyre v. Angel, 109 Cal. App. 2d 425, 435 [240 P.2d 1047]; Tomlinson v. Wander Seed & Bulb Co., 177 Cal. App. 2d 462, 469 [2 Cal. Rptr. 310].) The following language in the MacIntyre case is particularly applicable here: "If the facts thus adduced were undisputed, it would be the function of the court, not the jury to consider the writing in the light of such facts, but where (as in the instant case) those facts are in dispute (evidenced by testimony which is in conflict), ' "and the meaning of the contract is to be determined one way in one view of the facts, and another way in accordance with another view of the facts, then the determination of the disputed fact must be left to the jury." ' " (P. 435; citing Coats v. General Motors Corp., 3 Cal. App. 2d 340, 355 [39 P.2d 838].) Accordingly, the question as to whether paragraph 5(c) was in fact a part of the original contract or whether it was subsequently deleted pursuant to an executed oral modification was, in view of the conflict in the evidence, a fact question for the jury. (See Miller v. Brown, 136 Cal. App. 2d 763, 775 [289 P.2d 572].) [2] Moreover, when there is a question as to whether a part of a written agreement was intended by the parties to become a part of such agreement, the inquiry is directed to the identity of the real contract entered into between the parties. Such question is one of fact for the jury to be determined from all the circumstances surrounding its execution, and extrinsic evidence is competent to determine what constitutes the real contract. *672 (See Shelley v. Hart, 112 Cal. App. 231, 239 [297 P. 82].)
The Jury Instructions
[3] The questions directed to plaintiff's capacity (i.e., whether he was an agent or a general contractor), the meaning of the building contract, the nature and extent of the labor and materials furnished by plaintiff himself, the sums due and owing therefor, the amounts due and owing to subcontractors and materialmen, and the payments, satisfaction and discharge by Hall of the obligations due subcontractors and materialmen, were issues tendered by the pleadings. Evidence was adduced thereon, and arguments with respect to such evidence were addressed to the jury by respective counsel. The duty thereupon devolved upon the court to instruct on every theory finding support in the evidence. (Daniels v. City & County of San Francisco, 40 Cal. 2d 614, 623 [255 P.2d 785]; Wilbur v. Cull, 145 Cal. App. 2d 41, 43 [302 P.2d 41].) While the instructions proffered by the respective parties and refused by the court  [fn. 20] with respect to these issues were either faulty or inadequate in several respects so that the court was not required to give them as offered, or to modify and give them (Shaw v. Pacific Greyhound Lines, 50 Cal. 2d 153, 158 [323 P.2d 391]), and while instructions on some of the vital issues were not submitted by any of the parties at all, the court was not relieved of the responsibility to properly instruct the jury on the controlling legal principles applicable to the case. (Herbert v. Lankershim, 9 Cal. 2d 409, 482 [71 P.2d 220]; Jones v. Burgermeister Brewing Corp., 198 Cal. App. 2d 198, 204 [18 Cal. Rptr. 311]; Thomas v. Buttress & McClellan, Inc., 141 Cal. App. 2d 812, 819 [297 P.2d 768]; Jaeger v. Chapman, 95 Cal. App. 2d 520, 525 [213 P.2d 404].) It was therefore incumbent on the trial court to give instructions on all the vital issues in the case so that the jury would have a full and complete understanding of the law applicable to the facts. Accordingly, in the interest of a full and complete understanding of the law applicable to the case, it was necessary that the jury be instructed on the major subjects raised by the pleadings. (Jaeger v. Chapman, supra; Herbert v. Lankershim, supra.) A perusal of the trial court's instructions in this case discloses not only that they were scanty, but that they failed in several respects to give *673 the jury the full and complete understanding of the case to which it was entitled. We shall hereinafter point out the pertinent deficiencies in our consideration of the contentions of the parties on this appeal.  [fn. 21]*674
Hall's Appeal
Hall appeals from the portions of the judgment which adjudged that Hall is solely liable for the aforementioned sum of $14,843.85 due subcontractors and materialmen; from the adjudication that plaintiff is entitled to a lien and to a foreclosure of the same; and from the award of $4,000 attorney's fees to plaintiff.  [fn. 22] Hall also purports to appeal from that portion of the judgment which "[d]enied to said defendants the right to introduce evidence on their Further Separate And Distinct Defense and Counterclaim. ..."  [fn. 23]
[4a] We shall first consider the claim that the trial court erred in its finding that Hall was solely responsible and obligated to pay the sum of $14,843.85, which it found was still due and owing to subcontractors and materialmen. This determination was made by the trial court after the jury's verdict and without the taking of any additional evidence. As we have pointed out above, all issues in the instant case, with the exception of the existence and validity of the mechanic's lien and its foreclosure and the question of the attorneys' fees, were all for the consideration of the jury.
[5a] In the case at bench plaintiff sought a personal judgment against Hall and Dozier. As we have pointed out above, this determination was for the jury. It included not only the sum of $39,382.58, which plaintiff claimed was due him for labor and materials personally furnished by him, but *675 also such amounts for which he might be obligated to pay as a general contractor to such subcontractors and materialmen with whom he was in contractual privity. The trial court should, in the first instance, have instructed the jury as to the relationship of a general contractor, not only to the owners, but to the subcontractors and materialmen. This it did not do. It should also have instructed the jury on the subject of agency and the effect of plaintiff's conduct as an agent. [6] It was also incumbent upon the court to have instructed the jury that, except as it may arise through his construction contract or by some voluntary assumption of the obligation, there was no personal liability on the part of the owner towards laborers, materialmen, or subcontractors with whom he sustains no contractual privity. (See Stockton Lumber Co. v. Schuler, 155 Cal. 411 [101 P. 307]; Roberts v. Security T. & S. Bank, 196 Cal. 557 [238 P. 673]; Beard v. Lancaster Midway Oil Co., 72 Cal. App. 148 [236 P. 970].)
[5b] Plaintiff, in the instant case, contended that he was entitled to recover the sum of $21,319.42 due and owing to the subcontractors and materialmen to whom he was primarily liable under his contract with them. Accordingly, he was entitled to instructions on this theory. By the same token, Hall claimed that he was primarily liable for this sum, either on the theory of contractual privity or on the theory of assumption of the obligation, or both. Hall, too, was entitled to appropriate instructions. Of this sum of $21,319.42, the sum of $6,475.57 was represented by Santa Clara's claim. Santa Clara was litigating its claim in the same action where it, too, was seeking a personal judgment against Hall and Dozier. The contractual relationship between Santa Clara and Hall and Dozier, if any, should have been defined to the jury, as well as the effect of Santa Clara's recovery of a personal judgment against the owners upon plaintiff's claim against such owners. Moreover, Hall claimed that said sum of $21,319.42 included claims aggregating $11,130.01 for which he had given promissory notes, and that, therefore, he, and not plaintiff, was liable therefor. Plaintiff, on the other hand, contended that notwithstanding the giving of such notes, he was still primarily liable for the claims represented thereby. [7] The mere execution and delivery by the owner of a promissory note representing the value of materials or labor furnished in the course of construction of an improvement does not discharge the indebtedness, or release the general contractor who is primarily *676 liable therefor, unless the promissory note is given and received with an agreement that the note is to constitute payment of the original indebtedness. (Giant Powder Co. v. Fidelity & Deposit Co., 214 Cal. 639, 642-643 [7 P.2d 1023]; American System of Reinforcing v. Breakers Hotel Co., 217 Cal. 67 [17 P.2d 138]; Hammond L. Co. v. Richardson Bldg. etc. Co., 209 Cal. 82, 86 [285 P. 851].) [5c] The effect of the execution of the said promissory notes was a vital issue in this case, and the failure to instruct thereon left the jurors without advice as to how they should solve this important question. The jurors were merely instructed to decide "how much is owing to Mr. Distefano" and to "adjust the award to Mr. Distefano in such a manner as shall appear to you to be just and equitable under all the circumstances." The jurors were not given any instructions at all regarding the claims of subcontractors and materialmen. They were thus left to determine for themselves whether the sum of $21,319.42, or any part thereof, was due plaintiff, but they were not told how to approach the question. Moreover, in fairness to plaintiff, it appears from the instructions given, and in view of the failure to instruct on the claims of subcontractors and materialmen, that his recovery was limited to such labor, materials and services as he himself performed or furnished. These defects are serious and are such as to warrant a reversal. [4b] It is apparent, furthermore, that the trial court attempted to cure the defect when it undertook to adjudicate the issue as to the claims of materialmen and subcontractors by making a finding in this respect. As this issue was for the jury and not for the trial court, it was error to make such a finding.
[8a] The next contention made by Hall is that the trial court erred in sustaining objections to the introduction of evidence in support of his first counterclaim for damages for faulty construction. Under this counterclaim Hall alleged that plaintiff negligently supervised the construction of the apartment house so as to cause the building to be completed in a defective manner in that neither the roof nor the exterior walls of the building were weathertight, thus causing damages to the interior of said structure and the contents thereof to the extent of $30,000. Hall produced a witness in support of this counterclaim, and also, in the face of an objection to such evidence, made a timely offer of proof. The trial court sustained the objection on the ground that Hall had failed to furnish plaintiff with a bill of particulars as *677 to the items comprising said counterclaim as required by Code of Civil Procedure section 454.  [fn. 24] The penalty for failure to furnish a bill of particulars, when one has been demanded, is that no evidence will be allowed in support of the cause of action pleaded. The requirement that a party produce a bill of particulars, however, applies only to an action upon "an account." (See 2 Witkin, Cal. Procedure,  241, p. 1217.) Section 454 has received a fairly broad interpretation and has been construed to cover almost any kind of contract action for a money claim made up of more than one item. (Long Beach etc. Dist. v. Dodge, 135 Cal. 401, 407 [67 P. 499]; 2 Witkin, Cal. Procedure,  243, p. 1219.) It has been held, however, not to apply to an account stated (Auzerais v. Naglee, 74 Cal. 60 [15 P. 371]; Ahlbin v. Crescent Coml. Corp., 100 Cal. App. 2d 646 [224 P.2d 131]), nor to an action upon a compromise agreement. (Henning v. Clark, 46 Cal. App. 551 [189 P. 714].) In Ahlbin, it is stated that section 454 is not applicable to a contract or a promissory note which has an account for its consideration. It appears from the foregoing authorities that, at most, the requirement for a bill of particulars is restricted to actions based upon contracts seeking to recover "items of an account." In Kelly v. Hinkhouse, 108 Wash. 93 [183 P. 86], the appellate court was called upon to interpret a Washington statute whose language was similar to that of section 454. The Washington Supreme Court held that an action for damages for a breach of contract is not an action to recover "items of account" and that, accordingly, it was proper for the cross-complainant to ignore a demand for a bill of particulars. We have been unable to find a case in this state, nor has any been cited, which holds directly that section 454 does not apply to an action for damages for tort. The absence of any such authority results undoubtedly from what appears to be obvious, i.e., that an action for damages in tort is not an action upon "items of an account." In Eisele v. Oddie, 120 F. 695, the reviewing court, in construing a Nevada statute similar to section 454, held that the provision for a bill of particulars was not applicable to causes of action in tort. Likewise, in McDonald v. Barnhill, 58 Iowa 669 [12 N.W. 717], it is stated that a section *678 using similar language to that of section 454 is limited by its terms to a pleading founded on an account and that it does not include an action for negligence.
[9] The counterclaim in the instant case appears to allege both breach of contract and negligence. If the cause of action arises from a breach of a promise set forth in the contract, the action is ex contractu; but if it arises from a breach of duty growing out of the contract, it is ex delicto. (Eads v. Marks, 39 Cal. 2d 807, 811 [249 P.2d 257]; Peterson v. Sherman, 68 Cal. App. 2d 706, 711 [157 P.2d 863].) The counterclaim in the case at bench alleges that plaintiff "failed and neglected and refused to perform in accordance with the terms of said written agreement, and to the contrary so negligently and carelessly supervised construction of said apartment building as to cause. ..." Although the allegations contain elements of both contract and tort, the gravamen of the action is negligence and therefore the counterclaim is delictual. An action based on the negligent failure to perform contractual duties is generally regarded as delictual notwithstanding that it also involves a breach of contract. (Eads v. Marks, supra; Jones v. Kelly, 208 Cal. 251, 254-255 [280 P. 942].) [8b] Accordingly, in the light of the foregoing authorities, a demand for a bill of particulars was not proper and Hall was justified in ignoring such demand. It was prejudicial error, therefore, for the trial court to exclude relevant and material evidence on the said counterclaim because the damages, if any, established thereby would diminish or defeat plaintiff's demand.
[10a] The final contention made by Hall is that plaintiff forfeited his right to a mechanic's lien by recording a willfully misstated verified claim of lien. [11a] This issue was an equitable one to be determined by the court and not by the jury. [10b] Hall relies upon section 1193.1, subdivision (k), of the Code of Civil Procedure, which provides: "Any person who shall wilfully include in his claim of lien filed for record pursuant to this chapter work not performed upon, or materials, appliances or power not furnished for, the property described in such claim, shall thereby forfeit his lien." The notice of mechanic's lien contained language to the effect that the contract price for the apartment house was $158,458.05, on account of which $30,000 had been paid, leaving a balance of $128,458.05 still due and owing after deducting all just credits and offsets. The misstatement claimed is that plaintiff not only included the amounts *679 due him personally, but, in addition, all amounts claimed to be due all subcontractors and materialmen on account of the construction of the building. It is also claimed by Hall that the claim of $128,458.05 in the notice of lien is so excessive that it "must have been willfully misstated." This assertion is predicated upon the fact that the claim dropped in stages from said sum of $128,458.05 to the sum of $60,702.00 claimed at the time of trial.  [fn. 25]
It is apparent that these determinations are dependent upon the jury's findings as to the amount plaintiff is entitled to recover, if anything, and upon the jury's determination as to whether or not plaintiff is entitled to recover for the amounts due subcontractors and materialmen. In view of our determination that this case must be reversed in order to properly determine these issues, the question of the validity or forfeiture of the lien will likewise have to be retried by the trial court, because it must first be determined that there is an amount due plaintiff for which the mechanic's lien is to be security. [12] It should be here noted that section 1193.1, subdivision (k), must be construed and harmonized with section 1196.1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which provides in part as follows: "No mistake or errors in the statement of the demand, or of the amount of credits and offsets allowed, or of the balance asserted to be due to claimant, ... shall invalidate the lien, unless the court finds that such mistake or error in the statement of the demand, credits and offsets, or of the balance due, was made with the intent to defraud. ..." (See Callahan v. Chatsworth Park, Inc., 204 Cal. App. 2d 597, 608 [22 Cal. Rptr. 606].) Section 1193.1, subdivision (k), deals with two kinds of false claims only, i.e., claims for work not performed on the property and claims for materials, appliances or power not furnished for the property, while errors and mistakes consisting of demands for an excessive price or the failure to give credits for all payments made on account are covered by section 1196.1. (B. & J. Constr. Co. v. Spacious Homes, Inc., 204 Cal. App. 2d 216, 220 [22 Cal. Rptr. 41].) [11b] The two sections apply only where there is an actual intent to defraud. (B. & J. Constr. Co. v. Spacious Homes, Inc., supra; Henley v. Pacific Fruit etc. Co., 19 Cal. App. 728, 734 [127 P. 800]; Callahan v. Chatsworth Park, Inc., supra; Blanck v. Commonwealth Amusement Corp., 19 Cal. App. 720, 724 [127 P. *680 805].) Accordingly, the application of these sections is not one of law but one of fact because intent to defraud always presents a factual question. (Callahan v. Chatsworth Park, Inc., supra; B. & J. Constr. Co. v. Spacious Homes, Inc., supra; California Portland Cement Co. v. Wentworth Hotel Co., 16 Cal. App. 692, 704 [118 P. 103, 113].) In order to find such intent to defraud the evidence must be clear and convincing, and the question necessarily involves the weighing of evidence. (Callahan v. Chatsworth Park, Inc., supra; California P. C. Co. v. Wentworth Co., supra.)  [fn. 26]
Dozier's Appeal
[13] Dozier has appealed from "that portion of the judgment entered in the above-entitled action on March 4, 1960, which denied attorneys' fees and costs to said defendants on account of the trial of said action." A perusal of the record discloses that no judgment has been rendered in this action for or against Dozier. The judgment alluded to in the notice of appeal is the judgment in favor of plaintiff against Hall for $28,500, plus interest and costs, decreeing that plaintiff have a lien upon the property described therein, ordering a foreclosure of said lien, and ordering that plaintiff recover the sum of $4,000 as and for attorney's fees. Said judgment not only does not make any adjudications with respect to Dozier, but it makes no mention of Dozier at all.
The record discloses that the jury was instructed that if it should determine and find that Dozier was released from any obligation to plaintiff, it should draw a line through the names of Carl L. Dozier and Winifred Dozier in the form of verdict submitted to the jury. This unusual procedure produced the unfortunate result of eliminating Dozier from further consideration in the case. The jury verdict shows two complete obliterations in ink over typewritten portions of the verdict, which it is conceded by the parties, consisted of the names of Carl L. Dozier and Winifred Dozier. The judgment entered by the clerk on the jury's verdict, which was premature because the trial had not been concluded, carried the jury's verdict without the names of Dozier (because their names were scratched out) into the said judgment. The said verdict, under the judge's instructions, purported to find in favor of Dozier and against plaintiff. In the absence of *681 any issues which required findings by the trial court with respect to Dozier, the judgment made by the court at the conclusion of the trial, should, insofar as it concerned Dozier, have been drawn pursuant to the jury's verdict. Dozier asserts that he was entitled to a determination of attorneys' fees claimed by him, and that this issue was reserved for the trial court's consideration. This is denied by plaintiff. The trial court made no findings with respect to any claim of attorneys' fees on the part of Dozier.
Under the posture of the record as it appears before us, a judgment should be entered pursuant to the jury's verdict with respect to Dozier, if there are no other issues to be determined as to them by the trial court. If such issues remain they should be determined by the trial court, findings made thereon, and an appropriate judgment entered upon the issues determined by both the jury and the trial court.
Accordingly, insofar as the present appeal by Dozier is concerned, it is premature because there is no final judgment from which an appeal may be taken. The attempted appeal from the judgment must, therefore, be dismissed. [14] Such dismissal likewise precludes us from considering the question of costs. An order assessing or denying costs, or striking a cost bill, can be reviewed only on an appeal from the judgment (Markart v. Zeimer, 74 Cal. App. 152, 156-158 [239 P. 856]; Lacey v. Bertone, 33 Cal. 2d 649, 654 [203 P.2d 755]; Mullin v. Rousseau, 112 Cal. App. 719, 731 [297 P. 944]) or as a special order made after rendition and entry of final judgment. (Markart v. Zeimer, supra; Lacey v. Bertone, supra; Smallpage v. Turlock Irrigation Dist., 26 Cal. App. 2d 538, 541 [79 P.2d 752].) In either event, an order taxing or striking costs is not reviewable unless there has been a judgment in the trial court. (See 3 Witkin, Cal. Procedure,  23, pp. 2167, 2168.) It should be here pointed out that our reversal of the judgment in favor of plaintiff and against defendant Hall is not an adjudication with respect to Dozier, and is not intended to place the case at large insofar as Dozier is concerned.
Plaintiff's Appeal
Plaintiff has appealed from that part of the judgment which limits his recovery against Hall to $28,500. He urges his appeal only if Hall is successful in his appeal and requests that if the judgment is affirmed as against Hall, that then his appeal should be dismissed. As we have hereinabove indicated two of Hall's contentions made on this appeal *682 must be upheld and therefore require a reversal of plaintiff's judgment against Hall. With respect to Hall's appeal, and in support of his own appeal, plaintiff makes three contentions: (1) that he has not forfeited his lien under section 1193.1, subdivision (k), of the Code of Civil Procedure; (2) that the trial judge was fully justified in declaring that the unpaid claims of subcontractors were Hall's responsibility; and (3) that the trial judge was entirely justified, in the exercise of his discretion, in sustaining plaintiff's objections to the introduction of evidence as to claims concerning which Hall refused to furnish plaintiff a bill of particulars. These contentions have all been discussed in our consideration of Hall's appeal and they need not be repeated here. As to Dozier's appeal, plaintiff argues that Dozier is not entitled to attorneys' fees or costs. As we have hereinabove pointed out, we cannot consider Dozier's appeal on its merits because such appeal is premature. Inasmuch as our reversal of plaintiff's judgment against Hall will set the cause for retrial as between plaintiff and Hall, the award of attorney's fees in favor of plaintiff and against Hall is likewise set at large for determination upon such retrial.
The judgment in favor of plaintiff, Pascal Distefano, and against defendants Charles W. Hall and Dorothea Fabian is reversed and the cause as between such parties is remanded for a retrial.  [fn. 27] The appeal of defendants Carl L. Dozier and Winifred Dozier is dismissed. Each of the parties shall bear his own costs on appeal.
Bray, P. J., and Sullivan, J., concurred.
"1. Contractor agrees to give direct personal supervision of the construction of a Twenty-two (22) Unit apartment building to be located at 2346 Sutter Avenue, in the City of Santa Clara, County of Santa Clara, State of California, owned by the Owners, in accordance with certain plans and specifications furnished by the Owners, duplicate copies of which are attached to this agreement, and are initialed for identification by the parties hereto."
"4. The Contractor agrees to furnish efficient business administration and direct personal supervision of the work at all times during its progress, using his best skill and attention, and to use every effort to keep upon the work at all times an adequate supply of workmen and materials, and to secure its execution in the best and soundest way and in the most expeditious and economical manner consistent with the interests of the Owners."
"5. The Owners agree to pay to Contractor for the work and the furnishing of materials specified in this agreement, the actual costs necessarily incurred for the proper prosecution of the work, and paid directly by the Contractor for all labor, material and other proper charges, as hereinafter specified:"
"(a) Actual amounts of sub-contracts:"
"1. Santa Clara Plumbing Co. Inc. bid to furnish and install, including all labor and material, all heating and plumbing, according to plans and specifications, for Fifteen Thousand Two Hundred Fifty and no/100 ($15,250.00) Dollars."
"2. A & Dee Construction Co. bid to furnish all labor and materials to construct the foundation, garage floors and pads for steel columns, according to plans and specifications, for Four Thousand Eight Hundred Seventy-Two and no/100 ($4,872.00) Dollars."
"Said sub-contractors are part of Contractor's organization."
"All parties hereto agree to accept said bids."
"3. All remaining sub-contracts shall be let after bid, to approved bidders, and are subject to prior approval by Owners as to all terms of said sub-contract bid."
"(b) Actual cost to the Contractor of materials and supplies used in the construction of the building to be erected, as herein provided. No purchase of materials and supplies shall be made without prior approval of Owners."
"7. In consideration of the performance of this contract, the Owners agree to pay the Contractor, as compensation for his services hereunder, the sum of Eight Thousand ($8,000.00) Dollars."
The trial court then defined the meaning of "negligence," "fraud" and "proximate cause" in general terms, and then instructed as follows:
"You are again reminded that in the original instance the burden of proving the case to start with is upon Mr. Ruiz and Mr. Distefano, and as far as the defenses that have been referred to of excessive labor costs over the fourteen thousand dollars, negligence, and fraud, the burden is on the Defendants of proving these defenses by a preponderance of the evidence, by the greater weight of evidence, by evidence of greater convincing force, and if you find that the Defendants have not proved any of these defenses by a preponderance of the evidence, they are not entitled to be considered in arriving at the balances that are due the Plaintiffs."
"With respect to Mr. Distefano, if you find that the labor costs were excessive, in determining that matter you will necessarily have to consider and determine whether there was or was not an agreement as to the fourteen thousand dollars, or if you find that there was such negligence in performing the services of supervision as to proximately cause a loss to the Defendants, or if you find that Mr. Distefano perpetrated a fraud upon the Defendants by his representations from which the Defendants suffered a loss, and if you find any one of these defenses to be true by a preponderance of the evidence and that any one of them was a proximate cause of losses to the Defendants, then you will adjust the award to Mr. Distefano in such a manner as shall appear to you to be just and equitable under all the circumstances."
"Some question has been raised as to whether Mr. Dozier was released from his obligation under the agreement at the time when Mr. Dozier conveyed all of his interest in the property to Mr. Hall. There is no evidence of the release by Santa Clara Plumbing Company. This applies only to Mr. Distefano, but under the evidence that has been presented to you, you may find, and that's one of the things you have to determine, that Mr. Dozier was released from any obligation to Mr. Distefano, and if you do so find, you will indicate that simply by striking out the name of Mr. Dozier in the verdict, and I'll say more about that in a moment, just drawing a line through the name. And in the event that you should so find that Mr. Dozier was released, you may also strike the name of Mrs. Dozier, but not the name of any other party."
"Now, in this verdict, however, remember I told you you may or may not find that by the conduct of the parties here Mr. Dozier was released of his obligation under this agreement. If you find that he was not, you will, of course, --not released-- you will, of course, return the verdict against him. If you find, however, that he was released, your method of indicating that will simply be to have your foreman strike out, draw a line through the name of Mr. Dozier in the verdict, and it will be accomplished that way. And if you should do that, then you may also do the same thing with respect to Winifred Dozier."
NOTES
[fn. 1]  1. While the complaint appears to be essentially one to foreclose a mechanic's lien, it also prayed for a personal judgment against defendants. The pretrial order designates the complaint as one to foreclose a mechanic's lien and also for a personal judgment.
[fn. 2]  2. Labor, $30,573.58; material paid for by A & Dee Construction, $35,711.38; material "allegedly paid for by defendants," $27,348.56; material, $39,539.29; taxes $343.72; and cost of supervision in accordance with agreement dated March 10, 1958, $8,000.
[fn. 3]  3. Paid on labor, $2,936.55; paid on account, $30,000; and material "allegedly paid for by defendants," $27,348.56.
[fn. 4]  4. Labor, $27,996.51; material and miscellaneous paid for by A & Dee Construction Company, $37,322.62; material "allegedly paid for by defendants," $72,212.20; cost of supervision in accordance with written agreement dated March 10, 1958, $8,000.
[fn. 5]  5. Reimbursement on labor, $2,936.55; paid on account, $30,000; material "allegedly paid for by defendants," $72,212.20.
[fn. 6]  6. An action to foreclose a mechanic's lien is a suit in equity and a party thereto is not entitled to a jury trial. (Curnow v. Happy Valley Blue Gravel etc. Co., 68 Cal. 262, 264 [9 P. 149]; Coghlan v. Quartararo, 15 Cal. App. 662, 666 [115 P. 664]; Comastri v. Burke, 137 Cal. App. 2d 430, 436 [290 P.2d 663].) However, where a personal judgment is sought against the defendant in such an action a jury trial is proper. (Coghlan v. Quartararo, supra.) Moreover, even though the case involves equitable principles, if it is one where the common-law courts could and would grant relief, the right to trial by jury is preserved. (Ripling v. Superior Court, 112 Cal. App. 2d 399, 402 [247 P.2d 117]; Dills v. Delira Corp., 145 Cal. App. 2d 124, 128 [302 P.2d 397].) Accordingly, if a complaint states two complete rights of action, one legal and one equitable, a jury trial may be obtained upon the issues raised by the legal cause. (Connell v. Bowes, 19 Cal. 2d 870, 871 [123 P.2d 456]; Hutchason v. Marks, 54 Cal. App. 2d 113, 118-119 [128 P.2d 573].) Also, a party is entitled to a jury trial on the legal issues of fact raised by a cross-complaint, even though the complaint stated a cause cognizable only in equity. (Hutchason v. Marks, supra, p. 119.) Where a jury is called to try equitable issues, it merely assists the trial court and acts in an advisory capacity; and the court is not bound by the findings of the jury. (Bettencourt v. Bank of Italy, 216 Cal. 174, 179 [13 P.2d 659]; Dills v. Delira Corp., supra; Cutter Laboratories, Inc. v. R. W. Ogle & Co., 151 Cal. App. 2d 410, 418 [311 P.2d 627].)
[fn. 7]  7. This judgment was entered by the clerk on his own motion. He was without authority to enter a judgment at that time because there were equitable issues and the issue of attorneys' fees which the court alone could determine and which had not then been determined. The said judgment was therefore premature and of no effect because the trial of the action had not been concluded. (See Farrell v. City of Ontario, 39 Cal. App. 351, 359 [178 P. 740].)
[fn. 8]  8. This is obviously a typographical error. The figures should be $28,500 as this is the amount found to be due by the jury and is the principal amount which the trial court concluded and adjudicated was due and owing other than the sum of $4,000 awarded as counsel fees.
[fn. 9]  9. We shall hereafter allude to such other pertinent portions of the record as shall be applicable to the matter then under discussion.
[fn. 10]  10. The pertinent typewritten portions which appear on both exhibits and concerning the existence of which there is no dispute, are as follows:
[fn. 11]  11. These initials are: C.L.D., W.F.D., P.D., and what appears to be "C.H."
[fn. 12]  12. Plaintiff, Pascal Distefano, Carl L. Dozier, and Charles W. Hall.
[fn. 13]  13. It should be here noted that the word "out" opposite the deletion of paragraph 5(c) bears only the signatures of C. W. Hall and Pascal Distefano, while the deletion of paragraph 8 bears the initials of all the parties except Dorothea Fabian.
[fn. 14]  14. The record discloses that as of the last payroll period prior to September, i.e., the August payroll, the labor cost then amounted to $23,964.29.
[fn. 15]  15. This amount includes the balance of $6,475.57 due Santa Clara Plumbing Co., Inc. (hereinafter referred to as Santa Clara). This subcontractor was specifically referred to in the building contract in paragraph 5(a)1 as a subcontractor whose subcontract in the total sum of $15,250 the owners agreed to pay to plaintiff. Said subcontractor had filed an action against Hall and Dozier for a personal judgment and for a foreclosure of a mechanic's lien it had recorded whereby it sought to recover the sum of $6,972.56, plus interest. Said action was consolidated with the present action and the two actions were tried before the same jury, counsel for plaintiff herein also appearing as counsel for Santa Clara. The jury returned a verdict for Santa Clara. No appeal has been taken from the judgment entered on said verdict.
[fn. 16]  16. It was plaintiff's contention that notwithstanding the execution of these notes by Hall, that plaintiff was still liable for the obligations represented by said notes.
[fn. 17]  17. While plaintiff argued to the jury that he was entitled to recover the full amount of said sum of $21,319.42, he now contends on appeal, in view of the judgment in favor of Santa Clara, that the proper sum to be considered as owing to the subcontractors and materialmen is the sum of $14,843.85, i.e., the sum of $21,319.42, less the amount due Santa Clara in the sum of $6,475.57. This sum of $14,843.85 is the amount which the trial court herein specifically found to be Hall's obligation.
[fn. 18]  18. In his counterclaim Hall alleged as an element of fraud the representation as to the 73 cents per square foot labor cost. This contention was abandoned by Hall during his argument to the jury apparently on the basis that the $14,000 limitation amounted to a price of 93-95 cents per square foot.
[fn. 19]  19. Hall did not allege in his answer or in any of his affirmative defenses or counterclaims that plaintiff was not entitled to the $8,000 fee, although he did allege that under the building contract plaintiff had agreed to give direct personal supervision of the work at all times during its progress and had agreed " 'to secure its execution in the best and soundest way and in the most expeditious and economical manner consistent with the interests of the Owners.' " Moreover, in his answer Hall had denied generally the allegation of the complaint. In any event, no objection to this argument was interposed by plaintiff, nor is it now contended on this appeal that this issue was not before the jury.
[fn. 20]  20. No assignment of error is made by any of the parties to this appeal with respect to the refusal of the trial court to give any of the instructions submitted by such party.
[fn. 21]  21. The substantive instructions given by the court are as follows: "Every person who furnishes labor or materials or services to the lands of others is entitled to recover for the amount of such labor and material and services, provided that such labor and material and services are performed or furnished at the request of the owner, or owners, and that such labor and material and services are charged for reasonably, or in accordance with the agreement of the parties, if there is such an agreement. The defenses offered by the Defendants are, and by way of counterclaim the Defendants allege generally three things: first, that the cost of labor was excessive, that Mr. Distefano agreed that labor would cost no more than fourteen thousand dollars, that was for the labor exclusive of foundation, and labor of subcontractors, of course. Secondly, that the services of supervision by Mr. Distefano were negligently performed; and, thirdly, that Mr. Distefano perpetrated a fraud upon the Defendants by his representations as to what the labor would cost, and that he would diligently supervise the work of construction. There appears to be no question that the material and labor and services were rendered. The labor and services were performed, materials were furnished, the apartment was built, and there are balances owing to the two Plaintiffs. The questions for you to decide are, first, how much is owing to Santa Clara Plumbing, Mr. Ruiz, and the second one is how much is owing to Mr. Distefano."
[fn. 22]  22. No assignments of error have been pointed out in the briefs regarding attorney's fees, nor have they been therein mentioned. We shall, accordingly, treat this ground as having been abandoned by appellant Hall.
[fn. 23]  23. This last-mentioned specification is not referred to nor included in the recitals of the judgment. However, it deals with claimed error having to do with the refusal to admit evidence within the issues tendered by the pleadings and is therefore encompassed within the judgment. Accordingly, it will be considered on this appeal.
[fn. 24]  24. The pertinent portion of Code Civ. Proc.,  454 provides: "It is not necessary for a party to set forth in a pleading the items of an account therein alleged, but he must deliver to the adverse party, within ten days after a demand thereof in writing, a copy of the account, or be precluded from giving evidence thereof."
[fn. 25]  25. I.e., $81,231.42 in the bill of particulars and $73,512.37 in the amended bill of particulars.
[fn. 26]  26.  1193.1, subd. (k), has been held to be penal in nature and therefore must be strictly construed. (Schallert-Ganahl Lbr. Co. v. Neal, 91 Cal. 362 [27 P. 743]; Callahan v. Chatsworth Park, Inc., 204 Cal. App. 2d 597, 607 [22 Cal. Rptr. 606].)
[fn. 27]  27. In view of the several and complicated issues to be submitted to the jury, we respectfully suggest to court and counsel the use of special verdicts upon the retrial.

=== CASE 9738365 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:23.650283+00 ===

R. M. Maher, J.
Defendant was convicted by a jury of assault with intent to murder. MCLA 750.83; MSA 28.278. He was sentenced to a term of from 7-1/2 to 20 years in prison and appeals.
At trial, Henry Thomas testified that on October 26, 1973, he was employed at the Standard station at Mack and St. Aubin in the City of Detroit when defendant drove into the station seeking service. Defendant stated that he wanted $2 worth of gas, claiming later to have asked for $3 worth of gas. The witness, who had pumped $2 worth of gas into defendant’s car, turned back the dials on the gas pump and proceeded to pump an additional $1 worth of gas. Defendant, however, protested that Thomas had pumped only $1 worth of gas into his car, as shown by the dials on the pump, and would not accept the witness’s explanation that it is necessary to turn the dials back to zero before additional gas can be pumped. An argument ensued and Henry McKinney, the owner of the station and complainant in this case, came up and inquired what the trouble was. Upon being told, he and defendant got into an argument. At this point, Thomas went back into the station and heard shots. He did not see who fired the shots.
Henry McKinney, complainant here, testified that after learning of the dispute, he insisted that defendant pay $3, but defendant refused. Complainant told defendant that he could not go around taking things and get away with it, whereupon defendant said, "I’ll take your life”. Defendant then turned away and pulled a gun. Complainant pulled his gun and there was some shooting, although McKinney did not know who shot first. McKinney was shot through the arm and the *149bullet is still lodged in his ribs. Complainant fired his gun until it was empty and defendant suffered multiple wounds.
Defendant’s theory of the case, as expressed by counsel in closing argument, was that the jury must have a reasonable doubt that defendant was the aggressor because complainant had testified at the preliminary examination that he drew his gun when he saw defendant fumbling in his sweater. Furthermore, even though complainant’s gun was a five shot revolver, defendant was shot seven times and complainant had testified at the preliminary examination that four or five persons had been shooting.
On appeal, defendant claims that the trial court failed to properly instruct the jury. He argues that the trial court’s charge on the element of intent cast the burden of proof upon defendant and that its charge on self-defense was misleading.
"Once a plea of not guilty is entered, the defendant 'has an absolute right to a jury determination upon all essential elements of the offense.’ ” People v Reed, 393 Mich 342, 349; 224 NW2d 867 (1975), cert den, 422 US 1044; 95 S Ct 2660; 45 L Ed 2d 696 (1975). All the elements of the crime must be submitted to the jury in a charge which is neither erroneous nor misleading, People v Liggett, 378 Mich 706, 714; 148 NW2d 784 (1967), and clearly indicates that the prosecution is required to prove each element beyond a reasonable doubt. In re Winship, 397 US 358; 90 S Ct 1068; 25 L Ed 2d 368 (1970). Instructions to the effect that the jury should look to defendant for evidence explaining his acts or that the law presumes intent from defendant’s acts may serve to impermissibly shift the burden of proof. Where the burden is erroneously cast upon defendant to prove the absence *150of the intent required for conviction, reversal is mandated.
In the present case, the trial court instructed the jury on the element of intent as follows:
"Now, the next element of the crime is that the assault must have been committed with the intent to kill and murder. The question of intent is one that is hard to establish directly because grown persons do not always disclose they — the object they have in view in any acts in which they may indulge, and you have to gather the intent from the character of the act, the circumstances surrounding it, and from the conduct of a like character which may appear, as tending to aid you in finding and discovering it, but, in this connection, with all this, unless the testimony satisñes you of something else, you are warranted in holding a party responsible for the natural, probable and legitimate consequences of his acts.
"Now, an intent may be inferred — of this kind — may be inferred from the doing of a wrongful, fraudulent or illegal, act, and if the intention is to kill and murder another person, that satisfies the requirement of an intent to kill and murder in this case, unless, as I will explain to you, it is done under necessary self-defense, because the law assumes that every man intends the natural consequences of his own acts. ” (Emphasis supplied.)
In People v Pepper, 389 Mich 317; 206 NW2d 439 (1973), defendant contended that decedent was killed by accident but did not have his theory explained to the jury in the trial court’s instructions. The only defense explained to the jury was self-defense and even that was removed from consideration by a supplemental instruction. The Michigan Supreme Court found that the trial court’s failure to instruct on excusable homicide, when coupled with the trial court’s instruction on intent, assured defendant’s conviction. The trial *151court had charged the jury that intent is presumed as a matter of law from defendant’s acts. This focused the jury’s attention on intent regarding the consequences of defendant’s act when defendant’s theory of defense was not addressed to intent to kill but rather the intent to do the act itself. Whether or not the shooting was accidental became the subject of a presumption under the trial court’s instructions.
This Court distinguished People v Pepper, supra, from the situation presented in People v Adams, 48 Mich App 595; 210 NW2d 888 (1973). In Adams, the trial court’s instruction on intent, much like the one presented here, contained both "unless the testimony satisfies you of something else, you are warranted in holding a party responsible for the natural, probable and legitimate consequences of his act” and "the law presumes that every man intends the legitimate consequences of his acts”. The Court of Appeals affirmed, not finding manifest injustice. Defendant’s main defense in Adams was that of intoxication. The Court felt that the jury was properly charged as to intoxication, that the defense of intoxication was "inextricably interwoven” with the element of intent and that the holding in Pepper did not require reversal in Adams.
The case of People v Jordan, 51 Mich App . 710; 216 NW2d 71 (1974), in turn, distinguished People v Adams, supra. In Jordan, the trial court’s charge on intent coupled the word presumption with an instruction that defendant had the burden of coming forward with some evidence to negate the presumption that he intended the consequences of his acts. The Court, on p 716, felt that "[t]aken in its entirety, the [instruction] properly informed the jury that reference to the word 'presumption’ was *152in reality an allowable inference”. However, instructing the jury "that the defendant had the original burden of going forward with at least some evidence to negate specific intent” and that "[t]he presumption that defendant intended the consequences of his acts was applicable unless he offered some measure of contradictory evidence” resulted in a miscarriage of justice.
In the case at bar, the trial court’s instruction regarding intent did not cast the burden of going forward with evidence to negate specific intent with the force of the instructions in Jordan. On the other hand, we do not find the instant instructions to contain comments, such as those relied on by this Court in Adams, which would serve to clarify any misconception the jury might have had regarding the burden of proof.1 The trial court’s instruction, in this case, had the effect of improperly directing the jury to look to defendant for evidence explaining his acts and, absent an explanation, to assume intent. Use of the word "presumption”, or its equivalent, does not automatically mandate reversal. People v Jordan, supra, 716. However, where the overall effect of the instruction places a burden upon defendant to produce evidence in order to overcome a presumption of guilt, such an instruction is inconsistent with the presumption of innocence. All the elements of the crime charged, in this case, were not submitted to the jury in a correct and consistent manner. We find the instruction to be erroneously misleading and reverse. Unless the jury is properly instructed, it is unable to properly pass upon the evidence.
*153With respect to the trial court’s instruction on self-defense, did the trial court err in charging the jury "to consider all the circumstances and facts surrounding the beginning of this incident in order to determine who was the aggressor in the situation”? (Emphasis supplied.) Self-defense requires a showing that:
"(1) the accused was without fault or in other words was not the aggressor in bringing about the conñict; (2) under the circumstances as they appeared to the accused at the time he was in danger of death or of suffering great bodily injury; (3) except where assaulted in his own dwelling, there was no way open to the accused for retreat; and (4) the only recourse lay in repelling the attack by physical means.” People v Bright, 50 Mich App 401, 406; 213 NW2d 279 (1973) (Emphasis supplied.)
In People v Townes, 391 Mich 578; 218 NW2d 136 (1974), defendant entered deceased’s tire store and began accusing one of the employees of dating his wife. Deceased ordered defendant to leave the store. When defendant refused, deceased produced a revolver and again ordered defendant to leave. Prosecution witnesses testified that defendant left reluctantly, only to return suddenly and shoot deceased. Defendant testified that he was frightened when confronted with the gun, remaining in fear as he watched deceased holster the pistol, and only shot in self-defense when deceased made a sudden move. The trial court’s instruction apparently focused on defendant’s conduct with respect to the store employee and erroneously assumed that if defendant provoked a disturbance in the tire store, he could then be held accountable, as an aggressor, for any response to his conduct, whether by the store employee or deceased owner. This is not the law. "[A person] may only be held *154legally accountable as an aggressor for responsive conduct by another that is reasonably attributable to [that person’s] own conduct.” People v Townes, supra, at 592.
In the present case, defendant began a disruption at the gas station by refusing to pay $3 for gas. It was to this refusal to pay that complainant initially responded and it was at that point he and defendant began arguing. Complainant testified at trial that he pulled his gun after defendant pulled his. Defense counsel pointed out the inconsistency of complainant’s testimony at trial with his testimony at the preliminary exam where complainant testified that he drew his gun when he saw defendant fumbling in his sweater. The problem with the trial court’s instruction in this case is that it could reasonably be understood to have focused on the initial disruption with the gas station employee and not the crucial point of inquiry, defendant’s conduct to which complainant responded by drawing his gun and firing.
"The general doctrine undoubtedly is that one who has taken the life of an assailant, but who was himself in the wrong, cannot avail himself of the plea of self-defense. But the wrong which will preclude him from making that defense must relate to the assault in resistance of which the assailant was killed. If at the time the assault is made upon him, he is engaged in the commission of an act which is wrongful, but which is independent of the assault he may lawfully defend himself against it, to the extent even of slaying the assailant, if it is felonious, unless, indeed, his act is of such a character as to justify the assault.” People v Townes, supra, at 593, quoting State v Perigo, 70 Iowa 657, 666; 28 NW 452 (1886).
The instructions on self-defense, as they related to *155the facts in this case, were misleading and should be clarified on retrial.
Reversed and remanded for a new trial.
Following its charge on intent, the trial court stated that, "[T]he people must prove each of those elements beyond a reasonable doubt.” This general statement did not serve to clarify the trial court’s earlier statements regarding intent.

=== CASE 9738366 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:23.654661+00 ===

Bashara, J.
(concurring in result). I agree with Judge Maher that the following self-defense instruction was reversible error:
"The defendant cannot be the aggressor in the situation; if so, he cannot claim self defense and, for that reason, it is important for the jury to consider all the circumstances and facts surrounding the beginning of this incident in order to determine who was the aggressor in the situation because, if the defendant was the aggressor under the circumstances, he cannot claim self defense in the case. (Emphasis supplied.)
The instruction may have misled the jury to believe that defendant in initiating the dispute by refusing to pay $3 was precluded from asserting self-defense. The defendant may only be held accountable as an aggressor for responsive conduct by another that is reasonably attributable to defendant’s own conduct. People v Townes, 391 Mich 578, 592; 218 NW2d 136 (1974).
However, I cannot agree with Judge Maher that the trial judge’s instruction regarding intent improperly shifted the burden to the defendant to come forward and explain acts which formed the basis of the mens rea. A careful reading of the entire intent instruction discloses that the burden of proof remained with the prosecutor.
Therefore, I concur with the result reached by Judge Maher.

=== CASE 9738367 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:23.65824+00 ===

V. J. Brennan, P. J.
(dissenting). I must respectfully dissent from my Brother Maher’s opinion.
The majority opinion states that "where the *156overall effect of the instruction places a burden upon defendant to produce evidence in order to overcome a presumption of guilt, such an instruction is inconsistent with the presumption of innocence. All the elements of the crime charged, in this case, were not submitted to the jury in a correct and consistent manner.” After careful reading and rereading of the trial judge’s instructions, I find these instructions neither misleading nor incorrect. Immediately following the portion of the instructions quoted by the majority, the trial judge went on to instruct as follows:
"Now, as evidence of intent in this case the jury might properly consider whether or not a deadly weapon was used in the assault, and a pistol of the kind that was introduced into evidence in this case is a deadly weapon — if you find that that weapon was used in committing an assault, the jury may consider that properly in determining whether there was an intent to kill and murder, and, likewise, the jury may properly consider the location of any wounds that were caused as a result of the shooting incident that occurred.
"As I have said, the people must prove each of those elements beyond a reasonable doubt.”
The majority candidly admits that the fatally defective language of the judge’s charge in People v Jordan., 51 Mich App 710, 716; 216 NW2d 71 (1974), is not present in the case at bar. With this much, I agree. But the majority reads the instructions as being possibly misleading to the jury in that the jury could have misunderstood the judge’s instructions to mean that there is a presumption of guilt which arises from the acts of the defendant, and that the burden of going forward with the evidence is upon the defendant to rebut that presumption. This is a strained reading of the instructions at best. I think the trial judge was quite *157clear in communicating to the jury the fact that intent as an element of the oifense charged, being a state of mind, cannot be proved by direct evidence, but must be inferred from the totality of the facts and circumstances. The trial judge then went on to point out those facts and circumstances which they could consider in drawing the proper inference. The trial judge repeatedly told the jury that the people have the burden of proving each element of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt.
Further, it is well-settled law in Michigan that absent a showing of manifest injustice, this Court will not consider claims of error based on alleged erroneous instructions where there was no objection at trial. See GCR 1963, 516.2, People v Spaulding, 42 Mich App 492; 202 NW2d 450 (1972), lv den 388 Mich 809 (1972), People v Peace, 48 Mich App 79; 210 NW2d 116 (1973). In the case at bar, defendant did not object to the court’s instructions and, in fact, expressed his satisfaction therewith. Therefore, this Court must determine whether the trial court’s instructions resulted in manifest injustice. In determining whether the instructions were prejudicial to the defendant, the instructions are to be examined as a whole. See People v Harper, 43 Mich App 500; 204 NW2d 263 (1972), lv den, 389 Mich 759 (1973). The instructions read as a whole did not shift to defendant the burden of proof on the element of intent and I can find no manifest injustice.
The majority relies on People v Townes, 391 Mich 578; 218 NW2d 136 (1974). I find Townes inapposite and thus must respectfully disagree with my brothers. In Townes the defendant entered decedent’s store and began an altercation with an employee. The decedent intervened with a gun and ordered defendant out of the store. The *158defendant then left but returned immediately and shot decedent. The Supreme Court found the instructions in the Townes case to be reversibly erroneous in that it deprived the defendant of his defense of self-defense if the jury found that the defendant had provoked a disturbance in the store. Thus, the Court said that a person may be held accountable as an aggressor for responsive conduct by another only if the responsive conduct is reasonably attributable to that person’s own conduct. In the case at bar there was no third-party intervention, and I do not believe that the instructions, read as a whole, can reasonably be understood to imply that the defendant would not have a right of self-defense, if assaulted with a deadly weapon, should the jury find that he had provoked a disturbance in the gas station.
The trial judge instructed the jury on the theory of self-defense as follows:
"Now, you will remember that when I defined an assault for you I said an assault is an offer or attempt with unlawful force, and if, what would otherwise be an assault, is done under necessary self defense, then the act is not unlawful because the law recognizes the right of self defense, and if done in self defense, the crime would not be committed.
"If a defendant wounds the complainant in self defénse, honestly believing his own life to be in danger, or that he was in imminent danger of receiving serious bodily injury at the hands of the other party, and used no more force than was necessary to protect himself, then it would be self defense and, under these circumstances, the defendant would not be guilty of the crime charged.
"One who is threatened with immediate attack by an assailant is authorized to act, and his or her actions are to be judged in the light of the circumstances as they appeared to him or her * * * at that time, and if he believes that a violent act is imminent then it is imma*159terial whether or not a forceable attack upon him was intended by the other party.
"Now, the law does not countenance the shooting of another person except from the utmost necessity, and a defendant cannot claim self defense unless there was no other method of escaping death or serious injury. An assault with a deadly weapon could not be justified merely because another party had made annoying remarks or because there had been some civil transaction, such as going to the store and buying a pound of butter and a dispute arising out of it, or merely out of anger— these circumstances, in themselves, do not justify the exercise of self defense to the degree of using a deadly weapon, such as a pistol. The act of self defense miist be actually necessary or appear to be actually necessary to the defendant in order to be an occasion for self defense.
"And, self defense is not justified under all circumstances. The defendant cannot be the aggressor in the situation; if so, he cannot claim self defense and, for that reason, it is important for the jury to consider all the circumstances and facts surrounding the beginning of this incident in order to determine who was the aggressor in the situation because, if the defendant was the aggressor under the circumstances, he cannot claim self defense in the case.
"Now, if there was any way open and the defendant, or the party claiming self defense, could have left the scene without great danger to himself, he must avail himself of that opportunity before resorting to the use of a deadly weapon, or he cannot claim self defense; however, if the parties are so closely engaged that it is obvious that time to escape would not be availing to the parties, then he is not required to retreat under those circumstances.
"Now, I should further instruct you that in considering whether or not this was an occasion for self defense, the burden is on the people to prove that it was not an occasion for self defense. In other words, if you have any doubt on the subject — a reasonable doubt — as to whether or not the defendant was properly acting in self defense then you should give him the benefit of that doubt and find him not guilty.”
*160Unlike Townes, the jury was not instructed that if they should find that the defendant was the aggressor in bringing on the difficulty at the gas station that the defense of self-defense would be unavailable to him. Clearly, the trial judge gave the question of self-defense to the jury as a question of fact for them to decide. I do not believe that the defendant was prejudiced, because the instructions were adequate and the testimony of complainant was undisputed that defendant drew his gun first. Clearly, the trial judge intended to instruct the jury that in making their determination of who the aggressor was, they should consider all the facts and circumstances of the case, including those facts at the beginning of the incident. This was not error. In any event, the jury considered defendant’s contention of self-defense and found him guilty. The defendant did not object to the instructions as given and I find no manifest injustice. I would not disturb the jury’s finding.
I would affirm.

=== CASE 9738368 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:24.587261+00 ===

REES, Justice.
This appeal had its genesis in a class action brought by plaintiff, Foods, Inc., to enjoin the defendant members of the class from conducting certain activities at or near the supermarket facilities of plaintiff in Polk County. At the time of the commencement of the action, plaintiff operated nine supermarkets in the county. Plaintiff Foods, Inc., is better known as Dahl’s Food Stores, and will be referred to hereinafter as “Dahl’s”. The defendants consist of the members of the Iowa Lettuce and Grape Boycott Committee and the Des Moines Lettuce and Grape Boycott Committee, and all individuals who independently or as a class aid, abet or assist in the objects and purposes of said committees. According to the defendants, the Des Moines Lettuce and Grape Boycott Committee was organized for the purposes of: (1) educating and informing the public as to the working conditions of farm workers in California and the labor dispute involving the United Farm Workers, hereinafter U.F.W., AFL-CIO, the Teamsters Union, and the lettuce and grape growers, and (2) communicating support for the U.F.W. and asking consumers to exert economic pressure on retail supermarkets which do not merchandise lettuce and table grapes bearing the union label.
The record indicates representatives of the Des Moines committee contacted Mr. Arthur Cox, president of Dahl’s, with a request that the corporation purchase for resale only table grapes and lettuce bearing the U.F.W. label. The representatives of the committee informed Cox they would cause to have prepared a written agreement between Dahl’s and the committee containing such provisions and would present it to Dahl’s for execution. Cox rejected the request, or demand, of the committee.
On July 27,1973, members of the committee began picketing and distributing leaf*917lets at several Dahl’s supermarkets., Some of the picketers displayed placards calling on customers not to shop at Dahl’s stores. The leaflets distributed urged the public to boycott Dahl’s until an agreement was reached whereby Dahl’s stores would sell only U.F.W. lettuce and grapes. The leaflets' also contained information regarding the committee’s view of the nature of the farm workers’ dispute and the goals sought by the committee and the U.F.W.
Mr. Cox testified picketing resumed the following day, and there appears to be no dispute but that some picketing and leafleting also occurred at one or more of the Dahl’s stores on August 3, 5, 16 and 17. Certain of the defendants testified that on at least two of such occasions the picketers and leaflet distributors left the premises of the Dahl’s stores at the request of Cox.
The record appears to indicate some of defendants’ picketing activities took place directly on Dahl’s property near the customer entrance/exit doors, and some took place directly adjacent to plaintiff’s property on public sidewalks. There is nothing in the record to indicate that the picketing and leafleting was other than generally peaceful and orderly, although Cox testified he saw some defendants standing on Dahl’s property in front of customers, making it difficult for the customers to enter or exit the store. Mr. Baker, manager of Dahl’s Ingersoll Avenue store, testified that some defendants made it difficult for customers to enter the store and that vehicular traffic was backed up into public thoroughfares because of the defendants’ activities. The testimony of the defendants themselves leaves no doubt but that the purpose of the picketing and the leafleting was to exert economic pressure on Dahl’s to secure Dahl’s agreement to sell only U.F.W. grapes and lettuce. Defendants also emphasized that education of the public to the plight of the farmworkers was another purpose of their picketing and leafleting activities.
Following the filing of the original petition by plaintiff, an order for the issuance of a temporary writ of injunction was entered on August 14, 1973, enjoining defendants from trespassing on the premises of any Dahl’s supermarket, and from obstructing, by any manner or means, or interfering with, or preventing the entrance or exit of persons or vehicles to and from the supermarkets, from shouting at, disturbing or annoying persons attempting to enter the premises of any of the supermarkets, and from harassing or intimidating Dahl’s employees or customers.
In its petition, plaintiff also prayed that a permanent injunction issue. Defendants' moved to vacate the temporary injunction on August 16, and filed answer on August 20 to plaintiff’s petition as amended. Plaintiff’s petition, as amended, alleged defendants’ activities constituted a willful and unlawful trespass in violation of common law and of chapter 729, The Code, 1973, and further constituted an obstruction of the free use of private property, and the making or excitement of a disturbance in violation of § 744.1, The Code, 1973. Dahl’s further asserted the activities of defendants constituted an attempt to force Dahl’s to enter into an agreement, contract or understanding to. limit the amount or quantity of a commodity sold in Iowa, and an attempt to enter into a contract or conspiracy in restraint of trade or commerce among the several states and an attempt to monopolize, or combine or conspire with others to monopolize, a part of the trade or commerce among the several states. Defendants’ motion to vacate the temporary injunction alleged, inter alia, that their activities were protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution of the United States. No such defense, however, was asserted by defendants in their answer, which constituted substantially a general denial by which defendants denied certain allegations of the petition and admitted others.
Trial of the cause began on August 20, 1973. At the close of plaintiff’s evidence, defendants moved the court to dismiss Dahl’s petition and to quash the previously issued writ of temporary injunction. In their motion to dismiss, defendants asserted *918their áctivities were lawful and constituted conduct protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The motion also asserted what might with some stretch of the imagination be construed to be a claim by defendants to special protection by virtue of involvement in a “labor dispute.” Defendants assert such protection on appeal, but their only reference to labor activity in the motion to dismiss was as follows:
“We would also argue, secondly, that they [defendants] were there for a lawful activity, that is, the promulgation of better working conditions for a labor union in California.
“We would submit that their conduct and their activity was protected by the First Amendment and is protected by the laws of Iowa and that these people in doing what they are doing are attempting to better the working conditions of union members. It might be said that they are not union members, themselves, but the First Amendment does not go to who you are. It goes to what you are saying and the individuals who advocate the end and the better working conditions for these United Farm Workers Labor Union members are exercising those rights.
“We submit that the plaintiff has failed in its burden of proof for a permanent injunction against this protected and preferred First Amendment right and that the protected right of a labor union to picket and leaflet is protected by the First Amendment and the laws of Iowa, and we submit that the petition of the plaintiff should be dismissed.”
Trial court overruled defendants’ motion to dismiss, and the grounds asserted therein were not thereafter reasserted during the course of the proceedings. The cause was submitted August 22, 1973, and two days later trial court made its findings of fact, reached conclusions of law, and entered its decree granting a permanent writ of injunction. This appeal ensued.
Defendants state the following issues for review:
(1) Trial court erred in finding defendants’ activities were not protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution of the United States and in finding defendants were not involved in a labor dispute.
(2) Trial court erred in failing to differentiate between the various supermarket locations operated by plaintiff.
(3) Trial court erred in finding the public was invited to the premises of the Dahl’s stores solely for the purpose of transacting business with Dahl’s or as otherwise specifically authorized by the corporation.
(4) Trial court erred in holding that defendants trespassed upon Dahl’s premises, defendants’ activities constituted an unlawful restraint of trade and commerce, defendants violated § 553.1, The Code, 1973, and their activities were conducted for an unlawful purpose and with an unlawful intent.
(5) Trial court erred when it “broadly enjoined all individuals, including appellants,” from orally asking, urging or insisting that persons refuse to purchase any products from Dahl’s and from carrying and displaying placards or signs near Dahl’s premises.
(6) Trial court erred in finding that engaging in conversations with individuals on streets adjacent to Dahl’s premises was a violation of a lawful court order.
(7) Trial court erred when it held that because Dahl’s customers were “annoyed” and “disturbed,” that sufficient grounds existed for denying to defendants their First Amendment rights.
I. There first arises in this appeal the question as to whether defendants properly raised below their defenses of First and Fourteenth Amendment protection for their activities and special status as participants in a labor dispute. Dahl’s urges such defenses, which provide the foundation for a number of defendants’ issues stated for review, were never properly raised below and, consequently, may not be considered here. We perceive considerable merit in Dahl’s contentions in this regard.
*919In the decree from which defendants appeal, trial court made the following conclusion of law:
“The defendants have not raised in their pleadings as a defense that they are a labor organization or involved in a labor dispute or that their activities are protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, although their counsel has argued these points.
“The court concludes that defendants’ activities are not protected by the First or Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution nor are the defendants a labor organization or involved in a labor dispute.”
We read the first portion of trial court’s conclusion of law set out above as a holding that the matters of First Amendment protection and involvement in a labor dispute were not properly raised as defenses in this case. Therefore, we must view the latter portion of the court’s conclusion set out above as a mere gratuitous observation.
We have consistently held questions not presented to and not passed upon by the trial court cannot be raised or reviewed on appeal. Schnabel v. Display Sign Service, Inc., 219 N.W.2d 546, 548 (Iowa 1974); De-Long v. Scott, 217 N.W.2d 635, 637 (Iowa 1974). This rules applies equally to constitutional questions which are belatedly urged. Wolfs v. Challacombe, 218 N.W.2d 564, 570 (Iowa 1974); Polson v. Meredith Publishing Company, 213 N.W.2d 520, 523 (Iowa 1973).
The record indicates defendants’ answer to plaintiff’s petition as amended consisted only of admissions of certain allegations of plaintiff’s petition as amended, and denials of specific paragraphs of same. No reference was made in defendants’ answer to a defense based upon First Amendment protections or involvement of defendants in a labor dispute. The only intimation of any defense grounded on constitutional rights is embraced in defendants’ motion to vacate the temporary injunction, where First Amendment freedoms were concededly asserted, and in the motion to dismiss urged at the close of plaintiff’s evidence at trial. We must conclude the defenses now asserted on appeal were not properly and adequately raised by the motion to vacate the temporary injunction or the motion to dismiss.
We are concerned in this appeal with the court’s order directing issuance of a permanent writ of injunction against defendants. The temporary injunction which preceded it was in no way dependent upon the later hearing. See 42 Am.Jur.2d Injunctions § 13, page 740. A temporary injunction is a preventive remedy to maintain the status quo of the parties and protect the subject of the litigation. Kent Products v. Hoegh, 245 Iowa 205, 214, 61 N.W.2d 711, 716. When a final decree is entered, a temporary injunction is merged or dissolved into it and thereafter the propriety of the order directing the issuance of a temporary injunction or affording temporary relief is generally regarded as academic, or moot. 42 Am.Jur.2d Injunctions § 356, pages 1167-1168.
We do not incline to the view that the defenses to a petition for a permanent writ of injunction may be raised by way of motion to vacate a temporary injunction. The temporary injunction was not the outgrowth of a hearing on the merits. It was independent of and superseded by the trial on the merits of plaintiff’s petition and prayer for the issuance of a permanent writ of injunction. Any defense on the merits of the controversy should have been raised in the proceedings in which the merits were considered. Our review of this appeal does not go to the question of the propriety of issuing the temporary injunction, but rather to the final decree and the permanent writ of injunction issued pursuant thereto. The threshold question for determination, therefore, is whether the defenses urged by defendants were properly raised by a motion to dismiss the petition at the close of plaintiff’s evidence.
Rule 72, Rules of Civil Procedure, provides, inter alia, that an answer shall specifically admit or deny each allegation or *920paragraph of the petition and must “state any additional facts deemed to show a defense.” Rule 101, R.C.P., deals with defenses which must be specially pleaded, and provides:
“Any defense that a contract or writing sued on is void or voidable, or was delivered in escrow, or which alleges any matter in justification, excuse, release or discharge, or which admits the facts of the adverse pleading but seeks to avoid their legal effect, must be specially pleaded.”
The foregoing rule enunciates general principles as to what matters may be put in issue by, or provable under, a general denial, and what matters must be specially pleaded as affirmative defenses. We define an affirmative defense as “one resting on facts not necessary to support plaintiffs’ case.” Baker v. Beal, 225 N.W.2d 106, 114 (Iowa 1975); Henschel v. Hawkeye-Security Insurance Company, 178 N.W.2d 409, 420 (Iowa 1970).
In this case, Dahl’s petition was grounded on allegations of trespass and obstruction of property and on claims of attempts to restrain or monopolize trade or limit the quantity of a commodity sold. Defendants attempt to assert special protection afforded their activities by the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution and by virtue of their claimed participation in a labor dispute. It is readily apparent from the record these defenses rest on facts not necessary to support plaintiff’s case. Such defenses, if meritorious in the fact situation there, could have prevailed even if plaintiff succeeded in establishing conclusively by uncontroverted evidence the facts necessary to support its case. That is, the defenses might have succeeded in avoiding the normal consequences of plaintiff’s proven facts by invoking protected constitutional rights, as in the First Amendment claim, and specific statutory protection for certain labor activities, as in the claim of involvement in a labor dispute.
As rule 101, R.C.P., supra, indicates, matters of affirmative defense must be specially pleaded. A motion is not a pleading. Rule 69, R.C.P.; Rule 109, R.C.P.; Brekken v. County Board of Review for Story County, 223 N.W.2d 246, 247 (Iowa 1975). Where an affirmative defense is not properly pleaded, this court will not entertain its assertion on appeal. McCleeary v. Wirtz, 222 N.W.2d 409, 416 (Iowa 1974); In re Marriage of Tucker, 213 N.W.2d 498, 500 (Iowa 1973). McCleeary, supra, involved the affirmative defense of the bar of the statute of limitations, and at page 416 of 222 N.W.2d, we said:
“[W]e have unsuccessfully searched the record in an effort to find any effective trial court pleading of such an affirmative defense. Surely a mere reference to the statute of limitations during oral argument to the court on some issue or motion does not so qualify.” (Emphasis supplied).
Rule 103, R.C.P., provides, in pertinent part:
“Every defense in bar or abatement, or to the jurisdiction after a general appearance, shall be made in the answer or reply, save as allowed by rule 104.”
Rule 104, R.C.P., lists the exceptions to the ordinary requirement that every defense in law or fact to any pleading must be asserted in the pleading responsive thereto, if one is required. None of the exceptions is applicable here.
We are constrained to conclude the mere denials of specific paragraphs of plaintiff’s petition were insufficient to raise the affirmative defenses to which reference is made by defendants in this appeal. The motion to dismiss at the close of plaintiff’s case was ineffective to raise them. The record does not indicate defendants made any attempt to amend their answer to include or make reference to the defenses now urged.
A similar situation was present in Nelson v. Leaders, 258 Iowa 919, 140 N.W.2d 921. That case involved an action to enforce a restrictive covenant in a buy and sell agreement between stockholders in a farm equipment business. Defendant attempted on appeal to argue the covenant was void as *921against public policy, but such defense was not pleaded at trial; defendant merely denied pertinent allegations in the petition. He did, however, urge such defense in a motion to dismiss, and subsequently introduced evidence on the matter. Although trial court in Nelson considered, and ruled upon, the merits of the claim of unreasonableness, we held defendant was not entitled to urge the covenant’s invalidity on appeal due to his failure to plead the issue in conformity with rules 72, 101 and 103, R.C.P.
In light of the above considerations, we are impelled to hold defendants may not urge in this appeal the defenses of First Amendment protection and their claim of involvement in a labor dispute, because such defenses were not properly raised below.
II.We must then proceed to a determination as to which of the issues defendants state for review could support a reversal or modification of the court’s order without reference to the defenses of protection under the First and Fourteenth Amendments and the claim that defendants were involved in a labor dispute.
In their first issue stated for review, defendants contend trial court erred when it found defendants’ activities were not protected by the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, and that defendants were not involved in a labor dispute. It is clear this contention may not now be raised due to failure to assert it properly below.
The second issue stated for review is whether trial court erred in failing to differentiate between the various supermarket locations operated by Dahl’s. Defendants now claim the evidence demonstrated Dahl’s Ingersoll Avenue store is located in a multi-business district, the Fleur Drive store is part of a large shopping complex not owned by Dahl’s, and not all. stores have the same departments or offer the same services. In support of this stated issue, defendants argue the various Dahl’s stores have taken on the attributes of the community business block so that First Amendment activities may be enjoined only as authorized by the United States Supreme Court guidelines laid down in Marsh v. Alabama, 326 U.S. 501, 66 S.Ct. 276, 90 L.Ed. 265, Amalgamated Food Employees Union Local 590 v. Logan Valley Plaza, Inc., 391 U.S. 308, 88 S.Ct. 1601, 20 L.Ed.2d 603, and in Lloyd Corporation, Ltd. v. Tanner, 407 U.S. 551, 92 S.Ct. 2219, 33 L.Ed.2d 131. The cited cases provide the criteria for balancing First Amendment rights with private property rights where the property in question has taken on public aspects or been demonstrably dedicated to public use. Defendants cannot now avail themselves of the authority of such cases, having failed to properly raise a First Amendment claim below. Accordingly, we deem it unnecessary to reach the merits of this issue.
III. In the third issue stated for review, defendants urge trial court erred in finding the public was invited to Dahl’s premises solely for the purpose of transacting business at the supermarkets, or as otherwise specifically authorized by the corporation. In support of this contention, defendants point to evidence in the record indicating the location of U.S. mail substations in Dahl’s supermarkets and of provisions for accepting payments for utility bills at Dahl’s stores. Defendants argue this indicates a sufficient dedication of property to public use so that their First Amendment activities may not be enjoined. Since First Amendment protections were not properly raised below, we again are not inclined to consider them here.
IV. The fourth issue stated for review by defendants might be characterized as an omnibus statement. Defendants here contend trial court erred as a matter of law in holding defendants trespassed on Dahl’s property; that their activities constituted an unlawful restraint of trade and commerce; that their activities violated § 553.1, The Code, 1973; and that their activities were conducted with an unlawful intent and for an unlawful purpose.
We believe it unnecessary to consider all of these assertions as we conclude the record reveals a violation by defendants of *922Code section 553.1 sufficient to support the injunction substantially as it was ordered by the decree of the trial court.
Section 553.1, The Code, 1973, provides:
“553.1 Pools and trusts. Any corporation organized under the laws of this or any other state or country for transacting or conducting any kind of business in this state, or any partnership, association, or individual, creating, entering into, or becoming a member of, or a party to, any pool, trust, agreement, contract, combination, confederation, or understanding with any other corporation, partnership, association, or individual, to regulate or fix the price of any article of merchandise or commodity, or to fix or limit the amount or quantity of any article, commodity, or merchandise to be manufactured, mined, produced, or sold in this state, shall be guilty of a conspiracy.”
Eliminating some of the conjunctives in the above cited statute, we can discern the statute provides, “[a]ny * * * individual * * * entering into, or becoming a member of, or a party to, any * * * agreement * * * or understanding with any other * * * association, or individual * * * to fix or limit the amount or quantity of any article, commodity, or merchandise to be * * ⅜ sold in this state, shall be guilty of a conspiracy.”
The testimony of defendants themselves leaves no doubt but that one of the major purposes of the picketing and distributing of leaflets at Dahl’s was to induce the stores to agree with the “boycott committee” to sell only U.F.W. grapes and lettuce to the exclusion of others. Defendant Ryan testified Dahl’s was informed its stores would be picketed if an agreement was not reached to limit sales to “Black Eagle” grapes and lettuce. He also testified the purpose of the picketing was to “try to convince Mr. Cox and the Dahl’s corporation that it would be in their economic interest * * * to buy only Black Eagle products.” Defendant Valadez agreed the purpose of the picketing was to exact an agreement from Dahl’s to sell only U.F.W. lettuce and grapes. Defendant Leffler answered affirmatively to the question whether his purpose in picketing Dahl’s was to reduce commerce or trade at the Dahl’s stores.
We believe the evidence adduced at trial demonstrates as a matter of law a violation of § 553.1, The Code. Dahl’s was entitled to injunctive relief from the attempts of the defendants to induce the corporation to enter into an unlawful agreement to limit the amount and quantity of lettuce’and grapes sold in this state.
Defendants advance three arguments in support of their contention trial court erred as a matter of law in finding their activities a violation of section 553.1. First, they contend it was not the intent of the legislature to prohibit the exercise of First Amendment rights. As we have commented above, we will not entertain in this appeal the claim of the protection of the First Amendment belatedly urged. Accordingly, we deem it unnecessary to consider this contention of defendants further.
Secondly, defendants claim their activities are specifically exempt from the strictures of § 553.1 by the application of § 553.-11, The Code, 1973. The latter section provides:
“The labor of a human being either mental or physical is not a commodity or article of commerce and it shall not be unlawful for men and women to organize themselves into or carry on unions for the purpose, by lawful means, of lessening the hours of labor or increasing the wages, or bettering the condition of the members of such organizations, or lawfully carrying out their legitimate purposes.”
Here again, since defendants did not properly raise in the trial court any such defense of statutory exemption, we decline to consider it in this appeal.
Finally, defendants argue that to enjoin their activities as violative of § 553.1, The Code, is to encroach on an area preempted by federal authority. Since a preemption claim questions the very jurisdiction of our state courts to grant relief un*923der our state law, we are inclined to the view a party does not waive the issue by failing to assert it below.
Defendants present their pre-emption claim in a rather unusual fashion. In one division of their brief and argument, they strenuously argue that the instant case involves no question of application of federal law, saying:
“[T]he United Farm Workers Union, AFL-CIO, is simply not recognized nor covered by any of the Federal regulatory labor statutes * * *. Indeed, agricultural workers have been expressly exempted from the coverage of both the National Labor Relations Act and the Taft-Hartley Act, 29 U.S.C. § 152(3) (1970). And even if farmworkers organized by the United Farm Workers Union were included in such legislation, none of the Appellants or other members of the Committee are members of that union, as hereinbefore noted.”
Thus, defendants argue, they may not invoke the protections, nor be subject to the prohibitions, of federal labor statutes.
Later in their brief, however, and under the heading of the argument we now consider, defendants claim trial court’s action was pre-empted by federal law. We cannot look favorably upon these inconsistent and mutually exclusive assertions; nonetheless, we are convinced by defendants’ first assertion that no pre-emption question exists. See also United Farm Workers Organizing Committee v. Superior Court, 4 Cal.3d 556, 94 Cal.Rptr. 263, 483 P.2d 1215.
V. In the fifth and sixth issues stated for review by defendants, they assert trial court erred to the extent that its order enjoined activities conducted near Dahl’s premises, which presumably would include adjacent sidewalks, streets and other public areas.
We have hereinabove held that defendants’ activities constituted a violation of § 553.1, The Code. There is no merit in defendants’ contention that a state’s power to enjoin unlawful activity in restraint of trade is limited to prohibiting the activity only on the premises of the complaining party. See, e. g., the oft-cited case of Giboney v. Empire Storage and Ice Company, 336 U.S. 490, 69 S.Ct. 684, 93 L.Ed. 834. We therefore hold there is no merit in defendants’ contention in this regard.
VI. In their final issue stated for review, defendants assert trial court erred when it found that because Dahl’s customers were “annoyed” and “disturbed” that this was a reason for denying to appellants their First Amendment rights.
In paragraph 11 of its findings of fact, trial court found:
“Some of plaintiff’s invitees have been disturbed and annoyed by one or more of the defendants while such invitees were attempting to enter plaintiff’s food stores and other of plaintiff’s invitees have refused to patronize plaintiff’s stores because of the activities of one or more defendants.”
Trial court’s order directed the issuance of a writ of injunction restraining defendants from “shouting at, disturbing and annoying persons attempting to enter [Dahl’s premises].”
The contention of defendants in their final issue so stated for review appears to be in two parts. First, they claim the finding of disturbance of and annoyance to Dahl’s customers will not support the enjoining of defendants’ activities. Second, they attack as impermissibly vague the portion of trial court’s order enjoining them from disturbing and annoying persons attempting to enter Dahl’s stores.
The first claim, even if meritorious, is of no benefit to defendants in light of our holding above that the violation of Code section 553.1 is sufficient in itself to support the injunction.
We do, however, perceive merit in the second contention, and believe the court’s decree and the writ of injunction issued pursuant thereto must be modified.
This court is possessed of authority to modify portions of a decree of injunction. See, e. g., Watson v. Chapman, 244 Iowa 56, *92455 N.W.2d 555. Where appropriate, we have nullified portions of such decrees. See Douglass v. Iowa City, 218 N.W.2d 908 (Iowa 1974).
Defendants claim the words “disturbing” and “annoying” are too imprecise to give them notice of what manner of conduct is proscribed. With this we agree. A decree is susceptible of interpretation on the same basis as other written instruments. Dairyland, Inc. v. Jenison, 207 N.W.2d 753, 754 (Iowa 1973). The problem which confronts us in connection with the contested portion of the decree is that it defies precise interpretation. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary (unabridged) devotes approximately three column inches to the definition of “disturb” and even more to the definition of “annoy.” The dictionary sets out no fewer than 25 examples of nuances in the use of the word “disturb,” and informs us, inter alia, that to “annoy” is to provoke, vex, irk, bother or worry, et cetera.
We have noted the word “annoying” does not necessarily carry with it any connotation of intentional action. See State v. Williams, 238 N.W.2d 302 (Iowa 1976). The same can be said of the word “disturb.” We perceive a danger that a person of common intelligence would be required to surmise or conjecture at what conduct is or is not proscribed by this portion of the decree, and the writ of injunction issued pursuant thereto. We note the United States Supreme Court has invalidated as vague and overbroad an ordinance which made it a crime for “three or more persons to assemble * * * on any of the sidewalks * * * and there conduct themselves in a manner annoying to persons passing by * * *.” Coates v. City of Cincinnati, 402 U.S. 611, 91 S.Ct. 1686, 29 L.Ed.2d 214.
We have said an injunctive decree should ordinarily conform to the requirements of the particular case and not go beyond such requirements. Douglass v. Iowa City, supra, 218 N.W.2d at 913, citing 42 Am.Jur.2d Injunctions § 297, pp. 1097-1098. Defendants do not assert the invalidity of those portions of the court’s decree which restrain them from:
“(b) By any manner or means obstructing, interfering with, or preventing the entrance or exit of persons or vehicles to and from the above described premises of plaintiff.
l( * * *
“(d) Harassing, intimidating or otherwise interfering in any way with plaintiff’s employees or customers.”
We believe the restrictions above set out, and the conduct enjoined thereby, along with the other provisions of the decree, are sufficient to protect plaintiff’s interest in this matter.
Accordingly, we conclude the challenged portion of the decree goes beyond the requirements of this case, and we direct that the reference to “disturbing” and “annoying” be stricken from the decree and the writ of injunction issued pursuant thereto.
With the foregoing modification of the decree and the writ of injunction, we otherwise affirm the trial court.
MODIFIED, AND AS MODIFIED, AFFIRMED.
MOORE, C. J., concurs.
REYNOLDSON, LeGRAND and HARRIS, JJ., concur specially.
McCORMICK, MASON, RAWLINGS and UHLENHOPP, JJ., dissent.

=== CASE 9738370 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:24.596164+00 ===

*925MeCORMICK, Justice
(dissenting in part).
I would sustain the injunction only insofar as it bars defendants from picketing and handbilling on plaintiff’s private property and adjacent shopping center property and from interference with customer ingress or egress.
I.Applicability of § 553.1, The Code. The majority opinion holds the injunction was justified because defendants’ activities violated § 553.1, The Code. I do not believe § 553.1 was violated by defendants.
By its terms that provision makes it a crime to combine or agree “to regulate or fix the price * * * or to fix or limit the amount or quantity of any article, commodity, or merchandise to be * * * sold in this state”. (Italics added). No claim is made that the defendants were attempting to fix prices. Instead the majority opinion finds defendants were attempting to induce plaintiff “to enter an unlawful agreement to limit the amount and quantity of lettuce and grapes sold in this state.” The record does not support this finding.
Rather than attempting to induce plaintiff to enter an agreement to limit the amount of lettuce and grapes sold in Iowa, defendants sought to persuade plaintiff to agree to sell only a particular brand of lettuce and grapes. The majority finding is premised upon the unwarranted assumption that an effort to limit the brand of lettuce and grapes sold by plaintiff is equivalent to a limitation on the amount of lettuce and grapes which could be sold. No attempt was made by defendants to limit the quantity of lettuce and grapes sold in Iowa. Instead their attempt was to assure that the quantities sold by plaintiff were Black Eagle products.
As a criminal statute, § 553.1 must be strictly construed. Rohlf v. Kasemeier, 140 Iowa 182, 185, 118 N.W. 276, 277 (1908). An agreement by a retailer to sell a particular brand of a commodity does not constitute a limitation on the amount of the commodity which can be sold by that retailer or its competitors in the state. Such an agreement does not violate § 553.1. Reeves v. Cooperative Society, 160 Iowa 194, 201, 140 N.W. 844, 847 (1913) (“a mere selling agency is not a monopoly”); see Tucson Federal Sav. & L. Ass’n v. Aetna Inv. Corp., 74 Ariz. 163, 245 P.2d 423 (1952).
The injunction in this case cannot be upheld on the ground of violation by defendants of § 553.1.
II. Applicability of the Sherman Act. The trial court held defendants’ activities constituted an unlawful restraint of trade. The parties agree this holding was in response to plaintiff’s allegation that defendants’ activities violated the Sherman AntiTrust Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1 et seq. The majority opinion does not reach this ground because its holding is premised on the asserted violation of Iowa Code § 553.1, but I would reach the Sherman Act ground because I do not believe § 553.1 was violated.
A state court has no jurisdiction of alleged Sherman Act violations. Jurisdiction to enforce the Sherman Act lies exclusively in the federal courts. 15 U.S.C. § 4; General Investment Co. v. Lake Shore & M. S. R. Co., 260 U.S. 261, 287, 43 S.Ct. 106, 117, 67 L.Ed. 244, 260 (1922) (“This suit was brought in a state court, and in so far as its purpose was to enjoin a violation of the Sherman Anti-Trust Act that court could not entertain it.”).
The trial court lacked jurisdiction of the Sherman Act issue. The injunction cannot be sustained on that ground.
. I do not suggest a Sherman Act violation could have been found if the court did have jurisdiction. See New Negro Alliance v. Sanitary Grocery Co., 303 U.S. 552, 58 S.Ct. 703, 82 L.Ed. 1012 (1938).
III. Applicability of the trespass law. Plaintiff alleged and the trial court held that defendants’ activities constituted a trespass under Iowa law. We interpreted the criminal trespass statute, § 729.1, The Code, in State v. Williams, 238 N.W.2d 302 (Iowa 1976). In that case a majority of the court held § 729.1 regulates only conduct and not speech, thus distinguishing it from the situation in Thornhill v. Alabama, 310 U.S. 88, 60 S.Ct. 736, 84 L.Ed. 1093 (1940). *926In Thornhill the Supreme Court held unconstitutional on First Amendment grounds a statute which prohibited loitering without just cause or excuse about a place of business with the intent to influence or induce others not to deal with that business. Under Williams the Iowa trespass statute purports to regulate only the non-speech elements of conduct.
The record contains evidence that on at least one occasion traffic was backed up at the entrance to plaintiff’s Ingersoll store because drivers were stopping at the entrance to the premises to accept leaflets and talk with defendants. Similar activity near the door made it “inconvenient” for customers to enter the store — “There wasn’t a direct line that people could walk to the door”.
At most this activity constituted “unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others”, contrary to § 729.1(2)(c), insofar as it showed an unreasonable interference with customer ingress. To that extent, and to that extent only, justification existed for a limited injunction under the trespass statute.
This record is devoid of any evidence of disturbance, intimidation, harassment, violence, or disorder of any kind. Except for evidence of interference with ingress, no evidence was presented to show defendants’ conduct infringed the trespass statute in any way. Expressed “annoyance” by plaintiff’s employees and a few customers was caused by defendants’ message, not by their conduct, except as it interfered with pedestrian and vehicular ingress. Furthermore, as held in the majority opinion, the injunction was invalid in its effort to ban such “annoyance”.
I would hold the injunction valid on the trespass theory only insofar as it barred defendants from interference with customer ingress or egress.
IV. The First Amendment defense. While I agree with Justice Rees that defendants did not plead their First Amendment defense as required by the rules of civil procedure, I also agree with the special concurrence that the issue was tried by consent and is before us for review.
Defendants included the issue in the statement of issues presented for review in their appellate brief. See rule 344(a)(2), Rules of Civil Procedure. Their statement of the issue is sufficient to merit its consideration in this appeal if it was presented to and ruled on by the trial court. Schnabel v. Display Sign Service, Inc., 219 N.W.2d 546, 548 (Iowa 1974); see 2 Vestal & Willson, Iowa Practice, § 59.09 at 436; Blackburn, The Appellate Rules Amendments — Suggested Forms and Timetables, 22 Drake L.Rev. 223, 237-238 (1973). Nelson v. Leaders, 258 Iowa 919, 140 N.W.2d 921 (1966), which might be read as supporting a contrary holding, was decided under a rule of appellate procedure which has been repealed.
An issue is presented to the trial court when it is tried by consent. In this case, apart from defendants’ motions based on the constitutional defense, much of the evidence bore on the constitutional question. Plaintiff introduced evidence that some defendants consulted the Chicago office of the AFL-CIO regarding their picketing and handbilling rights. They received copies of various court decisions delineating such rights, including Amalgamated Food Employees Union Local 590 v. Logan Valley Plaza, Inc., 391 U.S. 308, 88 S.Ct. 1601, 20 L.Ed.2d 603 (1968), upon which they relied.
Much of the defendants’ evidence, received without objection, sought to establish public dedication of plaintiff’s premises. Moreover, much of plaintiff’s evidence sought to establish the contrary and to show, in addition, the picketing and hand-billing could have been as well limited to the public sidewalk or parking.
On cross-examination of a defense witness concerning picketing and handbilling in the parking lot near plaintiff’s Fleur Drive store, the following occurred:
Q. Have you asked anyone about permission to pass out leaflets at that location? A. No. I just figured that as citizens we have this right as guaranteed in the First Amendment.
*927Q. Do you feel that you have the right to pass out leaflets and picket in the thoroughfare in front of the Dahl’s store there? A. Very definitely, because, as I say, what I read is that no city, state or local ordinance can overrule the Supreme Court ruling that says we have a right to demonstrate in a peaceful manner.
Q. In a street? A. I am talking about a sidewalk. Excuse me. I am talking about the door.
Q. Right in front of the- door of the Dahl’s store there? A. Yes, and sidewalks, of course.
Although the pretrial motion to dissolve the preliminary injunction and the motion during trial to dismiss the action did not constitute pleadings of the First Amendment issue, they alerted plaintiff and the trial court to defendants’ First Amendment theory. When the evidence at trial is examined in this light, it is obvious the parties proceeded without objection to try the First Amendment issue. Indeed, a fair reading of the record indicates all other issues were subsidiary. Since the First Amendment issue was tried by consent, it is rightfully in the case. Peters v. Peters, 214 N.W.2d 151, 155 (Iowa 1974).
Furthermore, the trial court ruled on the issue. I do not find any trial court holding that the constitutional issue was not in the case, and I would not characterize the trial court’s ruling on the merits of the constitutional defense as gratuitous. The trial court obviously recognized the issue was presented by the record. It was what the trial was largely about. No one claimed the constitutional issue was not in the case until the appellee’s brief was filed in this court.
The issue having been tried by consent, and the trial court having ruled on it, defendants were entitled to predicate error on the trial court’s ruling in this court. They ought not to be barred from doing so for failing to anticipate that plaintiff would, in resisting this issue here, claim for the first time that it was not in the case.
Moreover, contrary to the view expressed in the special concurrence, I believe resolution of the First Amendment issue does affect the result.
It affects the result because defendants had and still have a viable right to engage in First Amendment activities on public property adjacent to plaintiff’s stores. Unlike the majority, I do not believe that right is barred by state anti-trust law, Code § 553.1. See Division I, supra. Nor is it barred by Hudgens v. National Labor Relations Board,-U.S.-, 96 S.Ct. 1029, 47 L.Ed.2d 196 (1976). In Hudgens the ' Supreme Court overruled Amalgamated Food Employees Union Local 590 v. Logan Valley, Inc., supra, which had authorized First Amendment activities in privately-owned shopping centers in certain circumstances. The overruling of Logan Valley does not affect the right to engage in First Amendment activities on public property.
On First Amendment grounds, the injunction cannot validly bar defendants altogether from picketing and handbilling on public property adjacent to plaintiff’s stores. Thus, I would sustain only those parts of the injunction which bar defendants from picketing and handbilling on plaintiff’s private property and adjacent shopping center property and from interference with customer ingress or egress.
MASON, RAWLINGS and UHLEN-HOPP, JJ., join this dissent.

=== CASE 9738396 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:52.611544+00 ===

Levin, J.
(dissenting). The stated object of the Act is "to regulate political activity”.1 All its provisions relate to that one object.
I
To regulate the "political activity” of candidates, electors, appointed and elected public officials, lobbyists and others, is one object. "Legislation, if it has a primary object, is not invalid because it embraces more than 1 means of attaining its primary object.”2 The Act accomplishes its one primary object by regulating the pre-campaign political activity of candidates and electors, by imposing limitations on the post-election political *135activity of elected and appointed public officials and those who would influence their decisions, and, through the Political Ethics Commission, by providing a means of implementing and enforcing such regulations.
Spending money in a political campaign is political activity. Limitations on contributions and expenditures and the filing of statements on the organization of candidate committees and reporting of contributions and expenditures regulate political activity.
Establishing a state campaign fund, "with a diversion of certain taxpayer-designated portions of income tax revenues to the fund for distribution to qualifying gubernatorial candidates”,* *3 regulates political activity in a gubernatorial campaign.
Political activity does not end when the votes are counted and oaths of office are administered. Regulating conflicts of interest and requiring financial disclosure by public officials are efforts to assure that the post-election political activity of officials and those who would influence their "vote, official action, or judgment”4 or "decision”5 is legitimate.
The function of the Political Ethics Commission is to implement the Act’s object of regulating political activity. The Commission is to prescribe and furnish the forms to be filed pursuant to the Act, accept and examine the filings, furnish the public with summaries of non-confidential statements and reports, promulgate rules to carry out the Act, issue declaratory rulings, investigate complaints of a violation of the Act and initiate measures to enforce it.
*136A unifying theme and concern of the Act is money for votes: the legitimate use of money to influence the votes of the electors (in political campaigns) and to influence the votes of elected and appointed public officials (through lobbyists); and the corrupt use of money to buy the votes of public officials. Restrictions on the use of money, public funding of gubernatorial campaigns, public disclosure of financial matters, with corresponding enlargement of accountability and openness, are means related to that theme and concern.
The Court concludes that the Act embraces more than one object. The Act does embrace many concepts and contains diversified provisions as does any law containing more than one idea or thought, or addressing a complex problem. Our duty, if we can fairly do so, is to coalesce these multiple concepts into one object.
"Numerous cases have held that the 'object’ of a statute is the general purpose or aim of the enactment”.6 The "object may be very comprehensive and still be without objection”.7 "[It] may include all matters germane to its object” and "all those provisions which directly relate to carry out and implement the principal object”.8 "[T]his section is not to be given a narrow or strained construction”.9 "The word 'object’ expresses an intrinsically elastic concept. The viewer’s focus defines the object, determining in the main whether the di*137mensions of the object are microscopic or macro-cosmic in size”.10
In oft-quoted language* 11 this Court said:
"This provision has proved a tempting source of attack on the validity of statutes with which parties are dissatisfied, for few laws of any length are enacted where the objection cannot be plausibly urged as to details and auxiliary provisions incidental to the main purpose of the legislation appearing in the body of the act and not itemized in the title. * * * While it contains various related provisions not directly indicated or enumerated in the title, under the construction of this constitutional requirement, as many times reviewed by this court, if the act centers to one main general object or purpose which the title comprehensively declares, though in general terms, and if provisions in the body of the act not directly mentioned in the title are germane, auxiliary, or incidental to that general purpose, the constitutional requirement is met. ” Loomis v Rogers, 197 Mich 265, 270, 271; 163 NW 1018 (1917). (Emphasis supplied.)
The Court relies on language in Kent County, ex rel Board of Supervisors v Reed, 243 Mich 120, 122; 219 NW 656 (1928): "The provisions in these two sections might have been enacted in separate laws without either of them in any way referring to or affecting the other”.12 That is not a workable *138rationale. A large number of laws would be invalid under it. In the 45 years since Reed was decided, this Court has not been heretofore constrained to rely on the quoted language.
In Bissell v Heath, 98 Mich 472, 476-477; 57 NW 585 (1894), this Court rejected a similar approach:
"It is suggested that the title expresses two objects, which might very well be the subjects of separate acts. It may be true, of any comprehensive statute, that it might be subdivided, and several laws in pari materia enacted in place of one; but it does not follow that an act which has but one general object is in conflict with the constitutional provision. As is stated in Cooley’s Constitutional Limitations (6th ed) p 175:
" 'There has been a general disposition to construe the constitutional provision liberally, rather than to embarrass legislation by a construction whose strictness is unnecessary to the accomplishment of the beneficial purposes for which it has been adopted.’ ”
The legislation under consideration in Attorney General v Weimer, 59 Mich 580, 588; 26 NW 773 (1886), formed a county out of three townships and organized other territory into new townships. In rejecting a contention that the statute embraced more than one object, the Court said that while "there was no necessary connection between the formation of the county and the organization of the new townships, still the connection is a natural one, and the latter is clearly germane to the former”. (Emphasis added.) The one-object limitation, said the Court, was not designed "to embarrass legislation by making laws unnecessarily restrictive in their scope and operation, and thus *139multiplying their numbers”.13 "To require that every end and means necessary to the accomplishment of [the] general object should be provided for by a separate act relating to that alone, would not only be senseless but would actually render legislation impossible.” 14
The Court appears to recognize that codifications, such as the Michigan Penal Code,15 the Insurance Code,16 Probate Code,17 Revised Judicature Act,18 the Uniform Commercial Code19 would *140be invalid if they were scrutinized under the Court’s "foreign and incongruous”/"no necessary connection”/"might have been enacted in separate laws” rationale.
A codification "necessarily embodie[s] various and somewhat diversified provisions”.20 "Codification of multifarious enactments would be impossible if the constitution obliges the Legislature to define the object of a codification in narrow terms. Especially in the case of a codification, the Legislature is free to conceive of the object of its endeavors in terms of a common denominator and to express that conception in umbrella words.”21
Codifications are not exceptions to the constitutional requirement that an act embrace only one object. The object of a codification, however, like a mosaic, is many-faceted.
The Court says that it does "not direct attention here to the second concept” ("[t]hat the object which the law embraced shall be expressed in its title”), but it nevertheless seeks to distinguish the codification cases from this case because the title of this Act does not contain the phrase "revise, consolidate and classify the laws”, generally found in most codifications. If that is a prerequisite, the Uniform Commercial Code would also fall because neither those words nor a facsimile appear in its title.22
*141This Act is a revision and a codification, albeit also — like most revisions and codifications — an extension of existing law. As stated by the Court, this Act specifically repeals "five individual and distinct acts. They concerned the licensing and regulation of legislative agents; the corrupt practice section of the general election law; two specific conflict of interest statutes; and an ethics act”.23 The object "to revise, classify and consolidate” the laws "regulat[ing] political activity” appears both from the title24 and from the body of the Act even though the words "revise, classify and consolidate” do not appear in the title. "Only the general object and not all the details and incidents of a statute need be indicated in the title”.25 "Any provisions germane to the subject expressed in the title may properly be included in the act.”26
*142The Court finds it "foreign” and "incongruous” to tie together "the creation of a state campaign fund for gubernatorial candidates * * * with regulation of lobbying activities”, and "financial disclosure provisions aimed at preventing unethical conduct * * * with the organization of a campaign committee”.27 Surely this is no more "foreign” or "incongruous” than tying together the law of sales or of negotiable instruments with secured transactions (Uniform Commercial Code), no-fault automobile liability with fire insurance (Insurance Code), neglected and delinquent children with decedents’ estates (Probate Code), governmental tort immunity with the organization of a district court (Revised Judicature Act).
A law does not introduce "foreign and incongruous” matter if, said the Court in phrasing that obiter dictum, it "is confined to the means supposed to be important to the end indicated”.28 (Emphasis supplied.) This Legislature supposes that the regulation of campaign expenditures, state financing of gubernatorial campaigns, lobbying and financial disclosures are means "important to the end indicated” of "regulating] political activity”. This Court does not say otherwise but substitutes its own supposition of the appropriate format of legislation.
*143In People v Milton, 393 Mich 234, 241, 248; 224 NW2d 266 (1974) this Court said:
“Not infrequently there will be a number of existing acts to which the new legislation would be germane, auxiliary or incidental. The legislative choice will not be held invalid merely because an alternative location for the new legislation might appear to some more appropriate.”
We rejected a claim that an amendment to the Revised Judicature Act creating the district court was defective insofar as it purports to vest criminal jurisdiction in that court: "the correct question is not whether the Legislature might have included provisions concerning the criminal jurisdiction of the district court in the Code of Criminal Procedure, but rather whether provisions establishing criminal jurisdiction are germane to the general purpose of the RJA”. (Emphasis supplied.)
The ultimate question here is not congruity, but whether there is one object. Asking the wrong question, the Court ordains a wrong conclusion.
There are five chapters in the Act. The Court does not advise the Legislature what division of the Act would be congruous. Are there one or more chapters that are congruous with each other? Are there any incongruities within any chapter? Nor does the Court indicate whether the defect it perceives can be remedied by adding to the title: "to revise, classify and consolidate”. If not, why not? How does this codification otherwise differ from other codifications?
The Court’s advisory opinion poses more questions than it answers, puts in question the validity of many statutes the constitutionality of which heretofore was undoubted and will encourage costly and time-consuming litigation. By changing *144the emphasis from object to congruity/necessary connection/might have been enacted in separate laws, the Court assures itself of much grist for the mill.
II
The Court commits itself to issue further opinions despite its declaration of unconstitutionality.
The Constitution permits an advisory opinion "on important questions of law upon solemn occasions as to the constitutionality of legislation after it has been enacted into lawbut before its effective date”. Const 1963, art 3, § 8. (Emphasis supplied.)
Delegate (now Secretary of State) Austin in proposing on the floor the amendment adding "after it has been enacted into law” stated that the purpose was to "prevent the supreme court from getting involved until the legislative process was completed and they would be working with a law rather than some bills or proposals for legislation”.29
The apparent purpose of issuing further opinions is to assist the Legislature in its further efforts. The Court cannot do so without "getting involved” in the legislative process.
Kavanagh, C. J., concurred with Levin, J.
"AN ACT to regulate political activity; to create a commission; to prescribe the powers and duties of the commission, the secretary of state, and other governmental bodies; to regulate campaign financing; to restrict compaign contributions and expenditures; to require campaign statements and reports; to prohibit anonymous contributions; to require certain anonymous funds to be transmitted to the state; to restrict use of public funds for mailings; to regulate campaign advertising and literature; to provide for segregated funds for political purposes; to create a state campaign fund; to provide for the use of public funds for political campaigns; to provide for reversion of or refunding of unexpended balances; to regulate conflict of interest, influence, and ethics of public officials, public employees, candidates, members of their immediate families, and businesses with which the individuals are associated; to regulate certain participation in making governmental decisions; to require financial statements; to regulate lobbying, lobbyists, and lobbyist agents; to require registration; to require persons to file certain statements and reports; to require persons to keep certain books and records; to permit governmental bodies to enact ordinances similar to matters covered by this act; to provide for defense funds; to provide for the collection of fees; to provide for the voiding of certain contracts; to prescribe remedies and penalties; to provide appropriations; and to repeal certain acts and parts of acts.”
Local No 1644, AFSC&ME, AFL-CIO v Oakwood Hospital Corp, 367 Mich 79, 91; 116 NW2d 314 (1962).
This is quoted from the opinion of the Court.
MCLA 169.121; MSA 4.1701(121).
MCLA 169.124; MSA 4.1701(124).
Local No 1644, AFSC&ME, AFL-CIO v Oakwood Hospital Corp, supra.
The People, ex rel the Secretary of State v The State Insurance Co, 19 Mich 392, 398 (1869).
Advisory Opinion re Constitutionality of 1972 PA 294, 389 Mich 441, 465; 208 NW2d 469 (1973). W A Foote Memorial Hospital, Inc v Jackson Hospital Authority, 390 Mich 193, 210; 211 NW2d 649 (1973).
National Loan & Investment Co v Detroit, 136 Mich 451, 452; 99 NW 380 (1904).
Advisory Opinion re Constitutionality of 1972 PA 294, supra, pp 488-489 (1973) (Levin, J., concurring).
See e.g., People, for use of Regents of the University of Michigan v Brooks, 224 Mich 45, 49; 194 NW 602 (1923); People v Palm, 245 Mich 396, 402; 222 NW 67 (1929); Young v Ann Arbor, 267 Mich 241, 244; 255 NW 579 (1934); Michigan Boiler & Sheet Iron Works v Dressler, 286 Mich 502, 508; 282 NW 222 (1938); Rohan v Detroit Racing Association, 314 Mich 326, 355; 22 NW2d 433 (1946); Benson v State Hospital Commission, 316 Mich 66, 78; 25 NW2d 112 (1946); Beacon Club v Kalamazoo County Sheriff, 332 Mich 412, 423; 52 NW2d 165 (1952); People v Milton, 393 Mich 234, 241; 224 NW2d 266 (1974).
The statute would in effect have restored the fee system to the Register of Deeds Office of Kent County, a result inconsistent with the objective expressed in the title. See People v Morton, 384 Mich 38, 40; *138179 NW2d 379 (1970); Maki v East Tawas, 385 Mich 151, 159; 188 NW2d 593 (1971).
The quoted words appeared first in People, ex rel Drake v Mahaney, 13 Mich 481, 495 (1865).
People, ex rel Drake v Mahaney, supra.
The provisions proscribing arson, burglary, robbery and homicide could all be enacted in separate laws without any of them referring to or affecting the other. The recent criminal sexual conduct act, 1974 PA 266, MCLA 750.520a, et seq.; MSA 28.788(1), et seq., apart from repealing inconsistent and redundant legislation, stands as separate and independent legislation which does not refer to or affect the law of arson, burglary, robbery or homicide; surely, it is not invalid because it was added as an amendment to the Michigan Penal Code.
This Court has advised that the no-fault motor vehicle liability act, 1972 PA 294; MCLA 500.3101 et seq.; MSA 24.13101 et seq., did not violate the one object requirement even though it was added to the Insurance Code and it is possible to have an Insurance Code without a no-fault motor vehicle liability act and the latter could have been enacted in a separate law without either enactment referring to or affecting the other. Advisory Opinion re Constitutionality of 1972 PA 294, supra.
The provisions concerning decedents’ estates and fiduciaries have no necessary connection with juveniles. It would have been possible to deal with these two subject matters by separate laws without either of them referring to or affecting the other.
The statutory provisions abolishing the defense of governmental function resulting from the negligent operation of a motor vehicle (MCLA 600.2904; MSA 27A.2904) and limiting the liability of a merchant for conduct involving persons suspected of larceny of goods (MCLA 600.2917; MSA 27A.2917) could have been enacted as separate laws and have no necessary connection to an act dealing largely with the organization and function of civil courts. See People v Milton, 393 Mich 234; 224 NW2d 266 (1974).
"The UCC replaced separate laws on sales, stock transfer negotiable instruments, bulk sales, warehouse receipts, bills of lading, bank checks, motor vehicle installment sales contracts, trust receipts, fraudulent conveyances, discharge of chattel mortgages, foreclosures of chattel mortgages, liens on inventory and many more. When first enacted, each of these separate laws stated its own separate object.” *140Advisory Opinion re Constitutionality of 1972 PA 294, supra, pp 488-489 (1973) (Levin, J., concurring). The separate chapters of the UCC might have been enacted in separate laws without referring to or affecting the others. They have "no necessary connection” with each other.
Regents of University of Michigan v Pray, 264 Mich 693, 697; 251 NW 348 (1933).
Advisory Opinion re Constitutionality of 1972 PA 294, supra, pp 488-489 (1973) (Levin, j.( concurring).
True, the UCC is dubbed a "code” in the body of the act, and this act is not. We may properly look to the body of the law to determine its object — that is indeed where we should look. See In re Brewster *141Street Housing Site, 291 Mich 313, 341; 289 NW 493 (1939); Attorney General v Union Guardian Trust Co, 273 Mich 554, 558; 263 NW 866 (1935); Kent County, ex rel Board of Supervisors of Kent County v Reed, 243 Mich 120, 122; 219 NW 656 (1928); Loomis v Rogers, 197 Mich 265, 271; 163 NW 1018 (1917). Whether an act in fact embraces only one or more than one object can only be determined upon examination of the act itself, not by reading its title. Upon examination of this Act it is apparent that it is a codification of the laws concerning campaign expenditures, lobbyists, conflicts of interest, standards of conduct for public officials.
The acts repealed are:
(a) 1947 PA 214, licensing and regulation of the activities of “legislative agents” (lobbyists). MCLA 4.401-4.410; MSA 2.601-2.610.
(b) 1954 PA 116, Ch XXXIV, captioned Campaign Expenses, of the Michigan Election Law, MCLA 168.901-168.929; MSA 6.1901-6.1929.
(c) 1968 PA 317, regulating the conduct of public officials in respect to contracts with public entities. MCLA 15.321-15.330; MSA 4.1700(51)-4.1700(60).
(d) 1968 PA 318, conflicts of interests of members of the Legislature and state officials in respect to contracts. MCLA 15.301-15.310; MSA 4.1700(21)-4.1700(30).
(e) 1973 PA 196, standards of conduct for public officers and employees; creating a state board of ethics. MCLA 15.341-15.348; MSA 4.1700(71)-4.1700(78).
"An Act to regulate political activity * * * and to repeal certain acts and parts of acts.” See footnote 1.
People v Sowall, 279 Mich 261, 266; 271 NW 751 (1937).
Westgate v Adrian Township, 161 Mich 333, 335; 126 NW 422 *142(1910); Benson v State Hospital Commission, 316 Mich 66, 77; 25 NW2d 112 (1946).
The preceding quotations in this paragraph are from the opinion of the Court.
"The act, with great particularity, prescribes how this police government shall be rendered effectual; but this particularity can not possibly be objectionable so long as it introduces nothing foreign and incongruous, but is confined to the means supposed to be important to the end indicated.” People, ex rel Drake v Mahaney, supra, p 496.
The phrase "no necessary connection”, also from People, ex rel Drake v Mahaney, supra, p 495, is also obiter dictum.
It appears from his writings that Justice Cooley was especially concerned with combinations of special interest groups to enact selective legislation benefiting their private interests.
1 Official Record Constitutional Convention 1961, p 1548.

=== CASE 3027337 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:01.085733+00 ===

United States Court of Appeals
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
________________
No. 01-1682
________________
United States of America,                  *
*
Appellee,                     *
*       Appeal from the United States
v.                                   *       District Court for the
*       Western District of Missouri.
Maurice Mosley,                            *          [UNPUBLISHED]
*
Appellant.                    *
________________
Submitted: August 6, 2001
Filed: August 15, 2001
________________
Before BOWMAN, FAGG, and HANSEN, Circuit Judges.
________________
PER CURIAM.
Kansas City, Missouri, police officers stopped Maurice Mosley's vehicle when
the officers noticed that the vehicle he was operating did not have its lights on. Mosley
had two passengers in the vehicle with him, and officers observed both of them to be
in possession of crack cocaine. The passengers were arrested at the scene. Upon
verifying Mosley's driver's license information, officers discovered that Mosley had an
outstanding felony parole warrant issued by the state of Kansas. Mosley, too, was
arrested, and a subsequent search of Mosley's vehicle yielded a .22 caliber handgun
that was located under the vehicle's driver's seat. Mosley admitted during police
questioning that he had handled the gun, including loading and unloading it with
ammunition, and that his fingerprints would be found on the gun.
A jury convicted Mosley of being a felon in possession of a firearm in violation
of 18 U.S.C. §§ 922(g)(1) and 924(e) (1994). On appeal, Mosley challenges the
district court's1 denial of his motion to suppress evidence obtained while he was
stopped by police officers, the district court's denial of Mosley's motion in limine
seeking to exclude other bad acts evidence, and the district court's2 denial of Mosley's
motion for judgment of acquittal.
We conclude that the district court did not err in denying Mosley's motion to
suppress his statements made to officers, because contrary to Mosley's assertion,
officers had probable cause for initially stopping the vehicle Mosley was driving after
watching him drive for four blocks in the dark without his headlights illuminated, which
is a traffic violation. See United States v. Jones, No. 00-2905, 2001 WL 704428, at
*5 (8th Cir. June 25, 2001) ("[T]his Court has held on numerous occasions that any
traffic violation, regardless of its perceived severity, provides an officer with probable
cause to stop the driver."). The officers were entitled to conduct a reasonable
investigation, including asking for a license and registration and questioning Mosley.
United States v. Edmisten, 208 F.3d 693, 694 (8th Cir. 2000), cert. denied, 121 S. Ct.
1158 (2001); United States v. Perez, 200 F.3d 576, 579 (8th Cir. 2000). In addition,
the district court did not abuse its discretion in denying Mosley's motion in limine
because the government was allowed to set forth the circumstances surrounding
1
The Honorable Dean Whipple, Chief Judge, United States District Court for the
Western District of Missouri, adopting the Report and Recommendation of the
Honorable Sarah W. Hays, United States Magistrate Judge for the Western District of
Missouri.
2
The Honorable Gary A. Fenner, United States District Judge for the Western
District of Missouri.
2
Mosley's arrest. See United States v. Summers, 137 F.3d 597, 602 (8th Cir. 1998)
(holding "bad acts that form the factual setting of the crime in issue" outside the scope
of Rule 404(b)).
Finally, Mosley argues that the evidence presented at trial was insufficient to
support a conviction for being a felon in possession. We disagree and conclude that
the district court did not err in declining to grant a judgment of acquittal. For purposes
of being a felon in possession of a firearm, possession may be either actual or
constructive. United States v. Miscellaneous Firearms & Ammunition, 945 F.2d 239,
240 (8th Cir. 1991). "Constructive possession of the firearm is established if the person
has dominion over the premises where the firearm is located, or control, ownership, or
dominion over the firearm itself." United States v. Boykin, 986 F.2d 270, 274 (8th
Cir.), cert. denied, 510 U.S. 888 (1993). In this case the evidence overwhelmingly
supports both actual and constructive possession: Mosley admitted to officers that he
actually possessed the firearm by handling it in the vehicle where the weapon was
recovered--a vehicle that Mosley controlled. Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of
the district court.
A true copy.
Attest:
CLERK, U.S. COURT OF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT.
3

=== CASE 2215568 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:03.072236+00 ===

72 Wis. 2d 26 (1976)
240 N.W.2d 422
GREEN BAY PACKAGING, INC., and another, Respondents,
v.
DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY, LABOR & HUMAN RELATIONS, and another, Appellants: SIEMZUCH and another, Defendants.[*]
No. 587 (1974).
Supreme Court of Wisconsin.
Submitted on briefs February 4, 1976.
Decided April 7, 1976.
*26b For the appellants the cause was submitted on the brief of Bronson C. La Follette, attorney general, and Lowell E. Nass, assistant attorney general.
For the respondents the cause was submitted on the brief of H. R. Klueter, attorney, and E. E. Larson, of counsel, both of Wausau.
On motion for rehearing:
For the respondents there was a brief filed by E. E. Larson and Jones, Larson, Charnholm, Anderson & Rouse, all of Wausau.
*27 WILKIE, C. J.
In this workmen's compensation case the sole issue is whether the defendant Arthur Majeske, the immediate employer of Marcin Siemzuch, the deceased husband of the claimant Maria Siemzuch, was a "contractor under" the respondent Green Bay Packaging, Inc., within the meaning of sec. 102.06, Stats. The circuit court reversed a determination to that effect by the Department of Industry, Labor, and Human Relations. We reverse, concluding, as a matter of law, that Arthur Majeske was such a "contractor under."
The facts in this case are essentially undisputed. Marcin Siemzuch was employed by Arthur Majeske to cut hardwood on land for which Majeske owned the "stumpage" rights. The wood was to be delivered to the Green Bay Packaging, Inc. (GBP) for use in the manufacture of paper. In October of 1971 Siemzuch was killed by a falling maple tree. Majeske had entered into a contract with GBP for the calendar year 1971, which required Majeske to deliver by truck to the GBP yard 300 cords of mixed hardwoods of specific kinds and dimensions. GBP does not cut hardwood itself, nor does it directly employ men to cut it. Neither was any of the wood to be cut from lands in which GBP had any stumpage rights. In fact, GBP had no interest whatsoever in where Majeske got the wood to deliver. GBP made no advances to Majeske, and did not supply equipment or supplies of any kind. When the wood was delivered to GBP the wood was measured and Majeske was paid accordingly. GBP did reserve in the contract the right to "from time to time send its representative to inspect the pulpwood as being produced or loaded and for that purpose the seller [Majeske] agrees to afford such representative such assistance as may be necessary to aid in such inspection." The only testimony concerning this clause was a statement that the GBP representative would "occasionally" stop by areas where wood was being *28 cut, but not necessarily to areas where Majeske (or his employees) were working.
Citing the "inspection" clause of the contract, and the specifications for wood set forth in the contract, DILHR found that GBP had "a large measure of control over the details of the manner in which the work was performed under the contract," and that "Majeske was a contractor under [GBP] as provided by Wisconsin Statute 102.06."
On GBP's petition for review of the DILHR determination, the circuit court found, as a matter of law, that Majeske was not a "contractor under" GBP and judgment was entered to that effect, reversing the DILHR determination.
"Contractor under" within Sec. 102.06, Stats.
In determining whether Arthur Majeske was a "contractor under" GBP within sec. 102.06, Stats., it is clear that only a question of law is involved.[1]
One of the most important sections of the Wisconsin Workmen's Compensation statute is sec. 102.06, which provides:
"102.06 Joint liability of employer and contractor; loaned employes. An employer shall be liable for compensation to an employe of a contractor or subcontractor under him who is not subject to this chapter, or who has not complied with the conditions of s. 102.28 (2) in any case where such employer would have been liable for compensation if such employe had been working directly for him, including also work in the erection, alteration, repair or demolition of improvements or of fixtures upon premises of such employer which are used or to be used in the operations of such employer. The contractor or subcontractor (if he is subject to the Workmen's Compensation Act) shall also be liable for such compensation, *29 but the employe shall not recover compensation for the same injury from more than one party. In the same manner, under the same conditions, and with like right of recovery, as in the case of an employe of a contractor or subcontractor, described above, an employer shall also be liable for compensation to an employe who has been loaned by him to another employer. The employer who becomes liable for and pays such compensation may recover the same from such contractor, subcontractor or other employer for whom the employe was working at the time of the injury if such contractor, subcontractor or other employer was an employer as defined in s. 102.04."
One of the earliest cases in which this section was considered is Great A. & P. Tea Co. v. Industrial Comm.[2] In A. & P., a contractor, Arnold Arndt, was engaged by A. & P. to regularly truck butter from Baraboo to Milwaukee. A truck driver, Robert Hattle, was killed while making such a delivery and the Industrial Commission's compensation award was affirmed by this court, in the following language:
"... As Arndt [subcontractor] was not within the act or covered by insurance, and the service which Hattle [employee] was performing was for [A. & P.'s] benefit and was of such nature that [A. & P.] would have been liable for compensation if [employee] had been working directly for [A. & P.], it is still wholly within the scope and legitimate purposes of the act to impose the compensation burden on [A. & P.] as the proprietor of an industry upon which the legislature has seen fit to impose the burden of the loss because of such an industrial injury.
"Thus construed, sec. 102.06 `conserves to the employee the indemnity intended to be given him by the legislature by making contractors liable for injuries received by employees of a subcontractor who is not under the act. They will be careful to protect themselves and will also *30 see to it that their subcontractors are protected against such losses.' Miller v. Industrial Comm., 179 Wis. 192, 190 N.W. 81." (Emphasis added.)[3]
This construction of sec. 102.06, Stats., emphasizes the literal language of the statute making an employer liable where he "would have been liable for compensation if such employee [of the contractor or subcontractor under] had been working directly for him."
Two years later this court, in Madison Entertainment Corp. v. Industrial Comm.,[4] abandoned the A. & P. doctrine. In Madison Entertainment Corp. an injured baseball player (F. J. Kleinheinz) was employed by a team (managed by E. L. Lenahan) which contracted with Madison Entertainment Corporation to perform at Breese Stevens Field. Kleinheinz was injured and attempted to collect workmen's compensation from Madison Entertainment. The court found that the words "contractor or subcontractor under" must be given a more restricted meaning, consistent with the underlying antifraud purpose of the statute:
"... While it may be difficult to set precisely the boundaries of the restriction, we think it may accurately be said that the statute was intended to deal with situations where a person or corporation discharges his or its duties under a contract by subletting work, or where such person or corporation delegates his or its usual business to another under contract.
"The editor of an elaborate note in 58 A. L. R. 872, in commenting upon statutes of this type, states:
"`It would seem that the chief purpose of provisions of this type is to protect the employees of subcontractors who are not financially responsible, and to prevent employers from relieving themselves of liability by doing through independent contractors what they would otherwise *31 do through direct employees.'" (Emphasis supplied.)[5]
Under this interpretation, Madison Entertainment was not liable because its business was promoting use of the facility, not running a baseball team, and therefore it "was not attempting to discharge its business through independent contractors"[6] and thus avoid liability under the workmen's compensation law. Madison Entertainment has been followed in a line of cases since 1933.[7] The invariable ingredient, the absence of which has prevented recovery under the "contractor under" provisions of sec. 102.06, Stats., is that the alleged "contractor under" must be engaged in the principal employer's "ordinary and usual business."
This line of cases runs counter to the clear and express language of the statute, as pointed out in the A. & P. Case. It is clear from the statute that an employer such as GBP shall be liable for compensation to an employee of a contractor or subcontractor under him, such as Arthur Majeske, "... who has not complied with the conditions of sec. 102.28 (2), Stats., in any case where such employer [GBP] would have been liable for compensation if such employe [Marcin Siemzuch] had been working directly for him." Here there is no question that Majeske did not carry the required workmen's compensation insurance. The language is crystal clear and does not permit of the qualifying restriction added by Madison Entertainment which requires that a contractor under *32 be performing part of the "ordinary and usual" business of the principal employer.
It is true that for years this court has followed the rule that where the court has placed a certain construction upon a statute, such construction becomes a part of the statute and subsequent legislative inaction is deemed to be approval of such construction.[8] But there are two entirely different situations in which the application of this rule is sought. In the first, this court has made an interpretation which is followed by the refusal of the legislature to make any change in the statute, even though bills making such a change are submitted for its action.[9] The second situation is entirely different. There, as in the instant case, the ruling of this court is followed by a period of inaction on the part of the legislature, where there is no evidence that this court's interpretation was brought to the attention of the legislature.
Since this court's 1933 interpretation of sec. 102.06, Stats.,[10] there has been nearly complete legislative inaction in regard to the definition of contractor under. No bills have been introduced to amend the substance of this definition from 1933 through the current 1975 session of the legislature,[11] with one exception. In the 1943 *33 legislative session, Senate Bill 210, which eventually became law as ch. 270, sec. 6, Laws of 1943, did amend sec. 102.06 by providing coverage where the employee of the uninsured contractor under was performing "work in the erection, alteration, repair or demolition of improvements or of fixtures upon premises of such employer which are used or to be used in the operations of such employer." This bill was a specific response to this court's 1942 decision in City of Hudson v. Industrial Comm.[12] which held that an employee of a contractor making repairs on a city bridge was not an employee of a contractor under. The comments of the advisory committee on this proposed change, prepared for the legislative committees at the time of hearings and unanimously agreed upon by the committee, state the following:
"Section 6. 102.06 In the recent case of City of Hudson v. Industrial Comm., the court held that the city of Hudson did not become liable to employes of a contractor engaged in the business of repairing the city of Hudson bridge, although the city had its own men constructing and repairing concrete abutments at the time of injury to the employe of the contractor. Other decisions leave doubt as to the intent of 102.06 as to who is to be considered a `contractor under' an employer subject to the act. The court has commented that the provision was intended to and does apply only to those situations where a principal enters into a contract to have some part of the work ordinarily and customarily done by him done by a contractor.
"The present amendment makes it clear that if the work being performed by the contractor is in the `erection, alteration, repair or demolition of improvements or of fixtures upon premises of such employer which are used or to be used in the operations of such employer,' the principal employer will become liable for payment of compensation to employes of the contractor who is without compensation insurance or who is not subject *34 to the Workmen's Compensation Act. This, it is believed, will enforce the original intent of 102.06 and provide for broader coverage of contractors' employes than under the narrowing decisions which the court has rendered.
"The principal employer can always protect himself by making certain that his contractor has compensation coverage. Insured employers will merely have to pay premium on employes of the contractor in the event that the contractor is without insurance."[13]
The postenactment footnote to the revised section incorporated in the Workmen's Compensation Act pamphlet of 1943 is:
"This amendment was effected by Chapter 270, Laws of 1943, effective June 10, 1943. It is not intended to limit the other provisions of this section, but to make clear that if work is being performed under the circumstances stated, liability will exist against the principal employer as provided. The intent is to provide for broader coverage of contractor employes than obtains under the narrowing decisions which the court has rendered, the last being in the case of City of Hudson v. Industrial Comm., 241 Wis. 476."[14]
The comments of a legislatively created advisory committee are relevant in construing statutes and ascertaining the legislative intent of statutes recommended by that committee.[15] So, too, are annotations in the biennial Workmen's Compensation Act pamphlet.[16] Although a *35 partial legislative amendment may indicate approval of the unaffected parts of the law which have been previously construed,[17] we conclude that this is not the case here. It is clear from both the comments and the footnote of the advisory committee that there was no legislative intent to approve of the prior narrowing constructions of sec. 102.06, Stats., made by this court. Indeed the opposite inference appears to be more reasonable. From 1933 until the present, there was total legislative inaction, broken only by one particular amendment which was aimed at this court's Hudson decision, but which did not indicate approval of this court's prior narrowing construction in Madison Entertainment and other related cases.
Where, as here, there is nearly complete legislative inaction following an interpretation of a statute by this court, this legislative action is to be considered as evidence that the legislature agrees with that interpretation, but not as raising a conclusive presumption of tacit adoption and ratification by the legislature. The weight accorded to this evidence is overcome where this court can unequivocally conclude, as here, that the prior construction is contrary to the clear and express language of the statute. The aim of all statutory construction is to discern the intent of the legislature, and where the meaning of the statute is plain, this is better evidence of the true legislative intent than nearly complete legislative inaction following a construction by this court.
Years ago, Mr. Justice EDWARD FAIRCHILD, in a dissent in Frye v. Theige,[18] supported the view that "legislative silence, standing alone, is not sufficient to indicate that the legislature has acquiesced in the court's construction." Sutherland, in his authoritative work on statutory construction, states that, while reversal of prior statutory interpretations is a rare event, "courts are not bound by *36 stare decisis to follow a previous interpretation later deemed to have been erroneous."[19] As for legislative inaction, he notes that it has been called "`a weak reed upon which to lean' and a `poor beacon' to follow in construing a statute."[20] In the case at bar there has not been total legislative inaction, because of the 1943 amendment. However, as explained above, we conclude that this single, narrow amendment does not in any way indicate approval of the prior constructions, and that the overall picture is one of legislative inaction since 1933.
The mistake of Madison Entertainment and its successive cases with respect to the interpretation of sec. 102.06, Stats., is manifest. We conclude that those cases should be overruled, and this court should follow, once again, the interpretation of sec. 102.06 as made in the A. & P. Case.
In returning to the A. & P. standard we do not mean to impose liability upon principal employers for the employees of all persons with whom they may have contractual relations, however slight. In A. & P. it was stated:
"... sec. 102.06 was not intended to make an employer liable to the injured employees of every one with whom the employer had some sort of contractual relations."[21]
By a contractor under we mean to refer to one who regularly furnishes to a principal employer materials or services which are integrally related to the finished product or service provided by that principal employer. In the instant case Majeske regularly furnished pulp to Green Bay Packaging and pulp is obviously integrally *37 related to the packaging materials sold by GBP. Majeske was therefore a contractor under GBP within the meaning of sec. 102.06, Stats.
Any previous rulings of this court contrary to this opinion are reversed. The workmen's compensation law of this state must be liberally construed to reach the objectives of that law.[22] The general recognition of the "contractor under" protection provisions of most workmen's compensation laws is discussed by Larson in his encyclopedia on workmen's compensation. In part, he states there:
"Forty-one states have adopted `contractor-under' statutes, imposing on the general employer compensation liability (sometimes joint, sometimes primary, but usually secondary) to the employees of contractors (in most instances uninsured contractors) under him.
". . .
"The purpose of this legislation was to protect employees of irresponsible and uninsured subcontractors by imposing ultimate liability on the presumably responsible principal contractor, who has it within his power, in choosing subcontractors, to pass upon their responsibility and insist upon appropriate compensation protection for their workers." (Emphasis added.)[23]
By the Court.Judgment reversed.
NOTES
[*]  Motion for rehearing denied, without costs, on June 2, 1976.
[1]  Heineman Lumber Co. v. Industrial Comm. (1937), 226 Wis. 373, 276 N.W. 343.
[2]  (1931), 205 Wis. 7, 236 N.W. 575.
[3]  Id. at pages 14, 15.
[4]  (1933), 211 Wis. 459, 248 N.W. 415.
[5]  Id. at page 463.
[6]  Id. at page 464.
[7]  For example: Employers Mut. Liability Ins. Co. v. Industrial Comm. (1937), 224 Wis. 527, 272 N.W. 481; Heineman Lumber Co. v. Industrial Comm., supra, footnote 1; City of Hudson v. Industrial Comm. (1942), 241 Wis. 476, 6 N.W.2d 217; Marinette County Fair Asso. v. Industrial Comm. (1943), 242 Wis. 552, 8 N.W.2d 268; Britton v. Industrial Comm. (1946), 248 Wis. 549, 22 N.W.2d 525.
[8]  State ex rel. Klingler & Schilling v. Baird (1972), 56 Wis. 2d 460, 467, 468, 202 N.W.2d 31; Estate of Pamanet (1970), 46 Wis. 2d 514, 175 N.W.2d 234, 177 N.W.2d 105; Chart v. Gutmann (1969), 44 Wis. 2d 421, 171 N.W.2d 331, certiorari denied, 397 U.S. 973, 90 Sup. Ct. 1089, 25 L. Ed. 2d 267; Zimmerman v. Wisconsin Electric Power Co. (1968), 38 Wis. 2d 626, 157 N.W.2d 648.
[9]  Cook v. Industrial Comm. (1966), 31 Wis. 2d 232, 142 N.W.2d 827; De Leeuw v. ILHR Department (1976), 71 Wis. 2d 446, 238 N.W.2d 706.
[10]  Madison Entertainment Corp. v. Industrial Comm., supra, footnote 4.
[11]  Revisor's bill, ch. 143, Laws of 1947, effective May 22, 1947, did not affect the definition of contractor under, but merely provided that a contractor under would himself be primarily liable only if he is subject to the Workmen's Compensation Act, and secondarily liable only if he is an employer as defined in sec. 102.04, Stats.
[12]  (1942), 241 Wis. 476, 6 N.W.2d 217.
[13]  Legislative Reference Library No. 1290, Comments on Amendments Unanimously Agreed Upon By Advisory Committee On Workmen's Compensation Legislation 1943, pp. 4, 5, sec. 6.
[14]  Workmen's Compensation Act of Wisconsin, with Amendments to June 10, 1943, Ind. Comm., page 6, note 12.
[15]  2A Sutherland, Statutory Construction (Sands 4th ed.), p. 206, sec. 48.07.
See also: Wisconsin Electric Power Co. v. Department of Revenue (1973), 59 Wis. 2d 106, 114, 207 N.W.2d 841; Buehler Brothers v. Industrial Comm. (1936), 220 Wis. 371, 374, 265 N.W. 227; Pellett v. Industrial Comm. (1916), 162 Wis. 596, 156 N.W. 956.
[16]  Valentine v. Industrial Comm. (1944), 246 Wis. 297, 300, 16 N.W.2d 804.
[17]  Sutherland, supra, footnote 15, at p. 262, sec. 49.10.
[18]  (1948), 253 Wis. 596, 604, 34 N.W.2d 793.
[19]  Sutherland, supra, footnote 15, at p. 238, sec. 49.05; see also: Dickerson, The Interpretation and Application of Statutes, pp. 252-255.
[20]  Sutherland, supra, footnote 15, at p. 261, sec. 49.10.
[21]  Great A. & P. Tea Co. v. Industrial Comm., supra, footnote 2, at page 11.
[22]  Neese v. State Medical Society (1967), 36 Wis. 2d 497, 504, 153 N.W.2d 552, and cases there cited; Johnson v. Wisconsin Lumber & Supply Co. (1931), 203 Wis. 304, 310, 234 N.W. 506, 72 A. L. R. 1279.
[23]  1A Larson, Workmen's Compensation Law, ch. IX, sec. 49.11.

=== CASE 9738373 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:30.212928+00 ===

JUSTICE NICKELS delivered the opinion of the court: After a jury trial in Will County, defendant was convicted of three counts of first degree murder (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(a)(2)), one count of aggravated battery with a firearm (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 12 — 4.2), and one count of reckless conduct (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 12 — 5). Defendant waived his right to be sentenced by a jury, and the trial judge found defendant eligible for the death penalty (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(b)(3)). After considering factors in aggravation and in mitigation, the trial judge sentenced defendant to death (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(h)). Defendant appealed directly to this court. Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, § 4(b); III. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 9 — l(i); 134 Ill. 2d R. 603. While defendant’s appeal was pending in this court, the Supreme Court announced its decision in J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B., 511 U.S. 127, 128 L. Ed. 2d 89, 114 S. Ct. 1419 (1994). In J.E.B., the Court held that peremptory challenges cannot be used to discriminate on the basis of gender during jury selection. On appeal, defendant argued, inter alla, that the State had exercised its peremptory challenges in violation of J.E.B. This court found that defendant had established a prima facie case of gender discrimination (People v. Blackwell, 164 Ill. 2d 67 (1995)) and remanded the cause to the circuit court for a hearing to give the State the opportunity to present reasons for its use of peremptory challenges. After a hearing, the circuit court found that the explanations advanced by the State for its use of peremptory challenges were gender neutral. Defendant again appeals to this court, challenging the trial court’s ruling that the State’s explanations were gender neutral. FACTS Testimony at trial revealed the following. Defendant grew up in Joliet but later moved to Mississippi. On October 18, 1990, defendant was in Joliet visiting his friend Virgil Jones. On the evening of October 18, Jones suggested to defendant that they visit a friend of Jones who lived in a nearby apartment. Jones and defendant drove to this apartment, and defendant was introduced to four individuals, one of whom was Steve Scott. Defendant brought a semiautomatic handgun with him, concealed in the waistband of his trousers. One of defendant’s new acquaintances suggested that the group attend a party in another apartment in the building. At this time, unknown to defendant, four members of the Latin Kings gang were present at the party. Shortly after defendant and his acquaintances arrived at the small studio apartment, a fight started between Steve Scott and the Latin Kings. Defendant then pulled out his handgun and fired at Scott’s attackers. Three Latin Kings (Desiderio Martinez, Robert "Jimmy” Gonzalez, and John Garcia) were killed and another (David Lopez) was wounded. A fifth individual (Wendy Magee), who had accompanied defendant to the apartment and was not involved in the fight, was also wounded. The police later arrested defendant near Jones’ apartment. Eight witnesses, including defendant, testified regarding the specific details of the shooting. Several witnesses testified that the Latin Kings confronted Scott, "flashed” gang signs at him, and accused him of being a member of the "Two-Sixers” gang. The Latin Kings and the Two-Sixers were rival gangs in Joliet. At some point, one of the Latin Kings removed his own shirt, banged his own head against a wall, and said that he had just been released from prison. Scott told the Latin Kings that he was no longer a member of the Two-Sixers, but the Latin Kings blocked him into a corner of the apartment. Soon afterwards, the Latin Kings started pushing and grappling with Scott. After the fight started, Scott managed to push his way to the door of the apartment and leave. The fight lasted about 15 seconds. The last time Scott saw the four Latin Kings they were facing toward the door and away from defendant. Before the shooting, no one threatened defendant or "flashed” gang signs at him. Scott’s attackers did not draw any weapons, and Scott’s only injury was a bump behind his ear. Several witnesses stated that the fight did not seem serious. Scott, however, testified that he was afraid that one of his attackers had a concealed weapon and would use it against him. As Scott was leaving, defendant removed his weapon and fired one shot into the group that had attacked Scott. The four attackers started to turn towards defendant. Defendant then fired numerous shots at the victims. Defendant fired a total of 14 times in the span of 10 to 15 seconds at Scott’s attackers. Some witnesses testified that one of the victims was shot after he had fallen to the ground. Witnesses also testified that a second victim was shot in the back of the head as he was fleeing. A third victim was. shot five times, once when he was lying on the floor and kicking the door to the apartment as defendant was leaving. Defendant testified at trial. Defendant stated that he brought a handgun with him to Joliet because he knew of the gang violence there. Defendant testified that his brother was killed by the Latin Kings in 1986 and that he and his family were harassed by the Latin Kings after his brother’s shooting. For this reason, defendant and his family moved to Mississippi. With respect to the shooting, defendant essentially testified that he panicked. Defendant stated that, after firing an initial shot, he fired rapidly into the mass of individuals in front of him. Defendant testified that, after the fight started, he was afraid that he might have to fight next. In addition, defendant thought that the victims might have weapons with them. The police later recovered a knife from the pockets of one of the victims. Defendant also believed that Scott’s life was in danger when the Latin Kings were attacking Scott. According to defendant, he felt that the only way he could get out of the apartment was by shooting. After defendant was arrested, he gave the police a statement similar to this testimony. JURY SELECTION During jury selection, the State exercised 15 of 17 peremptory challenges to exclude women from the venire, four of whom were black. Defendant argued that the State was racially discriminating in violation of Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69, 106 S. Ct. 1712 (1986). At a Batson hearing during voir dire, Assistant State’s Attorney Thomas discussed the State’s general strategy. While seeking to show that the State was not discriminating on the basis of race, Thomas specifically noted that the State had used its 17 peremptory challenges to exclude 15 women from the jury. Thomas suggested that the State was excluding potential jurors on the basis of gender. Thomas then stated that he excluded the women because he was concerned about potential sympathy for defendant’s mother. Thomas later reiterated this concern when discussing specific reasons for dismissing one of the prospective jurors. The jury was ultimately composed of five women and seven men. As stated, after the United States Supreme Court announced its decision in the cause was remanded by this court to the circuit court for a hearing to determine if the State had discriminated on the basis of gender. At the remand hearing, the circuit court listened to the reasons offered by the State for each of its peremptory challenges. The State’s reasons were offered by former Assistant State’s Attorney Tomczak, who was one of the prosecutors at defendant’s trial. Tomczak was not the prosecutor who had made the statements at the original Batson hearing. The State did not offer any explanations from Thomas, the prosecutor who had made the statements regarding gender. Tomczak had possession of the notes taken during jury selection. He used these notes, as well as the transcript, to refresh his memory. Tomczak stated that this case was his first death penalty case and he therefore remembered it reasonably well. At the remand hearing, Tomczak introduced a second general strategy used by the State that was not presented at the original Batson hearing. He stated that, in his experience, jurors fall into two categories: "proactive” and "reactive.” Proactive jurors are leaders and good communicators. They are more aggressive. Tomczak stated that he did not want too many proactive jurors on the jury because that would increase the possibility of a hung jury. Tomczak then went into specific detail about the reasons for excluding each woman from the venire. After hearing the State’s reasons, the circuit court found that these reasons were gender neutral. ANALYSIS Defendant has raised several arguments on appeal. Based on our disposition of this case, we address only-three issues: (1) whether the State discriminated on the basis of gender during jury selection; (2) whether the evidence was sufficient to support the first degree murder convictions; and (3) whether the imposition of the death penalty was excessive in this case. For the reasons discussed below, we reverse and remand for a new trial. I In J.E.B., the Supreme Court held that the use of peremptory challenges to discriminate on the basis of gender violates the equal protection clause. The Court stated that gender discrimination perpetuates misguided stereotypes about the relative abilities of men and women. J.E.B., 511 U.S. at 131, 128 L. Ed. 2d at 98, 114 S. Ct. at 1422. The Court also emphasized that gender discrimination harms the litigants, the community, and prospective jurors who have been excluded. J.E.B., 511 U.S. at 140, 128 L. Ed. 2d at 104, 114 S. Ct. at 1427. In reaching its holding in J.E.B., the Court extended its decision in Batson, where the Court had prohibited racial discrimination during jury selection. Accordingly, we apply the Batson approach in the context of gender discrimination. First, a defendant must make a prima facie showing that the State has exercised peremptory challenges on the basis of gender. Second, if the trial court concludes that a defendant has made a prima facie showing, the burden shifts to the State to give gender-neutral explanations for dismissing the potential jurors. Finally, the trial court decides whether defendant has carried his burden of proving purposeful discrimination. See Hernandez v. New York, 500 U.S. 352, 359, 114 L. Ed. 2d 395, 405, 111 S. Ct. 1859, 1866 (1991). In this case, we must determine whether the State has rebutted the prima facie showing of gender discrimination. The State’s explanations for its peremptory chailenges must be " 'clear and reasonably specific’ ” and "related to the particular case to be tried.” Batson, 476 U.S. at 98 & n.20, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88 & n.20, 106 S. Ct. at 1724 & n.20, quoting Texas Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 258, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207, 218, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 1096 (1981). The State may not rebut a defendant’s prima facie showing by stating that it excused members of the venire in the belief that they would be sympathetic toward defendant because of their shared gender. See Batson, 476 U.S. at 97, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88, 106 S. Ct. at 1723. Exclusion of even one potential juror on the basis of gender requires reversal. See People v. Harris, 129 Ill. 2d 123, 175 (1989). We note, however, that each of the State’s explanations for its peremptory challenges need not justify a challenge for cause (Batson, 476 U.S. at 97, 90 L. Ed. 2d at 88, 106 S. Ct. at 1723), and will be considered gender neutral "[ujnless a discriminatory intent is inherent in the prosecutor’s explanation” (see Hernandez, 500 U.S. at 360, 114 L. Ed. 2d at 406, 111 S. Ct. at 1866). In addition, the prosecutors who exercised the peremptory challenges are not required to testify under oath and are not subject to cross-examination regarding the reasons for the peremptory challenges. People v. Young, 128 Ill. 2d 1, 24-25 (1989); see also Harris, 129 Ill. 2d at 174. The trial judge’s determination is a finding of fact which necessarily involves an evaluation of credibility and will not be reversed unless it is clearly erroneous. Hernandez, 500 U.S. at 369, 114 L. Ed. 2d at 412, 111 S. Ct. at 1871. Our review in this regard is deferential to the trial judge’s determination. We now consider the specific explanations given by the State. As part of his general strategy, Tomczak stated on remand, he wanted to limit the number of proactive jurors on the jury. He specifically applied this explanation to four of the women excused from the veñire. One of the women, Barbara Bonow, was a customer service representative. Tomczak stated that she was a good communicator. Louise Kujath was proactive because she answered questions aggressively. Susan Ward was a salesperson, Sunday school teacher, and a good communicator. She had been on a jury twice before. The fourth proactive individual was Irene Kasbee. At the remand hearing, Tomczak stated that Kasbee was a real estate broker and had held positions of authority. Tomczak also stated that Kasbee was a good communicator and had engaged in narratives when answering the trial judge’s questions during voir dire. These statements are incorrect. Kasbee was not employed as a real estate broker: she was a secretary for a life insurance company. In addition, the record does not show any other positions that she may have held in the past. The record also does not support Tomczak’s statement that Kasbee gave narrative answers to the trial judge’s questions during voir dire. We further note that the State’s professed proactive strategy, if applied consistently, is a gender-neutral strategy. In this case, however, this proactive explanation was applied only to women. Several of the seven male venire members who were accepted on the jury exhibited characteristics that would also seem proactive. Daniel Foote was a school administrator; Michael Musser was a project engineer; Thomas McQuillan was a marketing coordinator; Kevin Pullara was a department manager for a store and the coach of several sports teams; and Ronald Bass was an organization effectiveness specialist for Xerox. Many of these male jurors were in positions of authority or positions requiring good communication skills. In addition, no reference to this proactive strategy was contained in the prosecutors’ notes of jury selection. The State’s application of this reason to the male jurors and the stricken women appears inconsistent. We also note that four of the women stricken from the jury (Erika Baillie-David, Lavergne Rechkemer, Louise Kujath, and Helen Smit) were either victims of crime or had close acquaintances who were victims of crime. Tomczak stated that they may have been disgruntled with the system. Three of the seated male jurors (Daniel Foote, Stanley Rousonelos, and Ronald Bass) had also been crime victims or had close acquaintances who had been crime victims. The State’s application of this reason appears inconsistent. In its brief to this court, the State further indicated that seven female potential jurors (Marguerite Shambo, Barbara Bonow, Louise Kujath, Irene Kasbee, Susan Ward, Tonya Meza, and Ceretha Young) were challenged because they showed possible antagonism to the death penalty. The record shows that only Shambo and Young suggested that each might be concerned about imposing the death penalty. The remaining potential jurors made no such statements. Furthermore, Tomczak did not suggest, at the remand hearing, that he excused these remaining jurors because of antagonism to the death penalty. Although the State acknowledges that these remaining potential jurors never explicitly articulated a concern with the death penalty, it notes that Tomczak simply felt uncomfortable with them. This explanation is vague and appears pretextual. With respect to the last two women stricken (Tonya Meza and Renee Brigham), Tomczak stated that they were removed to assure the presence of a later, more desirable juror. Specifically, Tomczak based these strikes on the actions of defense counsel Jaquays: "Mr. Jaquays — I have a clear recollection of this — at some point in time had used his final challenge. It was, very frankly, Judge, surprising to me because I did not know the death penalty laws and the Batson laws as clearly as I should have at the time. I was surprised that Mr. Jaquays had used his last challenge. I clearly remember as he used his last challenge, there were, there was a juror who was third down the line that I had a very, very strong feeling about. I believe now, having reviewed the notes, his name was Foote. I — and this was my actions — I suggested to Mr. Thomas that we utilize our peremptory challenges to put that individual on the jury. And there was no other consideration as to the two final challenges that we used to get to Mr. Foote other than simply to get to him.” Tomczak later corrected himself, noting that the last potential juror, whom he wanted on the jury, was named Bass, not Foote. Tomczak stated that he based his strikes on defense counsel’s use of all peremptory challenges before reaching Tonya Meza and Renee Brigham. Indeed, Tomczak stated that "there was no other consideration as to the final two challenges.” This stated consideration, however, is false. The record shows that defendant had several peremptory challenges remaining when Meza and Brigham were considered. Defendant still had four peremptory challenges remaining when the State removed Brigham. Defendant had two peremptory challenges remaining when the State removed Meza. In fact, after the jury was selected, the trial judge stated, and Tomczak agreed, that defendant still had one peremptory challenge remaining, which would be applied to the selection of alternate jurors. Thus, this reason for eliminating Meza and Brigham is not supported by the record. In response to these concerns, the State correctly notes that peremptory challenges are often used to remove individuals from the venire based on a combination of characteristics. People v. Andrews, 155 Ill. 2d 286, 295 (1993); Young, 128 Ill. 2d at 23-24. Thus, the State may exclude a woman for one reason and, at the same time, accept a similarly situated man, based on other reasons. The man may have exhibited other gender-neutral traits that the State found desirable. See Andrews, 155 Ill. 2d at 295. As this court has stated, however, the repeated use of vague, mistaken, and inconsistent explanations suggests that the State’s reasons are pretextual. People v. Hope, 147 Ill. 2d 315 (1992). The State’s reasons appear pretextual. In addition to providing specific reasons for striking each individual juror, the State seeks to explain the statements made by former Assistant State’s Attorney Thomas at the original Batson hearing. At the hearing, Thomas discussed the State’s general strategy to show that it was not discriminating on the basis of race: "MR. THOMAS: Another thing that I would point out is as a matter of trial strategy. I deliberately did not ask the court to ask the jurors any questions about their feelings towards firearms, nor did I ásk the court to ask them any questions about their feelings towards gangs. I think that to do that unnecessarily highlights those two things, puts it in their mind that they ought to be concerned about gangs and guns. And I deliberately didn’t do that because I think I have a pretty good idea at this time having prosecúted cases in this county for 12 years and having lived here all my life, which areas are subject to gang infestation and which aren’t. I would also like to point out to the court that my counting of peremptory shows that the prosecution exercised two peremptories as to males and 15 as to females. * * * The prosecution, according to my count, exercised two peremptory challenges as to males and 15 as to females. Conversely, the defense exercised eight as to females and 12 as to males. Another concern that myself and Mr. Tomczak had coming into this case was the concern about the sympathy factor when the jurors are confronted with the testimony of the defendant’s mother. I would again point out to the court that based on my experience in trying jury cases, even in cases where I felt I had a lock solid case, I’ve seen juries stay out for hours and hours having felt sympathy for one or both parents of the defendant when they testitied. That kind of thing happens, and it’s something to take into consideration.” After stating this general strategy, Thomas discussed some specific reasons for eliminating certain potential jurors. When discussing reasons for dismissing Darlene McGee, Thomas stated: "And again, I pointed out to the court I felt that I had to consider in my jury selection anyone that might feel sympathetic towards the defendant’s mother.” The State has offered several explanations for these statements. On appeal, the State argues that Thomas was merely commenting on how the State’s challenges had disproportionately affected women. According to the State, Thomas was noting the disproportionate impact of the State’s strikes on women. In addition, at the remand hearing, the State asserted that Thomas’ comments applied only to Darlene McGee and were not intended to apply to all potential jurors. The record does not support these arguments. At the Batson hearing, Thomas was presenting the general strategy that he used throughout jury selection. Thomas first stated that he did not want to emphasize gangs and guns to the potential jurors. He then called the court’s attention to the disproportionate number of women struck by the State and his concern for sympathy to defendant’s mother. Thomas was suggesting that the State was eliminating potential jurors on the basis of gender, not race. At this stage, Thomas would have no reason to make any reference to the gender of those individuals removed by the State except to suggest gender as part of his nonracial basis for the challenges. Alternatively, at the remand hearing, the State argued that Thomas was concerned about possible sympathy for either of defendant’s parents, not just his mother. The State contended that it removed potential jurors based on their status as parents. Removal of individuals based on their status as parents would represent a gender-neutral strategy. See Robertson v. Commonwealth, 18 Va. App. 496, 445 S.E.2d 713 (1994) (finding no discrimination where the State used its peremptory challenges to eliminate those individuals who were not parents). We reject this argument. Nothing in the record suggests that the State consistently struck men and women based on their status as parents. In fact, the record shows otherwise. Thomas specifically applied his sympathy concern to Darlene McGee, even though McGee did not indicate that she had any children. Accordingly, Thomas’ statements suggest that he was striking McGee because she and defendant’s mother were both women. Given this fact, Thomas’ statements cannot be construed as a gender-neutral strategy of striking potential jurors based on their status as parents. In this respect, this case is similar to J.E.B. In J.E.B., the underlying action was a paternity action. The State used all of its peremptory challenges to strike men from the jury, arguing that men might feel sympathy for the purported father involved in the paternity action. The Court rejected the argument " 'that men otherwise totally qualified to serve upon a jury might be more sympathetic and receptive to the arguments of a man alleged in a paternity action to be the father of an out-of-wedlock child, while women equally qualified to serve upon a jury might be more sympathetic and receptive to the arguments of the complaining witness who bore the child.’ [Citation.]” J.E.B., 511 U.S. at 137-38, 128 L. Ed. 2d at 102, 114 S. Ct. at 1426. In this case, Thomas’ statements with respect to Darlene McGee imply that she was removed because she might feel sympathy due to her shared gender with defendant’s mother. The State has offered no plausible explanation for Thomas’ statements. See Cleveland v. State, 318 Ark. 738, 888 S.W.2d 629 (1994) (finding that the prosecution had failed to rebut the prima facie showing of purposeful discrimination where the prosecution used 90% of its peremptory challenges to remove women and where the prosecution explained its challenges by suggesting that the defendant was removing men). The prosecutor’s own statements must be considered the best indicator of intent. The fact that several women ultimately served on the jury is not determinative of this intent. See Abshire v. State, 642 So. 2d 542 (Fla. 1994) (finding that the prosecutor’s statements showed that he was purposefully discriminating against women even though several women served as jurors). We find the trial judge’s determination to be clearly erroneous based on two factors: the State’s reasons given at the remand hearing and Thomas’ statements at the original Batson hearing. First, the State’s reasons for using 15 of 17 peremptory challenges to remove women were repeatedly vague, mistaken, and inconsistent. They are pretextual. People v. McDonald, 125 Ill. 2d 182, 198-201 (1988); People v. Hope, 147 Ill. 2d 315, 321-22 (1992). Second, and more significant, one of the prosecutors himself made statements indicating that potential jurors were excluded on the basis of gender and the State has failed to explain these statements in a gender-neutral manner. Accordingly, given these factors, we must reverse defendant’s convictions. McDonald, 125 Ill. 2d at 200-01 Defendant also argues that his first degree murder convictions should be reduced to second degree murder. Essentially, defendant argues that the evidence presented at trial was sufficient to support second degree murder convictions only, not first degree. If defendant is correct, the State cannot seek first degree murder convictions on retrial because of principles of double jeopardy. See Burks v. United States, 437 U.S. 1, 11, 57 L. Ed. 2d 1, 9, 98 S. Ct. 2141, 2147 (1978); McDonald, 125 Ill. 2d at 201; People v. Taylor, 76 Ill. 2d 289, 309 (1979). The second degree murder statute provides: "(a) A person commits the offense of second degree murder when he commits the offense of first degree murder *** and either of the following mitigating factors are present: (1) At the time of the killing he is acting under a sudden and intense passion resulting from serious provocation by the individual killed or another whom the offender endeavors to kill ***; or (2) At the time of the killing he believes the circumstances to be such that, if they existed, would justify or exonerate the killing under the principles stated in Article 7 of this Code [self-defense or defense of others], but his belief is unreasonable.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 9 — 2(a). Defendant concedes that the State established the elements needed to prove first degree murder. Under the statute, defendant must prove one of the two mitigating factors by a preponderance of the evidence to reduce the offenses to second degree murder. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 9 — 2(c); see also People v. Jeffries, 164 Ill. 2d 104 (1995). Defendant argues that he proved both mitigating factors. We note that defendant’s challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence is unusual. Ordinarily, a defendant challenges the sufficiency of the evidence presented by the State. In that instance, the standard of review is " 'whether, after viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt.’ ” (Emphasis in original.) People v. Collins, 106 Ill. 2d 237, 261 (1985), quoting Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 319, 61 L. Ed. 2d 560, 573, 99 S. Ct. 2781, 2789 (1979); see also People v. Ward, 154 Ill. 2d 272, 314 (1992). In this instance, however, defendant argues that he presented sufficient evidence to prove one of the mitigating factors. In this context, we consider whether, after viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have found that the mitigating factors were not present. Defendant first argues that he proved that his actions resulted from serious provocation by the Latin Kings gang members. To constitute serious provocation, however, a defendant must show that the provocation fits within certain recognized categories. A defendant may be seriously provoked by "substantial physical injury or substantial physical assault, mutual quarrel or combat, illegal arrest, and adultery with the offender’s spouse.” People v. Garcia, 165 Ill. 2d 409, 429 (1995). None of these categories apply here. Defendant argues that the actions of the Latin Kings constituted mutual combat. Mere words and gestures, however, are not enough to constitute serious provocation. Garcia, 165 Ill. 2d at 429-30; People v. Tenner, 157 Ill. 2d 341, 371-72 (1993). In this case, none of the conduct of the Latin Kings was directed at defendant before the shooting. Even if words or gestures were sufficient to constitute serious provocation, the testimony shows that none of the victims "flashed” gang signs at defendant, threatened defendant, or talked to defendant. .Defendant next argues that the shooting resulted from an unreasonable belief in the need for self-defense or defense of others. Defendant testified that he became fearful when the Latin Kings started fighting with Scott because he thought this was an altercation between rival gangs. In addition, defendant stated that he had first hand knowledge of the Latin Kings’ predisposition for violence because his brother had been killed by this gang. See People v. Reeves, 47 Ill. App. 3d 406, 411-12 (1977) (the defendant’s knowledge of deceased’s ability to inflict great bodily harm based on past experience supported claim of self-defense). Defendant testified that the shooting occurred over a short time interval, which was not enough time for him to realize that more shooting was unnecessary. See, e.g., People v. Shipp, 52 Ill. App. 3d 470, 476-77 (1977) (involving claim of self-defense). We reject this argument. Although defendant presented some evidence that would support an unreasonable belief in self-defense or defense of others, other evidence presented at trial does not support this mitigating factor. The evidence showed that defendant went to a party carrying a concealed and loaded semiautomatic handgun. The fight between Scott and the victims was a fist fight and did not involve weapons. Scott was attacked for 15 seconds and was making his way to the door to escape when the shooting started. The only injury sustained by Scott was a bump behind his ear. Several witnesses testified that the fight between Scott and the Latin Kings was not serious. Defendant fired his weapon 14 times as Scott was escaping, and during a time when the victims were facing away from defendant. No threats or hostile gestures had been made towards defendant. In addition, one of the victims was shot in the back of the head as that individual was running away from defendant. The State also presented evidence that two of the victims were shot again after they fell to the floor. In reaching this conclusion, we do not mean to suggest that we have made a finding regarding defendant’s guilt that would be binding on retrial. McDonald, 125 Ill. 2d at 202. We conclude, for double jeopardy purposes only, that the evidence presented at the first trial was sufficient to support first degree, murder convictions. The State may therefore pursue first degree murder charges on retrial. III Defendant further argues that the sentence of death in this case was excessive. We consider defendant’s argument because of the possibility of double jeopardy. Although double jeopardy ordinarily does not apply to sentencing proceedings, the Supreme Court has held that principles of double jeopardy do extend to capital sentencing proceedings. Bullington v. Missouri, 451 U.S. 430, 68 L. Ed. 2d 270, 101 S. Ct. 1852 (1981). This court has stated that our capital sentencing proceeding is basically " ’a trial on the issue of punishment’ ” and implicates double jeopardy concerns. People v. Davis, 112 Ill. 2d 78, 82 (1986), quoting Bullington, 451 U.S. at 438, 68 L. Ed. 2d at 279, 101 S. Ct. at 1858; see also People v. Levin, 157 Ill. 2d 138 (1993); People v. Page, 155 Ill. 2d 232 (1993). The State may not seek the death penalty again at retrial if the sentencer or the reviewing court determines that death has not been established as the appropriate punishment at the first trial. Poland v. Arizona, 476 U.S. 147, 154-55, 90 L. Ed. 2d 123, 131-32, 106 S. Ct. 1749, 1755 (1986); Bullington, 451 U.S. at 443, 68 L. Ed. 2d at 282, 101 S. Ct. at 1860. In Illinois, capital sentencing consists of two stages: an eligibility phase and an aggravation/mitigation phase. Defendant’s challenge is directed only to the second phase. In this case, the trial judge evaluated aggravating and mitigating factors at the second phase and determined that there were no mitigating factors “sufficient to preclude the imposition of the death sentence.” See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(h). Generally, this court will not interfere with a trial court’s determination of sentence unless the trial court has abused its discretion. See, e.g., People v. Gonzalez, 151 Ill. 2d 79, 89 (1992); People v. Illgen, 145 Ill. 2d 353, 379 (1991). This court, however, has noted that “[t]here is a qualitative difference between death and imprisonment as penalties.” People v. Gleckler, 82 Ill. 2d 145, 161 (1980). In reviewing the death penalty, we consider the "character and record of the individual offender and the circumstances of the particular offense.” Woodson v. North Carolina, 428 U.S. 280, 304, 49 L. Ed. 2d 944, 961, 96 S. Ct. 2978, 2991 (1976). We therefore give less deference to the trial court here than we would in other sentencing matters. During sentencing, the State relied on the evidence presented at trial for its factors in aggravation. Defendant then presented the live testimony of nine mitigation witnesses. Friends and relatives testified that defendant had provided emotional and economic support for his family throughout his life. In addition, they stated that he was an attentive and responsible parent to his daughter. Three prison officials testified favorably about defendant’s conduct in prison. A clinical psychologist also testified that defendant has an anxiety disorder and is prone to anxiety attacks. One of the mitigation witnesses was David Randall, a mitigation specialist who prepared a sentencing memorandum. According to Randall, defendant had a difficult background because of his parents’ mixed-race marriage, his father’s alcoholism, the family’s financial troubles, and the near-in-time deaths of his father, brother, and grandmother. Despite these troubles, defendant consistently avoided becoming involved with gangs when growing up in Joliet. Supervisors from previous jobs described defendant as reliable and hard working. Defendant was also involved in ROTC and served in the Army Reserve for two years. Defendant completed basic training and was honorably discharged. Although defendant left high school before graduation, he later obtained his GED. Defendant notes that, at the time of the shooting, he had no criminal record and no past history of violence. The lack of a significant criminal history is a statutory mitigating factor. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(c)(1). Defendant also argues that the circumstances surrounding his conduct were threatening and that he felt panicked in the apartment. Defendant was particularly afraid of the Latin Kings because of his brother’s murder. Although these circumstances may not have been sufficient to reduce defendant’s convictions for first degree murder, defendant argues that these circumstances should have been taken into account at sentencing. Defendant notes that extreme mental or emotional disturbance is another statutory mitigating factor. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1989, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(c)(2). We consider previous cases where this court has found a death sentence to be excessive. In People v. Carlson, 79 Ill. 2d 564 (1980), the defendant murdered his former wife and a police officer. The defendant and his wife had been married for 19 years and had divorced three months before the murders. The defendant hoped to reconcile with his former wife but learned that his former wife had a boyfriend. The defendant then shot his former wife 10 times and used gasoline to set the house on fire. When police tried to arrest him, the defendant shot and killed one of the officers. In reducing the defendant’s sentence to natural life imprisonment, this court emphasized that the defendant had no prior criminal record, that this was an isolated incident, and that the defendant had suffered severe physical and emotional problems before the shootings. In People v. Buggs, 112 Ill. 2d 284 (1986), the defendant set fire to his home after an argument with his wife. The defendant’s wife told him that she had been unfaithful during the marriage and that he was not the father of two of "their” children. The defendant then poured gasoline on his wife and throughout the home. The defendant’s wife and one of the children died during the ensuing fire. In reducing the sentence, this court noted that the defendant had been drinking heavily during the month of the incident and had a history of drinking problems, including blackouts. The defendant had also served in the military for 21 years. The defendant had no history of serious criminal activity, and this event was an isolated incident. A psychiatrist for the defense testified that the defendant suffered from isolated explosive disorder at the time of the offenses. In People v. Johnson, 128 Ill. 2d 253 (1989), the defendant was responsible for killing one individual and seriously wounding two others. The defendant had been fired from his job but was informed that he had a final paycheck. The defendant returned to his former work place but was told that there was no final paycheck for him. The defendant shot his former supervisor twice. The supervisor had earlier fired him. The defendant also shot one of his former co-workers twice, and this coworker later died. The defendant then had a third victim lie on the floor, shot him twice, and stabbed him. The defendant also took some money from the victims. This court reduced the defendant’s sentence, noting that the defendant had no significant criminal history. The defendant had no history of violence and had not been involved with gangs. In addition, the evidence showed that defendant suffered severe emotional distress from the loss of his job and failure to receive a promised check. We find that the mitigating factors in this case are comparable to those emphasized in the cases cited by defendant. At sentencing, defendant presented substantial mitigating evidence. As in the cases discussed above, defendant had no criminal record, and this event was an isolated incident. The testimony presented at trial and sentencing showed that defendant had not been involved with gangs and had no history of prior violence. In addition, the testimony does not suggest that the shooting was planned in any way. Defendant returned to Joliet for a brief visit and had not planned to attend the apartment party. Cf. People v. Gosier, 145 Ill. 2d 127 (1991) (upholding death sentence even though the defendant did not have a criminal record, where the evidence showed that the defendant planned his crimes). Defendant was present in an apartment when a fight started involving gang members. Defendant did not know that gang members would be present in the apartment. While we do not minimize the seriousness of defendant’s actions, "defendant has led a relatively blameless life except for this one explosive episode.” Johnson, 128 Ill. 2d at 282. The legislature did not intend that every defendant who qualifies for the death penalty receive the death sentence. Johnson, 128 Ill. 2d at 277. After reviewing the record, we conclude that the death sentence was excessive in this case. CONCLUSION We find that the State has failed to rebut the prima facie showing of gender discrimination. Accordingly, we must remand this matter for a new trial. In addition, we find that the sentence of death in this case was excessive. Based on double jeopardy, the State may not pursue the death penalty at retrial. We recognize that defendant has raised other issues supporting a new trial. Because we have determined that defendant is entitled to a new trial in any event, we do not address them. For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court is reversed and the cause is remanded for a new trial. Judgment reversed; cause remanded.

=== CASE 9738374 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:30.21816+00 ===

JUSTICE MILLER, dissenting: I continue to believe that the defendant has waived any contention that the jury in the present case was selected in violation of the rule announced in J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B., 511 U.S. 127, 128 L. Ed. 2d 89, 114 S. Ct. 1419 (1994). In a prior opinion, a majority of this court determined that the defendant had established a prima facie case of sex discrimination in the selection of Ms jury, and the court remanded the cause so that the prosecution would have the opportunity to advance neutral reasons for its challenges to the jurors in question. People v. Blackwell, 164 Ill. 2d 67 (1995). As I noted at that time, the majority was ignoring the rule we have previously enforced requiring that a defendant make a proper, timely objection to the jury selection procedures employed at trial. Until the decision in this case, our decisions had clearly and consistently held that a defendant’s failure to raise a Baison-type claim (Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69, 106 S. Ct. 1712 (1986)) in the trial court would result in the waiver of that contention. People v. Fair, 159 Ill. 2d 51, 71 (1994); People v. Evans, 125 Ill. 2d 50, 61-62 (1988). People v. Pecor, 153 Ill. 2d 109 (1992), is instructive. The defendant in that case argued at trial that the jury was being selected in violation of Batson. The trial judge rejected the defendant’s contention, believing that the defendant, who was white, lacked standing to challenge the exclusion of black members of the venire. While the defendant’s appeal was pending, the United States Supreme Court decided Powers v. Ohio, 499 U.S. 400, 113 L. Ed. 2d 411, 111 S. Ct. 1364 (1991), which eliminated any requirement that the defendant and the excluded venire members be of the same racial group. From a review of the record, the Pecor court concluded that the defendant had adequately preserved an objection to the prosecution’s alleged exclusion of black members of the venire. Responding to the State’s concern that a decision in favor of the defendant in that case would mean that any defendant would be allowed to raise a similar challenge to the selection of his jury, no matter how untimely the objection, this court counseled that "defendants who made no objection whatsoever cannot now simply create claims and go back to the trial court and attempt to prove a prima facie case of discrimination.” Pecor, 153 Ill. 2d at 126. Despite our admonition in Pecor, that is exactly what the present defendant has been allowed to do. At trial in the present case, the defendant did not object to the prosecutor’s exercise of peremptory challenges against female members of the venire. The only Batson-type claim raised by the defense involved the State’s alleged exclusion of several black potential jurors on the basis of race. Nonetheless, the majority has resolved to address the merits of the defendant’s belated contention that the prosecution improperly challenged female members of the venire. The majority’s decision to entertain the defendant’s tardy claim placed the State in the unenviable position of attempting to reconstruct, long after the fact, the particular reasons that led the prosecution team to prefer one prospective juror over another. The majority notes a number of discrepancies between the State’s explanations for its exclusion of certain jurors and the record from the original proceedings; the variances exemplify the difficulties in determining, at this late date, the reasons that motivated the prosecution’s exercise of its peremptory challenges when the strikes are attacked on a ground wholly different from the one asserted by the defendant at trial. Because I believe that the defendant has waived any challenge to the State’s alleged exclusion of women from the jury, I would consider in this appeal the defendant’s remaining allegations of error in the guilt-innocence phase of the proceedings. CHIEF JUSTICE BILANDIC joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 9738375 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:33.595615+00 ===

JUSTICE HARRISON delivered the opinion of the court: This case arises out of an automobile collision that took place on Route 12 and the Lake Vista Terrace intersection in Fox Lake, Illinois, on November 28, 1990, at approximately 2:25 p.m. Joseph and Howard Hansen, brothers and high school students, died when the red Ford'Escort Joseph was driving was struck by a cement truck. Joanne Watkins, mother and as special administrator of the estates of Joseph and Howard Hansen, brought a wrongful death action naming the following defendants: Neil Schmitt, driver of the cement truck; Meyer Material Company, owner of the cement truck; Sharon Bracher, driver of a school bus; and Fox Lake School District No. 114, owner of the school bus. Watkins alleged that the negligence of defendants caused the injuries and deaths of her sons. The trial court barred a deputy sheriff from testifying as plaintiffs accident reconstruction expert at trial. The deputy sheriff calculated the speed of defendant Meyer’s cement truck just prior to the accident and concluded that Schmitt was speeding. After this testimony was barred, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of all defendants in this case. The appellate court affirmed the circuit court’s judgment. No. 2 — 93—1300 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23). We allowed plaintiff’s petition for leave to appeal. 145 Ill. 2d R. 315. Plaintiff now raises three issues for our review: (1) whether the deputy sheriff’s accident reconstruction testimony as to speed should be admissible; (2) whether the evidence of skid marks and questions concerning Schmitt’s exercise of due care raised genuine issues of material fact precluding summary judgment in favor of Schmitt and Meyer Material; and (3) whether evidence of the school bus stopping for several minutes in the right-hand lane of Route 12, blocking the view of other traffic, raised factual questions as to the bus driver’s negligence. For the reasons which follow, we hold that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in barring Officer Jansky from giving expert reconstruction testimony at trial, but reverse the trial court’s decision granting summary judgment in favor of defendants. The facts of this case reveal that Joseph and Howard Hansen died when a Meyer Material Company cement truck struck the red Ford Escort Joseph was driving. The accident took place at the intersection of Route 12 and Lake Vista Terrace Road. Route 12 runs north-south and Lake Vista Terrace Road runs east-west. On the day in question, the Meyer cement truck, driven by Schmitt, traveled north in the left-hand lane of Route 12. The Fox Lake school bus, driven by Bracher, also traveled north, but in the right-hand lane of Route 12. Immediately before the accident, the school bus was making or was soon to make a right-hand turn from Route 12 onto Lake Vista Terrace Road. The school bus was required to stop at railroad tracks located approximately 30 feet east of Route 12 at the intersection in question. The railroad tracks ran parallel to Route 12 and crossed Lake Vista Terrace Road very close to the intersection. Thus, when Bracher stopped at the tracks, the rear end of the bus remained in the right-hand lane of Route 12, either straight or at an angle. The cars traveling north in the right-hand lane of Route 12 were stopped behind the school bus for some time. There was testimony that this school bus was stopped, blocking the right-hand lane of Route 12, for at least two minutes. During these events, Joseph and Howard Hansen had been traveling westbound on Lake Vista Terrace Road. Both Bracher and Ronald McGill, a student monitor on the bus, noticed the red Escort traveling westbound and heading toward the Route 12 intersection. McGill knew the Hansen brothers from high school and noted that Joe Hansen’s speed seemed appropriate and normal. McGill further testified that he observed Joe drive over the railroad tracks, come to a complete stop at the Lake Vista Terrace stop sign, and then begin "inching out” into Route 12. When the Escort inched out into the intersection and passed the bus, it was struck by the Meyer Material cement truck. The cement truck, driven by Schmitt, was uninhibited by a stop sign and clearly had the right-of-way. Schmitt also gave his account of the events leading up to the accident. Originally, Schmitt was in the right-hand lane of Route 12 and all the other traffic merged into this lane because of road construction. Schmitt testified that next, all traffic had to merge into the left-hand lane until' eventually, further down Route 12, both lanes were open. Schmitt noted that at this point, the rest of the traffic went back into the right lane, but he stayed in the left. Just before the Lake Vista Terrace Road intersection, Schmitt saw the bus stopped in the right-hand lane with its stop arm out and the rear lights flashing a couple of blocks ahead of him. After the bus retracted its stop arm, turned off its lights, and moved toward Lake Vista Terrace Road, Schmitt accelerated and approached the bus. Schmitt testified that the first time he saw the red Escort, the bus was in the process of making a right-hand turn and was stopped right before the railroad tracks. Schmitt further stated that immediately prior to the accident, the rear of the bus was still in the right-hand lane of Route 12, blocking virtually all of that lane. Schmitt testified that he had not seen the red Escort coming down Lake Vista Terrace. He recalled that as he came around the bus, he only saw the red Escort a second before impact. Schmitt described the speed of the Escort just prior to impact as “awful fast” and claimed that the Escort appeared to be accelerating. Schmitt stated that at this time, he grabbed the _ steering wheel to brace himself and applied the brakes with all of his weight, locking them up and sending the truck into a skid. The bumper of the cement truck struck the red Escort just behind the left front wheel on the driver’s side at a point in line with the westbound lane of Lake Vista Terrace Road. After striking the Escort, Schmitt’s cement truck skidded north of the intersection and spun to a rest in the middle of the southbound turning lane. Schmitt claimed that just prior to the accident, his speed only reached between 20 and 30 miles per hour due to the traffic and road construction on Route 12. Witnesses are not in agreement as to the exact position of the bus when it stopped at the intersection and the length of time which the bus was stopped. Bracher, the school bus driver, recalled that prior to executing the turn onto Lake Vista Terrace, she did not stop the school bus solely on Route 12. McGill, the student monitor on the bus, agreed that Bracher did not stop on Route 12, but merely slowed down to make the turn. Bracher further testified that she only turned the caution lights on a? she made the turn onto Lake Vista Terrace. McGill corroborated her testimony that the red flashing lights and stop arm were never activated. Bracher claimed that she did not come to a stop until she turned the corner onto Lake Vista Terrace. She then made the required stop at the railroad tracks, opened the bus door, looked down the tracks, closed the door, turned off the caution lights, and then proceeded down Lake Vista Terrace. Bracher acknowledged that when she stopped the bus at the railroad tracks, the rear and side of the bus were protruding out into Route 12. McGill agreed with this testimony and recalled that three-quarters of the bus was blocking Route 12 when it stopped at the railroad tracks in question. Both Bracher and McGill stated that the bus was only stopped long enough for Bracher to open the bus door and look down the tracks to make sure that no trains were coming.McGill estimated that the stop lasted approximately a minute or two. The bus then proceeded down Lake Vista Terrace and no one on the bus heard or saw the collision. In contrast, another witness, Donald Rankin, who was driving behind the school bus in a one-ton pickup truck, agreed with Schmitt that at some point the bus was stopped solely on Route 12, prior to turning onto Lake Vista Terrace Road. He remembered the bus stopping parallel with the other lane of Route 12, with its nose just inside Lake Vista Terrace, and with its stop arm out and red lights flashing. Rankin further recalled that after some time, the school bus retracted its stop arm and turned off the lights. However, according to Rankin, after the bus retracted its stop arm and turned off its lights, it still remained stopped in the right-hand lane for well over a minute and possibly up to two minutes or longer. Rankin commented that it seemed like an abnormally long period of time for a school bus to be stopped with its lights off before it eventually started to move. He estimated that, in total, the school bus was stopped blocking Route 12 for at least two minutes. Rankin stated that, clearly, the school bus would have blocked the vision of both the driver of the cement truck and the driver of the Escort. Rankin also observed the cement truck and Escort prior to the accident and saw the impact take place. He stated that when he was stopped behind the school bus originally, he checked his rearview mirror and saw the cement truck about two-tenths of a mile down the road in the left-hand lane. Rankin recalled that after the school bus had taken down its stop arm and turned off its lights, the cement truck approached and eventually passed his vehicle. Although there are varying reports as to which lights flashed and whether the stop arm was activated, no claim is made by anyone that Schmitt illegally passed the bus when the stop arm was extended or flashing lights showed. Rankin further testified that he first spotted the red Escort going west on Lake Vista Terrace. He claimed that the red Escort was moving fast. He noted that as the Escort pulled into the intersection, he only saw a blur of red in front of the school bus just prior to the impact. Rankin also questioned whether the Escort actually stopped at the stop sign prior to entering the intersection of Route 12 and Lake Vista Terrace Road. However, he acknowledged that he could not actually see whether the Escort stopped because his view of the stop sign was blocked by the school bus. In contrast, as stated, McGill, the school bus monitor, had a clear view of the Escort at the stop sign. McGill testified that he was positive the Hansen vehicle came to a complete stop and then began "inching” out into the intersection. Evidence was also presented regarding the speed of the Meyer cement truck. As stated, Schmitt testified that when both lanes of Route 12 opened up, he remained in the left lane and the rest of the traffic moved over to the right. He recalled that he was driving between 20 and 30 miles per hour, and that he accelerated when he saw the lights quit flashing and the stop arm come in on the school bus. Schmitt passed the bus and then slammed on his brakes a second before impact. Rankin also estimated that the speed of the Meyer cement truck was between 20 and 30 miles per hour. He further stated that the cement truck had no opportunity to avoid the collision. Another eyewitness, Walter Simpson, was driving directly behind the Meyer cement truck and witnessed the collision. Simpson estimated that he was driving approximately 50 feet or three or four car lengths behind the cement truck prior to impact. He testified that just prior to the collision he was traveling between 30 and 35 miles per hour and thought that he was moving about the same speed as the cement truck. Simpson based this estimate on the fact that the cement truck was not leaving him far behind and he was not catching up close to the truck. Thus, two eyewitnesses and the driver of the cement truck testified that the truck was traveling between 20 and 35 miles per hour. In contrast to this eyewitness testimony, the record in this case also includes the filed deposition of Lake County Deputy Sheriff John Jansky. Officer Jansky calculated that the cement truck was speeding at the time of the accident. Officer Jansky testified that prior to investigating the accident in question, he had taken week-long courses in on-the-scene accident investigation and vehicular dynamics at the Northwestern Traffic Institute. He further stated that since 1984, he has performed various calculations at accident scenes and testified in several criminal cases. However, Officer Jan-sky has never taken the test for state certification in accident reconstruction. Plaintiff argues that Officer Jan-sky’s testimony as to the speed of the cement truck should be admissible as expert testimony by an accident reconstructionist. Officer Jansky arrived on the scene approximately 30 minutes after the accident took place. First, he noted that Route 12 ordinarily had a 45-mile-per-hour speed limit in the area of the accident. However, on the day of the accident, 35 miles per hour was the last posted speed limit due to repair and reconstruction work at a bridge south of the Lake Vista Terrace intersection. Officer Jansky measured the skid marks left by the cement truck at the time the skid began in order to calculate the speed of the truck. He testified that the skid marks left by the Meyer truck indicated that the speed of the truck when the skid began was a minimum of 52.8 miles per hour, and 36 miles per hour at the time of impact with the Hansen vehicle. According to Officer Jansky, the rear wheels of the cement truck left skid marks a total distance of 124 feet, 59 feet before the collision and 65 feet after the collision. Officer Jansky estimated that at the time Schmitt slammed on his brakes, throwing the truck into a skid, the front bumper of the Meyer truck was 29 to 34 feet (or possibly 5 feet less) from the point of impact with the red Escort. He also stated that the truck’s tires had the proper depth of tread and the brakes worked properly. In his traffic accident report, Officer Jansky concluded that the cause of this accident was a combination of the excessive speed of the Meyer cement truck, the failure of the red Escort to remain stopped at the stop sign until the intersection was clear, and obstruction of vision caused by the school bus. As stated, the trial court barred Officer Jansky from giving expert reconstruction testimony as to the speed of the Meyer cement truck. Ultimately, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of all defendants, and the appellate court affirmed. The appellate court reasoned that expert reconstruction testimony is only admissible when it is necessary to rely on knowledge and the application of scientific principles beyond the ken of the average juror. The court held that jurors could draw their own conclusions as to the speed of the cement truck based on eyewitness testimony from Rankin, Simpson, and Schmitt. The court further reasoned that without Officer Jansky’s speed calculations, there were no factual questions regarding Schmitt’s speed, and Schmitt and Meyer Material were entitled to summary judgment. The purpose of summary judgment is not to try a question of fact, but to determine whether any genuine issues of triable fact exist. Gilbert v. Sycamore Municipal Hospital, 156 Ill. 2d 511, 517 (1993). A motion for summary judgment should be granted only when "the pleadings, depositions, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.” 735 ILCS 5/2 — 1005(c) (West 1994). It is well established that in determining whether a genuine issue of material fact exists, a court must construe the pleadings, depositions, admissions and affidavits strictly against the movant and liberally in favor of the opponent. Purtill v. Hess, 111 Ill. 2d 229, 240 (1986). In addition, any evidence which would be inadmissible at trial cannot be considered by the court in support of or opposition to a motion for summary judgment. See Wiszowaty v. Baumgard, 257 Ill. App. 3d 812, 819 (1994). We first address the issue of whether the trial court erred in barring Officer Jansky from testifying as plaintiff’s accident reconstruction expert at trial. Plaintiff argues that the trial court improperly barred Jansky’s expert testimony and that his testimony raised a genuine issue of material fact as to Schmitt’s speed. Plaintiff urges this court to follow the trend among appellate districts which recognizes eyewitness testimony as just one factor in the determination of whether accident reconstruction testimony should be admitted. See Augenstein v. Pulley, 191 Ill. App. 3d 664, 681 (1989). Plaintiff further argues that several appellate cases measure the admissibility of expert testimony by the standard of whether the evidence will aid the jurors’ understanding of the facts. See Augenstein, 191 Ill. App. 3d at 680-81; Ketchum v. Dura-Bond Concrete, Inc., 179 Ill. App. 3d 820, 831 (1989). Plaintiff contends that Officer Jansky’s calculations of speed would aid a jury’s understanding of what factors contributed to the accident in this case. Plaintiff further claims that the notion that an eyewitness can estimate speed more accurately than an accident reconstruction expert is a dubious one, especially in light of the "smooth power of modern automobiles.” Thus, plaintiff concludes that under this modern trend, Officer Jansky’s calculations of speed were admissible. In response, defendants argue that estimates of automobile speed have traditionally been considered a matter of common observation rather than expert opinion. Defendants note that this court addressed the admissibility of an accident reconstructionist’s speed calculations in Peterson v. Lou Bachrodt Chevrolet Co., 76 Ill. 2d 353, 359 (1979), and held that "the speed of an automobile is not a matter beyond the ken of the average juror.” Peterson, 76 Ill. 2d at 359. Defendants further point out that the court in Peterson reasoned that jurors can draw their own conclusions on the basis of ■eyewitness testimony as to speed and, thus, testimony of speed calculations should not be admitted. Peterson, 76 Ill. 2d at 359. This court very recently addressed issues concerning expert reconstruction testimony and whether such testimony may be admitted when there is also eyewitness testimony in Zavala v. Powermatic, Inc., 167 Ill. 2d 542, 546 (1995). In Zavala, plaintiff, the only eyewitness, lost two fingers in a drill press accident and claimed that her fingers were cut and not pulled off. Defendant’s reconstruction expert, Dr. Caulfield, testified that the only way the accident could have occurred was if the glove plaintiff wore became caught up in the reamer, a piece of equipment located in the drill press which plaintiff operated. Zavala, 167 Ill. 2d at 543-44. Thus, Dr. Caulfield concluded that plaintiff’s fingers were pulled, and not cut, because the reamer "presented only an entanglement, not a cutting, hazard.” Zavala, 167 Ill. 2d at 544. In determining whether the trial court properly admitted Dr. Caulfield’s expert reconstruction testimony, this court held that "expert reconstruction testimony is proper, even where there is an eyewitness, if what the expert offers is 'knowledge and application of principles of science beyond the ken of the average juror.’ ” Zavala, 167 Ill. 2d at 546, quoting Plank v. Holman, 46 Ill. 2d 465, 471 (1970). This court went on to explain that whether to admit expert reconstruction testimony depends upon the "usual concerns of whether expert opinion testimony is appropriate generally.” Zavala, 167 Ill. 2d at 546. In concluding that Dr. Caulfield’s testimony was proper, this court reasoned that his opinion as to how the accident happened focused on human factors and the reamer’s operation, and such information was clearly beyond the ken of the average juror. Zavala, 167 Ill. 2d at 546. We recognize that under our reasoning in Zavala, the existence of eyewitness testimony is not the conclusive factor in determining whether accident reconstruction testimony is admissible. Therefore, in the present case, the fact that there were three eyewitnesses who could testify as to the speed of the cement truck does not amount to an absolute bar to expert reconstruction testimony. Instead, we look at whether in addition to eyewitness testimony, expert reconstruction testimony would be needed to explain scientific principles to a jury and enable it to make factual determinations. The expert testimony at issue in this case is distinguishable from the testimony admitted in Zavala. The expert in Zavala was able to determine that because a reamer spins at a high velocity and has no cutting surface it could not cut but could only pull off a user’s fingers. Unlike estimating the speed, of a car, this is not the type of knowledge that a lay person could obtain after watching a drill press in operation. This type of analysis requires knowledge of the mechanics of a reamer and an application of scientific principles to determine that it could only cause certain types of injuries to its users. In contrast, any lay person with a reasonable opportunity to observe and ordinary experience with moving vehicles can estimate the speed of a car. Unlike Zavala, in this case a jury would be presented with sufficient evidence, through eyewitness testimony, to make its own factual determinations. Furthermore, as stated by defendants, when this court was previously faced with the issue of whether expert testimony as to speed was admissible, it held that automobile speed was not a matter beyond the ken of the average juror. Peterson, 76 Ill. 2d at 359. We adhere to the court’s position in Peterson. It is well established that speed is recognized "as a subject about which a layman can express an opinion.” See O’Brien v. Walker, 49 Ill. App. 3d 940, 949 (1977), citing Ryan v. McEvoy, 20 Ill. App. 3d 562, 568 (1974). In general, when a witness is familiar with the speed of a vehicle he may testify to the speed he observed, and if a witness is unable to estimate miles per hour he may state it as fast or slow. Delany v. Badame, 49 Ill. 2d 168, 178 (1971). A lay person is not required to have any specialized knowledge in engineering or to perform scientific calculations to estimate the speed of an automobile. In this case, three eyewitnesses who had a reasonable opportunity to observe the accident, and sufficient driving experience, gave their speed estimates all within a 20- to 35-mile-per-hour range. Even without defendant Schmitt’s testimony, there are two disinterested eyewitnesses who had a fair opportunity to observe Schmitt’s speed. Furthermore, regardless of the admissibility of his opinion as to speed, Officer Jansky may testify as to the skid marks and any other physical evidence he observed at the accident scene. The speed estimates from these three eyewitnesses, along with the evidence of skid marks, clearly formed a sufficient basis upon which a jury could make its own conclusions. We therefore conclude that the trial court did not err in barring Officer Jansky from giving expert testimony in this'case. In reaching this conclusion, we do not consider Officer Jansky’s qualifications as a reconstruction expert, as that issue was not raised by the defendants and is unnecessary to our holding. Even though the court was correct in finding Officer Jansky’s speed testimony inadmissible, we nevertheless believe that the court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of Schmitt and Meyer Material. Plaintiff points out that even if Officer Jansky is barred from expressing an opinion on Schmitt’s speed, no impediment precludes him from testifying that the cement truck left 124 feet of skid marks. According to plaintiff, this physical evidence of extensive skid marks could have been used by a jury to deduce that Schmitt was speeding. We agree that Officer Jansky should be allowed to testify as to any physical evidence he observed at the scene of the accident. The skid marks left by the cement truck could not be considered expert testimony. See Nolan v. Elliott, 179 Ill. App. 3d 1077, 1087 (1989). Evidence of skid marks is simply physical evidence which Officer Jansky observed as an eyewitness at the scene of the accident. Furthermore, in construing the evidence liberally in favor of the plaintiff, we believe that evidence of 124 feet of skid marks does present a factual question as to whether Schmitt was speeding. Evidence of skid marks, "though not conclusive, could be considered some evidence of excessive speed.” See Penzin v. Stratton, 26 Ill. App. 3d 475, 480 (1975). In Young v. Patrick, 323 Ill. 200, 202 (1926), this court held that skid marks "positively identified by the witness as being the marks made by the rear wheels of the car involved, tended to establish excessive speed.” In this case, according to Officer Jansky’s eyewitness testimony, the rear wheels of the cement truck slid approximately 59 feet before the collision and 65 feet after the collision. Evidence of such lengthy skid marks raises factual questions as to whether Schmitt’s speed was possibly greater than the estimates given by the eyewitnesses. In addition, according to deposition testimony, it is unclear whether the speed limit on Route 12 was the usual 45 miles per hour or 35 miles per hour because of road construction that day. Schmitt also conceded that he remained in the left-hand lane of Route 12 although all the other traffic returned to the right. He further stated that he accelerated past the school bus once the bus retracted its stop arm and turned off its warning lights. In light of the evidence of 124 feet of skid marks, the possible 35-mile-per-hour speed limit, and Schmitt’s testimony that he accelerated in the left-hand lane past stopped traffic, a jury could conclude that Schmitt was speeding. Given that eyewitnesses estimated Schmitt’s speed at between 20 and 35 miles per hour, if a jury concluded these were low estimates, the possibility would exist that Schmitt violated this 35-mile-per-hour speed limit. Furthermore, regardless of what the applicable maximum speed limit is, drivers are still required to drive at a speed which is reasonable and proper for traffic conditions. 625 ILCS 5/11 — 601 (West 1994). In addition, drivers have a duty to decrease their speed when approaching any sort of special hazard present with respect to other traffic. 625 ILCS 5/11 — 601 (West 1994). In this case, a large school bus was stopped for an extended period of time, blocking an intersection and obstructing the view of traffic on Route 12 and Lake Vista Terrace Road. A traffic condition such as this creates a special hazard because it interferes with the way motorists drive and the flow of traffic. Schmitt was required to adjust his driving accordingly. This would have entailed slowing down when approaching the school bus and overtaking it. Schmitt testified that prior to approaching the bus, he saw it stopped a couple of blocks ahead of him with its lights flashing and stop arm out. A jury could conclude that when a driver is faced with such a hazard he is required to slow down and approach the bus and backed-up traffic with caution. The evidence presents factual questions as to whether Schmitt exercised the appropriate caution when approaching this intersection. Defendants Schmitt and Meyer Material assert, as an alternative ground for entering summary judgment in their favor, that Joseph Hansen, the driver of the Escort, was greater than 50% negligent as a matter of law. This is the same argument defendants raised before this court in a "Motion To Dismiss Appeal As it Relates to Joseph Hansen.” This court denied defendants’ motion to dismiss the appeal on these grounds. We again reject defendants’ argument. We believe that since genuine issues of material fact were raised regarding Schmitt’s negligence, determining the relative degree of fault of each party should be left for the fact finder. See King v. Petefish, 185 Ill. App. 3d 630, 641 (1989). We therefore conclude that even without Officer Jan-sky’s expert reconstruction testimony, genuine issues of material fact exist regarding plaintiffs claim of negligence against Schmitt and Meyer Material. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s order granting summary judgment in favor of Schmitt and Meyer Material. The final issue we address is whether defendants Sharon Bracher and the Fox Lake School District were entitled to summary judgment. Plaintiff claims that the actions of Bracher, the school bus driver, were a contributing factor in causing the accident. She argues that blocking the roadway and the view of other drivers violates the rules of roadway safety. Specifically, plaintiff cites to section 11 — 1416 of the Illinois Rules of the Road (625 ILCS 5/11 — 1416 (West 1994)), which provides that "No person shall wilfully and unnecessarily hinder, obstruct or delay, or wilfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct any other person in lawfully driving or traveling along or upon any highway within this State ***.” 625 ILCS 5/11 — 1416 (West 1994). Plaintiff contends that Bracher violated this safety statute and breached her duty to the other drivers involved in the collision. We agree that the evidence raised factual questions as to whether Bracher improperly blocked the roadway for an extended period of time. Rankin, the eyewitness who was traveling directly behind the bus, testified that the bus was stopped solely on Route 12, prior to making any turns. Schmitt also stated that when he was approaching the bus, it was stopped on Route 12. Furthermore, both Schmitt and Rankin believed that the bus had its stop arm activated and lights flashing prior to turning off Route 12. According to Rankin, the school bus remained stopped on Route 12 for an abnormally long period of time even after it retracted the stop arm and turned off the lights. He estimated that the bus was stopped for at least two minutes and believed that it blocked the vision of both the driver of the Escort and the driver of the cement truck. This testimony is in conflict with the account of events given by both Bracher and McGill. However, in deciding a summary judgment motion, a court must not attempt to weigh the evidence. See Cnota v. Palatine Area Football Ass’n, 227 Ill. App. 3d 640, 647 (1992). Furthermore, we must construe the evidence liberally in favor of the nonmoving party. We believe that, in doing so, genuine issues of fact are raised as to whether the school bus was stopped for an unreasonable perio.d of time in an improper position. Stopping a large school bus in a regular lane of traffic for an extended period of time would create a hazardous condition on the roadway. In making such a stop, the school bus obstructed the view of other motorists traveling on Route 12 and Lake Vista Terrace Road and inhibited the free flow of traffic on these roads. Creating such a hazardous road condition could have been a contributing factor in the cause of this accident. After construing the evidence liberally in favor of the plaintiff, we conclude that genuine issues of material facts exist regarding plaintiff’s claim of negligence against Bracher and the Fox Lake School District. For the reasons stated, we reverse the judgment of the appellate court, reverse the judgment of the circuit court granting summary judgment in favor of all defendants, and remand this cause to the circuit court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. Judgments reversed; cause remanded.

=== CASE 9738376 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:33.600727+00 ===

JUSTICE HEIPLE, specially concurring in part and dissenting in part: My sole disagreement with the majority is its refusal to allow the testimony of the accident reconstruction expert as to the speed of the cement truck. Relying on Peterson v. Lou Bachrodt Chevrolet Co., 76 Ill. 2d 353 (1979), the majority opines that since the speed of a vehicle is not beyond the ken of the average juror, and since eyewitnesses are available to testify, then the testimony of the accident reconstruction expert is not necessary. 172 Ill. 2d at 204-05. As this court previously pointed out in Zavala v. Powermatic, Inc., 167 Ill. 2d 542, 546 (1995), quoting Plank v. Holman, 46 Ill. 2d 465, 471 (1970), "expert reconstruction testimony is proper, even where there is an eyewitness, if what the expert offers is 'knowledge and application of principles of science beyond the ken of the average juror.’ ” Just so. We have here a matter of physics involving weight, mass, measured skid marks, weather, pavement friction and surface conditions, all of which lend themselves to scientific analysis from an expert relative to the speed of the cement truck. While eyewitnesses to a moving vehicle can and should be allowed to testify as to its speed, the reliability of such testimony is problematical. To deny the supplementation of such testimony with the testimony of a qualified scientific expert interferes with the truthseeking function of a trial. Accordingly, I specially concur and dissent as noted. JUSTICE NICKELS joins in this partial special concurrence and partial dissent.

=== CASE 9738377 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:34.338784+00 ===

R. M. Maher, J.
Defendants were initially charged with unlawfully driving away a motor *241vehicle, MCLA 750.413; MSA 28.645, and receiving or concealing stolen property valued in excess of $100, MCLA 750.535; MSA 28.803. At the preliminary examination, the value of the property was established at less than $100 and the prosecution moved to dismiss count two, receiving or concealing stolen property. The motion was granted and defendants were bound over for trial on the charge of unlawfully driving away a motor vehicle. A jury found them guilty and each defendant was sentenced to a term of from 40 to 60 months in prison. Defendants appeal and we reverse.
On February 11, 1974, at approximately 2:30 to 2:45 p.m., George Sharpe parked his Farm Crest Bakery truck in front of 12501 Linwood Avenue, left the engine running, the doors unlocked, and went into a drug and liquor store. Five to ten minutes later, Mr. Sharpe saw his truck being driven away. He could not see who was driving the truck or how many people were in it. -
Between 2:30 and 3 p.m. that same day, Charles Jones, a Michigan Bell repairman, was standing on the porch of 12120 Wildemere. Mr. Jones noticed a Farm Crest Bakery truck in the alley about 100 feet from where he was standing. The truck was there when he arrived and next to the truck was a Buick with its trunk open. Mr. Jones saw one person standing near the back of the car and two people moving things from the truck. He never saw anyone in the truck but identified the three defendants in this case as the people he saw. It was not a positive identification, only that they looked familiar. After watching the three get into the Buick and drive off, a police car approached. Mr. Jones told the officers what he had seen, describing the Buick as "gold with a dark top, a deuce and a quarter”. Mr. Sharpe later identified *242the truck in the alley as his and found merchandise to-be missing.
At approximately 2:50 to 3 p.m., at the intersection of Davison and Linwood, police officers saw a 1967 Buick Electra 225. The officers had received information concerning a black over gold Buick containing three males. The car pulled into an A& P parking lot and four people got out. As they were walking toward the store, they were stopped. An officer went over to the car, looked in through the rear window and saw what appeared to be baked goods. He entered the car, moved a plywood board, and found boxes of Farm Crest doughnuts.
As previously stated, defendants were initially charged with unlawfully driving away a motor vehicle, a felony, and receiving or concealing stolen property over $100, also a felony. When testimony at the preliminary examination valued the property at under $100, reducing the second count to a misdemeanor, that count was dropped. It appears from the testimony in this case, that defendants could properly have been charged with breaking or entering a "motor vehicle * * * for the purpose of stealing or unlawfully removing therefrom any goods, chattels or property of the value of not less than $5”, MCLA 750.356a; MSA 28.588(1), a felony. However, defendants were tried for unlawfully driving away a motor vehicle which requires that the prosecution prove that they: (1) took possession of the vehicle, (2) drove or took it away, (3) wilfully, and (4) without authority. People v Limon, 4 Mich App 440, 442; 145 NW2d 287 (1966).
The evidence regarding the crime charged here is entirely circumstantial. "[WJhere the people’s case is based on circumstantial evidence the prosecution has the burden of proving 'that there is no *243innocent theory possible which will, without violation of reason, accord with the facts’ People v Davenport, 39 Mich App 252, 256; 197 NW2d 521 (1972). (Citations omitted.) Defendants cannot be convicted because someone unlawfully drove away Mr. Sharpe’s truck.
The prosecution in the present case attempted to show, by a close time sequence, that the three persons seen taking baked goods from a parked truck unlawfully drove that struck away from the drug and liquor store. There is no question here of conspiracy to commit the illegal act, MCLA 750.157a; MSA 28.354(1), since that was not charged; nor would the evidence support a theory of aiding or abetting the commission of the offense, MCLA 767.39; MSA 28.979, since such a charge must relate in this case to the taking of the truck, not its contents. Can it be said, then, with "impelling certainty”, see People v Davenport, supra, that persons taking baked goods from a parked truck, driven to the spot minutes earlier, participated in unlawfully driving it away?
The fact that three men moved baked goods from a stolen truck minutes after the truck had been unlawfully driven away by some person or persons, does not lead inevitably to the conclusion, that those men were guilty of having unlawfully driven away that truck. It is possible that any or all of the defendants began taking baked goods from the truck independent of the truck’s taking. The truck was unlocked and its engine running when taken from the drug and liquor store. There is a reasonable possibility that the taking of the truck was not planned and that whoever did drive away with the truck in the first place had parked it by the time any or all of the defendants arrived at the alley. Therefore, the prosecution in this case *244failed to negate every reasonable theory consistent with defendants’ innocence of the crime charged. See People v Parks, 57 Mich App 738, 744; 226 NW2d 710 (1975).
Défendants’ convictions are reversed without a new trial.
Bashara, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9738378 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:34.34266+00 ===

V. J. Brennan, P. J.
(dissenting). I must respectfully dissent from my brother’s opinion.
The majority relies on People v Davenport, 39 Mich App 252; 197 NW2d 521 (1972), for the proposition that "where the people’s case is based on circumstantial evidence the prosecution has the burden of proving 'that there is no innocent theory possible which will, without violation of reason, accord with the facts’ ”. (Citations are omitted.) A careful reading of Davenport convinces me that it is inapposite to the case at bar. In Davenport the defendant was charged with possession of heroin. The evidence consisted of a quantity of heroin found in a brown bottle contained in a bag in the basement of a house occupied by the defendant and three other persons. The bag also contained small plastic containers, one of which was labelled as a prescription for another resident of the house, and one of which was labelled as a prescription for the defendant. The Court reasoned, therefore, that since there was no evidence linking the defendant with the brown bottle or the bag, and since there were, therefore, innocent theories — unrebutted by any evidence — which accorded with the facts, that the prosecution had not borne its burden of proving that there was no innocent theory which would, without violation of reason, accord with the facts. The Court reasoned that it was as likely that anyone else living in the house, who would have *245had equal access to the basement, was in fact the possessor of the heroin. See Davenport, supra, 257.
In the case at bar the facts are substantially different and stand uncontroverted. The complainant parked his truck and left the engine running and went into a drug and liquor store. Five or ten minutes later police officers found the truck parked nearby in an alley with some of the merchandise missing. An eyewitness at the scene observed the three defendants removing goods from the truck and placing them in a Buick described as "gold with a dark top, a deuce and a quarter”. This eyewitness later identified the three defendants as the people he saw. Within five minutes or so, police officers saw a 1967 Buick Electra 225 fitting the description of the car given by the eyewitness. When they approached the car and looked in through the window into the back seat they saw what appeared to be baked goods, which, upon closer examination, turned out to be goods such as those missing from the complainant’s truck. This entire sequence of events occurred within minutes (possibly as few as 15 or 20 minutes) of the time the complainant observed his truck being driven away.
A jury may draw reasonable inferences from facts established either by direct or circumstantial evidence, but may not indulge in inferences wholly unsupported by any evidence. People v Weyonen, 247 Mich 308; 225 NW 552 (1929). Further, in order to allow a jury to infer the guilt of a defendant from circumstantial evidence, the facts proven tending to show the guilt of the defendant must be consistent with each other and must not only clearly indicate the guilt of the defendant, "but must be inconsistent with any other reasonable hypothesis upon which his innocence may be *246maintained”. 2 Gillespie, Michigan Criminal Law and Procedure (2d Ed), § 906, p 1216. (Emphasis added.) Here, unlike Davenport, supra, it cannot be said that it was "as likely” that anyone else who would have had equal access to complainant’s truck unlawfully drove it away. In the case at bar I think the prosecution carried its burden by the showing of uncontroverted facts, clearly pointing to the guilt of the defendants, and which were inconsistent with any other reasonable hypothesis upon which their innocence might be maintained. Certainly, no reasonable hypothesis comes to my mind which could possibly explain the facts of this case consistent with the innocence of the defendants, and, it is noteworthy that the defendants did not favor the trial court with any such theory except for some brief statements in closing arguments by the defendants’ counsel. Finally, the jury was properly charged, and after hearing all the evidence, found the defendants guilty. I would not take this matter out of the hands of the jury.
I have carefully examined the other allegations of error and have found them to be without merit and not of a compelling enough nature to warrant decisional discussion.
I would affirm.

=== CASE 2215586 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:03.292455+00 ===

240 N.W.2d 559 (1976)
Esther EIGEN, Respondent,
v.
FOOD PRODUCERS, INC., et al., Relators.
No. 45817.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
March 26, 1976.
Lasley, Gaughan, Reid & Stich and W. M. Lasley, Minneapolis, for relators.
Lewis & Salita and Wayne J. Salita, Minneapolis, for respondent.
Considered and decided by the court without oral argument.
PER CURIAM.
Relators seek review of an order of the Workers' Compensation Board vacating an earlier award based upon a settlement. This issue is whether in so ordering the *560 board abused its discretion. We hold that it did not.
By authority of Minn.St. 176.461 and 176.521, the board may, for cause, set aside an award based on a settlement. We have held "cause" to include newly discovered evidence or substantial change in the employee's condition. Wollschlager v. Standard Const. Co., 300 Minn. 550, 220 N.W.2d 346 (1974); Mattson v. Abate, 279 Minn. 287, 156 N.W.2d 738 (1968). The basic underlying concern in a determination of "cause" is "to assure a compensation proportionate to the degree and duration of disability." Elsenpeter v. Potvin, 213 Minn. 129, 132, 5 N.W.2d 499, 501 (1942).
In the instant case, the board found that there was good cause for reopening the award in the interests of justice and because new evidence existed that was material to a determination of the degree and extent of the employee's disability. A memorandum accompanying its order pointed out that the employee's condition had materially changed. We have examined the record and conclude that in so ruling the board did not abuse its discretion.
Respondent-employee is allowed $350 attorneys fees on this appeal.
Affirmed.

=== CASE 9738379 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:39.196003+00 ===

Lindemer, J.
This is a class action by employees and the widow of a deceased employee to recover pension benefits allegedly due pursuant to a plan adopted by Clean-Wear Service Company or Cadillac Overall Supply Co., its parent. All parties’ benefits were 100% vested but trustee National Bank of Detroit terminated pension rights at the direction of the Pension Trust Advisory Committee. The committee acted under the following provision of the retirement plan, entitled "Forfeiture of Benefits”:
"In the event that any participant shall enter the employment of any competitor of any Company without the written approval of such Company, or become associated in any manner with such a competitor in the opinion of the Advisory Committee, whose decision shall be final, before such participant has received the full amount in his segregated account or accounts to which he otherwise would be entitled, such participant shall lose all right to any balance in such account and the interest of such participant in any Trust shall at once cease and terminate and be allocated to other eligible employees covered by such Trust in accordance with the provisions of Section 3 below.”
When this clause was raised as a defense, plaintiffs moved for summary judgment as to liability pursuant to GCR 1963, 117.2(2). The trial court denied the motion but certified the question for interlocutory appeal. The Court of Appeals denied leave but this Court granted leave.
*383Appellants claim that the clause in question violates MCLA 445.761; MSA 28.61:
"All agreements and contracts by which any person, co-partnership or corporation promises or agrees not to engage in any avocation, employment, pursuit, trade, profession or business, whether reasonable or unreasonable, partial or general, limited or unlimited, are hereby declared to be against public policy and illegal and void.”
Appellees rely on Couch v Difco Lab, Inc, 44 Mich App 44; 205 NW2d 24 (1972). We agree that Couch controls.
The Legislature declared that promises or agreements not to engage in any employment were against public policy, illegal and void. This clause neither extracts nor embodies such a promise. Instead, it denies the right to further participation in the retirement plan if he does engage in such employment, an acknowledgment of his right to do so. While we recognize that employees may be deterred from engaging in competition by such an arrangement, we agree with Judge (now Justice) Levin’s interpretation of the Michigan statute in Couch:
"The Legislature has chosen to bar only agreements which prevent an employee from engaging in other employment. It has not barred any restraint upon seeking other employment. Nor has it, despite public discussion of forfeitures under private sector retirement plans, declared a public policy against enforcement of such clauses.”1
See also Judge (now Justice) Fitzgerald’s opinion in Tobin v General Motors Corp, 17 Mich App 475; 169 NW2d 644 (1969). If a broader prohibition is to *384be imposed, it is up to the Legislature, not this Court.
Appellants’ other arguments are not properly presented for our consideration by this motion for summary judgment but depend upon facts which must be developed at trial. See Hubbard v Miller, 27 Mich 15; 15 Am Rep 153 (1873), and Reed v Kaydon Engineering Corp, 38 Mich App 353; 196 NW2d 487 (1972).
The trial court’s denial of summary judgment is affirmed. Remanded for further proceedings.
Coleman and Fitzgerald, JJ., concurred with Lindemer, J.
Levin and Ryan, JJ., took no part in the decision of this case.
Couch, supra, at 48; 205 NW2d 26 (footnote omitted).

=== CASE 9738380 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:39.202289+00 ===

Williams, J.
(dissenting). In this action for a summary judgment, we are asked to determine whether a clause in an employee retirement profit-sharing plan unilaterally established by the employer, which provides for the forfeiture of all benefits if an employee becomes associated in any manner with a competitor, is an unreasonable restraint of trade. The clause contains no limitations in time and area.
We hold that such a clause is void and unenforceable as an unreasonable restraint of trade unless there are reasonable limitations in time and area. Since there are none here, we grant a summary judgment for plaintiffs.
I — Facts
This is a class action suit brought by persons who have been employees of Clean-Wear Service Company, or its parent company, Cadillac Overall *385Supply Company. The plaintiffs seek to recover benefits which had vested under a profit-sharing retirement plan unilaterally established by their employer and administered by the National Bank of Detroit.
The case comes to us on the pleadings only as the appeal is from the denial of the plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment.
Each of the named plaintiffs had worked for one of the defendant-companies for a period of at least 18 years. Plaintiff Arthur Woodward had served for part of his tenure with Cadillac Overall Supply Co. as a manager and division manager. William Page, now deceased, and formerly husband of plaintiff Mabel Page, was employed by the same company, and had served as a branch manager. The specific responsibilities of the other named plaintiffs are unclear.
Each of the named plaintiffs had vested rights to benefits under the profit-sharing plan, ranging from $5,863.64 to $18,683.09. These benefits were declared forfeit under a provision of the retirement plan which reads as follows:
"2. In the event that any participant shall enter the employment of any competitor of any Company without the written approval of such Company, or become associated in any manner with such a competitor in the opinion of the Advisory Committee, whose decision shall be final, before such participant has received the full amount in his segregated account or accounts to which he otherwise would be entitled, such participant shall lose all right to any balance in such account and the interest of such participant in any Trust shall at once cease and terminate and be allocated to other eligible employees covered by such Trust in accordance with the provisions of Section 3 below.”
Defendants allege that plaintiffs, upon resigning *386from the employ of defendants, entered into the employment of competing firms. In two cases, it is alleged that the plaintiffs established their own businesses in the same area as they had worked for their former employer, and in one of those cases, it is alleged that plaintiff later sold that business and entered into an agreement not to compete.
After notification of the forfeiture, plaintiffs filed a complaint in the Wayne County Circuit Court seeking recovery of the forfeited benefits. Plaintiffs brought a motion for summary judgment as to liability only, which was denied, solely on the authority of Couch v Administrative Committee of Difco Lab, Inc, 44 Mich App 44; 205 NW2d 24 (1972).
The trial court certified, in accordance with GCR 1963, 806.3(l)(a)(ii), that his order involved a controlling question of law as to which there was a substantial ground for difference of opinion, and that an appeal from the order might materially advance the ultimate termination of litigation.
Plaintiffs were denied leave to appeal the denial of summary judgment by the Court of Appeals on May 30, 1974. Leave to appeal to the Supreme Court was granted on October 15, 1974.
II — The Validity of the Forfeiture Clause Under MCLA 445.761 is Not Considered
Plaintiffs argue that the non-competition forfeiture clause before us is void and unenforceable as a matter of law under both statutory and common law.
Resolution of the claim that the clause is void under MCLA 445.761; MSA 28.611 would require *387determination of whether non-competition forfeiture clauses in general are agreements or contracts not to engage in an employment, and therefore void under the statute.
Resolution of the claim that the clause is void under common law poses a narrower question: Is a non-competition forfeiture clause in an employee retirement profit-sharing plan unilaterally established by an employer which provides that retirement benefits are forfeited if the employee enters into the employment of a competitor void unless it provides for reasonable limitations in time and area?
We find it unnecessary for the disposition of this case to resolve the broader statutory issue, and we refrain from doing so.
Ill — The Unlimited Non-Competition Forfeiture Clause as an Unreasonable Restraint of Trade
A. The Non-Competition Forfeiture Clause is a Contract in Restraint of Trade
At the threshold, there seems little question *388that a non-competition forfeiture clause is a restraint of trade. In Stoia v Miskinis, 298 Mich 105; 298 NW 469 (1941), this Court, quoting with approval from Williston on Contracts, included in the definition of a restraint on trade the following:
" 'Any bargain or contract which purports to limit in any way the right of either party to work or to do business, whether as to the character of the work or business, its place, the manner in which it shall be done, or the price which shall be demanded for it, may be called a bargain or contract in restraint of trade.’ 5 Williston on Contracts (rev ed), p 4576, § 1633.” 298 Mich 117-118.
This finding raises two questions. First, is the non-competition clause part of a bargain or contract? Second, if so, does it purport to limit in any way the right of either party to work or to do business? We answer both questions in the affirmative.
In establishing a profit-sharing plan, Clean-Wear and Cadillac offered to make certain payments for the benefit of its salaried employees in consideration of the employee’s continuing employment and services. The employees, by performing the desired services, accepted that offer. Thus, the employees have enforceable contractual rights under the plan, subject to the valid provisions of the plan.2 *389The non-competitive forfeiture clause is part of that contract, and we must determine its enforceability.
As to the second question, there can be very little doubt that the non-competition clause purports to "limit in any way the right” of the employee "to work or to do business”. A clause such as that before us which penalizes an employee for entering into the employment of a competitor or associating in any manner with a competitor at any time or any place constitutes a severe limitation on the right of an employee to work or do business.* *3
B. What Is An Unreasonable Restraint of Trade: Balancing Test
It has been long established in English and Michigan common law that a balancing test is used to test the reasonableness or unreasonableness of a contractual restraint of trade. In determining the reasonableness of a restraint under this test, the court weighs 1) the interests of the party in favor of whom the restraint runs; 2) the interests of the party being restrained; and 3) the interests of the public. Mitchel v Reynolds, 1 P Wms 181; 24 Eng Rep 347 (Q B 1711); Hubbard v *390Miller, 27 Mich 15, 19; 15 Am Rep 153 (1873).4
As shall be discussed, the specific definition and application of the balancing test has varied according to the type of restraint being examined. Specifically, covenants not to compete ancillary to an employment contract have often been treated differently under the balancing test from covenants not to compete incident to the sale of a business in two respects.
First, the reasonableness of employee restraint has been generally scrutinized more rigorously than the reasonableness of the covenant not to compete incident to the sale of a business.
Second, courts examining the employee restraint have often required that both the language of the covenant and the application of the restraint to the specific facts of the case be reasonable. Courts examining covenants not to compete incident to the sale of a business have almost always focused only on the reasonableness of the application of the restraint to the specific facts of the case.
The precise definition and manner of application of the balancing test called for in non-competition forfeiture clause cases is unsettled in Michigan law.5
*391We consider below the reasons underlying the requirements of strict scrutiny and reasonable limitations in the language of the covenant not to compete incident to an employee contract. These reasons are clearly applicable to cases involving non-competition forfeiture clauses. We therefore conclude that courts examining such clauses must subject the clause to strict scrutiny and require that both the language of the clause and the application of the restraint be reasonable.
Under this approach, a non-competition forfeiture clause is a reasonable restraint of trade only if it 1) is no greater than is necessary for the protection of the legitimate interests of the employer; 2) does not impose undue hardship on the employee; and 3) is not injurious to the interests of the public. Once the employee establishes that there is a restraint, the burden is placed on the employer to show the validity of the restraint.
1) Strict Scrutiny for Employee Restraints
As first suggested in the landmark Mitchel opinion, supra, the reasonableness of a covenant not to compete incident to the sale of a business has been *392generally scrutinized less rigorously than the reasonableness of such a covenant when incident to an employment contract.6
The greater deference granted a covenant not to compete incident to a sale of a business is rooted primarily in the recognition of the substantially equal bargaining power of freely contracting parties in such cases.7 As stated in Beal v Chase, 31 Mich 490, 523 (1875):
" * * * where such a contract is the result of fair bargaining, the reasonable presumption is that each party, in view of all the circumstances which were within his own intimate knowledge, was able to see how the bargain was to result to his advantage, and that the party resigning the business did not do so without being fully satisfied that he was receiving full equivalent, which would be more advantageous to him than the property and the business sold. And where a man has fully decided to sell his business to take up another, can there be any reason of state policy why he should be precluded from bargaining for the additional consideration he can obtain by agreeing not to engage in the same business? * * * If there be any sufficient reason, it was not presented on the argument, and is not hinted at in any of the cases to which our attention has been directed.”
Moreover, there must be some form of restraint on the transferor of good will in order for the transferee to get the full value of what is being acquired.8
*393An employee subject to a covenant not to compete included in his employment contract is in a much different situation from the seller of a business who binds himself or herself to such a covenant in exchange for consideration. The difference in the two situations, well-described in a scholarly opinion, Arthur Murray Dance Studios of Cleveland, Inc v Witter, 62 Ohio L Abs 17; 105 NE2d 685, 703-704 (Common Pleas, 1952), has led courts to scrutinize the reasonableness of the employee restraint more closely:
"[T]he snow-balling weight of authority in England and the United States recognizes a distinction. In contrasting the employee covenant with the sale covenant, some of the typical pronouncements are — the employee covenant is more critically examined, more strictly construed * * * . The following are some of the reasons given for making the above distinction. The average, individual employee has little but his labor to sell or to use to make a living. He is often in urgent need of selling it and in no position to object to boiler plate restrictive covenants placed before him to sign. To him, the right to work and support his family is the most important right he possesses. His individual bargaining power is seldom equal to that of his employer. * * * He is more apt than the seller to be coerced into an oppressive agreement. Under pressure of need and with little opportunity for choice, he is more likely than the seller to make a rash, improvident promise that, for the sake of present gain, may tend to impair his power to earn a living, impoverish him, render him a public charge or deprive the community of his skill and training. The seller has the proceeds of sale on which to live during his period of readjustment. A seller is usually paid an increased price for agreeing to a period of abstention. The abstention is a part of the thing sold and is often absolutely necessary in order to secure to the buyer the things he has bought. Usually the employee gets no increased compensation for agreeing to *394the abstention; it is usually based on no other consideration than the employment itself.”
The reasons for the application of strict scrutiny to an employee restraint in the form of a noncompetition forfeiture clause are at least as compelling.
First, in the establishment of a retirement plan and, specifically, a non-competitive forfeiture clause, there is often an imbalance in the bargaining power which invites employer over-reaching. In many instances, including the case before us, the retirement plan is not negotiated at all, being unilaterally established by the employer. This is particularly the case where the retirement plan contains a non-competition forfeiture clause, for such plans tend to cover higher level employees who tend not to be unionized.
Second, the forfeiture clause is not necessary for the employer to get the value of the thing primarily being acquired by the employment contract and retirement plan, i.e., the continued services of the employee.
Third, the non-competition forfeiture clause usually affects a far wider range of people, including employees who are not before the court, than does a covenant not to compete ancillary to the sale of a business where only the buyer and seller are directly involved.9
In passing, we should recognize that the United *395States Congress after much consideration enacted the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 29 USC 1001 et seq., and established a Federal policy regarding non-competition forfeiture clauses. The central thrust of the new act is to encourage the creation of private retirement programs through tax incentives and to protect the employee’s rights under these plans.10 Under the act, benefits must vest within certain prescribed time limitations. 29 USC 1053(a). Once the right to benefits vests, it cannot be forfeited, with certain exceptions not applicable to this case. Specifically, Congress provided that under the act a vested right is not to be forfeited because the employee later went to work for a competitor. United States Code Cong and Admin News, House Report No 93-807, pp 4724-4726 (1974).
For all of these reasons, we conclude that the *396reasonableness of non-competition forfeiture clauses must be strictly scrutinized.
On the basis of this conclusion, we specifically reject the "employee’s choice” test often used by courts opting for less than strict scrutiny of these clauses.11 Under this test, a court in determining the reasonableness of the clause focuses on what is termed the voluntariness of the employee’s choice to forfeit retirement benefits, without balancing the interests of the employer, the employees and the public to determine the fairness of the alternatives.
Chief Justice, then Judge, Warren Burger sharply criticized the use of such a test in Neuffer v Bakery & Confectionery Workers International Union, 113 US App DC 334; 307 F2d 671 (1962). In his well and strongly stated dissent, he first objected that "the majority opinion construes the contract most strictly against the employee when the law requires we construe it strictly against the employer who seeks to exact the forfeiture”. 307 F2d 671, 673-674.
But Judge Burger’s central concern was that the majority’s approach ignored the harshness or unfairness of the employee’s forfeiture. Noting the harshness of the application of the forfeiture clause in that case, he stated as follows:
"I can scarcely believe these factors are irrelevant when we deal with legal policy, for the law relating to forfeitures is essentially a policy matter in which equi*397table considerations have the dominant role.” 307 F2d 671, 674-675.
A similar objection was made by the authors of a recent law review article:12
"This [Neuffer] test seems to imply, however, that the employee has a choice: He may remain restricted, no matter how traditionally unfair the restrictions are, or he may compete and lose whatever interests he may have had, regardless of how innocuous such competition may be and insubstantial the interest foregone. The Neuffer court apparently assumed only that the contractual restrictions were reasonable and not against public policy, reaching its decision without weighing the equities of the parties.” 57 Iowa L Rev 75, 87 (1971).
In essence, the "employee’s choice” test would make every non-competition forfeiture clause reasonable, no matter how harsh or unfair, because the employee is always free to take the consequences of breaching the clause.
2) A Non-Competition Forfeiture Clause Must Be Reasonable in its Language
The purpose of a contractual restraint of trade is to protect certain interests of the party in favor of whom the restraint runs. When the contractual language creates a restraint beyond that which is necessary to protect the interests intended to be protected or the legitimate interests of the party benefited, the clause may be said to be overbroad.
*398A court confronted with an overbroad contractual restraint of trade must decide whether to enforce the restraint, in spite of its overbroad language, if the application of the restraint to the party before the court who is alleged to be subject to the restraint is reasonable, given the nature of this party’s conduct, and its effect on the party who is to be protected by the restraint.
In the context of a sale of a business, courts have almost uniformly enforced an overbroad covenant not to compete in such situations, often reforming the language of the covenant to form a more reasonable restraint in terms of the interest to be protected.
This has been the long-established practice of Michigan courts in dealing with covenants not to compete incident to the sale of a business. In Hubbard, supra, the court was confronted with a covenant not to compete unlimited in time and area, and proceeded to interpret the restriction to have reasonable limits intended by the parties.
In Hopkins v Crantz, 334 Mich 300; 54 NW2d 671 (1952), the Court, sitting as an equity court, in deciding whether to grant an injunction against a party who had breached a covenant not to compete incident to the sale of a business containing no limit in area, simply asserted its authority as follows:
"The court has the authority to enter a decree according to the facts so as to make the area of restriction a reasonable one.” 334 Mich 300, 304.
There is no mention of limiting the power to reform the covenant to expressions of the intent of the parties.
However, there is no authority in Michigan as to *399the treatment of overbroad covenants not to compete ancillary to an employment contract partially for the simple reason that any such covenant, no matter how limited, has been illegal under MCLA 445.761; MSA 28.61 since 1905.
In other jurisdictions, the issue of whether an overbroad covenant not to compete incident to an employee contract should be enforced when the employee’s competition falls within a narrow, reasonable restraint has been the subject of considerable controversy over a period of decades.13
While we need not discuss this precise issue, we think that there are important differences between a covenant not to compete incident to the sale of a business and a non-competition forfeiture clause that persuade us that the latter should not be enforced where the language of the restraint is broader than is necessary to protect the legitimate interests of the employer.
First, as mentioned above, a non-competition forfeiture clause usually affects a broad range of people, including employees covered by the clause who are not before the court.
Some of these employees are unreasonably deterred by the overbroad clause from taking legitimate employment. Commentators have strongly objected to the injustice of such a situation in arguing against the application or reformation of the overbroad clause.
The author of a recent law review article14 stated his objections as follows:
*400"Where the restraint on competition is framed in broad terms, the courts often enforce the agreement, if the employee’s competition falls within a narrower and reasonable boundary. While the judicial narrowing of a covenant not to compete, thereby making it enforceable, may be desirable when the clause is ancillary to an employment contract, sale of land or sale of business, such judicial redrafting is not desirable in the case of a non-competition restraint ancillary to a pension plan. For every covenant challenged in court, there are thousands which exercise an in terrorem effect on employees who simply respect their contractual obligations or who do not wish to take the risk of violating the covenant, going to court, and possibly losing their pensions. While this is true of any non-competition covenant ancillary to a contract, the in terrorem pressure seems much greater where forfeiture of such a vital interest as a pension is involved. The pension often represents security for the employee in his later years, which he cannot risk losing by competing and then testing the forfeiture clause in the courts. In contrast, the only reprisals for breach of a covenant not to compete ancillary to an employment contract, sale of land, or sale of business are injunctions and sometimes liquidated damages.
"When a broad covenant, such as that involved in Neuffer, is before the courts, the burden should be on the employer to show that the restraint on the employee’s right to compete was reasonable and protected a legitimate interest of the employer. The courts should not aid an employer by reforming an unreasonable and broad restriction, ancillary to a pension plan, into a legally enforceable one. If courts would refuse to enforce broad covenants not to compete, such a practice would discourage the drafting of unreasonable covenants and the resulting widespread compliance by employees in their retirement periods with potentially illegal restraints on competition.”
*401In addition to the in terrorem effect on employees who comply with the overbroad restraint, there is the matter of those employees who forfeit their benefits upon the unreasonable application of such a clause who never reach the courts.15
Moreover, an overbroad clause heightens the ill effect of non-competition forfeiture clauses on the public interest, deterring competition and employee mobility even where it serves no legitimate interest of the employer.
In sum, while enforcement of an overbroad covenant not to compete incident to the sale of a business substantially affects only the parties before the court, enforcement of an overbroad non-competition forfeiture clause in the light of the specific facts of the case may unfairly and harshly affect employees not before the court. Furthermore, enforcement of such a clause encourages employers to continue to use overbroad language to the detriment of the public interest.
A second difference between a covenant not to compete incident to the sale of a business and a non-competition forfeiture clause weighs against enforcing an overbroad example of the forfeiture clause. As discussed above, a restraint on competition from the seller of a business is very often *402necessary if the buyer is to get the value of what he paid for. To allow the seller to breach the covenant not to compete because of the over-breadth of the covenant after the buyer had paid consideration substantially for seller’s promise not to compete, would grossly distort the agreement reached by the two bargaining parties.
In contrast, a non-competition forfeiture clause is not necessary for the employer to get the major value of what he pays for in entering into an employment contract and establishing a retirement program, i.e., the continued services of his employees and the tax benefits granted businesses establishing retirement programs. Refusal to enforce an overbroad non-competition forfeiture clause does not, therefore, grossly distort the overall agreement between employer and employees.
A third and final difference supporting non-enforcement of an overbroad non-competition forfeiture clause lies in the fact that the sale of a business is almost always negotiated between parties with equivalent bargaining power. The establishment of a retirement program by an employer is, as discussed above, often unilateral, or the result of bargaining between parties of unequal power. To enforce an overbroad non-competition forfeiture clause in this content would be to aid an employer who has abused his power in creating an unreasonable restraint on employees in the name of binding an employee to an unreasonable agreement in which he or she had little or no say.
For all of these reasons, we conclude that in order for a non-competition forfeiture clause to be reasonable and enforceable by the employer, both the language and the application of the clause to the parties before the court must be reasonable.
In the light of our conclusions regarding the *403requirements of strict scrutiny and reasonable language in non-competition forfeiture clause cases, we agree with those courts who, in examining the reasonableness of employee restraints, and non-competition forfeiture clauses specifically, have applied the following test.16
A non-competition forfeiture clause is reasonable only if the restraint 1) is no greater than is necessary for the protection of the employer in some legitimate interest; 2) does not impose undue hardship on the employee; and 3) is not injurious to the interests of the public. The burden is placed on the employer to show the validity of the restraint.17
C. The Absolutely Unlimited Non-Competition Forfeiture Clause is Unreasonable Per Se
Given this test of reasonableness, an unnegotiated forfeiture clause in a pension plan which restrains all forms of competitive activity for an unlimited time and in an unlimited area will be unreasonable per se and always unenforceable. This is so because such a clause will necessarily be broader than is necessary to protect the legitimate interests of the employer and contrary to the public interest.
A very broad restraint may well be reasonable if specifically tailored to protect certain vital inter*404ests of a business. For example, a business may develop certain very important information which it wishes to keep from its competitors. Of primary importance may be technical information in which the company has invested a great deal of research and expense. In addition a business may wish to protect its developmental strategies, its customer lists, and the like. It may be vital to a business to keep these valuable assets from leaking to a competitor. Moreover, these assets are generally the product of the company as a collective entity, so that the company’s interest in such information would almost always be superior to that of any individual employee.
Courts, in general, have been sensitive to the importance of these business interests, and have often upheld broad employee restraints protecting these interests.18
At another level, a non-competition forfeiture clause may be tailored to protect certain things which, while important, may not be as vital to the well-being of the business, and to which an employee may lay a claim of interest equal to or superior to his employer. For example, the cost of training an employee represents an investment by the employer, as does the cost of providing the employee a chance to learn through on-the-job experience. Similarly, a company may pay an employee to develop a rapport with certain customers.
*405In such situations, the company’s investment must be balanced against the claim of the employee that general knowledge or skill gained through training or on-the-job experience, or a personal rapport established with customers represents a substantial personal investment which makes his claim of interest superior to that of the employer upon termination of employment.19
A non-competition forfeiture clause designed to protect such business interests must have narrower limits in time and area to be reasonable.
Finally, a non-competition clause may restrain the employee from all forms of competition with the former employer, independent of any of the factors mentioned above. In such a situation, the importance of the claimed business interest is considerably lessened, and inferior in any event to the employee’s claimed right to compete and the public’s interest in competition and a mobile labor force.
A clause, restraining the employer from all forms of competitive activity and containing no limitations in time and area whatsoever, where unnegotiated or negotiated where the employee was substantially disadvantaged in bargaining power, will always be unreasonable in that it is overbroad and contrary to the public interest.
This conclusion is buttressed by the fact that courts applying a test of reasonableness of the type we have accepted today have uniformly held that an unlimited non-competition forfeiture clause is an unreasonable restraint of trade.
The Supreme Court of South Carolina in a very recent opinion, Almers v South Carolina National *406Bank of Charleston, 265 SC 48; 217 SE2d 135, 139 (1975), held as follows:
" * * * we hold that a forfeiture clause in a profit or pension plan which provides that upon employment with a competitor a participant is divested of rights under the plan is invalid unless it contains reasonable time and geographic limitations.”
The clause invalidated in that case was unlimited in time and area.
In Food Fair Stores, Inc v Greeley, 264 Md 105; 285 A2d 632, 639-640 (1972), a non-competition forfeiture clause in a pension plan which was unlimited in time and area was similarly held an unreasonable restraint of trade.
The Supreme Court of Iowa, in Van Hosen v Bankers Trust Co, 200 NW2d 504 (Iowa, 1972), held that a non-competition forfeiture clause in a pension plan limited in area to one county, but unlimited in time, was "so unreasonable as to be in violation of public policy”. 200 NW2d 504, 509.
It is also significant that some states have promulgated statutes which specifically limit the validity of non-competition forfeiture clauses. Moreover, under these statutes, unlimited non-competition forfeiture clauses have invariably been held invalid.
Flammer v Patton, 245 So 2d 854 (Fla, 1971), held that a non-competition forfeiture clause in a retirement plan which was unlimited in time and area breached a Florida statute which provided that every contract by which anyone is restrained from exercising a lawful profession or business of any kind, excepting employment agreements restraining a former employee from engaging in a similar business and soliciting old customers within a reasonably limited time and area, and partnership agreements where partners agree not to engage in similar business after dissolution of *407%the partnership within a reasonably limited time and area, is void to the extent that it does not contain the noted reasonable restrictions. Fla Stat Ann § 542.12.
In Muggill v Reuben H Donnelley Corp, 62 Cal 2d 239; 42 Cal Rptr 107; 398 P2d 147; 18 ALR 3d 1241 (1965), Judge Traynor held that an unlimited non-competition forfeiture clause was void under a California statute very similar to the Florida statute described above.
In Estate of Schroeder v Gateway Transportation Corp, 53 Wis 2d 59; 191 NW2d 860, 865 (1971), the Wisconsin Supreme Court first held that a non-competition forfeiture clause was covered under the Wisconsin statute governing covenants not to compete, and then ruled that the clause was void because it did not have the required reasonable limitations, being unlimited in application to time and area. See also Holsen v Marshall & Ilsley Bank, 52 Wis 2d 281; 190 NW2d 189, 192 (1971), and Union Central Life Insurance Co v Balistrieri, 19 Wis 2d 265; 120 NW2d 126, 129 (1963).
IV — Conclusion
We hold that a clause in an employee retirement profit-sharing plan unilaterally established by the employer, or negotiated where the employee was substantially disadvantaged in bargaining power, which provides that a participant in the plan forfeits all rights to benefits if the employee enters into the employment of a competitor is void and unenforceable as a matter of law, where there are no limitations whatever in time and area.
The clause before us is such a clause, and we therefore reverse the trial court, concluding that a summary judgment for plaintiff must be granted.
Kavanagh, C. J., concurred with Williams, J.
MCLA 445.761; MSA 28.61 reads as follows:
"All agreements and contracts by which any person, co-partnership *387or corporation promises or agrees not to engage in any avocation, employment, pursuit, trade, profession or business, whether reasonable or unreasonable, partial or general, limited or unlimited, are hereby declared to be against public policy and illegal and void.”
MCLA 445.766; MSA 28.66 creates certain exceptions:
"This act shall not apply to any contract mentioned in this act, nor in restraint of trade where the only object of restraint imposed by the contract is to protect the vendee, or transferee, of a trade pursuit, avocation, profession or business, or the good will thereof, sold and transferred for a valuable consideration in good faith, and without any intent to create, build up, establish or maintain a monopoly; nor to any contract of employment under which the employer furnishes or discloses to the employe a list of customers or patrons, commonly called a route list, within certain territory in which such employe is to work, in which contract the employe agrees not to perform similar services in such territory for himself or another engaged in a like or competing line of business for a period of 90 days after the termination of such contract or services.”
See 1A Corbin on Contracts, § 153, pp 18-20; Couch v Difco Labs, Inc, 44 Mich App 44, 47; 205 NW2d 24 (1972); Cain v Allen Electric & Equipment Co, 346 Mich 568, 579; 78 NW2d 296 (1956) (employer’s creation in writing of policy to pay severance pay constituted an oifer of a contract which the employee had accepted by continuing in the employ of the employer); Psutka v Michigan Alkali Co, 274 Mich 318; 264 NW 385 (1936) (ample consideration to defendants to support their benefit plan as a contract with their employees is found in the attraction of more competent workers to defendants’ employ, the inducement of better and more continuous service and the avoidance of expense of labor turnover); Annotation: Rights and Liabilities as Between Employer and Employee with Respect to General Bonus or *389Profit Sharing Plans, 81 ALR2d 1066, 1069; Note, Pension Plans and the Rights of the Retired Worker, 70 Colum L Rev 909, 917 (1970).
The findings of the United States Congress in enacting the comprehensive Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 29 USC 1001 et seq., provide strong evidence of this deterrent effect. After numerous public hearings and hundreds of pages of testimony, Congress concluded that the forfeitability of pension and profit-sharing retirement income interfered "with the mobility of labor, to the detriment of the economy”.
See Almers v South Carolina National Bank of Charleston, 265 SC 48; 217 SE2d 135 (1975), quoting from US Code Cong & Adm News, vol 3, p 4679 (1974).
Professor Blake, in his article, Employee Agreements Not to Compete, 73 Harv L Rev 625 (1960) provides a thorough and enlightening description of the history of the law of contractual restraints of trade. In this article, Prof. Blake indicates that the Mitchel opinion, supra, laid the foundation for the subsequent use of the balancing test:
"Mitchel v Reynolds is a remarkable opinion for its method of balancing the social utility of certain types of restraints against their possible undesirable effects upon the covenantor and the public, and for its formulation of a rule of reason. There is very little in the modern approach to the problem for which a basis cannot be found in Macclesfield’s opinion.” 73 Harv L Rev 625, 630-631.
The development of common law in Michigan on restraint of trade has been limited due to the early enactment in 1905 of MCLA 445.761; MSA 28.61 and accompanying statutes. Contractual restraint of trade cases have most often been handled under these statutes. The
*391limited authority available from Michigan cases does not seem to resolve the question of which definition of reasonableness should be used in non-competition forfeiture clause cases.
In Tobin v General Motors Corp, 17 Mich App 475; 169 NW2d 644 (1969), the Court of Appeals held that sections in a bonus award and stock option plan providing that the employee lost any right to "earn out” benefits under the plan did not constitute an unreasonable restraint of trade. The Court did not discuss the test of reasonableness to be applied, but rather relied on O'Madigan v General Motors Corp, 312 F2d 250 (CA 8, 1963) which upheld the plan for the reasons stated in the district court opinion, 202 F Supp 190 (ED Mo, 1961). The district court seems to have relied on the "employee’s choice” test which is criticized in discussion below.
See also Bannert v American Can Co, 525 F2d 104 (CA 6, 1975) which relied on Tobin, supra, and dicta in Couch v Difco, supra, in upholding a non-competition forfeiture clause.
See Mitchel v Reynolds, 1 P Wms 181, 190; 24 Eng Rep 347, 350 and Employee Agreements Not to Compete, 73 Harv L Rev 625, 647 (1960).
See Arthur Murray Dance Studios of Cleveland, Inc v Witter, 62 Ohio L Abs 17; 105 NE2d 685, 704 (Common Pleas, 1952), quoted on p 393 of this opinion. See also Employee Agreements Not to Compete, 73 Harv L Rev 625, 647.
Arthur Murray Dance Studios of Cleveland, Inc v Witter, 105 NE2d 685, 703-704, and 73 Harv L Rev 625, 646.
See Budget Rent-a-Car Corp v Fein, 342 F2d 509, 517 (CA5, 1965), where a limited restraint on a competition ancillary to a standard franchise agreement was held an unreasonable restraint of trade. The court in Budget relied in part on the fact that the agreement, extracted by the parent car rental company from anyone who desired a franchise, affected "a far wider range of people than a covenant ancillary to a sale of business where only two parties — the seller and the buyer — are involved”.
For further discussion of the importance of the effect of a non-competition forfeiture clause on employees not before the court, see p 399 of this opinion.
The White House Conference on Aging published in 1971 a study entitled Income which provides valuable data on the financial situation of people as they near retirement age, and indicates that the concern of Congress was well-founded.
For example, according to a study by the U. S. Bureau of Census, the median income of families in the United States in 1967 peaked at $8,320 where the age of the head of the household fell between the ages of 45 and 54, then fell radically, plummeting to $3,377 where the head of the household was 65 or over. See Income, p 56.
In another study prepared by the U. S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, it was revealed that the median income of families headed by persons 65 and above was consistently less than half of that of families headed by people from 14 to 64 over the period 1960-1969. Similar results were found in computing the median income of unrelated individuals.
A third study of income sources of people 65 and over revealed that private pension plans constitute a relatively minor source of income in comparison with government income support. In 1967, for example, private pensions represented but 5% of the total income for this group, while income from the public sector represented 38%. It is this kind of imbalance that the recent Federal statute is intended to remedy. Widespread forfeiture of retirement benefits increases the need for government assistance, and increases the chances that assistance programs, such as the Federal Social Security program, will collapse under the burden. YungPing Chen & the Technical Committee on Income Income: Background & Issues (Washington, D C: White House Conference on Aging, 1971).
For "employee’s choice” cases, see Kristt v Whelan, 4 App Div 2d 195; 164 NYS2d 239 (1957), aff'd, 5 NY2d 807; 155 NE2d 116; 181 NYS2d 205 (1958); Alldredge v City National Bank & Trust Co of Kansas City, 468 SW2d 1, 4 (Mo, 1971); Van Pelt v Berefco Inc, 60 Ill App 2d 415; 208 NE2d 858, 865 (1965); Brown Stove Works, Inc v Kimsey, 119 Ga App 453; 167 SE2d 693, 695 (1969); Rochester Corp v Rochester, 450 F2d 118, 123 (CA 4, 1971).
See Koehn & Ptacek, Employer Protection Against Loss of the Key Employee, 57 Iowa L Rev 75, 86-88 (1971). See also Comment, Forfeiture of Pension Beneñts for Violation of Covenants Not to Compete, 61 Nw UL Rev 290, 304-305 (1966). The second article does not place Neuffer among the cases applying the employee’s choice test, but, using Kristt v Whelan, supra, as the exemplary case for this test, the author mounts an attack very similar to that presented by Judge Burger and the authors of Employer Protection.
For a description of some of the controversy that has been centered on the issue of severability of restraints of trade, see 73 Harv L Rev 625, 681-684, and the cases cited therein.
See also 41 ALR 2d 15 and 43 ALR 2d 94, annotations indicating that there remains considerable dispute on this issue.
61 Nw U L Rev 290, 298-299 (1966). See also Prof. Blake’s argument severing or reforming overbroad employee restraints in Employee Agreements Not to Compete, 73 Harv L Rev 625, 683-684, and also Employer Protection Against Loss of a Key Employee, 57 *400Iowa L Rev 75, 94-95 (1971) which similarly argues against enforcement where the employer has been guilty of consciously overreaching.
To the contrary see Lavey v Edwards, 264 Or 331; 505 P2d 342 (1973).
In this regard, it is notable that even a non-competition forfeiture clause which contains reasonable limits is often in some degree unfair in its application to employees who breach it. This is so because there is usually no correlation between the amount forfeited and the damage which may be done to the employer.
The employee who has worked loyally for the employer for a long period of time, and then for a competitor for a short period of time, is penalized more harshly than the employee who stays with the employer a relatively short time before moving on to a competitor. The former employee not only forfeits more benefits, but also has little or no chance of vesting new pension rights after forfeiture.
These problems make it all the more important that non-competition forfeiture clauses be carefully tailored so as to be applied, to as great an extent as possible, only in those cases where it is necessary to serve the legitimate interests of the employer.
Food Fair Stores, Inc v Greeley, 264 Md 105; 285 A2d 632, 639-640 (1972); Van Hosen v Bankers Trust Co, 200 NW2d 504, 508-509 (Iowa, 1972); Almers v South Carolina National Bank of Charleston, 265 SC 48; 217 SE2d 135 (1975); Employee Agreements Not to Compete, 73 Harv L Rev 625, 646-651 and the cases cited therein.
Placing the burden on the employer is sensible not only due to the strict scrutiny given employee restraints, but also because the employer has a more complete view of the interests of the business than an employee, and thus is in a better position to show a restraint is no more burdensome than needed to protect the employer’s legitimate interest. See 73 Harv L Rev 625, 648, fn 76, and the cases cited therein, and also 61 Nw U L Rev 290, 299 (Í966).
See cases cited in 73 Harv L Rev 625, 667-674 and in 41 ALR2d 15, parts III-VII. These sources provide a good survey of what courts have felt to be a reasonable employee restraint, and the factors which they have taken into account when making a determination of reasonableness.
It is also notable that a duty exists on the part of the employee to refrain from divulging his employer’s trade secrets to a competitor even in the absence of an express contractual covenant according to the 2 Restatement Agency, 2d, § 396(b).
See employee restraint cases cited in 73 Harv L Rev 625, 651-667, and in 43 ALR2d 94, parts III-VIII.

=== CASE 3027340 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:01.628815+00 ===

United States Court of Appeals
FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
___________
No. 01-1185
___________
United States of America,                 *
*
Appellee,                    *
*
v.                                  * Appeal from the United States
* District Court for the
Gary E. Loucks,                           * Western District of Missouri.
* [UNPUBLISHED]
Appellant.                   *
___________
Submitted: August 6, 2001
Filed: August 15, 2001
___________
Before BOWMAN, FAGG, and HANSEN, Circuit Judges.
___________
PER CURIAM.
Gary E. Loucks pleaded guilty to being a felon in possession of a firearm, in
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). At sentencing, he objected to the use of his prior
felony conviction for terroristic threats both to enhance his offense level under U.S.S.G.
§ 2K2.1(a)(4)(A) and to establish his criminal history under U.S.S.G. § 4A1.2(a),
arguing that this constituted double jeopardy and impermissible double counting. The
district court1 overruled his objection, and sentenced him to 46 months imprisonment
and 3 years supervised release.
Loucks renews his arguments on appeal. We reject his claim of impermissible
double counting because the Sentencing Guidelines specifically authorize this type of
double counting. See U.S.S.G. § 2K2.1, comment. (n.15) (“Prior felony conviction(s)
resulting in an increased base offense level under subsection . . . (a)(4)(A) . . . are also
counted for purposes of determining criminal history points pursuant to Chapter Four,
Part A (Criminal History).”); United States v. Rohwedder, 243 F.3d 423, 427 (8th Cir.
2001) (“Double counting is permissible if the Sentencing Commission intended that
result and each section concerns conceptually separate notions relating to sentencing.”).
Loucks’s double jeopardy argument also lacks merit. See Munger v. Erickson, 979
F.2d 1323, 1326 n.8 (8th Cir. 1992) (taking defendant’s prior conviction into account
in sentencing him for subsequent offense does not constitute double jeopardy violation;
defendant is being punished only for subsequent offense).
Accordingly, we affirm the judgment of the district court.
A true copy.
Attest:
CLERK, U.S. COURT OF APPEALS, EIGHTH CIRCUIT.
1
The Honorable Fernando J. Gaitan, Jr., United States District Judge for the
Western District of Missouri.
-2-

=== CASE 3027344 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:02.076014+00 ===

Opinions of the United
2007 Decisions                                                                                                             States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit
7-6-2007
Wallace v. Price
Precedential or Non-Precedential: Non-Precedential
Docket No. 03-9002
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007
Recommended Citation
"Wallace v. Price" (2007). 2007 Decisions. Paper 807.
http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007/807
This decision is brought to you for free and open access by the Opinions of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit at Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in 2007 Decisions by an authorized administrator of Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. For more information, please contact Benjamin.Carlson@law.villanova.edu.
NOT PRECEDENTIAL
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT
Nos. 03-9002 & 03-9003
WILLIAM WALLACE, JR.,
Appellant
v.
JAMES PRICE, Superintendent
On Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Western District of Pennsylvania
(D. C. No. 99-cv-00231)
District Judge: Hon. Sean J. McLaughlin
Argued June 7, 2007
Before: FUENTES, GREENBERG and ROTH, Circuit Judges
(Opinion filed: July 6, 2007)
OPINION
ROTH, Circuit Judge:
William Wallace was sentenced to death after a Pennsylvania jury convicted him of
first degree murder in the death of Tina Spalla. The jury also convicted Wallace of robbery,
criminal conspiracy, and second degree murder in the death of Carl Luisi. Wallace has filed
a habeas petition under 28 U.S.C. § 2254, challenging his convictions. The District Court,
adopting the Report and Recommendation of the Magistrate Judge, ordered that the first
degree murder conviction be vacated because the trial court did not admit hearsay evidence
of a statement made by Wallace’s accomplice, Henry Brown, that he, not Wallace, shot
Spalla. The District Court held that the refusal to admit this statement violated Wallace’s
rights under the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment and the Due Process Clause
of the Fourteenth Amendment, as set forth in Chambers v. Mississippi, 410 U.S. 284 (1973).
The other convictions were allowed to stand, leaving Wallace to serve a sentence of life
imprisonment without the opportunity for parole.
Wallace appealed the judgment of the District Court, raising the following five claims:
First, the exclusion of evidence of Brown’s confession warranted the vacating of all
Wallace’s convictions, not just the conviction for first degree murder. Second, the manner
by which Brown’s testimony was secured violated Wallace’s rights to due process and a fair
trial. Third, Wallace’s trial counsel was ineffective for failing to seek an independent
ballistics test. Fourth, Wallace’s Sixth Amendment right to counsel was violated when the
prosecution enlisted the aid of a jailhouse informant, who later testified against Wallace.
Fifth, the penalty-phase jury instructions regarding mitigation erroneously suggested a need
for unanimity in violation of Mills v. Maryland, 487 U.S. 367 (1988), and that error was not
harmless. The Commonwealth cross-appealed, claiming that the District Court erred in
2
vacating the first degree murder conviction on the grounds that Wallace’s federal
constitutional rights were violated and also erred in not concluding that any possible errors
were harmless.
We do not recount the facts and history of this case, which are well-known to the
parties. The Report and Recommendation and the opinion of the District Court are thorough
and well-reasoned, and we readily affirm the judgment of the District Court in full. We do
note that in analyzing whether the Chambers and Confrontation Clause violations amounted
to harmless error, the District Court employed the “substantial and injurious effect” standard
set forth in Brecht v. Ambrahamson, 507 U.S. 619 (1993). Although the Supreme Court had
yet to decide Fry v. Pliler, ___ S.Ct. ___, 2007 WL 1661463 (June 11, 2007), the District
Court was right to use the Brecht standard, regardless of whether the Pennsylvania courts had
recognized the precise error at issue and reviewed it for harmlessness under the “harmless
beyond a reasonable doubt” standard set forth in Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18 (1967).
See Fry 2007 WL 1661463, at *6. 1
Because the writ is granted as to Wallace’s conviction for first degree murder, we will
dismiss as moot his penalty-phase claim under Mills, which goes only to the sentence on that
conviction.
For the reasons stated above, we will affirm the judgment of the District Court.
1
We also note that the Commonwealth had conceded at oral argument that, with regard
to the Chambers and Confrontation Clause violations, we would not be bound by the
harmless error determination made by the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania.
3

=== CASE 3027346 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2015-10-13 22:38:02.781615+00 ===

Opinions of the United
2007 Decisions                                                                                                             States Court of Appeals
for the Third Circuit
7-6-2007
USA v. De Graaff
Precedential or Non-Precedential: Non-Precedential
Docket No. 06-2093
Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007
Recommended Citation
"USA v. De Graaff " (2007). 2007 Decisions. Paper 806.
http://digitalcommons.law.villanova.edu/thirdcircuit_2007/806
This decision is brought to you for free and open access by the Opinions of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit at Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in 2007 Decisions by an authorized administrator of Villanova
University School of Law Digital Repository. For more information, please contact Benjamin.Carlson@law.villanova.edu.
NOT PRECEDENTIAL
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 06-2093
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
v.
KATHLEEN T. DE GRAAFF,
Appellant
On Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of New Jersey
(D.C. Criminal No. 05-cr-00829)
District Judge: Hon. William J. Martini
Submitted Pursuant to Third Circuit LAR 34.1(a)
June 4, 2007
BEFORE: SMITH and COWEN,
and SILER*, Circuit Judges
(Filed: July 6, 2007)
*Honorable Eugene E. Siler, Jr., Senior United States Circuit Judge, U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, sitting by designation.
OPINION
COWEN, Circuit Judge.
Kathleen T. De Graaff appeals from an order entered by the United States District
Court for the District of New Jersey affirming a judgment of conviction and sentence
entered by a United States Magistrate Judge following a bench trial. The District Court
had jurisdiction pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3231. We have jurisdiction over the appeal
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291. For the reasons set forth below, we will affirm.
I.
Because we write solely for the parties, we set forth only those facts necessary to
our decision.
On April 18, 2004, police officers of the Department of Veterans Affairs (“VA”)
issued De Graaff two Violation Notices, charging her with simple assault in violation of
18 U.S.C. § 113(a)(5), and disorderly conduct in violation of 38 C.F.R. § 1.218(b)(11).
The charges arose out of an incident involving De Graaff and a nurse at the VA New
Jersey Healthcare Facility in Lyons, New Jersey.
At her initial appearance on June 24, 2004, De Graaff submitted a financial
affidavit to the court. Based upon the affidavit, the Magistrate Judge appointed a federal
public defender to represent De Graaff. Thereafter, the Magistrate Judge entered a plea of
not guilty onto the record and set the next court date, noting that officers from the VA had
informed her that the security officers involved in the incident were not present in court.
2
Before concluding the initial appearance, the Magistrate Judge discussed a letter
which De Graaff had written and addressed to the Chief Judge of the District Court. The
letter apparently dealt with De Graaff’s concerns about problems at the VA hospital,
because the Magistrate Judge responded that she “c[ould]n’t order [] people at the V.A.
Hospital to rectify whatever problems you think are there.” (S.A. at 6.) Despite the
Magistrate Judge’s lack of authority, he asked De Graaff several questions concerning her
trips to the VA hospital and the laundering of her late husband’s clothing during his stay
at the VA hospital, which De Graaff answered. Subsequently, the Magistrate Judge
concluded the hearing.
At no time during the initial appearance did the Magistrate Judge inform De Graaff
of the penalties associated with the charges against her, her right to retain counsel, or her
right not to make a statement, nor did the Magistrate Judge advise De Graaff that any
statement she made may be used against her. The Magistrate Judge stated only in passing
that she “d[id]n’t know what it is that they allege you did, which gives rise to the charge
of assault and being a disorderly person.” (Id.)
At a hearing held on July 29, 2004, De Graaff indicated to the Magistrate Judge
that she wished to apply for pretrial diversion. The Magistrate Judge therefore postponed
the trial pending a decision on defendant’s pretrial diversion application.
On August 26, 2004, the Magistrate Judge held a pretrial conference. At the
conference, De Graaff indicated to the Magistrate Judge that she did not wish to proceed
with pretrial diversion. The Magistrate Judge, therefore, scheduled the matter for trial.
3
Toward the end of the conference, De Graaff spoke out of turn, prompting the Magistrate
Judge to warn De Graaff that if she spoke or disrupted the courtroom, he would have her
“locked up.” (Id. at 28.) When De Graaff stated that she had “one thing to say,” the
Magistrate Judge retorted, “You have nothing to say. Leave the courtroom, Mrs. De
Graaff.” (Id.) After De Graaff had left the courtroom, the Magistrate Judge’s clerk
asked what she should do if De Graaff called inquiring about transcripts of the
proceedings. The Magistrate Judge instructed the clerk to “tell [De Graaff] she can get all
of her transcripts at once at the end.” (Id. at 29.)
On September 15, 2004, the government superceded the charges by way of
Complaint. The Complaint charged De Graaff with assault by striking, beating, or
wounding in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 113(a)(4), in addition to the disorderly conduct
charge.
A bench trial on the charges occurred on September 30, 2004 and November 23,
2004 before the Magistrate Judge. The Magistrate Judge found De Graaff guilty of
assault and disorderly conduct. She was sentenced to one year of probation, ordered to
refrain from contact with the VA nurse, and ordered to participate in a mental health
program. De Graaff appealed her conviction and sentence to the District Court, which
affirmed, and this appeal ensued.
II.
The District Court’s legal determinations are reviewed de novo, United States v.
Ledesma-Cuesta, 347 F.3d 527, 530 (3d Cir. 2003), and its factual findings are reviewed
4
for clear error, United States v. Helbling, 209 F.3d 226, 237 (3d Cir. 2000).
A.
De Graaff’s first contention is that her conviction should be set aside because the
Magistrate Judge failed to comply with the procedures set forth in Rule 58(b) of the
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, governing initial appearances. For the reasons
expressed below, we conclude that the Magistrate Judge’s non-compliance with Rule
58(b) amounts to harmless error, and, thus, even assuming arguendo that De Graaff raised
this claim below, we cannot find any error in the District Court’s judgment.
Rule 58 imposes a mandatory obligation on a magistrate judge to inform a
defendant at her initial appearance on a petty offense of the following: (1) the charge(s),
(2) the minimum and maximum penalties, (3) the right to retain counsel, and (4) the right
not to make a statement, and that any statement made may be used against her. Fed. R.
Crim. P. 58(b)(2)(A)-(B), (D). Here, there is no question that the Magistrate Judge failed
to comply with these procedures.
Despite the importance of the Rule 58 procedures, we are compelled to conclude
that the Magistrate Judge’s error was harmless because it is “highly probable” that the
omission did not contribute to the conviction. United States v. Zehrbach, 47 F.3d 1252,
1265 (3d Cir. 1995) (internal quotation marks, emphasis, and citation omitted) (setting
forth the harmless error standard for non-constitutional violations). While the Magistrate
Judge unquestionably failed to advise De Graaff of her right to retain counsel, it is highly
improbable that De Graaff would have exercised that right, given that her financial
5
situation necessitated the appointment of a federal public defender. Similarly, while the
Magistrate Judge did not inform De Graaff of her right not to make a statement and that
any statement might be used against her, there is no indication that the statements she
made at her initial appearance, concerning the frequency of her visits to the VA hospital
and the laundering of her husband’s clothes, or any inferences drawn therefrom, were
used against her at trial.
Likewise, no prejudice resulted from the Magistrate Judge’s failure to inform De
Graaff of the precise charges against her. De Graaff had notice of the initial charges
brought against her by way of the Violation Notices, and the Magistrate Judge at least
adverted to the “charge of assault and being a disorderly person” at the initial appearance.
(S.A. at 6.) As defense counsel conceded at the beginning of trial, De Graaff “had notice
of the facts” and had “been able to investigate and prepare.” (Id. at 40.)
Finally, although we are very troubled by the Magistrate Judge’s complete failure
to address the minimum and maximum penalties at the initial appearance, it is highly
improbable that any prejudice resulted. De Graaff was made aware of the maximum
penalty for the upgraded assault charge at the beginning of trial, when the government
stated in open court that the penalty for assault by striking, beating, or wounding was “a
maximum [of] six months imprisonment, and a maximum fine of $5,000.” (Id. at 38.)
There is no indication in the record that De Graaff would have proceeded differently had
she known of the penalties at the initial appearance. Moreover, even if she would have
pled guilty, it is highly improbable that she would have received a lesser sentence than the
6
one year of probation.
In summary, we conclude that while the Magistrate Judge failed to comply with
the Rule 58 procedures, the District Court’s decision to affirm the judgment of conviction
was not erroneous because there is a “high probability” that the Magistrate Judge’s error
did not contribute to the conviction.
B.
De Graaff’s next argument is that the Magistrate Judge evinced a deep-seated
prejudice and hostility toward her, necessitating vacatur of her conviction. Again even
assuming arguendo that De Graaff raised this claim below, we conclude that the record
does not support her claim of bias and therefore find no error in the District Court’s
decision.
Under 28 U.S.C. § 455(a), a magistrate judge must “disqualify himself in any
proceeding in which his impartiality might reasonably be questioned.” The test for
recusal under § 455(a) is whether a “reasonable person, with knowledge of all the facts,
would conclude that the judge’s impartiality might reasonably be questioned.” In re
Kensington Int’l Ltd., 368 F.3d 289, 301 (3d Cir. 2004). Generally, “beliefs or opinions
which merit recusal must involve an extrajudicial factor.” Selkridge v. United of Omaha
Life Ins. Co., 360 F.3d 155, 167 (3d Cir. 2004) (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted). Absent an extrajudicial factor, the facts must display a “deep-seated favoritism
or antagonism that would make fair judgment impossible.” Liteky v. United States, 510
U.S. 540, 555 (1994).
7
De Graaff claims that the above-mentioned letter she wrote to the Chief Judge of
the District Court was the impetus for the Magistrate Judge’s prejudice and hostility. She
claims that after learning about the letter, the Magistrate Judge committed “countless
errors,” but specifically refers only to an alleged violation of her right against self-
incrimination. She complains that the Magistrate Judge’s questioning at her initial
appearance required her to give self-incriminating answers and emanated from bias.
After careful review of the record, we cannot conclude that a reasonable person,
knowing all of the circumstances, would have questioned the Magistrate Judge’s
impartiality in this case. While De Graaff’s letter constitutes an extrajudicial factor, and
the Magistrate Judge did make some errors in this case, such as his failure to comply with
Rule 58, there is no evidence that the Magistrate Judge acted with bias against De Graaff.
Indeed, the Magistrate Judge’s questioning at the initial appearance was responsive to De
Graaff’s own stated concerns about problems which she perceived existed at the VA
hospital, not any bias or hostility toward De Graaff. Moreover, as discussed above, there
is no indication that the answers which De Graaff gave in response to the Magistrate
Judge’s questioning were used against her at trial.
In sum, we conclude that the record does not support a finding of an extrajudicial
factor causing impartiality or such a high degree of favoritism or antagonism as to make
fair judgment impossible. Thus, we find no error in the District Court’s rejection of De
8
Graaff’s claim of bias.1
C.
De Graaff’s final contention is that she was a victim of a conspiracy to deny her
access to tape recordings of the proceedings. The District Court rejected this argument,
as do we, because the conspiracy claim is unsupported by the evidence.
In support of her conspiracy claim, De Graaff points to the following statement
made by the Magistrate Judge to her clerk on August 26, 2004 at the end of the pretrial
conference: “If [De Graafff] calls you, tell her she can get all of her transcripts at once at
the end.” (S.A. at 29.) De Graaff claims that by remaining silent after the Magistrate
Judge made this statement, the prosecutor joined the alleged conspiracy. She further
asserts that in papers filed with the District Court, the prosecutor misquoted a portion of
the August 26, 2004 hearing transcript. Whatever the meaning of the Magistrate Judge’s
and the prosecutor’s actions, the record reveals that De Graaff was, in fact, allowed
access to tape recordings of the proceedings. De Graaff’s trial counsel indicated that in
preparation for trial, he had listened to the tape recordings of the pretrial proceedings.
Similarly, her post-trial counsel acknowledged that he had ordered and obtained
1
In the part of her brief addressing bias, De Graaff also posits that the Magistrate Judge
violated her right to a speedy trial by not setting her case for trial at her initial appearance,
thereby causing a one-month delay in the proceedings. Even assuming arguendo that a
constitutional right to a speedy trial attaches to petty offenses, we find no violation in this
case requiring reversal because De Graaff has not alleged that she suffered any prejudice
as a result of the brief delay. See Chapman v. California, 386 U.S. 18, 24 (1967) (no
reversal required where constitutional error is “harmless beyond a reasonable doubt”).
9
transcripts of all of the proceedings. At most, De Graaff’s access to the tape recordings
was delayed; however, there is no indication in the record that the delay caused her any
prejudice whatsoever. Given this factual record, we cannot conclude that the District
Court committed error.
For the foregoing reasons, the order of the District Court entered on March 20,
2006 will be affirmed.
10

=== CASE 9738384 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:43.02418+00 ===

Bashara, J.
The defendant was convicted by a jury of manslaughter, MCLA 750.321; MSA 28.553, and appeals.
On May 1, 1973 the defendant and James Gafney visited the apartment of the deceased, Andre Fair, and Ronald Kline. According to the testimony of the defendant, Gafney requested the defendant to accompany him to the apartment to obtain a refund from Fair for poor quality narcot*232ics allegedly purchased from him. Kline, on the other hánd, testified that the defendant and Gafney came to the apartment to show him some pills.
After entry into the apartment, the defendant testified that Gafney asked Fair to return his money. Fair refused and pulled a handgun. The defendant reached for the gun and a struggle ensued among Fair, Gafney and the defendant. During the struggle the handgun discharged and Fair was mortally wounded.
Kline’s version was that upon entry into the apartment the defendant pulled a handgun and assaulted Fair. During the struggle between the defendant and Fair, Gafney grabbed a shotgun that was in the apartment and held Kline at bay. Gafney then stated "set it out”. As the fray continued a window was broken, diverting the attention of Gafney and allowing Kline to escape. Kline heard a shot while fleeing from the room. Fair had been mortally wounded.
The defendant was charged with felony murder.. MCLA 750.316; MSA 28.548. The jury was instructed on both felony murder and manslaughter. A conviction for manslaughter was returned.
The first issue presented is whether there was sufficient evidence of a specific intent to rob to support an instruction on felony murder. Defendant argues that People v Barnes (On Remand), 44 Mich App 488; 205 NW2d 591 (1973), lv den, 389 Mich 795 (1973), negates such a finding of specific intent. In People v Barnes, supra, the complainant picked up the defendant hitchhiker. The defendant pulled a razor and placed it at the complainants neck, stating: "This is it, old man.” The defendant did not ask for any money. There was no other evidence of what the defendant meant by "[t]his is *233it”. The court reversed the conviction for assault with intent to rob for that reason.
"Words sometimes acquire a peculiar signification, in a particular locality, different from their ordinary meaning, but, when such is the case, it is a fact requiring proof, and not a fact which the court can take judicial notice of; the rule being that courts will take judicial notice of the ordinary meaning of English words, but not of uncommon or extraordinary meanings applied in isolated cases or in particular localities.” People v Gastro, 75 Mich 127, 131-132; 42 NW 937 (1889). Unlike People v Barnes, supra, the record discloses the peculiar signification of "set it out”. Kline testified that the expression meant that he was to give his money to Gafney. In fact, Kline explained that he was reaching for his money when the opportunity for escape arose. The evidence could have supported a finding of specific intent to rob. Accord, Jefferson v State, 298 So 2d 465 (Fla App 1974), "give it up”; Porter v State, 241 Ala 91; 1 So 2d 310 (1941), "get going” accompanied by threat to kill. We decline to follow the reasoning of People v Barnes, supra.
Defendant further argués that even if there was evidence to support the element of robbery in the felony murder charge against Gafney, there was no evidence that the defendant had the necessary specific intent to rob. We disagree. People v Sharp, 57 Mich App 624, 626; 226 NW2d 590 (1975), stated:
"[A]rmed robbery is a specific intent crime. People v Kelley, 21 Mich App 612; 176 NW2d 435 (1970), lv den, 383 Mich 792. Therefore, it is essential that the prosecution prove beyond c reasonable doubt that the defendant possessed specific intent or that he aided and abetted in the perpetration of the crime knowing that his *234coparticipants had the necessary specific intent. People v Poplar, 20 Mich App 132; 173 NW2d 732 (1969), People v McGuire, 39 Mich App 308; 197 NW2d 469 (1972), Iv den, 387 Mich 810. The requisite intent may properly be inferred by the jury from circumstantial evidence. People v Wright, 44 Mich App 111; 205 NW2d 62 (1972), People v Poplar, supra. ”
If the jury believed the testimony of Kline, they could have found the defendant possessed the requisite intent to rob when he initiated the incident by pulling a handgun. This allowed Gafney to grab the shotgun, get the drop on Kline and announce the robbery.
Defendant argues that it was reversible error for the trial judge to allow the defendant’s line-up attorney to read Kline’s written statement identifying the defendant and Gafney at a line-up. The statement was prepared by a police officer and signed by the line-up attorney. A proper foundation was not laid for admission of the written statement under the doctrine of past recollection recorded. This was error, but not prejudicial error because the error was cured when the statement was stricken. People v Mitchell, 298 Mich 172, 181; 298 NW 495 (1941), Detroit v O’Connell, 19 Mich App 538, 540; 172 NW2d 875 (1969), lv den 383 Mich 762 (1970).
Defendant also contends that the trial judge erred by giving an incomplete instruction on armed robbery.1 We agree. However, where the instruction was not objected to at trial our review is limited to whether there was a miscarriage of *235justice. People v Charles, 58 Mich App 371, 378-379; 227 NW2d 348 (1975), GCR 1963, 516.2, MCLA 769.26; MSA 28.1096. The jury ruled out armed robbery in the context of felony murder when it found the defendant guilty of manslaughter. The jury was not placed in a compromising position because the evidence could have supported a finding of robbery within the context of felony murder. The defendant should not be heard to complain of an incomplete instruction on armed robbery in the context of felony murder, when the evidence supports a finding of armed robbery, but the jury acquits him of the charge. There was no miscarriage of justice.
The next issue raised on appeal is whether the trial judge improperly instructed the jury on manslaughter. The instruction was as follows:
"[Manslaughter is the unjustified killing of another without malice and without premeditation * * * .”
Defendant contends that People v Townes, 391 Mich 578; 218 NW2d 136 (1974), requires the jury to instruct separately on voluntary and involuntary manslaughter when the factual situation can support either crime. We disagree. The Court in People v Townes, supra, found that the trial judge had initially instructed the jury on second-degree murder and a combination of voluntary and involuntary manslaughter. Subsequently, the jury asked for a clarification on the elements of second-degree murder and manslaughter. The trial judge instructed the jury on second-degree murder and involuntary manslaughter. The Supreme Court ruled that the trial judge’s supplementary instructions excluded voluntary manslaughter from the jury’s consideration. Since the evidence on the *236manslaughter charge more appropriately supported a finding of voluntary manslaughter, the Court reasoned that the only reasonable choice left the jury was a finding of guilty under the more serious offense of second-degree murder.
We are not faced with the problem raised in People v Townes, supra. The facts supported a finding under either felony murder or manslaughter and the jury was so charged. Since there is no distinction in punishment between voluntary and involuntary manslaughter, the defendant was not prejudiced. This general instruction on manslaughter was proper. People v Carter, 387 Mich 397, 418; 197 NW2d 57 (1972), People v Onesto, 203 Mich 490, 496; 170 NW 38 (1918), People v Knott, 59 Mich App 105, 114; 228 NW2d 838 (1975).
The next issue raised by the defendant is that it was improper for the trial judge to instruct the jury on manslaughter when defendant was charged with one count of felony murder. We find no error in this procedure under the recent Michigan Supreme Court decision of People v Carter, 395 Mich 434; 236 NW2d 500 (1975).
The defendant also argues that on three different occasions the prosecutor repeated leading questions over objections that were sustained. Our review of the record reveals that the conduct of the prosecutor was improper. "The rulings of the court are to be followed and when they are not the court should exercise its power of contempt or at least reprimand the offending person in the jury’s presence.” People v Brocato, 17 Mich App 277, 305; 169 NW2d 483 (1969). The questions related to the robbery in the context of the felony murder, but the jury acquitted the defendant of that charge. Therefore, we declare the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. People v Robinson, 386 Mich 551, 563; 194 NW2d 709 (1972).
*237Finally, there was no error in the instruction on reasonable doubt. People v Davies, 34 Mich App 19; 190 NW2d 694 (1971), lv den 385 Mich 773 (1971).
Affirmed.
V. J. Brennan, P. J., concurred.
The trial judge’s complete instruction on armed robbery was as follows:
"Now in order to constitute robbery, it is necessary that the taking be felonious, that it is done with the intent to commit a crime and not under any claim of ownership.
"It is well settled that a person cannot be guilty of robbery in taking that to which he has a right.”

=== CASE 9817036 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-09-01 03:51:07.616944+00 ===

MURPHY, Circuit Judge.
Petitioner Rolando Hernandez entered the United States without inspection in 1992 after fleeing Guatemala to escape from the Organization for People in Arms (ORPA), which had impressed him into its service. The Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) initiated deportation proceedings against him in 1993. Hernandez conceded deportability, but requested asylum and withholding of deportation. He was given an individual merits hearing before an immigration judge in June 1994. His testimony at the hearing forms the factual record in this matter, and the judge specifically found his testimony to be credible before granting his requested relief. The Board of Immigration Appeals (Board) issued its decision in October 2000, that Hernandez was statutorily ineligible for asylum. After carefully reviewing the record, we remand to the Board for its further consideration.
I.
Hernandez was born in Quezaltenango, Guatemala on August 20, 1965. Insofar as this case is concerned, his troubles began when two ORPA members approached him on a bus in April 1992 and initiated a conversation. The two men did not identify themselves as members of a guerrilla organization. At that time Hernandez had never heard of ORPA and did not know that it was a guerrilla group which used violent means in pursuit of its goals. During the conversation Hernandez told the two men where he lived and worked.
The two men began visiting him at his workplace and at the restaurant where he usually ate. They also began to pressure him to join their organization, but they misrepresented the nature of ORPA. They *809said that the group was dedicated to improving the lives of Guatemalans by undertaking non violent activities and protesting government injustices. Although Hernandez was generally sympathetic with the stated goals, he was reluctant to join the organization. He eventually did so only after the two men threatened to kill him if he did not. He believed that he would be expected to be involved in organizing strikes, work stoppages, or demonstrations against the government. He had no idea that he would be asked to participate in violent activities.
About a month after their first meeting, the two men came to a restaurant where Hernandez was eating, forced him into a car, and drove him to a guerrilla camp in a remote mountain location. Hernandez found approximately fifty ORPA soldiers at this camp, as well as two other individuals who had also been forcibly recruited and kidnapped. The three newcomers were then oriented to the group and given weapons training. Hernandez objected and informed the leaders that he did not want to be involved with weapons. They told him that the training was necessary and that ORPA had to take extreme measures in order to obtain its goals.
The next day Hernandez was taken by the guerrillas to a small village outside of Retalhuleu, where they engaged government forces in battle. Hernandez objected to taking part, but the leaders said the action was necessary. After the battle, the commander ordered Hernandez and others to dynamite a bridge and to stop cars and loot them. No one was injured by the dynamiting, but some of the drivers were beaten. Hernandez testified that he had not wanted to join in any of these acts, and only did so because he feared that the guerrillas would otherwise harm or kill him.
Several days later after the commander had received reports that some villagers in Playa Grande were giving information to the army, he ordered a group to go there to retaliate. About fifty people went to Playa Grande, and Hernandez and several others were ordered to remove villagers from their homes and to ransack their houses. They herded approximately 100 villagers to the town center. The commander identified about fifteen in this group as government informants, and ordered Hernandez and ten other guerrillas to open fire on them. All of the suspected informants were killed.
Hernandez did not want to be part of this firing squad, but he knew he was being tested and understood he would be killed if he did not follow the commander’s order. He would rather “have turned the fire on [his] own companions,” but he knew that “with one machine gun [he] wasn’t going to be able” to take care of all of the guerrillas. The commander stood right behind Hernandez during the shooting and examined the magazine of his rifle immediately afterwards to check whether he had followed orders. Hernandez testified that he attempted to aim away from the villagers and tried not to hit anyone, and that he shot approximately 10 to 12 rounds of a 30 round magazine to the left of where he thought the villagers were standing. He indicated that he did not believe that he had hit anyone.
After the shootings in Playa Grande, Hernandez went to the ORPA commander and asked to be set free. He told the commander that he disagreed with the group’s violent tactics and that he thought ORPA was doing more harm in Guatemala than good. The commander replied that Hernandez could not leave the group and that he would send him “to hell” if he ever asked to leave again. The commander then ordered two guerrillas to keep guard over him to prevent any escape attempt. Hernandez also went to the two men who *810had first sought him out and told them that he wanted to leave the group, but they warned him that he would be killed if he continued to talk that way. He considered trying to turn himself over to the government forces, but he feared they would shoot him as a guerrilla.
Several days later the guerrillas engaged in battle with government forces near the Mexican border. Hernandez recognized that this could be the best opportunity for escape, and he ran towards the border. His two guards ordered him to stop, but he shot at them and continued to run. The guerrillas turned their fire on Hernandez and hit him in the lower leg, but he ran on and eventually escaped into Mexico. He had been with ORPA approximately 20 days before he was able to escape.
Hernandez lived and worked in Mexico City for about two months before he learned that two men had been questioning his former employer in Guatemala, Guillermo Cruz, about “Rolando.” Hernandez was aware that ORPA had found a previous escapee who had fled to Costa Rica; he had been taken back to Guatemala and killed. Hernandez feared that he would meet a similar" fate if ORPA guerrillas succeeded in finding him. He borrowed money from Cruz and attempted to flee into the United States. After several unsuccessful attempts, Hernandez entered the United States on September 5, 1992. He maintained contact with his mother and with Cruz. His mother warned him to stay in hiding because three armed men had been looking for him, and Cruz sent word that “they” were looking for him.
II.
In May 1993, the INS issued an order to show cause against Hernandez, alleging that he was deportable for having entered the United States without inspection under § 241(a)(1)(B) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (Act).3 Hernandez conceded deportability, but applied for asylum and withholding of deportation under §§ 208 and 243(h)(1) of the Act. He contended that he was unable to return to Guatemala where he faced persecution by ORPA members because of his political opinion that their actions were harmful to Guatemala, an opinion that he had publicly expressed to his guerrilla commander and other group members.
A hearing was held before an immigration judge in June 1994. Hernandez testified through a translator. The immigration judge found that Hernandez credibly established that he had been forcibly recruited into ORPA by coercion and misrepresentations, that he had not supported the guerrillas, and that as soon as he became aware of their goals he informed the leaders of his disagreement with them and attempted to leave the group. The judge concluded that Hernandez was entitled to asylum because his credible testimony established a well founded fear of persecution by guerrilla leaders who knew that he had deserted their forces after announcing his opposition to them and also that Hernandez had established that it would be more likely than not that he would be persecuted if he returned to Guatemala. The judge then granted Hernandez’s application for asylum and withholding of deportation.
The INS appealed, and the Board of Immigration Appeals (Board) sustained *811that appeal in October 2000. The Board held that Hernandez was statutorily ineligible for relief because he had “assisted or otherwise participated in the persecution of [a] person on account of ... political opinion” within the meaning of §§ 101(a)(42) and 243(h)(2)(A) of the Act. It focused its attention on the action in Playa Grande which was the basis for its conclusion that Hernandez had assisted in persecution. Although the Board did not overturn the findings of the immigration judge who had found Hernandez’s testimony entirely credible, it indicated that the record was “inconclusive” as to whether he had aimed at or shot any villagers.4 It concluded that it need not decide whether Hernandez had aimed or shot at anyone, because his testimony indicated that he had assisted in persecution on account of political opinion since the villagers had been targeted for suspected aid to the Guatemalan government. The Board found that Hernandez did not meet his burden of proving otherwise, and cited Matter of Rodriguez-Majano, 19 I. & N. Dec. 811, 1988 WL 235466 (BIA 1988), and Fedorenko v. United States, 449 U.S. 490, 101 S.Ct. 737, 66 L.Ed.2d 686 (1981), for the proposition that “the participation or assistance of an alien in persecution need not be of his own volition to bar him from the relief of withholding of deportation and asylum.” The Board ordered Hernandez deported on the basis that he was statutorily ineligible for asylum or withholding of deportation, and it did not therefore reach the issue of whether he was otherwise entitled to asylum.5
Hernandez argues on his petition for review that the Board erred in holding that he assisted in persecution and in ruling him ineligible for asylum and withholding of deportation. Hernandez contends that the legal standard applied by the Board in determining whether he assisted in the persecution of others is inconsistent with Fedorenko v. United States, 449 U.S. 490, 101 S.Ct. 737, 66 L.Ed.2d 686 (1981), and the Board’s decision must therefore be reversed. Hernandez argues that Fedor-*812enko requires an evaluation of the particular conduct of the petitioner. He maintains that the evidence, when evaluated in accordance with Fedorenko, shows that he never assisted or participated in the persecution of others. The INS maintains that the Board correctly analyzed the case and that Hernandez did not meet his burden of proving that he did not assist or otherwise participate in the persecution of others.
III.
The Board’s conclusion that Hernandez is ineligible for asylum or withholding relief is a legal determination which we review de novo. See Escudero-Corona v. INS, 244 F.3d 608, 613 (8th Cir.2001). Factual findings underlying its conclusion are reviewed under a substantial evidence standard of review. Id.
An individual like Hernandez who is otherwise deportable may remain in the United States if he can show that he is eligible either for asylum or withholding of deportation under §§ 208 or 243(h) of the Immigration and Nationality Act. Neither type of statutory relief is available to an individual who participates .in certain types of persecution. The definition of a refugee eligible for asylum specifically excludes “any person who ordered, incited, assisted, or otherwise participated in the persecution of any person on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion.” INA § 101(a)(42). Identical language prohibits withholding of deportation for such an individual. See INA § 243(h)(2)(A). If there is any evidence that an applicant for either kind of relief has assisted or participated in persecution, that individual has the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that he has not been involved in such conduct. See 8 C.F.R. § 208.13 (asylum); 8 C.F.R. § 208.16 (withholding of deportation).
Fedorenko v. United States, 449 U.S. 490, 101 S.Ct. 737, 66 L.Ed.2d 686 (1981), is the leading case to have examined the question of whether an individual assisted or participated in persecution. Fedorenko was a Ukranian who became a guard at a Nazi extermination camp in Treblinka, Poland during World War II. After the war he entered the United States in 1949 with a visa issued under the Displaced Persons Act (DPA) and later obtained citizenship. In 1979 the government brought an action to revoke his citizenship on the grounds that he had obtained his naturalization by willfully misrepresenting material facts on his visa and citizenship applications. He had not disclosed his work at Treblinka, and the government contended that that omission was material because it would have made him ineligible for a visa under §§ 2(a) and 2(b) of the DPA. Those provisions specifically excluded individuals who had “assisted the enemy in persecuting civilians]” or who had “voluntarily assisted the enemy forces ... in their operations.” Id. at 495,101 S.Ct. 737.
Fedorenko admitted at trial that he had served as an armed guard at Treblinka during 1942 and 1943 and that he had been aware that thousands of Jews were being murdered there. He testified that he had been issued a uniform and two guns, that he had been paid for his service, and that he had received a merit stripe for good service. He had also been permitted to leave the camp regularly and had not attempted' to escape. He admitted that he had shot at escaping inmates during a 1943 uprising, but contended that he had been forced to serve as a guard, had not shared the persecutory motives of the Nazis, and had shot at escapees under orders. He acknowledged, however, that he and other Ukranian guards had significantly outnumbered the Germans at the camp. The district court declined to revoke Fedoren-ko’s citizenship because it found that his *813service at Treblinka was not voluntary; it reasoned that involuntary acts should not exclude someone from immigration. See United States v. Fedorenko, 455 F.Supp. 893, 913 (S.D.Fla.1978). The law would otherwise keep out relatively innocent persons such as camp inmates forced to perform jobs which assisted the extermination process in some way. Id.
The Fifth Circuit reversed, see United States v. Fedorenko, 597 F.2d 946 (1979), and the Supreme Court upheld its position. The Court criticized the district court’s attempt to read a voluntariness requirement into § 2(a) because courts “are not at liberty to imply a condition which is opposed to the explicit terms of the statute.” Fedorenko, 449 U.S. at 512-13, 101 S.Ct. 737. Although it ruled that there was no condition of voluntariness in the provision, the Court indicated that all aspects relevant to an individual’s conduct must be examined in order to determine whether he assisted in persecution. In a much cited footnote, the Supreme Court stated that “[t]he solution to the problem perceived by the District Court [ ] lies, not in ‘interpreting’ the Act to include a volun-tariness requirement that the statute itself does not impose, but in focusing on whether particular conduct can be considered assisting in persecution of civilians.” Id. at 512-13, n. 34, 101 S.Ct. 737 (emphasis supplied). The Court provided contrasting examples of conduct which would or would not amount to assisting persecution under the Act:
... an individual who did no more than cut the hair of female inmates before they were executed cannot be found to have assisted in the persecution of civilians. On the other hand, there can be no question that a guard who was issued a uniform and armed with a rifle and a pistol, who was paid a stipend and was regularly allowed to leave the concentration camp to visit a nearby village, and who admitted to shooting at escaping inmates on orders from the commandant of the camp, fits within the statutory language about persons who assisted in the persecution of civilians.
Id. The court acknowledged that “[ojther cases may present more difficult line-drawing problems, but we need decide only this case.” Id.
Under Fedorenko, a court faced with difficult “line-drawing problems” should engage in a particularized evaluation in order to determine whether an individual’s behavior was culpable to such a degree that he could be fairly deemed to have assisted or participated in persecution. Id. See also Riad v. INS, 1998 WL 559348 (9th Cir.1998). Although Fedorenko dealt with a different statutory provision than that at issue here, courts interpreting the “assistance to persecution” language in §§ 101(a)(42) and 243(h)(2)(A) have followed the type of analysis outlined by the Supreme Court in footnote 34. See Riad v. INS, No. 96-70898, 1998 WL 559348, at *3 (9th Cir. Sept.1, 1998); Ofosu v. McElroy, 933 F.Supp. 237, 243 (S.D.N.Y.1995). See also Ofosu v. McElroy, 98 F.3d 694, 701 (2d Cir.1996) (noting dearth of cases interpreting §§ 101(a)(42) or 243(h)(2)(A) but citing Fedorenko as authority). Courts interpreting these provisions “have evaluated the individual’s personal culpability in the atrocities committed to determine if the individual has assisted or participated in persecution.” Riad, 1998 WL 559348, at *2 (9th Cir.1998). As the Ninth Circuit has said in following Fedorenko, an individual’s responsibility for such behavior “must be assessed along a continuum of conduct.” Id.
After thoroughly going over the record, we conclude that the Board did not apply the correct legal standard in deciding whether Hernandez had assisted or participated in persecution. Although the *814Board cited Fedorenko in passing, its opinion does not reflect the type of analysis required. The Board should have analyzed all the pertinent evidence related to Hernandez’s conduct to determine whether, for purposes of §§ 101(a)(42) and 243(h)(2)(A), he should be held culpable for assisting persecution at Playa Grande. See Fedorenko, 449 U.S. at 512-13, n. 34, 101 S.Ct. 737; Riad, 1998 WL 559348, at *2. The fact that Hernandez had been involved in the shooting in Playa Grande was held by the Board to be “adequate to indicate” that he had assisted in persecution. Without mentioning or analyzing other significant evidence that was relevant to Hernandez’s culpability, it concluded that he had not met his burden of proving that he had not participated in persecution and that he was therefore ineligible for asylum and withholding of deportation.
As the Board noted, the burden of proof shifts to an asylum applicant once evidence is presented to show a mandatory ground for denial. This does not mean, however, that a petitioner will necessarily be held responsible for any involvement with a persecutory group. Rather, a court must evaluate the entire record in order to determine whether the individual should be held personally culpable for his conduct for purposes of §§ 101(a)(42) and 243(h)(2)(A). See Fedorenko, 449 U.S. at 512-13, n. 34, 101 S.Ct. 737. In this case, the Board omitted most of the facts in the record from its legal analysis. It did not consider Hernandez’s uncontroverted testimony that his involvement with ORPA was at all times involuntary and compelled by threats of death and that he shared no persecutory motives with the guerrillas. Nor did it discuss Hernandez’s testimony that he participated in the Playa Grande action in fear for his life, that the commander stood behind him during the shooting and checked the magazine of his rifle afterwards, that immediately after the incident he expressed his disagreement with ORPA’s actions to his commander, and that at the first available opportunity he risked his life to escape the guerrillas. It focused only on his being part of the group that shot at the villagers.
The facts here are very different from those in Fedorenko. Although Fedorenko was free to leave Treblinka from time to time, he never tried to escape. Hernandez was never given any leave, and he escaped at his first opportunity. Fedorenko served at Treblinka for over a year, but Hernandez spent only 20 days as a prisoner of ORPA. Unlike Fedorenko, Hernandez never received any payment or reward from ORPA. Hernandez risked his life by articulating his disagreement with ORPA’s violent. tactics, by disobeying his commander’s orders to shoot directly at the villagers, and by fleeing from his captors into Mexico. While Fedorenko and his fellow Ukra-nians far outnumbered the Germans at Treblinka, Hernandez and two other forced recruits were isolated within a group of fifty guerrillas. And significantly, Hernandez himself revealed his involvement with ORPA to United States officials whereas Fedorenko omitted important information on his entry documents and covered up his connection with Treblinka.
The case against Hernandez is built upon his own description of the action at Playa Grande and his involvement in it. There is nothing in the record to suggest that the government had any other source of information than his own voluntary testimony. It was Hernandez himself who revealed the facts, both the good and the bad. The immigration judge found his entire testimony completely credible — including his statements that he participated in brutal and violent acts only because of real fear that he would otherwise be killed. The Board did not attempt to discredit the hearing judge’s credibility findings, but it *815chose to look at only part of the story. There is no evidence that Hernandez’s participation with ORPA was not at all times compelled by fear of death, to indicate that Hernandez shared any persecutory motives, or to show that he did not escape as soon as possible. The Board should have examined all aspects of Hernandez’s testimony when determining whether his conduct constituted assistance in persecution.
If the record is analyzed in accordance with the Fedorenko legal standard, Hernandez may be seen to have met his burden of proving that he did not assist or participate in the persecution of others. Hernandez presented credible and uncon-troverted testimony that he was unaware that ORPA was a violent guerrilla organization and that he was forcibly recruited and compelled to join it under threats of death. He testified that he only participated in the action at Playa Grande because he knew he would be killed if he did not. Despite the presence of the commander and other guerrilla soldiers, Hernandez risked his life by disobeying orders and attempting to shoot away from the civilians. The evidence also indicated that Hernandez repeatedly articulated his disagreement with ORPA’s violent tactics to the commander and other guerrillas and asked to be set free. The commander responded that Hernandez could not leave, that he would be killed if he asked to leave again, and ordered two armed guerrillas to guard him and prevent him from escaping. Despite these explicit threats, Hernandez escaped at his first available opportunity by placing himself in great danger. He was shot while fleeing and had to leave his family and homeland behind. He had only been with ORPA for approximately twenty days after his abduction before he fled. It was his misfortune that the group was actively involved in violence in that short time and that he was forced to participate in it.
Since the Board erred as a matter of law by failing fully to analyze the record in accordance with Fedorenko, we remand for its full consideration of the issue of eligibility for the type of relief requested by Hernandez.
IV.
In conclusion, we vacate the order of the Board of Immigration Appeals and remand to the Board for it to conduct a full Fedor-enko analysis to determine whether Hernandez can be held to have “assisted or participated in persecution” within the meaning of §§ 101(a)(42) and 243(h)(2)(A) and for any other proceedings that the Board may find necessary.
. The Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (''IIRIRA''), Pub.L. No. 104-208, 110 Stat. 3009, repealed and renumbered portions of the Immigration and Nationality Act. Because Hernandez's case was brought before the effective date of the IIRIRA, our references are to pre-amendment law.
. The Board noted that under direct examination Hernandez testified:
Q: Did you shoot?
A: Yes.
Q: Did you kill anybody?
A: No. I tried to aim off to the side.
Q: Did you try to stop them from killing them?
A: No.
Q: ' Why not?
A: For fear.
Under cross-examination, Hernandez testified:
Q: [When the command was given to shoot] [d]id you aim at anybody?
A: Yes.
The following colloquy occurred on redirect:
Q: When you ... when you ... again at Playa Grande when you shot your rifle did you aim particularly at anybody?
[Objection, overruled by Immigration Judge.]
A: Yes. Yes. Not everyone just chose one person or certain persons to shoot at.
Q: Do you know if you shot anybody?
A: It’s possible, but I did as much as possible to not hit anyone.
. To be eligible for asylum, Hernandez would have to show that he is unable to return to Guatemala because of past persecution or a “well-founded fear” of future persecution by the government, or a group that the government cannot control, on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. See 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(42)(A). Facts in his favor include evidence that he had informed ORPA members of his political opinion about opposing their violent tactics, that his mother and his former employer had warned him that men had been questioning his whereabouts after his escape, and that he knew ORPA had found a previous escapee who was taken back to Guatemala and killed. There is incidentally nothing in the record apart from his immigration status to suggest that Hernandez has been anything other than a law abiding resident of this country since his entry in September 1992.

=== CASE 9738385 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:43.028973+00 ===

R. M. Maher, J.
(dissenting). The majority opinion acknowledges "the conduct of the prosecutor was improper", that "on three different occasions the prosecutor repeated leading questions over objections that were sustained”. For example, on one occasion, the following took place:
"Q. [Prosecutor]: Was part of the arrangement between you and Mr. Gaffney that you were supposed to give him something after you ripped off Mr, Fair’s apartment?
"[Counsel for defendant]: I object to that, there’s been no testimony that there has been anything in evidence about any agreement to rip off, it’s putting words * * *
"The Court: Sustain the objection.
"Q. [Prosecutor]: Isn’t it true that there was an agreement between you and Mr. Gaffney that you give him something for robbing Mr. Andre Fair’s apartment?
"[Counsel for defendant]: Your Honor, there’s been no evidence that there was any agreement to rob the apartment.
"The Court: Sustained.
"[Prosecutor]: I’m asking him if he * * *
"The Court: I sustained the objection.
"Q. [Prosecutor]: Wasn’t there an agreement between you and Mr. Gaffney that you would pay him something if he helped you rob Andre Fair’s apartment?
"[Counsel for defendant]: Your Honor, I’m getting close to asking for a mistrial, that’s four times, he is trying to put testimony in his words before the jury. There’s a limit as to what you can tell him to disregard. *238I don’t want to keep jumping up like a jumping jack * * * he’s trying to make this jury think I’m trying to hide something. There’s no evidence * * *
"The Court: * * * [Y]ou have every reason to jump up and object to the question.”
However, the majority opinion declares such error harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, citing People v Robinson, 386 Mich 551, 563; 194 NW2d 709 (1972).
The standards for determining whether error is reversible or harmless are:
"First, is the error so offensive to the maintenance of a sound judicial process that it never can be regarded as harmless? Second, if not so basic, can we declare a belief that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt?” People v Robinson, supra, 563 (Citations omitted.)
Thus, the initial step in determining whether error is harmless is to ascertain its impact upon the maintenance of a sound judicial process. "An error may be intolerably offensive if it is deliberately injected into the proceedings by the prosecutor.” People v Swan, 56 Mich App 22, 32; 223 NW2d 346 (1974) (footnote omitted). I do not think that this Court should condone the deliberate injection, by the prosecutor in this case, of prejudicial material by labeling such error harmless. I find such error "so offensive to the maintenance of a sound judicial process that it never can be regarded as harmless”.

=== CASE 2215631 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:38:03.824204+00 ===

218 Cal.App.2d 199 (1963)
THE PEOPLE, Plaintiff and Respondent,
v.
JOHN FREELAND, Defendant and Appellant.
Crim. No. 3383.
California Court of Appeals. Third Dist.
July 11, 1963.
James D. Walsh, under appointment by the District Court of Appeal, for Defendant and Appellant.
Stanley Mosk, Attorney General, Doris H. Maier, Assistant Attorney General, and John L. Giordano, Deputy Attorney General, for Plaintiff and Respondent.
FRIEDMAN, J.
Approximately two weeks after a burglary had been committed defendant was accosted by two detectives on a downtown Sacramento street. The time was approximately 11 p.m. One of the officers said: "Mr. Freeland, come with us." They searched his car, then took him to police headquarters and interrogated him. They had neither arrest warrant nor search warrant. The officers questioned defendant intermittently for several hours. They had another suspect in another room and moved back and forth, questioning defendant and the other person regarding the burglary which had taken place two weeks earlier. At first defendant denied complicity in the burglary, then admitted it. There are no indications of threats or duress. He was taken to the county jail and booked at 2 a.m. The officers recorded 2 a.m. as the time of arrest although defendant had actually been in their custody for several hours.
The next morning defendant was party to a recorded interview with a member of the district attorney's staff and the same two officers. He reiterated his confession. At his nonjury trial, sole issue was admissibility of the confession. He did not deny his guilt. Objections to the confession were premised, first, on the ground that it was the product of an unlawful arrest,  [fn. *] and second, that it was involuntary, being induced by promises of leniency. On voir dire examination defendant testified to such promises and the officers denied them. The prosecution offered no evidence of cause for the arrest. The trial court found that the confession was voluntary, *201 admitted it in evidence and found defendant guilty. He appeals.
[1] The testimony concerning promises of leniency was in direct conflict. The second ground of objection to the confession is not available on appeal, since there was substantial evidentiary support for the finding of voluntariness. (People v. Montano, 184 Cal.App.2d 199, 210 [7 Cal.Rptr. 307].) Our sole concern is the unlawful arrest contention and its relationship to admissibility of an otherwise voluntary confession.
The argument stems from the exclusionary rule which bars physical evidence and oral testimony which is the "direct result" or the "immediate product" of an unconstitutional search or seizure. (People v. Mickelson, 59 Cal.2d 448, 449-450 [30 Cal.Rptr. 18, 380 P.2d 658]; People v. Allen, 214 Cal.App.2d 136 [29 Cal.Rptr. 445]; People v. Macias, 180 Cal.App.2d 193, 198 [4 Cal.Rptr. 256].) Defendant was arrested without a warrant; there was no evidence of reasonable cause for the arrest; ergo, the arrest was an illegal seizure of defendant's person, in violation of Fourth Amendment principles applicable to state prosecutions under the Fourteenth Amendment to the federal Constitution, and in violation of article I, section 19, of the California Constitution and Penal Code section 836; the confession, even if not coerced in fact, was produced by defendant's illegal arrest, hence inadmissible--so runs the thesis which opens the confession to constitutional attack. The argument includes the notion that a confession must pass not only the test of coercion, but also the barrier against evidence obtained as the result of unconstitutional search or seizure; that a confession is no different than other evidence which falls into the prosecution's lap as the fruit of unconstitutional police methods. (See People v. Rodriguez, 11 N.Y.2d 279, 229 N.Y.S.2d 353 [183 N.E.2d 651].)
[2] Initially we recognize that defendant was not present at the police interrogation by invitation. Nor was this a case of temporary detention and questioning on the street. (Cf. People v. Mickelson, supra, 59 Cal.2d at pp. 467-468; see People v. Ellsworth, 190 Cal.App.2d 844 [12 Cal.Rptr. 433]; People v. Amos, 190 Cal.App.2d 384 [11 Cal.Rptr. 834]; People v. Bruno, 211 Cal.App.2d Supp. 855 [27 Cal.Rptr. 458].) Two detectives had accosted the defendant at night and said: "Mr. Freeland, come with us." His car was *202 searched and he was taken to the police station. Although he was not handcuffed, there was such actual restraint and submission to custody as to constitute an arrest. (Pen. Code,  835.) One of the officers testified that they were arresting defendant. The arrest having been made without a warrant and its legality being questioned in the trial court, the prosecution had the burden of justifying it. (Tompkins v. Superior Court, 59 Cal.2d 65, 67 [27 Cal.Rptr. 889, 378 P.2d 113]; Badillo v. Superior Court, 46 Cal.2d 269, 272 [294 P.2d 23].) By inference, the officers had some reason to suspect and apprehend defendant. There is no evidence of exigent circumstances and no apparent reason why the police could not have secured a warrant. If a warrant had preceded the arrest or if reasonable cause had been demonstrated in the trial court, the confession would have been unassailable. The prosecution, however, made no effort to redeem the arrest from the taint of illegality. On the record before us, defendant was in custody as the result of an unconstitutional seizure of his person.
[3] In 1943 the federal Supreme Court established the "McNabb rule" which, in federal prosecutions, bars confessions produced by police interrogation during the defendant's illegal detention. (McNabb v. United States, 318 U.S. 332 [63 S.Ct. 608, 87 L.Ed. 819]; see also Upshaw v. United States, 335 U.S. 410 [69 S.Ct. 170, 93 L.Ed. 100]; Mallory v. United States, 354 U.S. 449 [77 S.Ct. 1356, 1 L.Ed.2d 1479]; Hogan and Snee, The McNabb-Mallory Rule: Its Rise, Rationale and Rescue, 47 Georgetown L.J. 1.) In 1961 Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643 [81 S.Ct. 1684, 6 L.Ed.2d 1081], established the doctrine that the federal rule excluding evidence obtained as a result of unconstitutional searches and seizures was applicable to state criminal prosecutions as an expression of due process of law guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment. In another decision, filed on the same day as Mapp, several members of the court declared:
"The McNabb case was an innovation which derived from our concern and responsibility for fair modes of criminal proceeding in the federal courts. The States, in the large, have not adopted a similar exclusionary principle. And although we adhere unreservedly to McNabb for federal criminal cases, we have not extended its rule to state prosecutions as a requirement of the Fourteenth Amendment. ..." (Culombe v. Connecticut, 367 U.S. 568, 600-601 [81 S.Ct. *203 1060, 6 L.Ed.2d 1037]; see also Gallegos v. Nebraska, 342 U.S. 55, 63, 64 [72 S.Ct. 141, 96 L.Ed. 86].)
In Rogers v. Superior Court, 46 Cal.2d 3 [291 P.2d 929], the California Supreme Court accepted the last stated position, holding that the McNabb rule is not a due process requirement, does not govern admissibility of confessions in state criminal prosecutions and that an otherwise voluntary confession is admissible, although made during a period of illegal detention. Within recent weeks, a dictum in Ker v. California, 374 U.S. 23 [83 S.Ct. 1623, 10 L.Ed.2d 726], has fortified the idea that the Mapp case does not inject the McNabb rule into state criminal prosecutions. Ker v. California has to all appearances insulated the Rogers rule from further scrutiny at the hands of the federal courts. As we view the Rogers rule, absence of coercion and inducement continues to be the sole criterion of confession admissibility in California criminal prosecutions; illegal detention is only one of the factors which determine whether the statement was voluntary. (Rogers v. Superior Court, supra, 46 Cal.2d at p. 10; People v. Garner, 57 Cal.2d 135, 141-142 [18 Cal.Rptr. 40, 367 P.2d 680]; People v. Gauthier, 205 Cal.App.2d 419, 430 [22 Cal.Rptr. 888].)
[4a] The Rogers rule controls the present case, but not because both involve confessions made during periods of illegal detention. Of course there are different sorts of illegal detention. In Rogers, as in McNabb and allied cases, the illegal detention consisted of delay in taking the prisoner before a magistrate, in violation of either state law or federal procedural rules. (See also Cleary v. Bolger, 371 U.S. 392 [83 S.Ct. 18, 9 L.Ed.2d 390].) Here the illegal detention has a different coloration. Here the illegality consists of an unconstitutional seizure of defendant's person.
As noted in Rogers, 46 Cal.2d at p. 10: "There is a basic distinction between evidence seized in violation of the search and seizure provisions of the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of California and the laws enacted thereunder, and voluntary statements made during a period of illegal detention." The distinction does not turn on the source of illegality, whether constitutional or statutory; nor on the kind of evidence, physical or testimonial, confession or otherwise. The pivotal factor is the causal relationship between the illegality, on the one hand, and the questioned evidence on the other. This causal relationship has been the subject of diverse descriptive phrases such as "direct *204 result," "essential connection," "necessary product," and "immediate product." (People v. Mickelson, supra, 59 Cal.2d at p. 449; Badillo v. Superior Court, supra, 46 Cal.2d at p. 273; Rogers v. Superior Court, supra, 46 Cal.2d at p. 10; People v. Allen, supra, 214 Cal.App.2d at p. 138; People v. Macias, supra, 180 Cal.App.2d at p. 198.) In the oft- quoted phrase of Mr. Justice Frankfurter, the relationship has been likened to "a fruit of the poisonous tree." (Nardone v. United States, 308 U.S. 338, 341 [60 S.Ct. 266, 84 L.Ed. 307].)
As to the particular kind of evidence at issue, a confession, the ultimate test of admissibility remains that of volition in fact. If the individual's "will was overborne," if his confession was not "the product of a rational intellect and his free will," it is inadmissible because coerced. (Townsend v. Sain, 372 U.S. 293 [83 S.Ct. 475, 9 L.Ed.2d 770, 782]; see People v. Garner, supra, 57 Cal.2d at pp. 162-163, concurring opinion.) If the individual confesses his offense because he wills to confess, his statement is the product of his own choice, not that of the illegal restraint. To borrow a phrase from another area of the law, the choice of the accused becomes an independent, intervening cause of his confession, and his illegal restraint becomes only a collateral circumstance, not a cause.
Thus the Washington Supreme Court recently sustained admission in evidence of a confession made after arrest without probable cause where, under the facts, the arrest and accompanying circumstances were not coercive elements in producing the confession. (State v. Keating, 61 Wn.2d 452 [378 P.2d 703].)
We have been impelled to examine this matter closely. [5] Illegally secured prosecution evidence is excluded because government must not be allowed to profit by its own wrong and because the courts refuse to condone lawless activities of law enforcement officers. (People v. Cahan, 44 Cal.2d 434, 445 [282 P.2d 905, 50 A.L.R.2d 513]; People v. Martin, 45 Cal.2d 755, 761 [290 P.2d 855].) [4b] In cases sustaining admissibility in the face of illegal conduct, the court was able to satisfy itself that the conduct was entirely unrelated and collateral to procurement of the questioned evidence. (People v. Maddox, 46 Cal.2d 301, 305 [294 P.2d 6]; Rogers v. Superior Court, supra, 46 Cal.2d at p. 11.) In all realism there is a more palpable connection here. We give little consequence to the second confession the morning after *205 defendant's arrest; it simply flowed in the channel created by his confession the preceding evening. The latter was made in the course of an interrogation immediately following his illegal arrest. The arrest created the occasion for the interrogation which produced the confession. Yet defendant told his tale within two hours. He was not exhausted by extended restraint or prolonged grilling; not exposed to physical or psychological strains other than those affecting any crime suspect who is quizzed by the police; not subjected to hunger or thirst; his resistance not sapped. The circumstances smack of catharsis rather than the knout. His will was not overborne, his confession not coerced. It was the direct result of his voluntary choice and not the direct result of his illegal arrest.
Judgment affirmed.
Pierce, P. J., and Schottky, J., concurred.
"Mr. Wells: Your Honor, I have then citations to give the Court, if that's the case, and I have a motion, of course, to exclude any admissions. ..."
"Mr. Wells: I want to cite, first of all on this basis, People v. Macias, 180 Cal.Ap. [sic] 2d, 193. As to the evidence so far, thus far elicited, this Defendant was unlawfully, under an unlawful restraint. There is no showing he was lawfully arrested. He was not arrested by reason of a warrant, and there's no reasonable cause shown. And under the authority of People v. Macias, confessions made under an unlawful restraint are inadmissible."
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Defense counsel stated to the court:

=== CASE 9738386 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:44.805487+00 ===

*895ON PETITION TO TRANSFER
DICKSON, Justice.
How to instruct juries regarding reasonable doubt has long been a subject on which courts, individual judges, and lawyers have taken differing approaches. Today we seek not only to resolve conflicting opinions among different panels of the Court of Appeals but also to foster the improved wording of instructions so that we may achieve greater juror understanding and better application of the rudimentary principle of proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
Following a jury trial, defendant-appellant Steve Winegeart was convicted of the crime of burglary, a class B felony. Relying primarily on Cage v. Louisiana, 498 U.S. 39, 111 S.Ct. 328, 112 L.Ed.2d 339 (1990) (per curiam), the Court of Appeals reversed and remanded for a new trial, finding that the "moral certainty" language in the trial court's reasonable-doubt instruction may have permitted the jury "to find the defendant guilty based upon a degree of proof below the 'beyond a reasonable doubt' standard required by the Due Process Clause." Winegeart v. State, 644 N.E.2d 180, 183 (Ind.Ct.App.1994). In other Court of Appeals opinions reviewing identical or substantively identical "moral certainty" instructions, this holding has met alternatively with approval, Tobias v. State, 659 N.E.2d 246 (Ind.Ct.App.1995), and with disagreement, Malone v. State, 660 N.E.2d 619 (Ind.Ct.App.1996); Jackson v. State, 657 N.E.2d 131 (Ind.Ct.App.1995). To resolve this conflict, we grant the State's Petition to Transfer.
In his appeal from the conviction, the defendant contends that the trial court erred in instructing the jury regarding reasonable doubt and specific intent. Because the Court of Appeals granted relief on the defendant's claim as to his reasonable-doubt instruction, it did not address the second claim. We shall address each separately.
Reasonable-Doubt Instruction
The defendant asserts that the following instruction, which used the words "actual," "fair," and "moral certainty," permitted the jury to find guilt based upon a degree of proof below that required by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. After stating that the burden is upon the State to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, the challenged instruction explained:
A reasonable doubt is such doubt as you may have in your mind when having fairly considered all of the evidence, you do not feel satisfied to a moral certainty of the guilt of the defendant. A reasonable doubt is a fair, actual and logical doubt that arises in the mind as an impartial consideration of all the evidence and the cireum-stances in the case. It is not every doubt, however, it is a reasonable one. You are not warranted in considering as reasonable those doubts that may be merely speculative or products of the imagination, and you may not act upon mere whim, guess or surmise or upon the mere possibility of guilt. A reasonable doubt arises, or exists in the mind, naturally, as a result of the evidence or the lack of evidence. There is nothing in this that is mysterious or fanciful. It does not contemplate absolute or mathematical certainty. Despite every precaution that may be taken to prevent it, there may be in all matters depending upon human testimony for proof, a mere possibility of error.
If, after considering all of the evidence, you have reached such a firm belief in the guilt of the defendant that you would feel safe to act upon that belief, without hesitation, in a matter of the highest concern and importance to you, then you have reached that degree of certainty which excludes reasonable doubt and authorizes conviction.
This rule on reasonable doubt applies to each of you individually, and it is your personal duty to refuse to convict as long as you have a reasonable doubt as to the defendant's guilt as charged. Likewise, it is your personal duty to vote for conviction as long as you are convinced beyond a reasonable doubt of the defendant's guilt as charged.
Record at 56-57.
The defendant did not make a timely objection to this instruction. Alleged er*896rors in the giving of instructions are not available on appeal unless proper specific objections are made at trial. Ind.Crim.Rule 8(B). However, a trial error may be deemed "fundamental" so as to avoid procedural default if it is a "substantial blatant violation of basic principles" that renders a trial unfair to a defendant. Townsend v. State, 632 N.E.2d 727, 730 (Ind.1994).
In determining whether a claimed error denies the defendant a fair trial, we consider whether the resulting harm or potential for harm is substantial. The element of harm is not shown by the fact that a defendant was ultimately convicted; rather, it depends upon whether his right to a fair trial was detrimentally affected by the denial of procedural opportunities for the ascertainment of truth to which he otherwise would have been entitled.
Id. We have recently stated that, for a mistake to constitute fundamental error, "it must be so prejudicial to the rights of a defendant as to make a fair trial impossible." Barany v. State, 658 N.E.2d 60, 64 (Ind.1995).
Winegeart contends that the giving of the reasonable-doubt instruction blatantly violated constitutional principles and deprived his jury trial of fairness. He asserts that in the reasonable-doubt instruction used in his jury trial, the words "actual" and "fair" expand the quantum of doubt needed to constitute "reasonable" doubt, and that the instruction refers to "moral certainty" instead of "evi-dentiary certainty," thus authorizing the jury to find guilt based on a degree of proof below that required by the Due Process Clause.
The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment protects an accused "against conviction exeept upon proof beyond a reasonable doubt of every fact necessary to constitute the crime with which he is charged." In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 364, 90 S.Ct. 1068, 1073, 25 L.Ed.2d 368, 375 (1970). Because of the transcending interest a criminal defendant has in his liberty, the risk of an erroneous conviction necessitates that a substantial burden of proof be placed upon the prosecution. See Speiser v. Randall, 357 U.S. 513, 525-26, 78 S.Ct. 1332, 1342, 2 L.Ed.2d 1460, 1472-73 (1958). The standard of proof beyond a reasonable doubt serves to impress upon the fact-finder "the need to reach a subjective state of near certitude of the guilt of the accused." Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 315, 99 S.Ct. 2781, 2787, 61 L.Ed.2d 560, 571 (1979). While the federal constitution requires that juries be instructed "on the necessity that the defendant's guilt be proven beyond a reasonable doubt," it does not require the use of "any particular form of words." Victor v. Nebraska, 511 U.S. 1, -, 114 S.Ct. 1239, 1243, 127 L.Ed.2d 583, 590 (1994). However, the jury instructions, taken as a whole, must correctly express "the concept of reasonable doubt to the jury." Id.
In Cage, 498 U.S. 39, 111 S.Ct. 328, 112 L.Ed.2d 339, a reasonable-doubt instruction was determined to be constitutionally defective. In defining reasonable doubt, the instruction included language that equated reasonable doubt with "a grave uncertainty" and "an actual substantial doubt" and stated, "What is required is not an absolute or mathematical certainty, but a moral certainty." Id. at 40, 111 S.Ct. at 329, 112 L.Ed.2d at 342. The Court found that the words "substantial" and "grave" suggested a "higher degree of doubt than is required for acquittal under the reasonable-doubt standard," and that these statements, together with the reference to "moral certainty," rather than "evi-dentiary certainty," permitted a finding of guilt based upon a degree of proof below that required by the Due Process Clause. Id. at 41, 111 S.Ct. at 329-30, 112 L.Ed.2d at 342.
These principles were discussed and applied by the United States Supreme Court in the recent companion cases of Victor v. Nebraska and Sandoval v. California, 511 U.S. 1, 114 S.Ct. 1239, 127 L.Ed.2d 583 (1994), which approved reasonable-doubt instructions that included phrases such as "to a moral certainty," and "actual and substantial doubt." See Victor, 511 U.S. at -, -, -, 114 S.Ct at 1244, 1249, -, 127 L.Ed.2d at 597, 600, -. In both of the instructions approved in Victor and Sandoval, the moral certainty language appeared in very similar sentences, which stated that reasonable doubt occurs when, after "consideration of all the evidence," the juror does not *897have "an abiding conviction, to a moral certainty" of the guilt of the accused. Victor, 511 U.S. at -, -, 114 S.Ct. at 1244, 1249, 127 L.Ed.2d at 592, 598. In this context, the Supreme Court explained that "the reference to moral certainty, in conjunction with the abiding conviction language," sufficiently emphasized "the need to reach a subjective state of near certitude of the guilt of the accused." Id. at -, 114 S.Ct. at 1247, 127 L.Ed.2d at 596. The Victor court also distinguished its "moral certainty" instructions from the one in Cage, noting that "the problem in Cage was that the rest of the instruction provided insufficient context to lend meaning to the phrase." Victor, 511 U.S. at -, 114 S.Ct. at 1250, 127 L.Ed.2d at 596. The Court noted, "Instructing the jurors that they must have an abiding convietion of the defendant's guilt does much to alleviate any concerns that the phrase moral certainty might be misunderstood in the abstract." Id. at -, 114 S.Ct. at 1250, 127 L.Ed.2d at 600. Although clearly stating that the Justices "do not condone" and "do not countenance" the inclusion of the phrase moral certainty in a reasonable-doubt instruction, the Court found that in the context of the entire instruction, which explicitly directed the jurors to base their conclusion on the evidence of the case and not to engage in speculation or conjecture, the inclusion of the moral certainty language did not render the instruction unconstitutional. Id. at -, -, 114 S.Ct. at 1248, 1251, 127 L.Ed.2d at 597, 600. Similarly, while noting that equating reasonable doubt with substantial doubt is "somewhat problematic," the Court found that the context of the instruction, unlike that in Cage, contrasted substantial doubt with fanciful conjecture. Id. at -, 114 S.Ct. at 1250, 127 L.Ed.2d at 599. It concluded that "taken as a whole, the instructions correctly conveyed the concept of reasonable doubt to the jury." Id. at -, 114 S.Ct. at 1251, 127 L.Ed.2d at 601.
The challenged words and phrases in the reasonable-doubt instruction given to the Winegeart jury contain both significant differences from, and substantial similarities to, the instructions approved in Victor The Winegeart instruction's reference to "moral certainty" lacks the "abiding conviction" language noted in Victor. On the other hand, the "actual and substantial doubt" wording in the Nebraska instruction in Victor is similar to the "fair, actual, and logical doubt" phrase used in Winegeart's trial. Compare Victor, 511 U.S. at -, 114 S.Ct. at 1250, 127 L.Ed.2d at 599, with Winegeart, 644 N.E.2d at 181-82. Moreover, the Winegeart jury was directed to base its decision on all the evidence; to disregard whim, guess, surmise, or mere possibility of guilt; and to consider the "hesitate to act" benchmark-all factors that the Victor court found significant. See id. at -, 114 S.Ct. at 1250-51, 127 L.Ed.2d at 599-600.
In the present case, the Court of Appeals rejected Winegeart's challenge to the use of the words "fair" and "actual" as used to explain reasonable doubt, but found constitutional error because the prominently placed, first substantive sentence of the definition in the instruction equated reasonable doubt with moral certainty, in violation of Cage. Winegeart, 644 N.E.2d at 183. Applying the methodology of appellate review set out in Cage, the Court of Appeals found that the use of the phrase "moral certainty" (rather than "evidentiary certainty") "may have allowed" the jury to define guilt based upon a degree of proof below that required by the Due Process Clause. Id.
In the time since Cage, however, the United States Supreme Court has revised and clarified the test for determining the constitutionality of a reasonable-doubt instruction. The proper constitutional inquiry "is not whether the instruction 'could have' been applied in an unconstitutional manner, but whether there is a reasonable likelihood that the jury did so apply it." Victor, 511 U.S. at -, 114 S.Ct. at 1243, 127 L.Ed.2d at 591. Accord Estelle v. McGuire, 502 U.S. 62, 72-73, 112 S.Ct. 475, 482, 116 L.Ed.2d 385, 399 n. 4 (1991) (disapproving the standard of review employed in Cage). Thus, unlike the Court in Cage, we must determine not whether the instruction "may have allowed" the jury to find guilt based upon a constitutionally deficient standard of proof, as did the Court of Appeals in this case, Winegeart, 644 N.E.2d at 183, but rather whether "there is a reasonable likelihood" *898that the jury applied the instructions to con-viet based upon constitutionally insufficient proof of guilt. Victor, 511 U.S. at -, 114 S.Ct. at 1243, 127 L.Ed.2d at 591... Our Court of Appeals found that the contested language "carried with it the distinct potential of im-permissibly relieving the State of its constitutionally-imposed burden of proof." Winegeart, 644 N.E.2d at 183 (emphasis added). This evaluation, while appropriate under Cage, does not comply with the new standard articulated in Victor and Estelle.
As to Winegeart's constitutional challenge to the reasonable-doubt instruction given at his trial, we conclude that there is not a reasonable likelihood that the jurors who determined the defendant's guilt applied the instruction in a way that violated the Due Process Clause. Thus the giving of this instruction would not have constituted error even if a timely and proper objection would have been made at trial. When there is no error, ipso facto, there is no fundamental error. Barany, 658 N.E.2d at 64. However, we disapprove of the continued use of this instruction in the future.
The instruction uses 300 words in eleven sentences to explain reasonable doubt. This is not atypical for reasonable-doubt instructions, which often appear to be a conglomeration of phrases providing supplemental or alternative explication of reasonable doubt. Through the years, appellate decisions have held a wide variety of reasonable-doubt instructions to satisfy the minimal constitutional requirements. After a particular phrase has been thus tolerated by appellate courts, trial courts will often-usually in response to requests by counsel-incorporate such "approved" phrases into reasonable-doubt instructions. As a result, most reasonable-doubt instructions commonly in use in our courts today have not been crafted for the purpose of most effectively explaining the concept of reasonable doubt to jurors but rather are used primarily because the language therein is considered adequate to avoid appellate reversal.
As courts utilize such longer, more intricate explanations of reasonable doubt, juries are likely to draw an overall impression which may transcend the literal meaning of the substance of the words. Such lengthy and conceptually challenging instructions often present a drumbeat repetition, declaring that reasonable doubt is not every doubt, not whim, not guess, not surmise, not mere possibility, not fanciful, ete.; and that to qualify as reasonable doubt, such doubt must be fair, actual, logical, natural, ete. It is not surprising that jurors often have difficulty in synthesizing and comprehending reasonable doubt or that they may perceive that the instructing judge is minimizing the degree of doubt that will preclude a finding of guilt.
Although reluctant to find reversible error in instructions purporting to explain reasonable doubt, the United States Supreme Court has acknowledged: "Attempts to explain the term 'reasonable doubt' do not usually result in making it any clearer to the minds of the jury." Miles v. United States, 103 U.S. 304, 312, 26 L.Ed. 481, 484 (1881), quoted in Holland v. United States, 348 .S. 121, 140, 75 S.Ct. 127, 138, 99 L.Ed. 150, 167 (1954). The Seventh Cireuit has declared:
"Reasonable doubt" must speak for itself. Jurors know what is "reasonable" and are quite familiar with the meaning of "doubt." Judges' and lawyers' attempts to inject other amorphous catch-phrases into the "reasonable doubt" standard, such as "matter of the highest importance" only muddy the water.... It is, therefore, inappropriate for judges to give an instruction defining "reasonable doubt," and it is equally inappropriate for trial counsel to provide their own definition.
United States v. Glass, 846 F.2d 386, 387 (7th Cir.1988). This view has found support in several other jurisdictions. See United States v. Headspeth, 852 F.2d 753, 755 (4th Cir.1988) (noting that "the term reasonable doubt has a 'self-evident meaning comprehensible to the lay juror, which judicial efforts to define generally do more to obscure than to illuminate"); United States v. Moss, 756 F.2d 329, 338 (4th Cir.1985) (stating, "Recognizing that little can be gained from attempts to define reasonable doubt, while admitting that added confusion is often created by these well-intentioned judicial efforts, we join in the general condemnation of trial court attempts to define reasonable doubt in *899their jury instructions"); Smith v. Bordenkircher, 718 F.2d 1273, 1276 (4th Cir.1983), cert. denied, 466 U.S. 976, 104 S.Ct. 2355, 80 L.Ed.2d 828 (1984) (stating, "We share this generally disapproving view" of attempts to explain reasonable doubt); Illinois v. Malmenato, 14 Ill.2d 52, 150 N.E.2d 806, 811 (1958), cert. denied, 358 U.S. 899, 79 S.Ct. 222, 3 L.Ed.2d 148; (observing, "Reasonable doubt is a term which needs no elaboration and we have so frequently discussed the futility of attempting to define it that we might expect the practice to be discontinued"); Kansas v. Larkin, 209 Kan. 660, 498 P.2d. 37, 39 (1972) (commenting that "it may well be questioned whether any definition is more illuminating than the phrase itself. The words are ordinary ones meant to be used in their popular or conventional sense and are understandable by a person of ordinary intelligence"); Missouri v. Taylor, 486 S.W.2d 239, 244 (Mo.1972) (noting, "It is difficult to explain simple terms like 'reasonable doubt' so as to make them plainer," and "Reasonable doubt is reasonable doubt, and that is about all that can be said in regard to it") (citations omitted).
Justice Ginsburg disagrees: "(Elven if definitions of reasonable doubt are necessarily imperfect, the alternative-refusing to define the concept at all-is not obviously preferable." Victor, 511 U.S. at -, 114 S.Ct. at 1253, 127 L.Ed.2d at 603 (Ginsburg, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment). Observing that "American courts have flirted with efforts to elaborate on the meaning of these familiar words," Chief Judge Newman of the Second Cireuit Court of Appeals finds it "rather unsettling that we are using a formulation that we believe will become less clear the more we explain it." John O. Newman, Beyond "Reasonable Doubt," 68 N.Y.U.L.Rev. 979, at 982, 984 (1993). However, he acknowledges that the explanatory reasonable-doubt instruction currently in use "is ambiguous and open to widely disparate interpretation by jurors." Id. at 985.
Professor Wigmore, noting that "various efforts have been made to define more in detail this elusive and undefinable state of mind," states:
Nevertheless, when anything more than a simple caution and a brief definition is given, the matter tends to become one of mere words, and the actual effect upon the jury, instead of being enlightenment, is likely to be rather confusion, or, at the least, a continued incomprehension. In practice, these detailed amplifications of the doctrine have usually degenerated into a mere tool for counsel who desire to entrap an unwary judge into forgetfulness of some obscure precedent, or to save a cause for a new trial by quibbling, on appeal, over the verbal propriety of a form of words uttered or declined to be uttered by the judge. The effort to perpetuate and develop these elaborate unserviceable definitions is a useless one, and serves today chiefly to aid the purposes of the tactition. It should be abandoned.
9 John H. Wigmore, Evidence in Trials at Common Law § 2497, at 405, 406-09 (James H. Chadboum rev. 1981).
Several researchers have concluded that jurors' understanding of the concept of reasonable doubt may indeed be enhanced after hearing an instruction explaining the concept. See Laurence J. Severance and Elizabeth F. Loftus, Improving the Ability of Jurors to Comprehend and Apply Criminal Jury Instructions, 17 L. & Socy Rev. 153, 180 (1982); Laurence J. Severance et al., Toward Criminal Jury Instructions that Jurors Can Understand, 75 J.Crim.L. & Criminology 198, 206 (1984). Other studies, however, suggest that conventional pattern instructions attempting to explain the concept of reasonable doubt are ineffective. See Geoffrey P. Kramer & Dorean M. Koenig, Do Jurors Understand Criminal Jury Instructions? Analyzing the Results of the Michigan Juror Comprehension Project, 23 J.L.Reform 401, 414-16 (1990) (concluding that "the minimal and even negative effects of these instructions should raise serious concern about whether instructed jurors understand a crucial element of their charge-the meaning of reasonable doubt"); Norbert L. Kerr et. al., Guilt Beyond a Reasonable Doubt: Effects of Concept Definition and Assigned Decision Rule on the Judgments of Mock Jurors, 34 J.Personality & Soc.Psychol. 282, 285-86 (1976).
*900Some commentators maintain that, because the meaning of reasonable doubt is not self-evident to the lay juror, the federal Constitution requires courts to honor any defendant or jury requests for instructions defining reasonable doubt. See Henry A. Diamond, Note, Reasonable Doubt: To Define, or Not to Define, 90 Colum.L.Rev. 1716, 1736 (1990). One commentator asserts that "[mjost people require considerable explanation, example, and parallel articulation to grasp the basic contours of [the concept of reasonable doubt]," and that a reasonable-doubt instruction, unadorned by explanation, "is an invitation to clothe it by invention, its flexibility an opportunity to bend it to prefigured purposes." H. Richard Uviller, Acquitting the Guilty: Two Case Studies on Jury Misgivings and the Misunderstood Standard of Proof, 2 Crim.L.F. 1, 38 (1990). One study reports that the responses of potential jurors asked what probability they associate with "reasonable doubt" range from 50 percent to 100 percent. Terry Connolly, Decision Theory, Reasonable Doubt, and the Utility of Erroneous Acquittals, 11 L. & Hum.Behav. 101, 102 (1987).
Substantial research by linguists, psychologists, and others suggests that many jurors have difficulty understanding jury instructions but much less difficulty understanding those that have been rewritten in light of psycholinguistic principles. See Peter M. Tiersma, Reforming the Language of Jury Instructions, 22 Hofstra L.Rev. 37, 42-52 (1993). Researchers have provided valuable suggestions on how to write more comprehensible jury instructions, including the illumination of jargon and modifying clauses and the use of simpler language. Summarizing the suggestions of psycholinguists, Professor Tanford provides ten guidelines for the improvement of instructions.
1. Eliminate nominalizations (making nouns out of verbs) and substitute verb forms; eg., changing "an offer of evidence" to "items were offered into evidence."
2. Replace the prepositional phrase "as to" with "about;" eg., changing "you must not speculate as to what the answer might have been" to "you must not speculate about what the answer might have been."
3. Relocate prepositional phrases so they do not interrupt a sentence; eg., avoiding sentences such as "proximate cause is a cause which, in a natural and continuous sequence, produces the injury."
4. Replace words that are difficult to understand with simple ones; eg., changing "agent's negligence is imputed to plaintiff" to "agent's negligence trans-fors to plaintiff."
5. Avoid multiple negatives in a sentence; e.g., "innocent mis recollection is not uncommon."
6. Use the active rather than passive voice; eg., changing "no emphasis is intended by me" to "I do not intend to emphasize."
7. Avoid "whiz" deletions (omitting words "which is"); eg., by changing "statements of counsel" to "statements which are made by counsel."
8. Reduce long lists of words with similar meanings to only one or two; eg., shortening "knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education" to "training or experience."
9. Organize instructions into meaningful discourse structures that avoid connecting unrelated ideas in ways that make them seem related.
10. Avoid embedding subordinate clauses in sentences; e.g., "you must not speculate to be true any insinuation suggested by a question asked a witness."
J. Alexander Tanford, The Law and Psychology of Jury Instructions, 69 Neb.L.Rev. 71, 81-82 (1990) (citations omitted).
We agree in principle with the Seventh and Fourth Cireuits and those other jurisdictions that have concluded that the phrase "reasonable doubt" may suffice without further explication and that many attempts to provide effective additional explanation have fallen short. However, we are not convinced that the task is impossible in light of recent and ongoing research, and we thus prefer to endorse for use in Indiana courts a reasonable-doubt instruction that, to the maximum *901extent possible, reflects the wisdom of the various available resources.
There is an inherent challenge in devising a comprehensible and succeinet instruction explaining to lay jurors the concept of reasonable doubt. They must be informed that their determination of guilt depends upon the absence of reasonable doubt. The existence of reasonable doubt precludes a finding of guilt. Viewed in this way, the reasonable-doubt instruction is necessarily an attempt to define a negative concept. When court instructions proceed to define this concept by stating what it is not, the resulting double negative concept diminishes juror comprehension even further. In addition, we perceive that instructions containing repeated statements narrowing the class of doubts eligible for consideration as reasonable doubt may have a cumulative effect of minimizing the value and importance of this bedrock principle of eriminal justice.
Although not utilized by the trial court in the present case, one attempt to suggest an improved reasonable-doubt instruction is found in Indiana Pattern Jury Instruction 1.15 1:
A reasonable doubt is a fair, actual and logical doubt that arises in your mind after an impartial consideration of all of the evidence and cireumstances in the case. It should be a doubt based upon reason and common sense and not a doubt based upon imagination or speculation.
To prove the defendant's guilt of the elements of the crime charged beyond a reasonable doubt, the evidence must be such that it would convince you of the truth of it, to such a degree of certainty that you would feel safe to act upon such conviction, without hesitation, in a matter of the highest concern and importance to you.
1 Indiana Pattern Jury Instructions-Criminal, instruct. 1.15 (2d ed. 1991). This instruetion seeks to explain what reasonable doubt is and is not and then proceeds to equate "beyond a reasonable doubt" with the degree of probability a juror would require to act unhesitatingly "in a manner of highest concern and importance to" himself or herself. Such attempts to quantify the degree of probability have received mixed reviews.
The "hesitate to act" analogy is discussed in Victor, 511 U.S. at -, 114 S.Ct. at 1250, 1252, 1257, 127 L.Ed.2d at -, -, -. The Victor majority comments that "the hesitate to act standard gives a common-sense benchmark for just how substantial such a doubt must be." Victor, 511 U.S. at -, 114 S.Ct. at 1250, 127 L.Ed.2d at 599. In contrast, the "hesitate to act" language is criticized as problematic by Justices Ginsburg and Blackmun. Justice Blackmun, with Justice Souter concurring, states that such language "may in fact make matters worse by analogizing the decision whether to con-viet or acquit a defendant to the frequently high-risk personal decisions people must make in their daily lives." Victor, 511 U.S. at -, 114 S.Ct. at 1257, 127 L.Ed.2d at 608 (Blackmun, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). Justice Ginsburg expressly notes that "[al committee of distinguished federal judges, reporting to the Judicial Conference of the United States, has criticized this 'hesitate to act' formulation." Victor, 511 U.S. at -, 114 S.Ct at 1252, 127 L.Ed.2d at 601 (Ginsburg, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment). The committee explained:
analogy it uses seems misplaced. In the decisions people make in the most important of their own affairs, resolution of conflicts about past events does not usually play a major role. Indeed, decisions we make in the most important affairs of our lives-choosing a spouse, a job, a place to live, and the Hike-generally, involve a very heavy element of uncertainty and risk-taking. They are wholly unlike the decisions jurors ought to make in eriminal cases.
Federal Judicial Center, Pattern Criminal Jury Instructions 18-19 (1987) (commentary on instruction 21). We find such reasoning persuasive and believe that, while the "hesitate to act" language may bolster an otherwise marginal instruction against constitu*902tional challenge, use of this analogy is neither required nor particularly desirable in explaining the concept of reasonable doubt.
In contrast to the Indiana Pattern Jury Instruction and other common instructions that attempt to define the negative concept of reasonable doubt, a proposal from the Federal Judicial Center focuses upon the positive concept of proof beyond a reasonable doubt. It defines that term, succinetly, as proof "that leaves you firmly convinced," and explains that reasonable doubt is a greater degree of doubt than merely "possible doubt." It explains that a juror's choice between guilty and not guilty should be equated to the distinction between "firmly convinced" of guilt versus "a real possibility" that the defendant is not guilty. The instruction states:
[The government has the burden of proving the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Some of you may have served as jurors in civil cases, where you were told that it is only necessary to prove that a fact is more likely true than not true. In criminal cases, the government's proof must be more powerful than that. It must be beyond a reasonable doubt.
Proof beyond a reasonable doubt is proof that leaves you firmly convinced of the defendant's guilt. There are very few things in this world that we know with absolute certainty, and in criminal cases the law does not require proof that overcomes every possible doubt. If, based on your consideration of the evidence, you are firmly convinced that the defendant is guilty of the crime charged, you [should] find [him/her] guilty. If on the other hand, you think there is a real possibility that [he/she] is not guilty, you [should] give [him/her] the benefit of the doubt and find [him/her] not guilty.
Federal Judicial Center, Pattern Criminal Jury Instructions 17-18 (1987) (instruction 21). The use of this instruction has received significant endorsement. See Victor, 511 U.S. at -, 114 S.Ct. at 1253, 127 L.Ed.2d at 603 (Ginsburg, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment) (stating, "This model instruction surpasses others I have seen in stating the reasonable doubt standard succinetly and comprehensibly"); Arizona v. Portillo 182 Ariz. 592, 898 P.2d 970, 974, (1995) (finding this definition to be the one that "most fairly and accurately conveys the meaning of reasonable doubt," the "consistent use" of which "will assist jurors, be fair to both the state and defendants, and obviate the need for any future appeals on this issue," and ordering that it be given "in every future criminal case"); Jackson, 657 N.E.2d at 138 n. 2 (agreeing with Justice Ginsburg's endorsement).
In the exercise of our inherent and constitutional supervisory responsibilities, see Ind. Const. Art. VII, § 4, we seek to assure that juries in criminal cases are equipped with instructions that will allow them to understand and apply correctly the concept of reasonable doubt. Informed by numerous studies and recommendations from academic and judicial authorities, we acknowledge the shortcomings in Indiana Pattern Jury Instruction 1.15, in the instruction at Wineg-eart's trial, and in the various other reasonable-doubt explanations commonly in use. A substantial improvement in effective communication may be achieved by utilization of the Federal Judicial Center's proposed instruction. We therefore authorize and recommend (but, acknowledging that two of the five members of this Court find the present Indiana Pattern Jury Instruction preferable, do not mandate) that Indiana trial courts henceforth instruct regarding reasonable doubt by giving the above-quoted Federal Judicial Center instruction,2 preferably with no supplementation or embellishment. We also request that this instruction be added to the next revision of the Indiana Pattern Jury Instructions-Criminal.
While the challenged instruction in the present case is less effective than we would prefer, it is not so deficient as to be constitu*903tionally defective. We therefore reject the defendant's contention of reversible error regarding the trial court's reasonable-doubt instruction.
Specific-Intent Instruction
The second issue presented in the defendant's appeal is his assertion that Final Instruction 183 impermissibly relieved the State of its burden of proof on the issue of specific intent. The State responds that, because the ground on which the defendant objected to this instruction at trial was different than that now advanced on appeal, the allegation of error has been waived. It further responds that the instruction is substantially similar to some that have been likewise challenged in and upheld by Indiana appellate courts. See Henderson v. State, 544 N.E.2d 507, 509 (Ind.1989); Blackburn v. State, 519 N.E.2d 554, 557 (Ind.1988); Warmer v. State, 577 N.E.2d 267, 271 (Ind.Ct.App.1991); Beecher v. State, 567 N.E.2d 861, 864 (Ind.Ct.App.1991).
At trial, the defendant objected to the giving of Instruction 18 not on the ground that he raises here but on the ground that it was covered by other instructions. Record at 240-41. Indiana Criminal Rule 8(b) provides that a party must state his specific objections to the trial court's instructions before the commencement of argument and that no claim of error is available on appeal exeept upon the specific objections properly made at trial. However, such procedural default will not preclude appellate review of issues of fundamental error. Townsend v. State, 632 N.E.2d 727 (Ind.1994). Because the defendant here claims that Instruction 18 was impermissible under Sandstrom v. Montana, 442 U.S. 510, 99 S.Ct. 2450, 61 L.Ed.2d 39 (1979), and its progeny, and because a Sandstrom violation is considered fundamental error, see Walker v. State, 632 N.E.2d 723, 724 (Ind.1994); Reid v. State, 529 N.E.2d 1309, 1309 (Ind.1988), procedural default will be precluded if such an error is found.
A jury instruction will be found to violate the Fourteenth Amendment where it is reasonably likely that the jury interpreted the instruction as shifting to the defendant a burden of persuasion on the intent element. See Estelle, 502 U.S. 62 at 72-73, 112 S.Ct. 475 at 482, 116 L.Ed.2d 385 at 399 n. 4; Sandstrom, 442 U.S. at 523-24, 99 S.Ct. at 2458-59, 61 L.Ed.2d at 50-51. However, in Henderson, 544 N.E.2d at 509, and Jacks, 394 N.E.2d at 175,4 this Court rejected claims of Sandstrom violations regarding instructions that were substantially similar to Instruction 18 in the present case. See also Blackburn, 519 N.E.2d at 557. Following Sandstrom, the Supreme Court in Francis v. Franklin, 471 U.S. 307, 105 S.Ct. 1965, 85 L.Ed.2d 344 (1985), held that a reviewing court:
must determine whether the challenged portion of the instruction creates a mandatory presumption, or merely a permissive *904inference. A mandatory presumption instructs the jury that it must infer the presumed facts if the State proves certain predicate facts. A permissive inference suggests to the jury a possible conclusion to be drawn if the State proves predicate facts, but does not require the jury to draw that conclusion.
Mandatory presumptions ... violate the Due Process Clause if they relieve the State of the burden of persuasion on an element of an offense. A permissive inference does not relieve the State of its burden of persuasion because it still requires the State to convince the jury that the suggested conclusion should be inferred based on the predicate facts proved.... A permissive inference violates the Due Process Clause only if the suggested conclusion is not one that reason and common sense justify in light of the proven facts before the jury.
Francis, 471 U.S. at 314-315, 105 S.Ct. at 1971, 85 L.Ed.2d at 353-54 (citations omitted) (footnote omitted). Furthermore, the Francis court explained, if the challenged portion of the instruction does not appear to pass constitutional muster, it "must be considered in the context of the charge as a whole," because it may be explained by other instructions sufficiently to avoid the creation of an unconstitutional presumption. Id. at 315, 105 S.Ct. at 1971, 85 L.Ed.2d at 354.
The instructions disapproved in Francis told jurors that "'acts of a person of sound mind and discretion are presumed to be the product of the person's will" and that a person ""%s presumed to intend the natural and probable consequences of his acts," thereby mandating that the jurors make particular presumptions. Id. at 316, 105 S.Ct. at 1972, 85 L.Ed.2d at 354. In contrast, Instruction 18 talks in terms of what the jury "may look to," "may infer," and may consider in order to arrive at "a determination of the defendant's intent." Record at 54 (emphases added). These phrases de-seribe permissive inferences, not mandatory presumptions. Moreover, we note that the permissive term "may" is used here three times. Overall, Instruction 18 did not mandate that the jury employ any particular presumptions but merely permitted it to draw appropriate inferences from the evidence.
Considering the instruction as a whole, we conclude that there is no reasonable likelihood that the jury interpreted Instruction 18 as shifting to the defendant a burden of persuasion on the intent element of the charged offense. We find no error as to this issue.
Conclusion
Transfer is granted and the opinion of the Court of Appeals is vacated pursuant to Indiana Appellate Rule 11(B)8). The judgment of the trial court is affirmed.
SULLIVAN and SELBY, JJ., concur.
DeBRULER, J., concurs in result with separate opinion in which SHEPARD, C.J., concurs.
. The Indiana Pattern Jury Instructions are prepared under the auspices of the Indiana Judges Association and the Indiana Judicial Conference Criminal and Civil Instruction Committees. Although not formally approved for use, they are tacitly recognized by Indiana Trial Rule 51(E).
. We believe that jurors will benefit from an instruction that refers to civil juries on which they may previously have served and the different standards of proof used in civil proceedings. Not only should this be helpful to jurors who actually have such experience, but it will also help dispel inapplicable concepts that jurors may have obtained from national television or popular novels.
. Final Instruction 18 provided:
You are instructed that where a specific intent or kind of culpability is required to make an act an offense, such as in the charge preferred [sic] against the defendant, the State is not required to make proof of specific intent by direct evidence, since purpose and intent are subjective facts. That is, they exist within the mind of man, and since you cannot delve into a person's mind and determine his purpose and intent, you may look to all the surrounding circumstances, including what was said and done in relation thereto. The State is only required to produce such evidence as will satisfy the jury beyond a reasonable doubt that the crime charged was committed by the defendant with the degree of culpability charged in the information. You may, however, infer that every person intends the natural and probable consequences of his voluntary acts, unless the circumstances are such to indicate the absence of such intent. A determination of the defendant's intent may be arrived at by the jury from a consideration of the defendant's conduct and the natural and usual consequences to which such conduct logically and reasonably points.
Where an unlawful act, however, is proved to be knowingly done, no further proof is needed on the part of the State in the absence of justifying or excusing facts.
Record at 54.
. We note that the Court's reliance in Jacks upon the nature of the instruction as not "conclusive" was misplaced under Sandstrom and Francis, see Sandstrom, 442 U.S. at 523-24, 99 S.Ct. at 2458-59, 61 L.Ed.2d at 50-51; Francis, 471 U.S. at 316-17, 105 S.Ct. at 1972-73, 85 L.Ed.2d at 355. It is the Jacks court's alternate rationale for upholding the instructions-that they lack a "burden-shifting effect," Jacks, 394 N.E.2d at 175-that we are following here.

=== CASE 9738387 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:44.811208+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
concurring in result.
Appellant did not raise and preserve for appeal the issue of the allegedly erroneous jury instructions. This procedural default ordinarily renders appellate review unavailable. Ind.Crim.Rule 8(B); Thomas v. State, 264 Ind. 581, 348 N.E.2d 4, 7 (1976). Sullivan v. Louisiana, 508 U.S. 275, 113 S.Ct. 2078, 124 L.Ed.2d 182 (1993), holds that a constitutionally defective reasonable doubt instruction is not subject to harmless error analysis. This holding does not obviate the requirement for timely and appropriate litigation of the issue of whether the instruction was actually defective. In this case, the trial court was not made aware of the potential error and, since the record does not reveal a blatant violation of basic and elementary principles, Smith v. State, 459 N.E.2d 355 (Ind.1984), consideration of the potential error is not now available, and I join in affirming the conviction and sentence.
In addition, I do not share the majority's perception of deep problems within this area, nor the belief that the Federal Judicial Center, Pattern Criminal Jury Instructions 17-18 are the appropriate remedy. Specifically, I do not believe that "firmly convinced" equates to "beyond a reasonable doubt." Both objectively and subjectively, "firmly *905convinced" seems more similar to "clear and convincing" than to "beyond a reasonable doubt." I find the Indiana Pattern Jury Instruction, Op. at 901, more than adequate.
SHEPARD, C.J., concurs.

=== CASE 9738388 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:46.135756+00 ===

JUSTICE FREEMAN delivered the opinion of the court: The question in this case is whether due process is implicated in a claim of innocence based upon new evidence so as to permit the claim to be raised in a petition under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act (725 ILCS 5/122 — 1 et seq. (West 1992)). We hold that it is. BACKGROUND In 1982, Kurtis Washington was sentenced to 25 years in prison for murdering Tony Hightie. Hightie had been murdered outside his home in Chicago shortly after 9 p.m. on May 9, 1980. Washington was implicated in the crime by Donna McClure, Hightie’s girlfriend, and Ronald Tapes. McClure and Tapes witnessed the murder. At trial, they said that they had been sitting in a parked car near Hightie’s home when they were approached by a man. The man said that he was looking for someone named Will. When McClure and Tapes proved no help, the man approached Hightie just as he left his home. Hightie had been wearing a jacket and hat that belonged to Tapes’ brother who was named William. McClure and Tapes said that after a few words with Hightie, the man shot him. The man, McClure and Tapes said, was Washington. Washington’s defense was that he had been at a grocery store at the time of Hightie’s murder. The store cashier, a person who had accompanied Washington, and Washington’s mother all testified to that fact. The appellate court affirmed the conviction and sentence on direct review (No. 1 — 82—1868 (unpublished order under Supreme Court Rule 23)). In 1990, Washington filed a post-conviction petition, alleging nine grounds of error, six of which asserted ineffective assistance of trial counsel. See U.S. Const., amends. VI, XIV; Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, §§ 2, 8. One of the grounds was that Washington’s trial counsel, a private attorney who also served as Washington’s appellate counsel, failed to investigate evidence that someone other than Washington murdered Hightie. The claim was supported with an affidavit of Jacqueline Martin dated March 3,1990. Evidence was permitted on that as well as the other ineffective-assistance claims. The trial judge held an in camera hearing in which he considered Martin’s testimony. Underlying the claim at issue in this appeal is the substance of that testimony. Martin told how Hightie had been shot after having been mistaken for someone else. Martin, who was 16 years old at the time, told how she had been present when Marcus Halsey, then her boyfriend, and Frank Caston had left Halsey’s house to revenge an earlier beating of Halsey’s brother. She, Halsey, Caston, and Gaston’s girlfriend drove in a car to an alley in a neighborhood in Chicago. She later learned that it happened to be the neighborhood where Hightie lived. Martin told how, after Halsey and Caston left the car, she had heard two gunshots, and, when the two returned, she had heard Halsey say "it was the wrong guy.” Halsey and Caston later changed clothes, discarding in another alley what they had earlier worn. Martin said that they drove to the home of one of Halsey’s sisters, where she stayed the rest of the night. Halsey was questioned by police the next morning. Martin accompanied, him to the police station, as did Gaston’s girlfriend. At the station, Martin found in her pocket bullets that Halsey had handed to her the night before. She said that she threw the bullets away. Martin said that after the police questioning, Halsey had threatened to kill her if she told anyone what had happened. Halsey’s threats continued, Martin said, and so she eventually stopped going to Halsey’s house. Some months later, Halsey’s brother confronted her as she was walking near a park and forcibly took her to Halsey. She said that she was kept against her will at Halsey’s house for three weeks to a month. She eventually escaped with the help of an unnamed acquaintance whom she happened to see while looking out a window. Martin said that she went immediately to her mother’s house. That same day she left for Mississippi. She stayed there for six years. Martin told how at the time of the hearing she still feared Halsey. In view of Martin’s in camera testimony, Washington successfully sought to amend his post-conviction petition to add a tenth claim based upon the newly discovered evidence. The trial judge denied relief under the first nine claims Washington asserted, including the ineffectiveness claim which was supported by Martin’s affidavit and testimony. Regarding that claim, the judge referred to testimony given by Washington’s defense counsel that, in preparation for trial, he had tried to contact Martin. Counsel had also testified that he believed Washington had a strong alibi defense and his strategy was to focus on that rather than to try to prove that someone other than Washington murdered Hightie. However, the trial judge granted a new trial on the ground that Martin’s testimony was new evidence which, if believed, would have "had some significant impact” upon the jury. The State appealed. Washington cross-appealed, contesting the denial of relief on the petition’s other nine claims. The appellate court affirmed the grant of relief as to the newly discovered evidence claim without addressing the others. 256 Ill. App. 3d 445. We granted the State’s petition for leave to appeal. Meanwhile, Washington, who had been released on an appeal bond, was charged with, pleaded guilty to, and was sentenced to probation for an unrelated offense. We revoked his appeal bond. Though Washington had failed to appear after the bond revocation, his counsel again filed a cross-appeal contesting the denial of relief under the petition’s other claims. 134 Ill. 2d R. 318(a). The State moved to strike the cross-appeal under the fugitive dismissal doctrine (see People v. Partee, 125 Ill. 2d 24, 37 (1988)). We granted that motion, leaving for this appeal only consideration of Washington’s newly discovered evidence claim. • ANALYSIS The claim Washington raised is a "free-standing” claim of innocence; unlike the ineffective-assistance claim supported by Martin’s testimony, the newly discovered evidence is not being used to supplement an assertion of a constitutional violation with respect to his trial. The issue is not whether the evidence at trial was insufficient to convict Washington beyond a reasonable doubt. The appellate court rejected that challenge on direct appeal. The issue is whether Washington’s claim of newly discovered evidence can be raised in a petition under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act to entitle Washington to a new trial. Post-conviction relief is Washington’s remaining hope for a judicial remedy, the time limitations of other avenues offering relief for such a claim having lapsed. See 735 ILCS 5/2-1202(c) (West 1992) (allowing such claims to be made in a motion for a new trial within 30 days); 735 ILCS 5/2-1401(c) (West 1992) (permitting such claims up to two years after a final judgment, the period being excused in certain limited situations, including "fraudulent! ]” concealment of evidence). Executive clemency, of course, would remain available to Washington. Ill. Const. 1970, art. V, § 12; 730 ILCS 5/3 — 3—13 (West 1992). To decide the issue, we must see if either a federal or Illinois constitutional right is implicated in such a freestanding claim of innocence, since Post-Conviction Hearing Act relief is limited to constitutional claims. 725 ILCS 5/122 — 1 (West 1992). Washington argues that his claim implicates due process protections. The beginning point for addressing that argument is Herrera v. Collins, 506 U.S. 390, 122 L. Ed. 2d 203, 113 S. Ct. 853 (1993), where the Supreme Court rejected the contention as a federal constitutional matter. In light of our own constitution’s due process guaranty, we must also assess Washington’s argument as a matter of Illinois constitutional jurisprudence. See Rollins v. Ellwood, 141 Ill. 2d 244, 275 (1990). Federal Due Process The issue in Herrera was whether a freestanding claim of innocence following a Texas capital conviction could be raised in a habeas corpus petition in view of either the eighth amendment protection against cruel and unusual punishment or the fourteenth amendment due process clause. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 397-98, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 215, 113 S. Ct. at 859. Ten years after his conviction, Herrera claimed that his brother, who had since died, committed the crimes. The claim was supported by two affidavits. The Court said that the claim implicated neither the eighth nor the fourteenth amendment but also offered that, even if that were not the case, the claim was unpersuasive anyway. The opinion requires close study. Looking first to the eighth amendment, the Court admitted an "elemental appeal” in the notion that the Constitution should be construed to prohibit the execution or imprisonment of the innocent. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 398, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 215, 113 S. Ct. at 859. But constitutionally, a newly discovered evidence claim had to "be evaluated in the light of the previous proceedings” in which guilt or innocence was determined. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 398, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 215, 113 S. Ct. at 859. The Court explained that once the usual constitutional safeguards for ensuring against the risk of convicting the innocent in trial proceedings were met, a conviction must mean that the person convicted is no longer "innocent” but is one "who has been convicted by due process of law.” See Herrera, 506 U.S. at 398-99, 400, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 215, 216, 113 S. Ct. at 859, 860. Recognizing a freestanding claim of innocence would amount to according "additional process.” Herrera, 506 U.S. at 406, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 221, 113 S. Ct. at 864. In reality, a freestanding innocence claim could present but an error of fact in the trial outcome; it could not reflect the kind of constitutional violation for which habeas relief was designed. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 400, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 216-17, 113 S. Ct. at 860, quoting Townsend v. Sain, 372 U.S. 293, 317, 9 L. Ed. 2d 770, 788, 83 S. Ct. 745, 759 (1963). The claim was not, the Court reminded, one asserting that the evidence at trial was not sufficient to convict beyond a reasonable doubt. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 401-02, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 217-18, 113 S. Ct. at 861. And the Court pointed out how the claim was different from the showing of innocence needed to excuse a procedural bar under the "fundamental miscarriage of justice exception” of habeas jurisprudence. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 404, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 219, 113 S. Ct. at 862 (stating that the showing of innocence was merely a "gateway” to consideration of an otherwise procedurally barred constitutional claim). A claim of innocence itself simply was not, the Court concluded, cognizable under the eighth amendment. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 404-05, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 219, 113 S. Ct. at 862. Turning to the fourteenth amendment, the Court noted, first, that procedural, not substantive, due process governed, for substantive due process analysis would require the petitioner, in fact, to be innocent. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 407 n.6, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 221 n.6, 113 S. Ct. at 864 n.6. But he was not, the Court explained. The petitioner had been convicted in an otherwise constitutionally proper trial. Therefore, the relevant question was not whether due process prohibited execution of an innocent person but whether it permitted judicial review of a freestanding claim of innocence. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 407-08, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 221, 113 S. Ct. at 864. The Court said it did not, answering the question in consideration of the possible relief. As for commanding a new trial, the Court noted that it generally deferred to state "expertise” as to criminal process and procedure. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 407-08, 411, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 221, 223, 113 S. Ct. at 864, 866, quoting Patterson v. New York, 432 U.S. 197, 202, 53 L. Ed. 2d 281, 287, 97 S. Ct. 2319, 2322 (1977). The Court could not find it unfair that Texas precluded new evidence to be presented years after a conviction. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 411, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 223, 113 S. Ct. at 866. As for vacation of the death sentence, the Court noted that Texas, like all capital punishment states, including Illinois, have constitutional or statutory provisions for executive clemency. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 414 n.14, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 225 n.14, 113 S. Ct. at 867 n.14. Executive clemency, the Court explained, is the "fail safe” of our criminal justice system. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 415, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 226, 113 S. Ct. at 868. In the last portion of the opinion, the Court nevertheless addressed "for the sake of argument” the petitioner’s claim — rejecting it — as if it were constitutionally cognizable. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 416-19, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 227-28,113 S. Ct. at 869-70. To do so, the Court proceeded under an assumption that "a truly persuasive demonstration of 'actual innocence’ ” in a capital case where there was "no state avenue open to process such a claim” would be unconstitutional. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 417, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 227, 113 S. Ct. at 869. That portion of the opinion sparked comments both in concurrence and dissent. In her concurrence, which Justice Kennedy joined, Justice O’Connor pointed out that the analysis of the last portion of the opinion was "neither necessary” to the case "nor advisable.” Herrera, 506 U.S. at 421, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 230, 113 S. Ct. at 871 (O’Connor, J., concurring, joined by Kennedy, J.). She acknowledged the "sensitive” and "troubling” issue presented, remarking that the "execution of a legally and factually innocent person would be a constitutionally intolerable event.” Herrera, 506 U.S. at 419, 421, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 228, 230, 113 S. Ct. at 870, 871 (O’Connor, J., concurring, joined by Kennedy, J.). Yet, Justice O’Connor concluded, in a case where a jury found evidence sufficient to convict in an otherwise constitutionally fair trial, the "sole remedy was a pardon or clemency.” Herrera, 506 U.S. at 421, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 230, 113 S.’ Ct. at 871 (O’Connor, J., concurring, joined by Kennedy, J.). In his concurrence, which Justice Thomas joined, Justice Scalia pointed out that the Court had already said, in Townsend v. Sain, 372 U.S. 293, 9 L. Ed. 2d 770, 83 S. Ct. 745 (1963), though without elaboration, that habeas relief was not available for claims of actual innocence. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 428-29, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 235, 113 S. Ct. at 875 (Scalia, J., concurring, joined by Thomas, J.). Justice Scalia simply understood the first part of the Court’s opinion to strengthen the statement made in Townsend. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 429, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 235, 113 S. Ct. at 875 (Scalia, J., concurring, joined by Thomas, J.). In his dissent, which Justices Stevens and Souter joined, Justice Blackmun believed the first portion of the opinion to be dictum, not the second part Justice O’Connor identified. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 430, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 235, 113 S. Ct. at 876 (Blackmun, J., dissenting, joined by Stevens and Souter, JJ.). Justice Blackmun noted that "[t]he majority’s disposition *** leaves the States uncertain of their [federal] constitutional obligations.” Herrera, 506 U.S. át 439, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 242, 113 S. Ct. at 881 (Blackmun, J., dissenting, joined by Stevens and Souter, JJ.). He disagreed that procedural and not substantive due process governed the fourteenth amendment analysis, the execution of an innocent person being "the ultimate ' "arbitrary impositio[n].” ’ ” Herrera, 506 U.S. at 436-37, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 239-40, 113 S. Ct. at 878-79 (Blackmun, J., dissenting, joined by Stevens and Souter, JJ.), quoting Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 848, 120 L. Ed. 2d 674, 696, 112 S. Ct. 2791, 2805 (1992). On one hand Herrera underscores the unkind reality that, though the Constitution "offers unparalleled protections against convicting the innocent” (Herrera, 506 U.S. at 420, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 229, 113 S. Ct. at 871 (O’Connor, J., concurring, joined by Kennedy, J.)), it cannot guaranty that result (see Patterson, 432 U.S. at 208, 53 L. Ed. 2d at 291, 97 S. Ct. at 2326). Then again, the last portion of the opinion suggests that the Constitution must somehow be made to do so, at least in a capital case. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 416-19, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 227-28, 113 S. Ct. at 869-70. Justice O’Connor echoed that notion, even agreeing that only a pardon or clemency could promise relief given a constitutionally fair conviction. How the Constitution might guaranty that the truly innocent are not imprisoned or executed given the greater portion of the Court’s discussion in Herrera is not easily answered. It is no criticism to read Herrera as a conflicted decision. As Justice O’Connor said, claims of innocence— even those in noncapital cases — present troubling issues. We are, of course, bound by the Supreme Court’s interpretation of the United States Constitution. Conflicted or not, at least for noncapital cases, Herrera clearly states, as the Court did in Townsend v. Sain, that a freestanding claim of innocence is not cognizable as a fourteenth amendment due process claim. And so Washington’s effort to state a federal constitutional due process claim under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act must fail. Due Process Under the Illinois Constitution The possibility remains that Washington’s claim may be cognizable under the Illinois Constitution’s due process protection. That protection is stated as it is in the fourteenth amendment: no person “shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of law.” Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 2; see U.S. Const., amend. V. The Record of Proceedings of the Constitutional Convention does not reveal anything as to what the drafters intended for the Illinois protection different from the federal counterpart. See 3 Record of Proceedings, Sixth Illinois Constitutional Convention 1496-1523. Nevertheless, in People v. McCauley, 163 Ill. 2d 414, 440 (1994), we noted that we labor under no self-imposed constraint to follow federal precedent in “lockstep” (see People v. Tisler, 103 Ill. 2d 226, 245 (1984)) in defining Illinois’ due process protection. In McCauley, we looked primarily to how the protection had been interpreted with respect to the issue there presented: police interference with a suspect’s right to legal assistance. We found historical support to say that, as a state matter, due process should protect against deliberate attempts to deny legal counsel. McCauley, 163 Ill. 2d at 441-42. As for Washington’s claim here, there are decisions in which this court has perfunctorily evaluated new evidence claims in cases brought under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act. See People v. Silagy, 116 Ill. 2d 357, 367-68 (1987); People v. Witherspoon, 36 Ill. 2d 471, 477-78 (1967), rev’d on other grounds, 391 U.S. 510, 20 L. Ed. 2d 776, 88 S. Ct. 1770 (1968). The same is true of decisions of our appellate court. See, e.g., People v. Cunningham, 267 Ill. App. 3d 1009, 1017 (1994); People u. Moleterno, 254 Ill. App. 3d 615, 624-25 (1993); People v. Lovitz, 101 Ill. App. 3d 704, 708 (1981). The practice seen in those decisions is an evaluation of the claim as if it were brought in a motion for a new trial. See, e.g., Silagy, 116 Ill. 2d at 368, citing People v. Molstad, 101 Ill. 2d 128, 134 (1984); but see People v. Albanese, 125 Ill. 2d 100, 114 (1988), relying upon People v. Cornille, 95 Ill. 2d 497 (1983). But neither this court nor the appellate court has ever expressly identified the constitutional right implicated in a freestanding claim of innocence based upon new evidence. It is because that issue is raised here for the first time that the State sought leave to appeal under Supreme Court Rule 317(a) (134 Ill. 2d R. 317(a) (allowing appeals as of right when questions under the federal or Illinois Constitutions are raised for the first time in and as a result of the action of the appellate court)). Again, Post-Conviction Hearing Act relief is impossible if no constitutional right is implicated in the claim asserted. People v. Orndoff, 39 Ill. 2d 96, 99 (1968). Perhaps the closest this court has come to determining that our constitution’s due process clause could be a means to recognize a newly discovered evidence claim for post-conviction purposes was in People v. Cornille, 95 Ill. 2d 497 (1983). There, the court held that a post-conviction claim based upon the discovery that an expert testifying in an arson prosecution lied about his expertise was cognizable under the due process clauses of both the United States and Illinois Constitutions. Cornille, 95 Ill. 2d at 505-15. However, the decision did not turn on a differentiation of the clauses. The State’s failure to prevent the perjury by verifying the expert’s credentials was sufficient "indicia of State action” which, linked to the "adjudicatory process! ],” made the expert’s conduct a due process violation under both. Cornille, 95 Ill. 2d at 511. Cornille finds its place among a long line of related cases holding that the use of false testimony underlying a conviction is a due process violation. Cornille, 95 Ill. 2d at 508-09. Those kinds of claims are fundamentally different from ones such as Washington has raised. Washington can claim no state action with regard to the evidence he now relies upon for post-conviction relief. And the "adjudicatory process” by which he was convicted did not otherwise lack due process. Essentially, then, the issue is the time relativeness of due process as a matter of this State’s constitutional jurisprudence; that is, should additional process be afforded in Illinois when newly discovered evidence indicates that a convicted person is actually innocent? We believe so as a matter of both procedural and substantive due process. In terms of procedural due process, we believe that to ignore such a claim would be fundamentally unfair. See McCauley, 163 Ill. 2d 441; see generally Herrera, 506 U.S. at 435 n.5, 435-37, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 239 n.5, 239-40, 113 S. Ct. at 878 n.5, 878-79 (Blackmun, J., dissenting, joined by Stevens and Souter, JJ.), citing Medina v. California, 505 U.S. 437, 120 L. Ed. 2d 353, 112 S. a. 2572 (1992). Imprisonment of the innocent would also be so conscience shocking as to trigger operation of substantive due process. See Herrera, 506 U.S. at 436-37, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 239-40, 113 S. Ct. at 879 (Blackmun, J., dissenting, joined by Stevens and Souter, JJ.). The conflicted analysis in Herrera is some proof of that. Though the Court rejected the application of substantive due process principles as grounds in Herrera, the Court nevertheless conceded that "a truly persuasive demonstration of 'actual innocence’ ” would make a conviction unconstitutional. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 417, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 227, 113 S. Ct. at 869. We have no difficulty seeing why substantive due process as a matter of Illinois constitutional law offers the grounds for such a conclusion. The Supreme Court rejected substantive due process as means to recognize freestanding innocence claims because of the idea that a person convicted in a constitutionally fair trial must be viewed as guilty. That made it impossible for such a person to claim that he, an innocent person, was unfairly convicted. We think that the Court overlooked that a "truly persuasive demonstration of innocence” would, in hindsight, undermine the legal construct precluding a substantive due process analysis. The stronger the claim — the more likely it is that a convicted person is actually innocent — the weaker is the legal construct dictating that the person be viewed as guilty. A "truly persuasive demonstration of innocence” would effectively reduce the idea to legal fiction. At the point where the construct falls apart, application of substantive due process principles, as Justice Blackmun favored, is invited. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 436, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 239-40, 113 S. Ct. at 879 (Blackmun, J., dissenting, joined by Stevens and Souter, JJ.), quoting Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania, 505 U.S. at 848, 120 L. Ed. 2d at 696, 112 S. Ct. at 2805. We believe that no person convicted of a crime should be deprived of life or liberty given compelling evidence of actual innocence. See generally Herrera, 506 U.S. at 417, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 227, 113 S. Ct. at 869; see also Herrera, 506 U.S. at 419, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 228, 113 S. Ct. at 870 (O’Connor, J., concurring, joined by Kennedy, J.) (acknowledging as a "fundamental legal principle that executing the innocent is inconsistent with the Constitution”). Given the limited avenues that our legislature has so far seen fit to provide for raising freestanding claims of innocence, that idea — but for the possibility of executive clemency — would go ignored in cases like this one. We therefore hold as a matter of Illinois constitutional jurisprudence that a claim of newly discovered evidence showing a defendant to be actually innocent of the crime for which he was convicted is cognizable as a matter of due process. That holding aligns Illinois with other jurisdictions likewise recognizing, primarily as a matter of state habeas corpus jurisprudence, a basis to raise such claims under the rubric of due process. See State ex rel. Holmes v. Court of Appeals, 885 S.W.2d 389 (Tex. Grim. App. 1994); Summer-ville v. Warden, State Prison, 229 Conn. 397, 641 A.2d 1356 (1994); In re Clark, 5 Cal. 4th 750, 855 P.2d 729, 21 Cal. Rptr. 2d 509 (1993); Jones v. State, 591 So. 2d 911 (Fla. 1991). That only means, of course, that there is footing in the Illinois Constitution for asserting freestanding innocence claims based upon newly discovered evidence finder the Post-Conviction Hearing Act. Procedurally, such claims should be resolved as any other brought under the Act. Substantively, relief has been held to require that the supporting evidence be new, material, noncumulative and, most importantly, " 'of such conclusive character’ ” as would " 'probably change the result on retrial.’ ” See Silagy, 116 Ill. 2d at 368, quoting Molstad, 101 Ill. 2d at 134. As for this case, we find neither reason to disagree with the appellate court that those concerns were satisfied nor need to elaborate upon that conclusion. See 256 Ill. App. 3d 445. The judgment of the appellate court is affirmed. Affirmed.

=== CASE 9738389 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:46.142601+00 ===

JUSTICE McMORROW, specially concurring: In this appeal we are asked to decide whether newly discovered evidence that a defendant is actually innocent of a crime for which he has been convicted and sentenced may be ground for a new trial under the Illinois Post-Conviction Hearing Act (725 ILCS 5/122 — 1 et seq. (West 1992)). I agree with the majority that such new evidence is sufficient to raise a constitutional question cognizable in a post-conviction petition. I also agree that the defendant in the instant cause should receive a new trial based on alleged newly discovered evidence of his actual innocence with respect to crimes for which he is presently incarcerated. I depart from the majority with respect to its analysis of the United States Supreme Court’s decision in Herrera v. Collins, 506 U.S. 390, 122 L. Ed. 2d 203, 113 S. Ct. 853 (1993). Discussion of Herrera is unnecessary, inasmuch as it involves the scope of federal due process protections in the context of federal habeas corpus proceedings. In the case at bar, this court’s proper focus should be on our State constitutional due process precedent with respect to proceedings under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act, a significant issue to which the majority gives inadequate attention. I also write separately because the majority opinion fails to address the arguments presented by the State in this case, and because the opinion neglects to explain why the defendant’s evidence is sufficient to warrant a new trial. I write separately to express my views on these matters. First, I disagree with the majority’s analysis of the United States Supreme Court’s decision in Herrera v. Collins, 506 U.S. 390, 122 L. Ed. 2d 203, 113 S. Ct. 853 (1993). In Herrera, a defendant convicted of murder filed a habeas corpus petition 10 years after his conviction. In his petition, the defendant alleged that he had newly discovered evidence that would prove he was innocent of the crime. The Court noted that, generally, a claim based on newly discovered evidence of actual innocence did not present a basis for federal habeas relief in the absence of an independent constitutional violation which occurred in the state criminal proceeding. The Court justified this rule on the principle that the purpose of habeas corpus review is not to correct factual errors, but to remedy constitutional errors. With respect to the defendant’s claim that he was entitled to a new trial under the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment, the Court reviewed jurisprudence and historical practice to conclude that the refusal to consider defendant’s habeas corpus petition did not "transgress[ ] a principle of fundamental fairness 'rooted in the traditions and conscience of our people.’ [Citation.]” Herrera, 506 U.S. at 411, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 223, •113 S. Ct. at 866. The Court expressed the opinion that petitioner’s proper forum was a request for executive clemency. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 412-15, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 224-26, 113 S. a. at 866-69. Notwithstanding these observations, the Court proceeded' to an analysis of the merits of the defendant’s claim of newly discovered evidence of actual innocence. The Court remarked, "We may assume, for the sake of argument in deciding this case, that in a capital case a truly persuasive demonstration of 'actual innocence’ made after trial would render the execution of a defendant unconstitutional, and warrant federal habeas relief if there were no state avenue open to process such a claim. But because of the very disruptive effect that entertaining claims of actual innocence would have on the need for finality in capital cases, and the enormous burden that having to retry cases based on often stale evidence would place on the States, the threshold showing for such an assumed right would necessarily be extraordinarily high.” Herrera, 506 U.S. at 417, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 227, 113 S. Ct. at 869. The Court reviewed the defendant’s petition and concluded that it did not raise a justiciable question of actual innocence. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 418, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 227-28, 113 S. Ct. at 869-70. The majority devotes considerable attention to the Herrera decision. 171 Ill. 2d at 480-85. The majority criticizes Herrera on the ground that it is a "conflicted decision.” 171 Ill. 2d at 485. The majority also reproves the Herrera Court because it "overlooked that a 'truly persuasive demonstration of innocence’ would, in hindsight, undermine the legal construct precluding a substantive due process analysis.” 171 Ill. 2d at 488. This court need not consider whether Herrera is correctly decided or analyzed, and should not speculate on what effect the Court’s opinion may have with respect to application of federal due process in habeas corpus proceedings. The Supreme Court’s decision in Herrera with regard to the scope of due process under the fourteenth amendment to the United States Constitution is not binding on this court’s interpretation of the Illinois Constitution. The Illinois due process clause (Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 2) "stands separate and independent from the Federal guarantee of due process” (Rollins v. Ellwood, 141 Ill. 2d 244, 275 (1990)) and provides ample basis to conclude that newly discovered, compelling evidence of actual innocence warrants post-conviction relief. The majority acknowledges that our state’s due process guarantee cannot condone the refusal to grant a new trial to one who presents compelling evidence of actual innocence that could not have been presented sooner in the exercise of due diligence. 171 Ill. 2d at 487. However, the majority relies upon the dissenting views expressed in Herrera to support this conclusion. 171 Ill. 2d at 487-88. The majority’s failure to base its conclusion on Illinois case law is perplexing. Our due process clause guarantees that no person “shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of law.” Ill. Const. 1970, art. I, § 2. The term “due process of law” is an ever-maturing concept that evolves from our history and precedent and is not amenable to precise definition. Barnett v. County of Cook, 388 Ill. 251, 255 (1944). A fundamental precept of due process is the notion that governmental forces may not exercise their powers arbitrarily and capriciously (City of Decatur v. Chasteen, 19 Ill. 2d 204, 210 (I960)), nor can they “override the natural demands of justice” (Heimgaertner v. Benjamin Electric Manufacturing Co., 6 Ill. 2d 152,159 (1955)). Yet it is truly arbitrary and capricious, and wholly contrary to the natural demands of justice, to deny a new trial to and continue the incarceration of a defendant who has compelling evidence of his actual innocence and who was, in the exercise of due diligence, unable to present such evidence sooner. The purpose of our criminal laws is to prosecute, imprison, and punish those who are guilty of having committed a criminal offense, not to senselessly forfeit the liberty of those whose innocence can be convincingly demonstrated. The policy of finality, as asserted by the State, must yield, as a matter of fundamental due process, to the manifest injustice that would result from the continued incarceration of a demonstrably innocent person. I also write separately because I believe the majority is remiss in its failure to respond to arguments raised by the State. The State contends that there is Illinois precedent that newly discovered evidence of actual innocence is not ground for post-conviction relief. Because of the importance of this issue, this court should fully address the State’s argument. The cases upon which the State relies are inapposite to our present inquiry. For example, in People v. Gendron, 41 Ill. 2d 518 (1969), this court merely noted that "allegations concerning the failure of certain witnesses to appear at trial do not present questions of constitutional dimension ***.” Gendron, 41 Ill. 2d at 519. The Gendron court did not address the question of whether the testimony of the witnesses amounted to new evidence of the defendant’s actual innocence that was discovered after the close of the defendant’s trial. Other precedent relied upon by the State is equally distinguishable. The rule that the defendant must prove the prosecution acted improperly or unfairly has been limited to instances where the State has knowingly used perjured testimony to obtain the defendant’s conviction (.People v. Brown, 169 Ill. 2d 94 (1995); People v. Cihlar, 111 Ill. 2d 212 (1986); People v. Colletti, 48 Ill. 2d 135 (1971); People v. Ferguson, 102 Ill. App. 3d 702 (1981)) and is inapplicable to the instant cause. Moreover, this court has not always required the State’s knowing use of perjured testimony in order to find a due process violation. See People v. Cornille, 95 Ill. 2d 497, 513 (1983) (court found due process violation although prosecution had not knowingly used perjured testimony at defendant’s trial, reasoning that prosecution’s failure to engage in meaningful examination of witness’ testimony permitted use of false testimony at trial and "create[dj enough involvement by it in the false testimony to establish a violation of due process”). The State’s argument attempts to equate a defendant’s request for a new trial based on the use of allegedly perjured testimony with a defendant’s request for a new trial based on newly discovered evidence of actual innocence. However, there is a significant, qualitative difference between perjured testimony and evidence that the defendant is actually innocent of the crimes for which he is incarcerated. An allegation that certain of the State’s evidence against the defendant at trial was perjured is aimed at weakening and undermining the strength of the State’s evidence of the defendant’s guilt. An allegation of newly discovered evidence of innocence is not intended to question the strength of the State’s case. An allegation of newly discovered evidence of innocence seeks to establish the defendant’s actual innocence of the crimes for which he has been tried and convicted. In comparison, allegations of perjured testimony do not seek to establish the defendant’s actual innocence, but are aimed at merely questioning the sufficiency of the State’s evidence against the defendant at trial. Given this important distinction, the error of the State’s position is apparent. Deprivation of the life or liberty of an individual in this state, notwithstanding persuasive evidence of the person’s actual innocence, unquestionably violates the fundamental concept of substantive due process of law and cannot be sanctioned by this court. Where the newly discovered evidence bears directly on the innocence of the defendant and raises a compelling question of the defendant’s guilt, and the defendant could not have discovered such evidence sooner through the exercise of due diligence, it would violate our state’s due process guarantees to deny the defendant the opportunity to submit such evidence to a finder of fact to determine anew his guilt or innocence. This court’s precedent has established that there is a post-conviction remedy where the defendant provides newly discovered evidence that he is actually innocent of the crime for which he has been tried, convicted, and sentenced. People v. Albanese, 125 Ill. 2d 100 (1988); People v. Silagy, 116 Ill. 2d 357 (1987); People v. Molstad, 101 Ill. 2d 128 (1984). These decisions are valid and sound. Having determined that newly discovered evidence of actual innocence raises a constitutional question properly considered in a post-conviction petition, the remaining issue is whether defendant should receive post-conviction relief in the instant cause. In order to be entitled to a new trial based on newly discovered evidence of actual innocence, the defendant must demonstrate that the new evidence is " 'of such conclusive character that it will probably change the result on retrial,’ ” that the evidence was " 'discovered since the trial and *** [that it is of such] character that it could not have been discovered prior to trial by the exercise of due diligence.’ ” Molstad, 101 Ill. 2d at 134, quoting People v. Baker, 16 Ill. 2d 364, 374 (1959); see also Silagy, 116 Ill. 2d at 368. The majority fails to analyze the evidence in the case at bar in order to determine whether defendant should receive a new trial, perfunctorily stating that it "find[s] neither reason to disagree with the appellate court that those concerns were satisfied nor need to elaborate upon that conclusion.” 171 Ill. 2d at 490. I believe that this court should address the State’s arguments that the defendant’s newly discovered evidence does not warrant a new trial. These issues are vitally important ones that deserve this court’s close attention. The State asks this court to overrule the holding in Molstad that the defendant’s evidence must be "of such conclusive character that it will probably change the result on retrial.” Molstad, 101 Ill. 2d at 134. The State argues that this court should adopt a more stringent standard by which to gouge a post-conviction petitioner’s claim of newly discovered evidence of actual innocence. The State proposes that the defendant should be required to prove that, based upon the newly discovered evidence as well as the other evidence produced at trial, no rational trier of fact could find beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was guilty of the crime charged. See Herrera, 506 U.S. at 429, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 235, 113 S. Ct. at 875 (White, J., concurring). However, this standard applies to a review of the evidence where the defendant claims that the State’s evidence was insufficient to prove him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 61 L. Ed. 2d 560, 99 S. Ct. 2781 (1979). Moreover, where a reviewing court determines that no rational trier of fact could find the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, the proper remedy is not a new trial but an acquittal on the charges for which there was insufficient evidence to convict the defendant. Jackson, 443 U.S. 307, 61 L. Ed. 2d 560, 99 S. Ct. 2781. In light of these considerations, the more stringent standard suggested by the State is not properly applicable to a post-conviction request for a new trial based on newly discovered evidence of actual innocence. This court should expressly acknowledge, but nevertheless decline, the State’s invitation to overrule the Molstad precedent heretofore established by this court. Requests for a new trial based on newly discovered evidence of actual innocence are to be viewed with great caution and are not lightly granted. The trial court’s determination is a discretionary one that will be overturned only upon a clear abuse of discretion. Baker, 16 Ill. 2d at 373-74; People v. Washington, 230 Ill. App. 3d 1002, 1007 (1992); People v. Clay, 211 Ill. App. 3d 291, 303-04 (1990). There is no basis in the present record to find an abuse of discretion in the trial court’s granting of the defendant’s request for post-conviction relief because of newly discovered evidence of actual innocence. The record shows that the defendant could not have discovered Jacqueline Martin or the substance of her testimony while he was standing trial for the Hightie murder. At the time defendant was being prosecuted, Jacqueline had fled to Mississippi and virtually no one knew of her whereabouts. Thus, in the exercise of due diligence, defendant could not have learned of Jacqueline’s testimony in sufficient time to present it in his own defense at his trial. The record also demonstrates that Jacqueline’s testimony was critical to a determination of defendant’s guilt. Jacqueline stated that Marcus Halsey’s brother had been beaten and that it was believed that "Kino or Tony” had been responsible for the attack. Jacqueline’s testimony established that Marcus and Frank went to Tony Hightie’s neighborhood on the night of the shooting, that they had a gun with them, and that they went there in order to retaliate for the beating that Marcus’ brother had sustained earlier that day. Jacqueline stated that Marcus and Frank left the car and walked to a nearby location. Jacqueline then heard two gunshots and the boys came running back to the vehicle. Jacqueline heard Marcus tell Frank that they had shot the wrong person. Both Marcus and Frank changed their clothes and threw them away in an alley. Thereafter, Jacqueline was repeatedly threatened by Marcus not to reveal what she had witnessed on the night Tony Hightie was shot. In light of this evidence, I find no error in the trial court’s allowance of the defendant’s post-conviction petition. The trial court concluded that a rational trier of fact, considering Jacqueline’s testimony in conjunction with the other evidence presented at defendant’s trial, would probably conclude that defendant was not guilty of the Tony Hightie shooting and that it was Marcus or Frank who had shot and killed Tony Hightie. The record supports the trial court’s determination that defendant is entitled to a new trial based upon newly discovered evidence showing that he is actually innocent of the crime for which he was convicted and sentenced. I note that defendant’s post-conviction petition included photographs of both the defendant and Frank Gaston, an alleged friend of Marcus, and that these photographs show a remarkable facial resemblance between defendant and Frank Gaston. For these reasons, I concur in the majority’s conclusion that the defendant in the instant cause should receive a new trial.

=== CASE 9738390 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:51:46.147377+00 ===

JUSTICE MILLER, dissenting: I do not agree with the majority’s conclusion that a freestanding claim of newly discovered evidence of innocence constitutes a basis for relief under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act (725 ILCS 5/122 — 1 through 122 — 8 (West 1992)) in a noncapital case. Accordingly, I dissent. The defendant seeks to establish his right to a new trial under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act by alleging newly discovered evidence of his innocence of the murder for which he was convicted 14 years ago, in 1982. To be eligible for post-conviction relief, a defendant must establish a constitutional violation in the proceedings that resulted in his conviction. 725 ILCS 5/122 — 1 (West 1992); People v. Brown, 169 Ill. 2d 94, 101-03 (1995); People v. Guest, 166 Ill. 2d 381, 389 (1995). The majority correctly concludes that the defendant’s claim of actual innocence does not implicate any federal constitutional rights. See Herrera v. Collins, 506 U.S. 390, 122 L. Ed. 2d 203, 113 S. Ct. 853 (1993); Townsend v. Sain, 372 U.S. 293, 9 L. Ed. 2d 770, 83 S. a. 745 (1963). The majority finds, however, that the same claim implicates the due process guarantee of the Illinois Constitution (111. Const. 1970, art. I, § 2) and thus may be pursued under our state’s Post-Conviction Hearing Act. The majority fails to explain, as an initial matter, why the due process clause of the Illinois Constitution should be interpreted differently from the due process clause of the United States Constitution. Invoking the flawed decision in People v. McCauley, 163 Ill. 2d 414 (1994), the majority simply declares that we are under no obligation to construe provisions of the Illinois Constitution in “lockstep” with the United States Supreme Court’s interpretation of corresponding provisions of the United States Constitution. 171 Ill. 2d at 485. Before adopting an interpretation that varies from one given by the United States Supreme Court, however, we should seek some legitimate, objective ground for distinguishing the language of the state constitution from that of the United States Constitution. As the court explained in People v. Tisler, 103 Ill. 2d 226, 245 (1984), in deciding whether the search and seizure provisions of the Illinois Constitution should be interpreted more broadly than the fourth amendment of the United States Constitution: “We must find in the language of our constitution, or in the debates and the committee reports of the constitutional convention, something which will indicate that the provisions of our constitution are intended to be construed differently than are similar provisions in the Federal Constitution, after which they are patterned.” Although the approach exemplified in Tisler has not been without exception, it represents the better analysis, in my view, and one that I would continue to adhere to. In the present case, the majority acknowledges that the language of the federal and state due process guarantees is identical and, further, that there is nothing in the debates of the 1970 state constitutional convention that suggests that the drafters intended the Illinois provision to mean something different from its federal counterpart. 171 Ill. 2d at 485. The majority nonetheless concludes that the due process clause of the Illinois Constitution requires a different and more expansive meaning than the same language commands under the federal constitution, and that notions of procedural and substantive due process separately sustain the defendant’s action here. Neither ground is persuasive. Illinois law affords convicted defendants a number of opportunities to raise allegations of newly discovered evidence of innocence; the availability of these forms of relief refutes the majority’s conclusion that procedural due process compels a post-conviction remedy for the same claim. First, a defendant may present such evidence in a motion for a new trial, filed within 30 days of the verdict or finding of guilty. 725 ILCS 5/116 — 1 (West 1994). If the defendant discovers the evidence too late to satisfy the preceding time limit, relief may be available under section 2 — 1401 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/2 — 1401 (West 1994)). While at one time it was the rule that claims of newly discovered evidence could not be raised in a petition under section 72 of the Civil Practice Act, which was the statutory predecessor to section 2 — 1401 (People v. Colletti, 48 Ill. 2d 135, 137 (1971)), more recent cases have recognized that such claims may be prosecuted under section 2 — 1401. People v. Sanchez, 131 Ill. 2d 417, 419-20 (1989); see Ostendorf v. International Harvester Co., 89 Ill. 2d 273, 283-84 (1982). Notably, the two-year time limit for bringing actions under section 2 — 1401 corresponds to the two-year limit imposed by Rule 33 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, which provides the sole means for bringing claims of newly discovered evidence of innocence by convicted defendants in the federal system. Guinan v. United States, 6 F.3d 468, 470-71 (7th Cir. 1993). The measures available in Illinois for raising claims of newly discovered evidence of innocence are at least as extensive as those that may be pursued under Texas law, which the Supreme Court approved in Herrera v. Collins, 506 U.S. 390, 122 L. Ed. 2d 203, 113 S. Ct. 853 (1993). Because Illinois law provides convicted defendants with sufficient means by which to raise claims of actual innocence, I do not agree with the majority that considerations of procedural due process mandate an additional remedy under the Post-Conviction Hearing Act. As an alternative basis for today’s holding, the majority concludes that principles of substantive due process also compel recognition of the defendant’s claim. This further rationale is equally unpersuasive, however. A defendant seeking to assert a claim of actual innocence in a post-conviction petition has, by definition, been convicted of the charge following a trial or a guilty plea. As the Herrera Court noted in rejecting a similar argument by a capital defendant, "The question before us *** is not whether due process prohibits the execution of an innocent person, but rather whether it entitles petitioner to judicial review of his 'actual innocence’ claim. This issue is properly analyzed only in terms of procedural due process.” Herrera, 506 U.S. at 407 n.6, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 221 n.6, 113 S. a. at 864 n.6. In opposition to Herrera’s analysis, the majority asserts that the "legal construct” of a convicted defendant’s guilt becomes weaker as the showing of actual innocence grows stronger. 171 Ill. 2d at 488. Although that observation has some theoretical appeal, it slights the role of the trial in our system of criminal justice. At the time a person files a post-conviction petition, he stands before the court, and society, as a convicted defendant, having been found guilty following a trial or guilty plea at which, presumably, all constitutional rights were honored. I do not believe that the legal significance of that event waxes or wanes depending on the strength of a subsequent showing of actual innocence. Given the passage of time, and the fading of memories, there can certainly be no assurance that an adjudication made following a new trial would be any more reliable than the adjudication of the original proceeding, which produced the defendant’s conviction. Herrera, 506 U.S. at 403-05, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 218-19, 113 S. a. at 862. A defendant who cannot obtain relief in a motion for new trial or in a petition under section 2 — 1401 of the Code of Civil Procedure does not lack all recourse. In Illinois, a convicted defendant who wishes to raise a claim of newly discovered evidence outside the preceding time limits may submit a petition for executive clemency. See 111. Const. 1970, art. V, § 12; 730 ILCS 5/3— 3 — 13 (West 1994). Clemency "is the historic remedy for preventing miscarriages of justice where judicial process has been exhausted.” Herrera, 506 U.S. at 412, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 224, 113 S. Ct. at 866. The availability of this additional avenue of relief should not be ignored. Finally, I would note that the out-of-state authorities cited by the majority in support of today’s decision are fundamentally different from the case at bar. 171 111. 2d at 489. The present appeal arises from a petition filed under our state’s Post-Conviction Hearing Act by a defendant who was sentenced to imprisonment for his offense. The cases cited by the majority either involve capital defendants or were maintained under statutes that do not expressly require a constitutional violation as a predicate for relief. In re Clark, 5 Cal. 4th 750, 855 P.2d 729, 21 Cal. Rptr. 509 (1993), and State ex rel. Holmes v. Court of Appeals, 3rd District, 885 S.W.2d 389. (Tex. Crim. App. 1994), two of the decisions cited by the majority, were both capital cases. The distinction between capital and non-capital sentences has been considered important by some in determining whether to allow post-conviction relief for claims of newly discovered evidence of innocence. See Herrera, 506 U.S. at 419-21, 122 L. Ed. 2d at 228-30, 113 S. Ct. at 870-71 (O’Connor, J., concurring). Because this defendant was not sentenced to death for the underlying conviction, we need not determine here whether a different rule should apply to capital defendants. The state statutes in the two other cases cited by the majority did not require allegations of constitutional violations, unlike the Illinois provision at issue here. In Summerville v. Warden, State Prison, 229 Conn. 397, 641 A.2d 1356 (1994), the Connecticut habeas corpus statute directed the court to dispose of the case " 'as law and justice requires.’ ” Summerville, 229 Conn, at 422, 641 A.2d at 1369, quoting Conn. Gen. Stat. § 52 — 470(a) (West 1991). To gain a new trial under that provision, the defendant needed to show only that he was " 'burdened by an unreliable conviction.’ ” Summerville, 229 Conn, at 419, 641 A.2d at 1367, quoting Bunkley v. Commissioner of Corrections, 222 Conn. 444, 460-61, 610 A.2d 598, 607 (1942). Similarly, the Florida habeas statute involved in Jones v. State, 591 So. 2d 911 (Fla. 1991), required the defendant to establish only that " 'if the matter shown had been before the trial court when judgment was entered, the court would have been precluded from entering the judgment.’ ” Jones, 591 So. 2d at 915, quoting Russ v. State, 95 So. 2d 594, 597 (Fla. 1957). In contrast to the Connecticut and Florida statutes, our state’s Post-Conviction Hearing Act expressly limits the availability of relief to constitutional violations. A number of questions remain in the wake of the majority’s holding in this case. It is difficult to reconcile the result in the present appeal with our decision in People v. Brown, 169 Ill. 2d 94 (1995), which recently reaffirmed the rule that an allegation of perjury does not raise a constitutional claim in the absence of knowledge of the false testimony by the prosecution. In addition, today’s decision, unless otherwise limited, paradoxically will make relief more readily available when the claim of newly discovered evidence of innocence is raised in a post-conviction petition than when it is raised in a motion for a new trial. In a motion for a new trial, a defendant must show diligence in obtaining the new evidence in addition to demonstrating its conclusive character. See People v. Molstad, 101 Ill. 2d 128, 134-36 (1984); People v. Haun, 221 Ill. App. 3d 164, 175 (1991). Under today’s decision, however, a defendant who raises the same claim in a post-conviction petition may apparently obtain relief by establishing the material, noncumulative, and conclusive character of the new evidence, without regard to his diligence in obtaining it. In sum, unlike the majority, I do not believe that the Illinois Constitution provides greater due process protection in this context than does the United States Constitution, and thus I do not agree that the present defendant’s claim represents a ground for post-conviction relief. CHIEF JUSTICE BILANDIC joins in this dissent. Dissenting Opinion Upon Denial of Rehearing