=== CASE 9737653 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:35.87189+00 ===

Cavanagh, J.
(dissenting). I agree with the majority’s rejection of motive, intent, absence of mistake, and bolstering the victim’s credibility as proper MRE 404(b) purposes under the facts of this case. However, I dissent because defendant’s scheme, plan, or system in doing things was not a purpose offered or articulated at trial as required by VanderVliet,1 Crawford,2 and Starr.3 Also, the majority fails to show that the evidence of a common plan in this case is relevant apart from its tendency to show the defendant *74committed the instant crime because he acted in conformity with his criminal disposition. Finally, the majority errs in creating a rule that any similarities among successive crimes proves a plan, and thus proves that the charged offense was committed.
PROPER PURPOSE
VanderVliet teaches that something more than a mechanical recitation of MRE 404(b) list of “proper purposes” is required in order to move forward to the remaining three legs of its test.4 A determination must be made that the purpose claimed is relevant to an issue other than propensity. This protects against the introduction of extrinsic act evidence when that evidence is offered solely to prove character. 444 Mich 74. In this determination, relevance is intertwined with whether a proper purpose was presented. In order to provide a proper purpose under 404(b), the evidence must be relevant to a material fact or issue in the case. That is, the purpose for which the 404(b) evidence is offered must relate to an issue of consequence other than defendant’s arguably MRE 401 relevant propensity to commit certain bad acts. Whether the purpose is proper is a fact-specific, case-by-case determination.
*75It is undisputed that the prosecution did not present the other acts evidence for a proper purpose.5 At trial, the prosecution presented the evidence to show defendant’s motive and intent, his absence of mistake, to demonstrate the possibility that adults can be sexually attracted to children, and to bolster the complainant’s credibility. The trial court made a conclusory determination that the evidence was relevant and admissible because defendant had committed a similar act in the past. In its ruling, the court did not state the purpose on which it relied. It merely stated that the evidence was presented for a proper purpose. When instructing the jury, the trial court warned that the evidence was proper only to show defendant’s scheme, plan, or system in doing certain things.
Each of the prosecution’s arguably plausible6 purposes are properly rejected by the majority. However, the majority has gone one step further, and makes a determination whether “scheme, plan, or system” is a *76proper purpose under these facts. Apparently, this issue was preserved for our review because the trial court instructions to the jury recited these magic words.
Judge Whitbeck’s dissent below properly recognized that the initial question for the appellate court is whether, under VanderVliet, the prosecutor articulated a proper purpose at trial. 236 Mich App 1, 16; 600 NW2d 98 (1999). It is insufficient for the prosecutor, on appeal, to recite purposes that were articulable at trial. Id. Under VanderVliet, the prosecutor has the burden of articulating a nonpropensity ground for admission of other acts evidence. It is not enough that a nonpropensity theory might exist if it was not articulated or relied on by the prosecution at trial. This was reiterated in both Starr and Crawford. See 236 Mich App 17, n 6 (explaining that those cases require that the proper purpose be offered or articulated by the prosecutor, rather than simply requiring that a proper purpose exists). Moreover, it is not enough that the trial court may have listed or articulated a proper purpose when accepting the evidence. The first leg of VanderVliet requires the prosecutor at trial to articulate a proper purpose for admitting the prior acts evidence, it does not look forward to the purposes articulated by the trial court when accepting the evidence.
This view is further supported by this Court’s adoption of a procedural safeguard in these cases after VanderVliet. MRE 404(b)(2) provides that the prosecution “shall” not only provide pretrial notice of its intent to introduce 404(b) evidence, but it must also provide the rationale, whether or not it is mentioned in 404(b)(1), for admitting the evidence. This require*77ment is consistent with our case law because it requires the prosecutor to do more than simply recite the proper purposes listed in MRE 404(b)(1).
Additionally, as a matter of fairness to the defendant, the prosecutor should not be allowed to list its purposes and rationale at trial, and then grasp for more on appeal when those fail. MRE 404(b)(2) provides the defendant an opportunity to respond to the prosecutor’s list of purposes and rationale for admission. If the prosecutor is allowed on appeal to argue that unarticulated purposes existed, we would discourage compliance with this rule.
Judge Whitbeck scoured the record to find any and all arguments showing the prosecution’s nonpropensity theories.7 Scheme, plan, or system was not included in the list. In fact, it was not until the case reached this Court a second time that the “scheme, plan, or system” theory was added by the prosecutor. The prosecutor cites People v Engelman, 434 Mich 204, 223, n 27; 453 NW2d 656 (1990), for the proposition that the failure to advance the correct theory of admission does not justify automatic reversal of a conviction. This fails because, first, this was dicta, and, second, Judge Whitbeck correctly noted that the cases relied upon in the Engelman footnote do not support the prosecutor’s view. Judge Whitbeck stated:
I first note that Engelman, in turn, cites Templin v Not-tawa Twp, 362 Mich 257; 106 NW2d 825 (1961), and Plec v Liquor Control Comm, 322 Mich 691; 34 NW2d 524 (1948) .... Templin, however, does not deal with an evidentiary rule and stands only for the time-honored proposition that a *78reviewing court will not disturb the conclusions of a lower court that reached the right conclusion regardless of the reasons it cites for reaching that conclusion. Templin, supra at 261. The decision in Plec rests on the same basis .... At best, therefore, it seems to me that Engel-man stands for the proposition that the fact that a trial court may have erred in assigning a proper purpose for accepting the other acts testimony is not fatal on appeal, if a proper purpose existed and was articulated at trial. I secondly note that, quite obviously, Engelman predated the Court’s adoption of the VanderVliet four-legged test and therefore should not be interpreted as speaking definitively to the question of an “articulated” versus an “articulable” purpose with respect to the first leg. [236 Mich App 20, n 10 (emphasis in original).]
After two attempts at the Court of Appeals, and two attempts at this Court, it appears that the prosecutor has finally articulated a proper purpose under the majority view. It is apparent that the first leg of the four-legged test articulated in VanderVliet has been rendered a nullity. That case is left to wobble on its remaining three legs. From today forward, prosecutors may ignore the requirements of 404(b)(1) and (2) along with the first requirement of VanderVliet. On appeal, they may list any and all proper purposes in an attempt to hit the mark with one, or they may allow the appellate court to find one for them, thereby affirming a criminal conviction.
Because the prosecutor failed to meet the requirements of the first leg of VanderVliet and our court rules regarding character evidence, I would affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals.
SCHEME, PLAN, OR SYSTEM
As explained, the proper purpose articulated by the prosecutor must be relevant to a fact in issue. The *79majority properly analyzes this requirement in its discussion of the prior bad acts to show defendant’s motive, intent, absence of mistake, and bolstering the victim’s credibility. However, its analysis of scheme, plan, or system is lacking this requirement.
The majority explains that the proper purpose must be relevant, or material:
Materiality, however, “does not mean that the evidence must be directed at an element of a crime or an applicable defense.” A material fact is one that is “ ‘in issue’ in the sense that it is within the range of litigated matters in controversy.” [Ante, p 57 (citations omitted).]
In finding that defendant’s scheme, plan, or system was material, the majority relies on an interesting interpretation of the Engelman dicta. Ante, pp 61-62. It is true that other acts evidence is not limited to proving identity or intent. We need not look to Engel-man to support this statement when 404(b) itself provides a nonexhaustive list of the proper purposes for admitting evidence. However, the propositions surrounding the Engelman quote are simply inaccurate. The majority provides that “We [this Court] held that evidence of other instances of sexual misconduct that establish a scheme, plan, or system may be material in the sense that the evidence proves that the charged act was committed.” Ante, pp 61-62. To the contrary, in Engelman we held that photographic evidence of the defendant standing nude next to a minor female was inadmissible to show that defendant had a scheme, plan, or system of luring children into his home for sex acts even though defendant had taken nude photos of the victim in that case. 434 Mich 221. The holding was based on a lack of a “true plan.” Id. The instant majority provides that Engelman “sug*80gested” that a trae plan required that defendant formed a plan including the charged and uncharged crimes as stages in the plan’s execution. Ante, pp 62-63. In fact, Engelman held that because a true plan was not shown, as defined by Imwinkekied, Uncharged Misconduct Evidence, § 3:21, p 53, and 1 Wharton, Criminal Evidence (14th ed), § 186, pp 786-787, the evidence was inadmissible. 434 Mich 221. Finding no support in our case law,8 the majority looks to other jurisdictions to add a new theory of logical relevance that will fit within the category of scheme, plan, or system. It relies on State v Lough, 125 Wash 2d 847; 889 P2d 487 (1995), and People v Ewoldt, 7 Cal 4th 380; 867 P2d 757 (1994). However, the theory derived from those cases does not “clarify” our case law, but instead rejects it.
Lough simply followed the Ewoldt analysis and its precedent. The Ewoldt rule provides that other acts *81evidence is relevant to prove that the charged act was committed if it is sufficiently similar to support the inference of a common design or plan. 7 Cal 4th 402. This view was rejected in Engelman, where this Court explained that when the ultimate fact to be proved through the other acts evidence is that the criminal act took place, the question becomes whether the evidence offered tends to establish some intermediate inference, other than the improper inference, which is probative of the ultimate issue in the case — the commission of the act. 434 Mich 217. In other words, there must be a proper intermediate inference established by the other acts evidence that is probative of whether the crime occurred. Id. at 218.
The majority has provided no intermediate inference.9 Instead, it adopts the rule that the prosecutor need only show similarities in the charged and uncharged crimes. These similarities prove only that defendant acted in conformity with his character to commit similar acts. This analysis allows the prosecution to skip the intermediate inference requirement and instead point to one or two similarities as proof that the second act must have occurred. In other words, the prosecutor may now work backwards and argue that, where there are similarities, there is a plan, and therefore the other acts evidence proves defendant committed the instant crime. This logic has never been adopted, and it appears this leap is now made simply to convict a reprehensible defendant. The proper rule would follow well-established principles of evidence that require a showing that the *82other acts evidence is being presented to show something other than propensity to commit the crime. Crawford, supra at 390.
SUFFICIENT SIMILARITY
The majority’s new rule removes the prosecutor’s burden of weaving a logical thread linking the prior act to the ultimate inference. Rather than follow our established law in this area, it adopts California’s “sufficient similarity” test provided in Ewoldt. However, under the facts of this case, it fails to carry even this light burden. Ewoldt explains that to establish a common plan, the common features must indicate the existence of a plan rather than a series of similar spontaneous acts, but the plan need not be distinctive. Ewoldt, supra at 403.
In this case, the majority points to three common features among the uncharged and charged acts. First, the alleged victims had a father-daughter relationship. Second, the victims were of similar age at the time of the abuse. Third, defendant played on his daughters’ fears of breaking up the family to silence them. Ante, p 66. The problem with such common features is that they include the very elements of the uncharged and charged crimes. Defendant was convicted of CSC I pursuant to MCL 750.520b(l); MSA 28.788(2)(1). That statute provides that defendant is guilty if he engages in sexual penetration with another person, that other person is at least thirteen but less than sixteen years of age, and any of the following: (i) the actor is a member of the same household as the victim; (ii) the actor is related to the victim by blood or affinity to the fourth degree; (iii) the actor is in a position of authority over the victim and *83used this authority to coerce the victim to submit. In this case, both victims were between the ages of thirteen and sixteen at the times of the offenses, the majority’s second similarity. Defendant was a member of the same household as both victims, and defendant was related by either blood or affinity to both victims, the majority’s first similarity of a father-daughter relationship. Finally, as a father or stepfather he was in a position of authority over both victims and arguably used it to get them to submit, which is the majority’s third similarity of use of threats.10
It is obvious that the preceding logic will do great damage to the law of evidence if the prosecutor is allowed to introduce the very elements or nature of a prior crime in order to show that the defendant committed a later crime. Any second offender of a charged or uncharged similar crime will have his prior acts disclosed to the jury in order to prove a plan. There is no longer a requirement that the prosecutor show a permissible intermediate inference to prove any material fact. Similarities instantly show a plan, and use of a plan shows that defendant committed the crime at issue.
Moreover, the majority has shown nothing to indicate that the common features of the charged and uncharged crimes “indicate [d] the existence of a plan rather than a series of similar spontaneous acts” under the Ewoldt test. Id. at 403. Rather, the facts indicate that defendant spontaneously took advantage of an opportunity to rape his daughter while they *84were alone in the house. No facts show that he manipulated the situation in order to get his daughter alone in the house as part of a plan to later attack her. The threat that she would break up the family appears to have been an afterthought to cover up the crime after it occurred rather than part of an overall common plan to commit CSC I. Finally, no facts link the prior acts against defendant’s stepdaughter to a plan to rape defendant’s daughter ten years later. The majority has failed to even show the impermissible “series” of spontaneous acts. While it is alleged that defendant committed a series of similar acts against his stepdaughter, the instant offense is remote in time and cannot be considered a part of that series. Instead, the instant offense is nothing more than a similar act in that it too is a CSC I offense.
CONCLUSION
The majority errs for several reasons. First, it has removed the responsibility of the prosecutor to provide and articulate a proper purpose as required under the first leg of the VanderVliet test. Instead, it adopts a new “common plan” purpose not argued by the prosecutor. This allows appellate courts, in hindsight, to search for proper purposes to support admission of MRE 404(b) evidence despite the fact that defendant was not allowed to argue against its admission. Because the prosecutor failed to carry its burden for introduction of the other acts evidence, our inquiry should end. Second, the majority errs in removing the longstanding requirement of showing that the evidence of the plan legitimately and logically shows that defendant committed the crime. The majority simply asserts that the commission of the *85crime is the ultimate fact, but fails to explain how the facts of the first sex offense led to the conclusion that the second offense was committed. The majority cannot show that the evidence of a common plan in this case is relevant apart from its tendency to show that the defendant committed the instant crime because he acted in conformity with his criminal disposition. Third, the majority errs in creating a rule that any similarities among successive crimes proves a plan, and thus proves that the charged offense was committed. Even under that test, the similarities ought not be the elements or nature of the crime itself.
For the above reasons, I would affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals.
Kelly, J., concurred with Cavanagh, J.
People v VanderVliet, 444 Mich 52; 508 NW2d 114 (1993).
People v Crawford, 458 Mich 376; 582 NW2d 785 (1998).
People v Starr, 457 Mich 490; 577 NW2d 673 (1998).
The VanderVliet test provides that, first, evidence must be relevant to an issue other than propensity under Rule 404(b); second, the evidence must be relevant under Rule 402 as enforced through Rule 104(b) to an issue of fact or consequence at trial; third, the trial court should employ a balancing test under Rule 403 to determine whether the probative value of the similar acts evidence is substantially outweighed by its potential for unfair prejudice; and, fourth, the trial court, upon request, may provide a limiting instruction under Rule 105.
It is not solely the prosecutor’s failure to recite magic words that requires reversal in this case. It is the failure under our case law and MRE 404(b)(1) and (2) to provide a legitimate rationale for admitting the evidence. The majority argues that pointing out similarities between an uncharged and charged act satisfies the prosecutor’s burden to articulate and provide rationale for admission of the evidence. In future cases, criminal defendants should cite this rationale to ensure review of issues not preserved at trial. The majority also argues that the trial court admitted the evidence under a “scheme, plan, or system” theory. The record is void of support for this assertion. The court simply stated that the evidence was relevant because it was similar. Finally, instructing the jury that it should use the evidence to support a showing that this is “how he [defendant] does certain things” fails to cure the error.
As the amicus curiae Criminal Defense Attorneys of Michigan brief points out, the suggestion that other acts evidence is relevant to show that adults can be sexually attracted to children is nothing more than an ingenious disguise of an improper propensity purpose. No rational juror in our society today would doubt that an adult could be sexually attracted to a child. The fact that the majority chose not to address the question evidences its agreement that this is implausible.
Judge Whitbeck also noted that the prosecution added “modus oper-andi,” “corpus delicti,” and “corroboration” as new theories at the Court of Appeals. 236 Mich App 19-20, n 10.
The majority’s injection of People v Oliphant, 399 Mich 472; 250 NW2d 443 (1976), fails to provide support for its view. First, Oliphant was decided before we adopted the requirements of MRE 404(b)(2), Vander-Vliet, Starr, and Crawford. Also, in Oliphant, the evidence was material to the issue of consent. In the instant case, the evidence was admitted to prove that the instant offense occurred. As Engelman explains:
“When the prosecutor offers uncharged misconduct to prove the commission of the actus reus, the judge should very carefully scrutinize the prosecutor’s theory of logical relevance. This is the theory of relevance in which it is easiest for the prosecutor to slip into improper character reasoning. Since the ultimate inference is conduct, this theory places the greatest strain on the prohibition in the first sentence of Rule 404(b). The courts are reluctant to admit uncharged misconduct to prove the actus reus, and that reluctance is well-founded. If the prosecutor wants to avoid Rule 404(b), the prosecutor must persuade the judge that the prosecutor is invoking an intermediate inference other than the defendant’s subjective character.” [434 Mich 215-216 (citations omitted).]
Of course, after today, the prosecutor need not bother with these unduly strict requirements, and may introduce evidence of prior acts by pointing to similarities between the prior act and the offense charged.
The majority’s explanation, that the “common system” theory itself is its own intermediate inference, is vacuous, but would fit quite well into a work of Lewis Carroll.
The majority concedes that the charged and uncharged acts were dissimilar in many respects. Rather than acknowledge that the two crimes are separate spontaneous acts lacking a common thread other than the statutory elements, it takes cover in the abuse of discretion standard of review — a standard that now appears insurmountable.

=== CASE 9737654 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:36.172147+00 ===

ROBERTSON, Judge.
The State of Indiana appeals the denial of Kathy Ullery’s petition to modify (increase) the child support obligation of her ex-husband, Michael Ullery.1 The State raises one issue which does not constitute reversible error.
*215FACTS
The facts in the light most favorable to the trial court’s judgment indicate that Kathy and Michael were divorced on February 22, 1985. Kathy was awarded custody of the two children bom of the marriage, Melissa, bom May 14, 1975, and Kimberly, bom November 9, 1976. Michael was ordered to pay $50.00 per week in child support.
At the time the present petition was filed, Michael was gainfully employed. However, Michael quit his job after the petition was filed. He testified at trial that he quit because his employer was not treating him fairly. Michael denied that he quit his job as the result of the filing of the present petition. He also denied that he had chosen not to be gainfully employed and not to pay his support. The amount of support that Michael would have been obligated to pay under the Indiana Child Support Guidelines had he remained employed would have been $137.00 per week.
The trial court denied the motion to increase Michael’s child support obligation noting that Michael was unemployed. The trial court ordered Michael to notify the IY-D Division of the Prosecutor’s office when he becomes employed.
DECISION
We note at the outset that Michael has failed to file an appellee’s brief. When the appellee fails to file a brief, we may reverse the trial court if the appellant makes a prima facie showing of reversible error. Champion Home Builders Co. v. Potts (1989), Ind.App., 538 N.E.2d 280. However, although we may reverse upon a showing of prima facie error when the appellee fails to file an appellee’s brief, we are not compelled to do so and may, in our discretion, decide the case on the merits. S.M.V. v. Littlepage (1982), Ind.App., 443 N.E.2d 103, trans. denied. In the exercise of our discretion, we decline to invoke the prima facie error rule and choose to address this appeal on the merits.
The State argues that the trial court erred in failing to increase Michael’s child support obligation because Michael was voluntarily unemployed, citing Ind.Child Support Guideline 3(A). The State urges that the evidence indicates that Michael quit his job as the result of the filing of the petition to modify and intends to go back to work with his old employer.
The trial court’s modification of a support order will be reversed only for an abuse of discretion; that is, only when the trial court’s decision is clearly against the logic and effect of the facts and circumstances. Gerber v. Gerber (1985), Ind. App., 476 N.E.2d 531. In determining whether the trial court abused its discretion in modifying (or refusing to modify) a child support order, the court of review does not weigh the evidence or judge the credibility of the witnesses but, rather, considers only that evidence most favorable to the judgment, together with the reasonable inferences which can be drawn therefrom; and, if from that viewpoint, there is substantial evidence to support the finding of the trial court, it will not be disturbed even though the court of review may have reached a different conclusion had it been the trier of fact. Meehan v. Meehan (1981), Ind., 425 N.E.2d 157.
Where a parent becomes voluntarily unemployed or underemployed, the trial court must calculate support based upon a determination of potential income. Ind.Support Guideline 3(A)(3); Matter of Paternity of Buehler (1991), Ind.App., 576 N.E.2d 1354. The purpose for determining potential income is to discourage a parent from taking a lower paying job to avoid the payment of significant support and also to fairly allocate the support obligation when one parent remarries and, because of the income of the new spouse, chooses not to be employed. Id. However, as the Buehler court noted:
No mention is made of using child support as a tool to promote a society where all work to their full economic potential, or make their career decisions based strictly upon the size of potential paychecks. It is not our function here to approve or disapprove of the lifestyle of these parties or their career choices *216and the means by which they choose to discharge their obligations in general.
576 N.E.2d at 1356. Accordingly, in Buehler, we held the trial court’s increase in the father’s support order, based upon its finding that the father had the ability and potential to earn more than he was currently receiving from his existing job, to be an abuse of discretion. Id. We noted that the father was earning relatively the same amount he was earning when his relationship with the child’s mother was intact. Id.
In the present case, Michael testified that he quit his job because his employer was not treating him fairly. Moreover, he denied that he quit his job because of the filing of the present petition and he denied that he had chosen not to be gainfully employed and not to pay his support.
As noted above, we do not weigh the evidence or judge the credibility of the witnesses. The record supports the trial court's determination that Michael was not voluntarily unemployed or that his current decline in income was purposely brought about to reduce his support payments. See Garrod v. Garrod (1992), Ind.App., 590 N.E.2d 163. Therefore, we cannot conclude that the trial court’s decision not to increase Michael’s child support obligation was an abuse of discretion.
Judgment affirmed.
BAKER, J., concurs in result with separate opinion.
RATLIFF, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. The State (the Indiana Department of Public Welfare as Assignee of Kathy Ullery) was a party in the action below. Therefore, the State has standing to prosecute this appeal. Ind.Appellate Rule 2(B).

=== CASE 9737655 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:36.176083+00 ===

BAKER, Judge,
concurring.
I concur with Judge Robertson’s reasoning and the result he reaches. It was within the trial court’s sound discretion to determine whether Michael’s unemployment was “voluntary” under Ind.Child Support Guideline 3(A)(3), and the evidence supports the trial court’s determination it was not. I write separately, however, to emphasize that, in my opinion, there may be legitimate reasons for a parent to leave his or her employment or to take a lower paying job other than to avoid child support obligations. In such cases, I do not believe the support guidelines mandate a conclusion that the parent is voluntarily unemployed or underemployed.
I agree fully with Senior Judge Ratliff’s statement that a parent should not be able to use his or her unemployment or underemployment to escape parental responsibilities. I am fearful, however, that the good judge's reasoning permits courts to enter the business of dictating a parent’s employment decisions even when those decisions are not occasioned by the desire to avoid child support obligations. When a parent leaves his or her employment because of unfair treatment on the job, for example, the parent’s resulting unemployment and loss of wages may, in some cases, be properly categorized as involuntary. Similarly, I cannot believe the child support guidelines dictate that a parent may never make a career move to a lower paying job without also finding he or she is suddenly underemployed for child support purposes. For example, surely a lawyer’s move from a lucrative private law practice to a lower paying public service position or judgeship would not compel the court to conclude the move necessarily resulted in the parent’s voluntary underemployment under Child Supp. G. 3(A)(3). It would seem Senior Judge Ratliff’s interpretation of the guideline demands just that result.
Finally, permitting parents’ employment decisions to be completely controlled by child support obligations seems to suggest children have the right to demand that their parents meet their maximum individual earning capacities. I know of no such right. The determination of whether there are legitimate reasons for the parent’s career choice or whether the parent is simply trying to avoid his or her child support obligations, i.e., whether the parent is a deadbeat, is best left to the trial court’s sound discretion after hearing the evidence and viewing witness demeanor.
Because the evidence supports the trial court’s conclusion that Michael was not voluntarily unemployed when he quit his job because of unfair treatment, I concur in affirming the trial court’s judgment deny*217ing Kathy’s petition to increase Michael’s child support obligation.

=== CASE 9737656 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:36.179824+00 ===

RATLIFF, Judge,
dissenting.
When a parent subject to a support order for the benefit of his minor dependent children voluntarily terminates his employment, he should not be able to use his unemployment as a means of escaping his responsibilities to his children. In fact, he should be treated as if he remained employed at his former job and his support obligations determined accordingly.
Ind.Child Support Guideline 3(A)(3) specifically provides:
“If a parent is voluntarily unemployed or underemployed, child support shall be calculated based on a determination of potential income. A determination of potential income shall be made by determining employment potential and probable earnings level based on the obligor’s work history, occupational qualifications, prevailing job opportunities, and earnings levels in the community....”
The Commentary to the above quoted guideline provides: “One purpose of potential income is to discourage a parent from taking a lower paying job to avoid the payment of significant support.” Here, Michael Ullery did more than take a lower paying job — he quit his job. Such conduct equally should be discouraged.
In Gerber v. Gerber (1985), Ind.App., 476 N.E.2d 531, the non-custodial mother subject to a support order for her children contended that the trial court erred in failing to modify the support order where her earnings were substantially reduced. However, she had remained employed until two weeks before the hearing on her petition to modify. We affirmed the denial of her petition, stating:
“A non-custodial parent under a support order cannot voluntarily terminate her employment and then, less than two weeks later, complain to the court the order must be modified because payment is no longer within her means. To allow Michelle to do so would open the door for every non-custodial parent to do likewise in order to avoid payment of their legal and moral obligations to support their children. Michelle cites no authority which would support her position, and public policy would preclude such a potentially disasterous [sic] holding.”
Id. at 533 (emphasis added).
In Billings v. Billings (1990), Ind.App., 560 N.E.2d 553, wé affirmed an increase in support where the obligor had voluntarily quit a lucrative job and was underemployed. Citing the Child Support Guidelines, we approved the admission of the obligor’s tax returns from prior years to determine potential income. Id. at 555-56.
To the extent the majority opinion relies upon Matter of Paternity of Buehler (1991), Ind.App., 576 N.E.2d 1354, and Garrod v. Garrod (1992), Ind.App., 590 N.E.2d 163, that reliance is misplaced. Neither of those cases is apposite. In Garrod, nothing in the record revealed that the husband was voluntarily unemployed or that he had reduced his income in an effort to avoid support payments. Id. at 168. Here, it is significant that Michael quit his job after being served with Kathy’s petition to modify. See Record at 39-40. The trial court merely found that Michael was unemployed. Record at 62. Given the lack of a finding that his unemployment was not voluntary, the trial judge should have followed the guidelines and determined potential income.
Buehler also is clearly distinguishable. There, the obligor was earning the same as he had for the ten years of the parties’ relationship. Buehler, 576 N.E.2d at 1356. Thus, there was no intentional reduction of income to defeat payment of a proper amount of support. Id.
I agree with Judge Garrard’s observation in Buehler that the support guidelines are not to be used as a method of social engineering to assure that everyone is employed to his or her full earning potential; however, such is not the case here. Under the appropriate guideline, based upon his earning potential as determined from his actual earnings from the job he quit upon receiving Kathy’s petition to modify, Mi*218chael should have been ordered to pay $137.00 per week rather than the $50.00 of the order then in force. Michael should not be permitted to escape his legal and moral obligation by the device of quitting his job.
I am aware of Michael’s contention he quit his job because of perceived unfair treatment by his employer. However, while not condoning unfair treatment by his employer if such was the case, suffice it to say that many persons find some aspects of their employment distasteful but, nevertheless, keep working to meet their obligations. Perhaps Michael should have sought other employment to find relief from the treatment he regarded as unfair, but until that happened, either he should have continued his employment, or, pursuant to the guidelines, his support obligation should have been determined based upon that employment in the event of his voluntary unemployment.
I believe the majority opinion sends a message to disgruntled support obligors that they can relieve themselves of their obligations by quitting their jobs. I do not subscribe to such a view and do not believe the law can or should tolerate such a result.
For the reasons stated, I respectfully dissent.

=== CASE 9737657 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:37.618877+00 ===

Young, J.
We consider in this case the trial court’s decision to suppress defendant’s voluntary confession on the ground that defendant did not “knowingly and intelligently” waive his Miranda1 rights. We conclude *625that the trial court applied an erroneous legal standard in assessing the validity of defendant’s Miranda waiver. Moreover, we conclude that the waiver was valid. Therefore, we reverse the trial court’s decision suppressing defendant’s confession.
I. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
On May 21, 1994, defendant flagged down Detroit Police Officers Nevin Hughes and Linda Dickinson, who were on routine patrol in a marked vehicle, and blurted out that he had just confessed to a 911 operator that he had killed his mother, Teriza Daoud. As it turns out, in 1985, the victim’s body had been discovered in a Dumpster in Toledo, Ohio. The victim’s body was “hog-tied” with electrical cord and burned. An autopsy report indicated that the victim died as a result of multiple blunt-force injuries to her head. The victim had also been exposed to some source of carbon monoxide before her death. Ironically, the case had remained unresolved until defendant’s decision to approach the police nine years later.
In response to defendant’s roadside outburst, Officers Hughes and Dickinson pulled their patrol car to the curb, approached defendant and advised him of his Miranda rights. Officer Dickinson testified at defendant’s preliminary examination that defendant proceeded to waive his Miranda rights and tell the officers that he “took a lug wrench and he cut it in half and he hit his mother several times in the head and then he choked her and then he wrapped her up in a blanket, tied her up with some wire and he took her out to a[n] area near a school in Troy.”
*626The officers drove defendant to the Detroit Police Department’s 9th Precinct station where defendant was advised of his Miranda rights a second time. Defendant again waived those rights and repeated what he had previously told the officers.
In response to defendant’s statement that the murder took place in Troy, Officer Dickinson immediately notified the Troy Police Department. Troy Police Detective Mitch Lenczewski testified at the preliminary examination that he and Sergeant Mark Tuck2 went down to the Detroit Police Department on May 21 and interviewed defendant.3 Defendant was advised of and waived his Miranda rights a third time. Defendant then gave a taped confession in which he explained that he repeatedly struck his mother in the head and choked her to get her to stop screaming. After killing her, defendant wrapped his mother’s body in blankets and placed it in the trunk of his uncle’s car. He then drove the car to a nearby school, and parked it there. Defendant returned to his mother’s house, took her car, and drove it to the Oakland Mall in Troy to make it look like she had been shopping there.
After getting a ride from some “guys” at the mall, defendant returned to the school where he had left his uncle’s car. Defendant bought a gasoline container, filled it, and drove to Toledo with the victim’s body in the trunk. There, defendant threw his mother’s body into a Dumpster and set it afire. *627Defendant then returned to Michigan and, with apparent success, went about concealing his crime. Following the interview with Detective Lenczewski, defendant signed a waiver form and provided a written statement in which he again confessed to his mother’s murder. All defendant’s statements were admitted at the preliminary examination.
After defendant was bound over for trial on June 10, 1994, he filed a notice of intent to raise an insanity defense. Accordingly, the trial court ordered that defendant be examined by the Center for Forensic Psychiatry. Following a September 1994 competency hearing, the trial court determined that defendant was incompetent to stand trial and committed him to the Michigan Department of Mental Health for treatment.4 Upon defendant’s request, the trial court further ordered that defendant be examined “relating to the issue of competency to understand his constitutional and Miranda rights prior to making a statement to the police . . . .”
Defendant was eventually examined by three experts, Drs. Robert Mogy, Charles Clark, and Thomas Grisso, all of whom submitted reports. Walker5 hearings were held on September 25, 1996, and February 7, 1997, during which the trial court *628heard testimony from all three doctors pertaining to the validity of defendant’s confession. The doctors disagreed with respect to defendant’s ability to understand his Miranda rights. Dr. Mogy believed that defendant was delusional in that he believed that God controlled the police and would set him free if he confessed and that this delusion made him unable to appreciate the fact that the police would use his statements against him. In contrast, Dr. Clark testified that there were no clear indications that defendant’s confession was the product of any delusion or that defendant did not understand that the police would use his statement against him.
In light of the contradictory opinions rendered by Drs. Mogy and Clark, Dr. Grisso was hired to perform yet another examination. Dr. Grisso testified that defendant literally understood that the police intended to put him in jail; however, due to his religious “delusions and preoccupations,” defendant was unable to use that information and “relate it to his own situation.”
Relying on the testimony given by Drs. Mogy and Grisso, the trial court suppressed defendant’s statements on the ground that defendant did not make a knowing and intelligent waiver of his Miranda rights. The trial court found that defendant was delusional at the time of his contact with police, in that he “believed that he had no need of any protective rights as God would be releasing him from jail as a reward for confessing to his mother’s murder.” The court reasoned that this delusion “prevented rational comprehension of the specific topic at issue—his right to counsel and his right against self-incrimination.”
*629The prosecution sought leave to appeal from the Court of Appeals. That Court reversed the trial court’s decision to the extent that it purported to suppress all defendant’s statements.6 The Court explained that defendant’s initial statements made before he was transported to the police station were not the product of custodial interrogation and thus were outside the scope of Miranda. However, the Court left standing the trial court’s decision suppressing defendant’s later recorded confession.
This Court granted the prosecution’s application for leave to appeal. 461 Mich 873 (1999).
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
In People v Cheatham, 453 Mich 1, 30; 551 NW2d 355 (1996), this Court set forth the standards for our review of the trial court’s decision in this case:
Although engaging in de novo review of the entire record, see People v Walker (On Rehearing), 374 Mich 331, 338; 132 NW2d 87 (1965), this Court will not disturb a trial court’s factual findings regarding a knowing and intelligent waiver of Miranda rights “unless that ruling is found to be clearly erroneous.” [People v Burrell, 417 Mich 439, 448; 339 NW2d 403 (1983).] Credibility is crucial in determining a defendant’s level of comprehension, and the trial judge is in the best position to make this assessment.
Although we review for clear error the trial court’s factual findings regarding a defendant’s knowing and intelligent waiver of Miranda rights, we agree with the prosecution that the meaning of “knowing and intelligent” is a question of law. We review questions *630of law de novo. McDougall v Schanz, 461 Mich 15, 24; 597 NW2d 148 (1999).
HI. ADMISSIBILITY OF CONFESSIONS: AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
The United States Supreme Court originally followed the common-law rule pertaining to the admission of confessions: that a confession was admissible as long as it was freely and voluntarily made. See Hopt v Utah, 110 US 574, 584-585; 4 S Ct 202; 28 L Ed 262 (1884).7 Then, in Bram v United States, 168 US 532, 542; 18 S Ct 183; 42 L Ed 568 (1897), the Court for the first time found the voluntariness requirement to be grounded in the Fifth Amendment’s command that no person “shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself.” However, the voluntariness requirement was limited to cases in federal court. In Twining v New Jersey, 211 US 78, 114; 29 S Ct 14; 53 L Ed 97 (1908), the Court held that “exemption from compulsory self-incrimination in the courts of the states is not secured by any part of the Federal Constitution” (emphasis added).
Beginning with Brown v Mississippi, 297 US 278; 56 S Ct 461; 80 L Ed 682 (1936), the Court introduced due process as a basis for excluding involuntary confessions in criminal proceedings occurring in state courts.8 It was held that fundamental unfairness in *631violation of due process exists “when a coerced confession is used as a means of obtaining a verdict of guilt.” Lisenba v California, 314 US 219, 236-237; 62 S Ct 280; 86 L Ed 166 (1941). Under the Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments, the test for admissibility was the same as that under the Fifth Amendment’s compelled self-incrimination provision, requiring “ ‘that the confession is made freely, voluntarily, and without compulsion or inducement of any sort.’ ” Haynes v Washington, 373 US 503, 513; 83 S Ct 1336; 10 L Ed 2d 513 (1963), quoting Wilson v United States, 162 US 613, 623; 16 S Ct 895; 40 L Ed 1090 (1896).
The Court eventually returned its focus to the privilege against self-incrimination. In Malloy v Hogan, 378 US 1, 6; 84 S Ct 1489; 12 L Ed 2d 653 (1964), the Court overruled Twining and held that “the Fifth Amendment’s exception from compulsory self-incrimination is also protected by the Fourteenth Amendment against abridgment by the States.”9 The Court acknowledged that the Brown Court “felt impelled, in light of Twining, to say that its conclusion did not involve the privilege against self-incrimination.” Id. However, the Court reasoned that any distinction “was soon abandoned.” Id. at 6-7. Thus, the Malloy Court concluded that
*632today the admissibility of a confession in a state criminal prosecution is tested by the same standard applied in federal prosecutions since 1897, when, in Bram v United States, 168 US 532; 18 S Ct 183; 42 L Ed 568 [(1897)] the Court held that “[i]n criminal trials, in the courts of the United States, wherever a question arises whether a confession is incompetent because not voluntary, the issue is controlled by that portion of the Fifth Amendment to the constitution of the United States commanding that no person ‘shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself.’ ” Id., 168 US at 542; 18 S Ct at 187. Under this test, the constitutional inquiry is not whether the conduct of state officers in obtaining the confession was shocking, but whether the confession was “free and voluntary; that is, [it] must not be extracted by any sort of threats or violence, nor obtained by any direct or implied promises, however slight, nor by the exertion of any improper influence. . . .” Id., 168 US at 542-543; 18 S Ct at 186-187; see also Hardy v United States, 186 US 224, 229; 22 S Ct 889, 891; 46 L Ed 1137 [(1902)]; Ziang Sung Wan v United States, 266 US 1, 14; 45 S Ct 1, 3; 69 L Ed 131 [(1924)]; Smith v United States, 348 US 147, 150; 75 S Ct 194, 196; 99 L Ed 192 [(1954)]. In other words the person must not have been compelled to incriminate himself. [Id. at 7.]
IV. MIRANDA v ARIZONA
Against this backdrop, the Court in Miranda addressed what it believed to be the inherent coercion present in all custodial interrogations. Beginning with the premise that, because of the “compulsion inherent in custodial surroundings, no statement obtained from [a] defendant can truly be the product of his free choice,” id. at 458, the Court fashioned a set of “procedural safeguards” in order to “permit a full opportunity to exercise the privilege against self-incrimination”:
*633To summarize, we hold that when an individual is taken into custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom by the authorities in any significant way and is subjected to questioning, the privilege against self-incrimination is jeopardized. Procedural safeguards must be employed to protect the privilege and unless other fully effective means are adopted to notify the person of his right of silence and to assure that the exercise of the right will be scrupulously honored, the following measures are required. He must be warned prior to any questioning that he has the right to remain silent, that anything he says can be used against him in a court of law, that he has the right to the presence of an attorney, and that if he cannot afford an attorney one will be appointed for him prior to any questioning if he so desires. [Id. at 467, 478-479.]
The Court further explained that “[t]he defendant may waive effectuation of these rights, provided the waiver is made voluntarily, knowingly and intelligently.” Id. at 444.
In subsequent decisions, the Supreme Court elaborated on what is required for an effective waiver of the Miranda rights. In Moran v Burbine, 475 US 412, 421; 106 S Ct 1135; 89 L Ed 2d 410 (1986), the Court explained that “[t]he inquiry has two distinct dimensions”:
First, the relinquishment of the right must have been voluntary in the sense that it was the product of a free and deliberate choice rather than intimidation, coercion, or deception. Second, the waiver must have been made with a full awareness of both the nature of the right being abandoned and the consequences of the decision to abandon it. Only if the “totality of the circumstances surrounding the interrogation” reveal both an uncoerced choice and the requisite level of comprehension may a court properly conclude that the Miranda rights have been waived.
*634The “totality of the circumstances” approach referred to in Moran requires an inquiry into all the circumstances surrounding the interrogation. This includes evaluation of the suspect’s
age, experience, education, background, and intelligence, and into whether he has the capacity to understand the warnings given him, the nature of his [Miranda] rights, and the consequences of waiving those rights. [Fare v Michael C, 442 US 707, 725; 99 S Ct 2560; 61 L Ed 2d 197 (1979); see also Cheatham, supra at 27.]
We read Fare as setting forth an objective standard for determining whether Miranda rights are validly waived. See United States v Yunis, 273 US App DC 290, 302; 859 F2d 853 (1988). While, as explained below, determining whether a defendant provided a knowing and intelligent waiver necessarily involves an inquiry into the suspect’s level of understanding, this can only be done by examining the objective circumstances surrounding the waiver.10 Finally, the prosecution has the burden of establishing a valid waiver by a preponderance of the evidence. Colorado v Connelly, 479 US 157, 168; 107 S Ct 515; 93 L Ed 2d 473 (1986).11
*635A. VOLUNTARY PRONG OF THE MIRANDA WAIVER
Determining whether a waiver of Miranda rights was voluntary involves the same inquiry as in the due process context. In Connelly, supra at 169-170, the Supreme Court explained that there is “no reason to require more in the way of a ‘voluntariness’ inquiry in the Miranda waiver context than in the Fourteenth Amendment confession context.” Thus, whether a waiver of Miranda rights is voluntary depends on the absence of police coercion. Id. at 170. The Connelly Court explained that “ ‘the relinquishment of the right must have been voluntary in the sense that it was the product of a free and deliberate choice rather than intimidation, coercion, or deception . . . I” Id., quoting Moran, supra at 421.
In the instant case, there is no question that defendant’s decision to waive his Miranda rights, and, concomitantly, his decision to confess, was completely voluntary. Consequently, as in Cheatham, our *636task here is to determine whether defendant’s waiver was also “knowing and intelligent.”
B. KNOWING AND INTELLIGENT PRONG OF THE MIRANDA WAIVER
In contrast to the voluntary prong, determining whether a suspect’s waiver was knowing and intelligent requires an inquiry into the suspect’s level of understanding, irrespective of police behavior. See United States v Bradshaw, 290 US App DC 129, 132-134; 935 F2d 295 (1991); Derrick v Peterson, 924 F2d 813, 820-821 (CA 9, 1990). However, as we explained in Cheatham, supra at 28, “[t]o knowingly waive Miranda rights, a suspect need not understand the ramifications and consequences of choosing to waive or exercise the rights that the police have properly explained to him.” See also Colorado v Spring, 479 US 564, 574; 107 S Ct 851; 93 L Ed 2d 954 (1987) (“The Constitution does not require that a criminal suspect know and understand every possible consequence of a waiver of [Miranda rights]”).12 Thus, “[l]ack of foresight is insufficient to render an otherwise proper waiver invalid.” Cheatham, supra at 29. Rather,
*637[t]o establish a valid waiver, the state must present evidence sufficient to demonstrate that the accused understood that he did not have to speak, that he had the right to the presence of counsel, and that the state could use what he said in a later trial against him. [Id.; see also People v Garwood, 205 Mich App 553, 558; 517 NW2d 843 (1994).]
We agree with the plurality in Cheatham that the requirement of a “knowing and intelligent” waiver of Miranda rights essentially forces courts to make “ ‘sweeping inquiries into the state of mind of a criminal defendant who has confessed, inquiries quite divorced from any coercion brought to bear on the defendant by the State.’ ” Id. at 21-22 (Boyle, J.), quoting Connelly, supra at 167.13 In light of the fact that the Fifth Amendment itself protects only against compelled self-incrimination, the requirement of a “knowing and intelligent” waiver of Miranda rights is puzzling.14 As the Ninth Circuit observed in Derrick, supra at 821;
[T]he Court requires that there be improper state action under the [F]ourteenth [A]mendment before a confession can be suppressed, but requires no such state action in the Miranda context, even though the constitutional provision underlying the Miranda warning—the [F]ifth [A]mendment—is applied to the states through that same [Fourteenth [A]mendment.
*638Before the Supreme Court’s recent decision in Dickerson v United States, 530 US 428; 120 S Ct 2326; 147 L Ed 2d 405 (2000), this apparent incongruity was easily reconcilable, given that the Supreme Court itself had acknowledged in at least fifteen post-Miranda decisions that the Miranda warnings are not themselves rights protected by the Fifth Amendment, but instead are prophylactic rules designed to protect the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.15 In Dickerson, however, the Court abruptly changed course, holding that Miranda is a “constitutional decision” announcing a “constitutional rule.”16
Although the Supreme Court has now decided that the Miranda rights are constitutionally mandated, the *639Court has yet to address the apparent inconsistency between the voluntary and knowing and intelligent prongs of the Miranda waiver analysis. Until it does so, our duty is to accept and attempt to apply Miranda and its progeny, including the requirement of a “knowing and intelligent” waiver of the Miranda rights. Like the Derrick court, “we . . . are obligated to bifurcate the Miranda waiver analysis into an inspection of (1) whether the waiver was ‘voluntary’ and (2) whether the waiver was ‘knowing’ and ‘intelligent.’ ” Derrick, supra at 821; see also Cheatham, supra at 26 (Boyle, J.).
V. APPLICATION
Cheatham represents our most recent attempt to apply the knowing and intelligent prong of the Miranda waiver. The trial court, in its opinion suppressing defendant’s confession, interpreted our decision in Cheatham as requiring that a suspect be able to “apply [his Miranda rights] to himself and understand his relationship with the police.” As a result, the trial court reasoned that defendant’s delusional belief that “God would be releasing him from jail as a reward for confessing to his mother’s murder” prevented him from making a knowing and intelligent decision to waive his Miranda rights. We conclude that the trial court erred as a matter of law because it misread Cheatham and, consequently, focused on why defendant was confessing rather than considering whether defendant could in fact understand and waive his Miranda rights.
Our conclusion in this regard is supported not only by the trial court’s written opinion focusing on defendant’s purported delusions, but by the court’s *640comments during defendant’s Walker hearings. At one point during Dr. Mogy’s testimony, the trial court commented that “[t]he only issue is [defendant’s] motivation to make the statement.” The court even suggested that only someone who was delusional would come forward and admit to a murder after nine years.17 Although defendant may have believed that he would not go to jail, such a belief has nothing to do with whether defendant was able to understand “ ‘that he need say nothing at all and that he might then consult with a lawyer if he so desired.’ ” Cheatham, supra at 29, quoting United States v Hall, 396 F2d 841, 846 (CA 4, 1968). In this regard, we agree with the following statement by the Supreme Court of Illinois:
To waive rights intelligently and knowingly, one must at least understand basically what those rights encompass and minimally what their waiver will entail. The mental state that is necessary to validly waive Miranda rights involves being cognizant at all times of the State’s intention to use one’s statements to secure a conviction and of the fact that *641one can stand mute and request a lawyer. [In re WC, 167 Ill 2d 307, 328; 212 Ill Dec 563; 657 NE2d 908 (1995).]
Because the trial court applied the wrong legal standard in determining defendant’s ability to make a knowing and intelligent waiver of his Miranda rights, we reverse the trial court’s decision suppressing defendant’s confession. Viewing the objective circumstances surrounding defendant’s waiver, the waiver was clearly knowing and intelligent. Detective Lenczewski gave undisputed testimony that, while advising defendant of his Miranda rights, he had defendant read along from a department-issued card. Detective Lenczewski further testified that he stopped after each warning, asked defendant if he understood, and continued after defendant stated that he in fact understood. The exchange ended with defendant’s direction to “get on with it.” Such a remark clearly evidences defendant’s awareness of the events that were transpiring. Defendant eventually waived his rights and proceeded to give a detailed confession.18
Turning to the opinions proffered by the various expert witnesses, although Dr. Clark admitted that it was possible that defendant was suffering from a delusion that affected his ability to understand his actions, he believed such a notion to be “quite speculative.” Dr. Clark found no objective evidence that defendant was not capable of understanding his Miranda rights. Indeed, Dr. Clark believed that it would be a “mystery” why defendant would tell the police what he did if defendant did not understand to *642what use the police would put his statements. Dr. Clark placed particular emphasis on a remark defendant made at his arraignment—that the court should “go ahead and send me to jail”—because that statement was made relatively close in time to his confession.19
Dr. Grisso testified that, while defendant’s delusion prevented him from appreciating the consequences of his actions, he clearly had a “straight forward understanding ... of what the Miranda warnings are saying.” With regard to defendant’s understanding of the role of the police, Dr. Grisso testified that defendant would “understand that the police intend[ed] to jail him.” In his report submitted to the court, Dr. Grisso explained that defendant knew what the police were supposed to do but, because of his mental illness, “did not believe that [] it would happen.”
As stated, a knowing and intelligent waiver of the Miranda rights does not require that a suspect “understand the ramifications and consequences of choosing to waive or exercise the rights that the police have properly explained to him.” Cheatham, supra at 28. Rather, a very basic understanding is all that is necessary for a valid waiver.
The Supreme Court has made clear that a defendant need not have a wise or shrewd basis for waiving Miranda rights for the waiver to be valid. In Connecticut v Barrett, 479 US 523, 525-526; 107 S Ct 828; 93 L Ed 2d 920 (1987), the Court considered a case in which a defendant orally confessed to a crime, but refused to make a written statement without the pres*643ence of counsel. In the course of concluding that Miranda did not require suppression of the defendant’s oral statements, the Court stated that “[t]he fact that some might find [the defendant’s] decision [to confess] illogical is irrelevant, for we have never ‘embraced the theory that a defendant’s ignorance of the full consequences of his decisions vitiates their voluntariness.’ ” Id. at 530 (citation omitted). Similarly, in Spring, supra, the Court considered a case in which the police interrogated the defendant without telling him all the crimes at which the interrogation was aimed. In concluding that this lack of information did not affect the validity of the defendant’s waiver of his Miranda rights, the Court held that “the additional information could affect only the wisdom of a Miranda waiver, not its essentially voluntary and knowing nature.” Id. at 577.
Thus, it is clear that the United States Supreme Court does not equate a “knowing and intelligent” waiver of Miranda rights with a wise or lawyer-inspired decision to waive those rights.20 A trial court’s determination of whether a waiver of Miranda rights is “knowing and intelligent” should not involve any determination whether the decision to waive those rights is actually a wise decision in terms of the defendant’s self-interest. Rather, the only inquiry with regard to a “knowing and intelligent” waiver of Miranda rights is, as stated, whether the defendant understood “that he did not have to speak, that he had the right to the presence of counsel, and that the *644state could use what he said in a later trial against him.” Cheatham, supra at 29.
Here, even Dr. Mogy, who testified at length about defendant’s supposed belief that “God was going to free him,” acknowledged that defendant “did, at some point, seem to be aware that he could go to jail for making these statements.” Dr. Mogy’s basic position was that defendant simply ignored the consequences of confessing because of his delusions, not that defendant could not understand those consequences. Indeed, Dr. Mogy acknowledged that defendant could understand the literal aspects of his Miranda rights.
In its opinion, the trial court expressly found “the testimony and reports of Dr. Mogy and Dr. Grisso to accurately reflect the nature of [defendant's mental state” at the time that defendant waived his Miranda rights. The trial court also noted that “Dr. Grisso testified that while [defendant did have an intellectual understanding of the rights he was read, his delusions prevented him from appreciating those rights as they applied to his own situation” (emphasis added). Finally, the trial court stated that “this case presents a defendant with the intellectual capability of understanding the rights which [were] read to him.” Thus, it is plain that the trial court found that defendant understood his Miranda rights. That should have ended the trial court’s inquiry because a basic understanding is all that is required for a knowing and intelligent waiver of Miranda rights. The trial court erred in suppressing defendant’s confession.21
*645VI. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated, the trial court erred as a matter of law in concluding that defendant’s claimed delusional belief that God would set him free prevented him from knowingly and intelligently waiving his Miranda rights. Moreover, as in Cheatham, supra at 31, there is no evidence that, “ ‘at the time the warnings were given and during the subsequent questioning, Defendant manifested expressly or by implication from [his] words and actions any lack of comprehension of what was said to [him] or of what was occurring’ ” (citation omitted).22 Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s decision suppressing defendant’s confession.
Weaver, C.J., and Taylor, Corrigan, and Markman, JJ., concurred with Young, J.
Miranda v Arizona, 384 US 436; 86 S Ct 1602; 16 L Ed 2d 694 (1966). The now-familiar Miranda warnings require the police, before a custodial interrogation, to inform a suspect (1) that he has the right to remain silent, (2) that anything he says can and will be used against him in court, (3) that he has a right to the presence of an attorney during any questioning, and (4) that if he cannot afford an attorney one will be appointed for him. Id. at 469-473.
Sergeant Tuck was involved in the earlier investigation of Teriza Daoud’s murder.
The interview was conducted by Detective Lenczewski because defendant remembered Sergeant Tuck from the original investigation and refused to talk to him.
This decision was based on a report prepared by Dr. Jennifer Balay, an examiner for the Center for Forensic Psychiatry. That report indicated that defendant appeared delusional and that while defendant “had a superficial understanding of the fact that he had been arrested and charged with the murder of his mother,” he was “completely unconcerned . . . believing that he would soon be released from jail because it was the Lord’s will to do so.” The report concluded that “defendant’s disturbed mental state has rendered him unable to appreciate the nature and object of the proceedings against him and unable to rationally assist counsel in his own defense.”
People v Walker (On Rehearing), 374 Mich 331; 132 NW2d 87 (1965).
Unpublished order, entered January 11, 1999 (Docket No. 215615).
The Hopt Court explained that a confession should be excluded if it was induced by threats or promises “which, operating upon the fears or hopes of the accused . . . deprive him of that freedom of will or self-control essential to make his confession voluntary within the meaning of the law.” Id. at 585.
The Court relied on the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause essentially to avoid its holding in Twining.
Const 1963, art 1, § 17 also affords a right to be free from compelled self-incrimination, providing that “[n]o person shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself . . . .” We noted in Cheatham, supra at 10, that “[t]he wording of the Michigan Constitution granting protection from compelled self-incrimination is identical to the Fifth Amendment protection.” As in Cheatham, however, there is no need in this case to consider the precise nature of the protection against self-incrimination provided by the Michigan Constitution because the trial court relied exclusively on the Fifth Amendment and defendant makes no argument that art 1, § 17 should be construed differently.
Contrary to the dissent’s assertion, we do not suggest that a suspect’s subjective mental state plays no role in a determination whether there was a knowing and intelligent Miranda waiver. We merely recognize that the only conceivable basis for ascertaining a suspect’s subjective understanding, other than by supernatural means, which we do not possess, is to examine the objective circumstances surrounding Hie waiver.
The dissent questions our reliance on Connelly in setting forth the prosecution’s burden of proof in this case. The dissent suggests that, because Connelly involved only the voluntary prong of the Miranda waiver, its statement of the burden of proof is not applicable in cases involving the question whether a Miranda waiver was knowing and intelligent. However, Connelly expressly stated that “[w]henever the State bears the burden of proof in a motion to suppress a statement that the *635defendant claims was obtained in violation of our Miranda doctrine, the State need prove waiver only by a preponderance of the evidence.” Connelly, supra at 168 (emphasis added). This statement does not strike us as one of limited applicability. The lower federal courts certainly have not hesitated in applying a preponderance of the evidence standard when determining whether a Miranda waiver was knowing and intelligent. See, e.g., United States v Palmer, 203 F3d 55, 60 (CA 1, 2000); United States v Doe, 60 F3d 544, 546 (CA 9, 1995); Wernert v Arn, 819 F2d 613, 616 (CA 6, 1987).
The dissent also suggests that a higher standard is mandated by the Supreme Court’s assorted references to the prosecution’s “heavy burden” in proving a waiver. Perhaps the dissent has overlooked the fact that the Supreme Court in Connelly acknowledged its prior decisions referring to the prosecution’s “heavy burden” and still adopted a preponderance of the evidence standard. Connelly, supra at 167-168.
As a final matter, we note that this Court also applied the preponderance of the evidence standard to the Miranda waiver’s knowing and intelligent prong in Cheatham, supra at 27.
The Court in Spring actually referred to waiver of “the Fifth Amendment privilege.” Id. We assume that the Court misspoke because it is illogical to talk about a waiver of the right against compelled self-incrimination. As Professor Joseph Grano explains, the idea of a waiver of the Fifth Amendment privilege would only make sense if the Fifth Amendment conferred a substantive right of silence. However, the Fifth Amendment confers not a right of silence per se, but a right not to be compelled to answer questions. See Grano, Confessions, Truth, and the Law (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1993), pp 141-142. Thus, the Spring Court must have been referring to waiver of the Miranda rights and not the Fifth Amendment privilege.
Cheatham was a majority opinion with the exception of part in, in which Justice Boyle, joined by Chief Justice Bkickley and Justice Riley, discussed what she believed to be an inconsistency between the voluntary and knowing and intelligent prongs of the Miranda waiver analysis.
As the Supreme Court recognized in Connelly, supra at 170, “the Fifth Amendment privilege is not concerned ‘with moral and psychological pressures to confess emanating from sources other than official coercion.’ ” The Connelly Court further emphasized: “Miranda protects defendants against government coercion leading them to surrender rights protected by the Fifth Amendment; it goes no further than that.” Id.
See, e.g., Davis v United States, 512 US 452, 458; 114 S Ct 2350; 129 L Ed 2d 362 (1994); Withrow v Williams, 507 US 680, 690-692; 113 S Ct 1745; 123 L Ed 2d 407 (1993); McNeil v Wisconsin, 501 US 171, 176; 111 S Ct 2204; 108 L Ed 2d 158 (1990); Duckworth v Eagan, 492 US 195, 203; 109 S Ct 2875; 106 L Ed 2d 166 (1989); Arizona v Roberson, 486 US 675, 681; 108 S Ct 2093; 100 L Ed 2d 704 (1988); Connecticut v Barrett, 479 US 523, 528; 107 S Ct 828; 93 L Ed 2d 920 (1987); Moran, supra at 424-425; Oregon v Elstad, 470 US 298, 305; 105 S Ct 1285; 84 L Ed 2d 222 (1985); New York v Quarles, 467 US 649, 654; 104 S Ct 2626; 81 L Ed 2d 550 (1984); United States v Henry, 447 US 264, 274; 100 S Ct 2183; 65 L Ed 2d 115 (1980); North Carolina v Butler, 441 US 369, 374; 99 S Ct 1755; 60 L Ed 2d 286 (1979); Brown v Illinois, 422 US 590, 600; 95 S Ct 2254; 45 L Ed 2d 416 (1975); Michigan v Tucker, 417 US 433, 444; 94 S Ct 2357; 41 L Ed 2d 182 (1974); Michigan v Payne, 412 US 47, 53; 93 S Ct 1966; 36 L Ed 2d 736 (1973).
In support of its conclusion regarding Miranda’s “constitutional basis,” the Court first observed that it had “consistently applied Miranda’s rule to prosecutions arising in state courts,” which action could only be justified if the Miranda warnings were required by the United States Constitution. Id. at 120 S Ct 2333.
Second, the Court noted that Miranda itself “is replete with statements indicating that the majority thought it was announcing a constitutional rule.” Id. Finally, the Court found support for its conclusion that “Miranda is constitutionally based” in Miranda’s “invitation for legislative action to protect the constitutional right against coerced self-incrimination.” Id. at 120 S Ct 2334.
We reject the notion that confessing to a crime is inherently irrational. One can easily imagine circumstances in which a person would decide to confess for reasons of morality and conscience. Indeed, as Professor Grano has pointed out, there are many situations in which a guilty person with any basic sense of morality would voluntarily come forward:
To take the easiest case, few would dispute that a guilty individual has a moral obligation to confess when his confession is necessary to prevent an innocent person from being convicted for a crime. Similarly, even aside from the possibility of erroneous conviction, a person has a moral obligation to admit that he has falsely accused another, for only by so confessing can the person hope to remove the harm wrongly caused to the other’s good name. [Grano, n 12 supra at 41.]
In sum, there are countless reasons why a “rational” person might decide to confess past criminal activity.
Actually, including Ms irntial contact with Detroit Police Officers Hughes and Dickinson, defendant had been read Ms Miranda rights three times. Each time defendant waived Ms rights and made a statement. Defendant also signed a waiver form and provided a written statement
Dr. Clark explained that “[t]he more contemporaneous the information is you’re looking at, the more [itj goes to the question to what his state of mind was at the time [of the confession].”
We agree with Professor Grano that “Miranda’s justification for recognizing a right to counsel has nothing to do with helping the defendant to make strategically wise decisions.” Grano, n 12 supra at 170.
The dissent maintains that our analysis confuses separate legal and factual issues. To the contrary, we merely hold that the trial court erred as a matter of law in focusing on defendant’s motivation for confessing. Given the trial court’s unique position as factfinder, we might ordinarily *645remand a ease for reconsideration under these circumstances. However, because the trial court’s own factual findings (as well as the objective circumstances surrounding defendant’s Miranda waiver that the trial court ignored) support our conclusion that defendant’s waiver was knowing and intelligent, there simply is no need for a remand here.
According to the dissent, one of the “primary problems” with our analysis is that we “assume[] that cases involving mentally ill defendants may be easily analogized to cases involving persons with low intelligent quotas.” Post at 654. However, other than this conclusory allegation, the dissent fails to explain exactly what “analogy” our opinion draws between this case and Cheatham. We have never suggested that mental illness is the same as having a low i.q. We merely recognize the obvious: both conditions could conceivably affect a suspect’s ability to provide a knowing and intelligent Miranda waiver. However, our conclusion here is that there is no objective evidence that defendant’s mental illness prevented him from understanding his Miranda rights.

=== CASE 9737658 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:37.62564+00 ===

Cavanagh, J.
I dissent. The majority, under the guise of applying well-established rules of law, creates an unduly restrictive rule for examining waiver of the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination *646as protected by Miranda v Arizona, 384 US 436; 86 S Ct 1602; 16 L Ed 2d 694 (1966).1 The question presented on appeal is much more complex than the majority implies. I would hold that the trial court did not clearly err in its determinations that the defendant was delusional at the time he confessed and that he was unable to understand the actual consequences that could arise as a result of his confession. I would further affirm the legal conclusions drawn below because the prosecution did not carry its burden of proving that the defendant knowingly and intelligently waived his constitutionally protected rights under the totality of the circumstances.
*647I
A. STANDARD OF REVIEW
I agree with the majority that “we review for clear error the trial court’s factual findings regarding a defendant’s knowing and intelligent waiver of Miranda rights . . . Ante at 629, citing People v Cheatham, 453 Mich 1, 30; 551 NW2d 355 (1996). I further agree that questions of law are reviewed de novo. Ante at 629-630. Yet, the majority opinion is incomplete to the extent that it: (1) fails to fully explore the burden of proof that must be borne by the prosecution, and (2) fails to distinguish the factual issues from the legal issues in this case.
B. PROSECUTORIAL BURDEN
The majority announces that “the prosecution has the burden of establishing a valid waiver by a preponderance of the evidence.” Ante at 634. Although I am willing to proceed under the assumption that the burden of proof is by a preponderance of the evidence because the prosecution failed to prove its case even by a preponderance, I do not believe that the applicable burden is as clearly established as the majority implies.
The preponderance test employed by the majority springs from Colorado v Connelly, 479 US 157, 168; 107 S Ct 515; 93 L Ed 2d 473 (1986), a United States Supreme Court case discussing the voluntary waiver of constitutional rights protected by Miranda. Traditionally, constitutional waiver cases place a “heavy” burden on the prosecution. Johnson v Zerbst, 304 US 458, 464; 58 S Ct 1019; 82 L Ed 1461 (1938); see, also, Colorado v Spring, 479 US 564, 581; 107 S Ct 851; 93 *648L Ed 2d 954 (1987) (Marshall, J., dissenting), and Connecticut v Barrett, 479 US 523, 531; 107 S Ct 828; 93 L Ed 2d 920 (1987) (Brennan, J., concurring). Our Supreme Court has also recognized that, “ ‘courts indulge every reasonable presumption against waiver’ of fundamental constitutional rights, and that we ‘do not presume acquiescence in the loss of fundamental rights.’ ” Johnson at 464.
To date, the United States Supreme Court has never expressly declared that a preponderance standard should be applied in knowing and intelligent waiver cases. In Connelly itself, Justice Brennan’s dissent reiterated the fact that Connelly was a voluntariness case, Connelly at 187-188, and explained why the imposition of a preponderance standard was undesirable:
In holding that the government need only prove the voluntariness of the waiver of Miranda rights by a preponderance of the evidence, the Court ignores the explicit command of Miranda: “If the interrogation continues without the presence of an attorney and a statement is taken, a heavy burden rests on the government to demonstrate that the defendant knowingly and intelligently waived his privilege against self-incrimination and his right to retained or appointed counsel. This Court has always set high standards of proof for the waiver of constitutional rights, and we re-assert these standards as applied to in-custody interrogation.” ... In recognition of the importance of the Due Process Clause and the Fifth Amendment, we always have characterized the State’s burden of proof on a Miranda waiver as “great” and “heavy.” [Id. at 184-185.]
Although Connelly’s imposition of the preponderance standard arguably extends to knowing and intelligent waiver cases, the proposition is certainly open to debate. In announcing the preponderance standard *649in Connelly, the Supreme Court examined cases involving the exclusion of evidence, and built upon other cases examining voluntary waiver. Connelly at 167-169. The United States Supreme Court’s recent recognition that Miranda was a constitutional decision,2 lends some support that Connelly's rationale should not be extended to knowing and intelligent cases.
The majority is correct that the Supreme Court stated that “[w]henever the [s]tate bears the burden of proof in a motion to suppress a statement that the defendant claims was obtained in violation of our Miranda doctrine, the [s]tate need prove waiver only by preponderance of the evidence.” Connelly at 168. The entirety of the Supreme Court’s statement was as follows, however, “We now reaffirm our holding in Lego: Whenever the State bears the burden of proof in a motion to suppress a statement that the defendant claims was obtained in violation of our Miranda doctrine, the State need prove waiver only by a preponderance of the evidence.” Connelly at 168, referring to Lego v Twomey, 404 US 477; 92 S Ct 619; 30 L Ed 2d 618 (1972). In Lego, the inquiry focused solely on voluntariness. There, the Supreme Court held: “the prosecution must prove at least by a preponderance of the evidence that the confession was voluntary. Of course, the States are free, pursuant to their own law, to adopt a higher standard. They may indeed differ as to the appropriate resolution of the values they find at stake.” Id. at 489.
*650C. FACTUAL ISSUES v LEGAL ISSUES
Although the majority recognizes that the trial court’s findings of fact must be reviewed for clear error, nowhere does the majority apply the standard it announces. Instead, the opinion proceeds with an open-ended analysis after concluding that “the meaning of ‘knowing and intelligent’ is a question of law.” Ante at 629. After broadly categorizing the entire discussion as a legal issue, the majority then conducts an independent review of the trial court’s factual findings. See id. at 639-644.
Given the broad range of issues that may be considered factual, I am not prepared to summarily conclude that all questions remotely related to the knowing and intelligent inquiry are legal in nature. Rather, it is incumbent upon us to laboriously separate the factual issues from those issues that are purely legal, and to separate legal conclusions from factual inferences.
1. FACTUAL ISSUES
In the present case, the trial judge weighed the credibility of the competing witnesses and found “the testimony and reports of Dr. Mogy and Dr. Grisso to accurately reflect the nature of Defendant’s mental state at the time,” and that “there is no question that Defendant, at the time of his arrest, was psychotic.” The trial court also expressly stated:
The nature and subject matter of Defendant’s delusions prevented rational comprehension of the specific topic at issue—his right to counsel and his right against self-incrimination. His delusional process required self-incrimination to effectuate freedom.
*651As previously noted, in Miranda-waiver cases, findings of fact made by the trial judge are entitled to deference unless clearly erroneous. In order to overturn a trial judge’s findings as clearly erroneous, we must be left with the “definite and firm conviction that the trial court made a mistake.” People v Burrell, 417 Mich 439, 449; 339 NW2d 403 (1983). I am left with no such conviction in this case. Clearly, the trial judge weighed the competing testimony, considered the credibility of the expert witnesses, and made a reasoned interpretation after thorough deliberation. Nothing in the record convinces me that the trial court made a mistake. I would, therefore, hold that the trial judge’s factual findings were not clearly erroneous.
2. LEGAL ISSUES AND PREMISES
Because the trial judge’s findings were not clearly erroneous, the key legal question in this case is whether the defendant could knowingly and intelligently waive his rights despite the delusion causing him to believe that God would set him free as a reward for confessing. As stated previously, questions of law are reviewed de novo. Yet, the concept of de novo review does not relieve this Court of its duty to operate within the constitutional parameters.
It is well settled that our examination of Miranda-based knowing and intelligent waiver cases must proceed with a consideration of the totality of the circumstances. See Moran v Burbine, 475 US 412, 421; 106 S Ct 1135; 89 L Ed 2d 410 (1986). The United States Supreme Court has expressly stated:
*652[T]he determination whether statements obtained during custodial interrogation are admissible against the accused is to be made upon an inquiry into the totality of the circumstances surrounding the interrogation, to ascertain whether the accused in fact knowingly and voluntarily decided to forgo his rights to remain silent and to have the assistance of counsel. [Fare v Michael C, 442 US 707, 724-725; 99 S Ct 2560; 61 L Ed 2d 197 (1979).]
In Fare, the Supreme Court examined whether a juvenile defendant waived his Fifth Amendment rights as protected by Miranda even though he asked to see his probation officer. In holding that the waiver determination must be made pursuant to a totality of the circumstances inquiry, the Supreme Court stated:
There is no reason to assume that such courts—especially juvenile courts, with their special expertise in this area—will be unable to apply the totality-of-the-circumstances analysis so as to take into account those special concerns that are present when young persons, often with limited experience and education and with immature judgment, are involved. Where the age and experience of a juvenile indicate that his request for his probation officer or his parents is, in fact, an invocation of his right to remain silent, the totality approach will allow the court the necessary flexibility to take this into account in making a waiver determination. [Id. at 725.]
The Supreme Court then went on to apply the totality of the circumstances test, and concluded that “no special factors indicate that respondent was unable to understand the nature of his actions” and that “[t]here is no indication that he was of insufficient intelligence to understand the rights he was waiving, or what the consequences of that waiver would be.” Id. at 726.
*653The majority summarily cites Fare for the proposition that courts should examine Miranda waivers objectively. Although the totality of the circumstances test has an objective component, I believe that Fare clearly explained that courts have the flexibility to consider special factors that may affect waiver. Mental illness fits naturally within the totality of the circumstances test, and it may be a factor tending to indicate that the defendant cannot “understand the rights he [is] waiving, or what the consequences of that waiver would be.” Id.
D. APPLICATION
In the present case, the prosecution argues only: (1) that the trial court clearly erred in its factual findings, and (2) that the law does not require that the defendant be able to comprehend how Miranda applies to his own situation. As stated previously, I am unconvinced that the trial judge clearly erred. Similarly, I believe that the prosecutor has proceeded under a flawed legal interpretation of Miranda. The prosecution has offered nothing to persuade me that mental illness should not be factored into the totality of the circumstances equation. Thus, the prosecutor’s case must fail, even by a preponderance of the evidence.
ii
Nothing in the majority opinion persuades me that only a literal understanding of Miranda is required. Not only does the majority build its case upon a shaky foundation, but it supports its substantive legal arguments with premises that are only tangentially *654relevant. I see two primary problems with the analysis offered by the majority: (1) it quotes case law only selectively, and (2) it assumes that cases involving mentally ill defendants may be easily analogized to cases involving persons with low intelligence quotas.
A. WHAT THE CASE LAW SAYS BUT THE MAJORITY DOES NOT
The majority begins its knowing and intelligent waiver analysis by stating that, though determining whether a suspect’s waiver was knowing and intelligent requires a degree of subjective inquiry,3 suspects need not understand the consequences of waiver. Ante at 637. Yet the quotations the majority selects are taken from opinions that leave open the possibility that the defendant’s level of comprehension about the consequences of waiver will be relevant. None of the authority cited by the majority holds that a waiver will be valid per se if the defendant is able to literally comprehend Miranda, even though that defendant may be unable to apply the literal meaning of Miranda to his own situation.
The majority erroneously concludes that the trial court misapplied Cheatham by requiring that the defendant be able to understand how his Miranda rights applied to his situation. The majority quotes Cheatham for the proposition that, “ ‘[t]o knowingly waive Miranda rights, a suspect need not understand the ramifications and consequences of choosing to waive or exercise the rights that the police have prop*655erly explained to him.’ ” Ante at 636, quoting Cheatham at 28. However, when the aforementioned quotation is taken in the context of the entire Cheatham opinion, the quotation does not so easily support the majority’s holding.
As a preliminary matter, it is important to note that the Cheatham Court did not hold that courts need not ever determine whether a defendant understood the consequences of his actions. Rather, Cheatham held only that defendant Cheatham sufficiently understood his rights, and that he had the capacity to provide a valid waiver. Id. at 27. Unlike the present case, Cheatham focused on the defendant’s intellectual capacity, and the analysis of that intellectual capacity was implicitly tied to the defendant’s understanding of his own circumstances. The Cheatham excerpt quoted by the majority was taken from the middle of Cheatham’s totality of the circumstances analysis. When read in context, it is apparent that the Court was examining both whether the defendant literally understood the Miranda warnings, as well as whether he understood the meanings of the words as applied to his own situation.
Similarly, the majority’s citation of Colorado v Spring, supra, provides little support for the proposition that the defendant must only possess a literal understanding of the Miranda warnings in order to provide a knowing and intelligent waiver. While the Spring Court explicitly stated that “[t]he Constitution does not require that a criminal suspect know and understand every possible consequence of a waiver of the Fifth Amendment privilege,” id. at 574, it also stated, “In this case there is no allegation that Spring failed to understand the basic privilege guaranteed by *656the Fifth Amendment. Nor is there any allegation that he misunderstood the consequences of speaking freely to the law enforcement officials.” Id. at 575. Thus, Spring implicitly recognizes that, if a defendant does misunderstand the consequences of speaking freely to law enforcement officials, then his Miranda waiver could be considered invalid under the knowing and intelligent prong. A conclusion that a defendant need not understand every consequence of confessing is different than a conclusion that the defendant must understand the most basic consequences of confessing. This case presents exactly the type of situation envisioned but not presented in Spring—the defendant misunderstood the consequences of speaking freely to the police. He lacked a basic comprehension of what could actually occur if he waived his rights.
The trial court’s analysis comports with Supreme Court observations that a defendant must possess at least a basic understanding of his rights under the totality of the circumstances. See, e.g., Moran at 421. Although the defendant may have been able to understand what it means to be silent, to have a lawyer present, and to have his statements used against him, his decision to confess was directly tied to his delusion that God would control the police and set him free. It is, therefore, questionable whether the defendant ever truly comprehended the actual meaning of the Miranda warnings.
As I wrote in Cheatham, “the ultimate focus for purposes of the knowing and intelligent prong remains on the level of the suspect’s comprehension.” Id. at 56. I further agree with Justice Mallett’s Cheatham assessment that “[t]he validity of a waiver *657does not depend on a verbatim recitation of the Miranda litany, but rather depends on an actual understanding on the part of the individual of his Miranda rights and the consequences of waiving them.” Id. at 59. Even the Cheatham lead opinion recognized that the knowing and intelligent prong of Miranda focuses “on the knowledge of the accused irrespective of improper police behavior,” id. at 18, and that courts must evaluate whether the defendant has the capacity to understand the warnings given to him under all the circumstances. Id. at 27.
B. WHAT THE MAJORITY SAYS BUT THE CASE LAW DOES NOT
The majority secondarily finds support for its holding from the proposition that “a defendant need not have a wise or shrewd basis for waiving Miranda rights for the waiver to be valid.” Ante at 642. The majority accurately points to precedent providing that the defendant cannot successfully challenge a waiver as invalid on the basis that he failed to realize that his decision was imprudent. Id. at 642-644.4 However, I fail to see how wisdom is relevant to this defendant’s confession. This case differs from the cases offered in support of the majority opinion in that the defendant’s waiver defense springs not from a lack of wisdom, but from an inability to fully understand that the dictionary meaning of the Miranda warning would actually apply to his own circumstances. The trial court held that his delusions about the consequences of his actions brought about his confession. No
*658amount of information or wisdom would have altered the delusion compelling the defendant to confess. Even a fully informed person or a person with a genius level intelligence quotient can suffer from a delusional perception of reality. Mental illness and shrewdness are simply not equivalent concepts.
ni
The prosecutor has failed to carry its burden that this defendant provided a knowing and intelligent waiver. Similarly, the majority has failed to persuade me that its conclusions are supportable. I am not prepared to sign an opinion that narrows Miranda’s knowing and intelligent prong to the point of near extinction, especially when the opinion only pretends to hide behind well-established principles.
I would hold that the totality of the circumstances test allows a determination whether an individual defendant’s mental illness precludes him from knowingly and intelligently waiving his rights. Here, the defendant’s delusional episodes vitiated his ability to knowingly and intelligently waive his rights. I would, therefore, affirm the decision of the Court of Appeals.
Kelly, J., concurred with Cavanagh, J.
I expressly disagree with the majority’s editorialism that
[i]n light of the fact that the Fifth Amendment itself protects only against compelled self-incrimination, the requirement of a “knowing and intelligent” waiver of Miranda rights is puzzling. [Ante at 637.]
I further disagree with the dicta following the majority’s conclusion. Id. at 645. As I pointed out in People v Cheatham, 453 Mich 1, 30, 57; 551 NW2d 355 (1996), the overarching consideration in Miranda-weiver cases is not deterrence, but rather the protection and vindication of constitutional rights. See also Dickerson v United States, 530 US 428; 120 S Ct 2326; 147 L Ed 2d 481 (2000).
I am not puzzled by the Supreme Court’s bifurcation of the Miranda-waiver analysis, because the voluntariness prong protects aspects of the defendant’s rights distinct from the aspects protected by the knowing and intelligent prong. The voluntariness prong of Miranda seeks to protect defendants against the compulsion envisioned by the Fifth Amendment. Moran v Burbine, 475 US 412, 421; 106 S Ct 1135; 89 L Ed 2d 410 (1986). The knowing and intelligent prong ensures that a suspect understands the substantive protections of the Fifth Amendment as incorporated into the Fourteenth Amendment. Id. For these reasons, I do not share the majority’s hesitation to follow case law requiring that a defendant be able to understand his rights as a prerequisite to waiving them.
See Dickerson, n 1 supra at 120 S Ct 2334, n 4.
Curiously, the majority levies the charge that I somehow interpret the majority opinion as suggesting “that a suspect’s subjective mental state plays no role in a determination whether there was a knowing and intelligent Miranda waiver.” Ante at 634, n 10. Obviously, that is not the case.
Citing Cheatham, Spring, and Connecticut v Barrett, supra at 525-526.

=== CASE 2211571 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:08.684617+00 ===

605 N.E.2d 1212 (1993)
Arthur M. HEREDIA and Peggy A. Heredia, Appellants-Defendants.
v.
Neil F. SANDLER and Carol Sandler, Appellees-Plaintiffs.
No. 92A05-9205-CV-154.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Fifth District.
January 20, 1993.
*1213 Eric E. Snouffer, Snouffer & Snouffer, Fort Wayne, for appellants-defendants.
Thomas J. Goeglein, Beckman, Lawson, Sandler, Snyder & Federoff, Fort Wayne, for appellees-plaintiffs.
*1214 BARTEAU, Judge.
Arthur and Peggy Heredia sought return of the earnest money given in connection with an offer to purchase the home of Neil and Carol Sandler. The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of Heredias and ordered the $1,000 earnest money to be returned to them. However, the court vacated this order on Sandlers' Motion to Correct Error. Heredias appeal, arguing that summary judgment was properly granted in their favor.
We affirm, holding that material issues of fact remain, making summary judgment inappropriate.
FACTS
Sandlers listed their home for sale with Roth & Wehrly Realtors. Their listing agent was Edward LaRocque. The house was shown to Heredias by Janet Gerke, a sales associate of Bradley Realty. The Heredias offered to purchase the house for $125,000. Their offer was contingent upon, among other things, obtaining the required financing, the right to inspect the real estate and the contingency that the lower level be free and dry of water leaks. The offer, along with $1,000 earnest money, was submitted to Gerke, who submitted it to LaRocque, who in turn gave it to the Sandlers. Sandlers submitted a counter-offer to Heredias which differed from the Heredias' offer only in that the purchase price would be $133,000.
The Heredias accepted the counter-offer and proceeded to have the house inspected by James Goodard who prepared a building analysis report. (R. 120-126). Among the problems the inspection revealed were some signs of basement dampness and that the heat exchanger on the furnace was cracked and the furnace would have to be replaced. Several miscellaneous problems were also noted.
According to the Purchase Agreement, if the inspection report revealed a defect in the condition of a system described in the Agreement, Heredias were to give the Sandlers a copy of the report within five days of receiving it. Sandlers were then required to repair the defect before closing. Generally, either party could terminate the agreement if Sandlers were unable or unwilling to cure the defect(s).
Within five days after receiving the inspection report, Heredias prepared an "Inspection Amendment" and gave it to Gerke, who in turn gave it to Sandlers. The document was abstracted from the inspection report by Heredias and contains a laundry list of "repairs" Heredias wanted Sandlers to do before closing, including replacing the furnace.[1] Sandlers met with Heredias to discuss the alleged defects shortly after receiving the Amendment. Initially, Sandlers refused to do any of the requested repairs except to replace the furnace. Neil Sandler received a bid of $1,485 for a furnace which would, according to a reputable contractor, be sufficient for the house. Sandlers also offered to give that money to the Heredias to use toward the purchase of a higher quality furnace if they so desired.
Not satisfied with this offer, Heredias, through counsel, contacted LaRocque, the listing agent, and informed him that they wanted their earnest money returned to them. The earnest money was not returned. Sandlers, also through counsel, agreed to replace the furnace and to repair exhaust fans, the smoke detectors and the garage. For the first time, the Sandlers objected to the "Inspection Amendment" and argued they were entitled to receive a copy of the actual inspection report. According to Sandlers, they were not required to make any repairs because the five days in which the Heredias had to provide them *1215 with the inspection report had expired. Heredias continued to refuse to close the transaction. Sandlers sold the home to a third party.
Sandlers initiated this lawsuit by suing Heredias for liquidated damages of 5% of the purchase price ($6,650), attorney fees and costs. Heredias counter-sued for return of their earnest money, attorney fees and cost. The trial court granted Heredias' motion for summary judgment and ordered Sandlers to return the deposit and to pay attorney fees and costs. The trial court then vacated the judgment by granting Sandlers' motion to correct error. Heredias appeal from the grant of the motion to correct error.
DISMISSAL
Although Sandlers' have made no formal motion to dismiss, they argue in their brief that the appeal should be dismissed; therefore, we first address this issue. Sandlers assert that, in essence, Heredias are appealing the denial of their motion for summary judgment, which is not a final appealable order. According to Sandlers, we should dismiss this appeal because Heredias are attempting to pursue an interlocutory appeal without following the required procedure in Ind.Appellate Rule 4(B)(6). Sandlers also argue they are entitled to appellate attorney fees because of Heredias' failure to follow the proper procedure for bringing an interlocutory appeal.
Heredias appeal the grant of a Motion to Correct Error. Therefore, this appeal is governed by Ind.Trial Rule 59 and App.R. 4. Trial Rule 59(F) provides in part:
Any modification or setting aside of a final or an appealable final order following the filing of a motion to correct error shall be an appealable final judgment or order.
Sandlers admit that the grant of summary judgment would have been an appealable final order. The setting aside of the grant of summary judgment is therefore appealable according to T.R. 59(F). This is reiterated in App.R. 4(A), which provides in part:
Appeals may be taken by either party from all final judgments of circuit, superior, probate, criminal, juvenile, county and where provided by statute for municipal Courts. When a Motion to Correct Error is used a ruling or order by the trial court granting or denying the same shall be deemed a final judgment, and an appeal may be taken therefrom.
(emphasis supplied). Therefore, Sandlers' argument fails and Heredias may pursue this appeal. Sandlers' request for appellate attorney fees likewise fails.
SUMMARY JUDGMENT
At the heart of this dispute is whether Heredias had a right under the Purchase Agreement to terminate the Agreement and refuse to buy Sandlers' home. Construction of an unambiguous written contract is generally a question of law for the court, making summary judgment particularly appropriate in contract disputes. Bicknell Minerals, Inc. v. Tilly (1991), Ind. App., 570 N.E.2d 1307, reh'g denied, trans. denied. Where the terms of a contract are clear and unambiguous, the terms of the contract are conclusive and this court merely applies the contractual provisions. Jackson v. DeFabis (1990), Ind. App., 553 N.E.2d 1212. A contract is ambiguous only when reasonably intelligent people could honestly find its provisions susceptible of more than one interpretation. Kitchen Jewels, Inc. v. Beck (1987), Ind. App., 513 N.E.2d 1246.
This dispute centers on § 16.01 of the Purchase Agreement, which provides:
16.01 Buyer's Right to Inspection.
(a) Buyer may have the Real Estate inspected, and Seller agrees to make the Real Estate available for such inspection. All inspections and written reports of them (except those required by a lender in connection with a mortgage loan) shall be made within fifteen (15) days after the date this Agreement becomes effective.
(b) Inspections shall be at Buyer's expense by qualified, independent inspectors selected by Buyer. An inspector is considered "independent" if the inspector is unrelated to the parties, and will not *1216 realize direct or indirect financial benefit (other than receipt of a fee for services rendered) as a result of performing an inspection. The inspections may include, but are not limited to, the following systems and items: electrical, gas, central heating, central air conditioning, and plumbing (including sewage disposal and sump pumps) systems; well; built-in appliances; roof; walls; ceilings; floors; foundations; basement; crawl space; hazardous or toxic substances; and wood eating insect infestation. Buyer may also have inspections of a septic system and the quality of water in a well on the Real Estate to determine whether they satisfy standards imposed by the Board of Health of the county in which the Real Estate is located. Inspections required by a lender do not fulfill Buyer's right of inspection under Subsection 16.01.
(c) If an inspection report reveals a defect in the condition of a system or item described in Subsection 16.01(b), which could reasonably interfere with Buyer's intended use of the Real Estate, Buyer shall give Seller a copy of such report within five (5) days after receiving it. Prior to closing, Seller shall cure each such defect to Buyer's reasonable satisfaction subject to Subsection 16.01(d). If Seller is unable or unwilling to do so, either party may terminate this Agreement. However, Buyer may WAIVE Seller's obligation to cure and proceed to closing by giving Seller notice to that effect within fifteen (15) days after Seller gives Buyer notice of termination. Upon such waiver, this Agreement shall remain in effect, but without Seller's obligation to cure. Upon any termination, all earnest money shall be returned without delay.
(d) Neither of the parties shall have the right to terminate this Agreement if: (1) the cost of curing all defects contained in the inspection report does not exceed $100.00 (which cost shall be paid by Seller); or (2) the defect as to which a right to terminate is claimed is one which Seller disclosed to Buyer in writing, at or before Buyer's execution of this offer.
(emphasis supplied).
Heredias argue that the question of whether the "Inspection Amendment" complied with the terms of 16.01(c) is a question of law for the court. Accordingly, so they argue, the trial court's initial determination that the Amendment did in fact comply with the Agreement was correct. They further argue that the only relevant material fact is whether there were defects in the property. According to Heredias, because it is undisputed that defects did exist, they were entitled to terminate the Agreement when Sandlers refused to make all the requested repairs.
We agree that the question of whether the "Inspection Amendment" complied with the contract is a question of law. In this regard, the words of the contract are clear: "if an inspection report reveals a defect in the condition of a system or item described in Subsection 16.01(b) ... Buyer shall give Seller a copy of such report within five (5) days after receiving it." The only report to which this section refers is an inspection report.
Heredias concede that the "Inspection Amendment" is not the inspection report. However, they argue that real estate agents and brokers in Allen County use the Inspection Amendment as a matter of course to comply with the standard provision contained in § 16.01. They rely on extrinsic evidence  the affidavit of James Goodard  to support this argument. However, when the terms of the instrument are susceptible of a clear and unambiguous construction, extrinsic evidence is inadmissible. South Bend Carpetland U.S.A. v. Sandock (1991), Ind. App., 570 N.E.2d 123, 125, reh'g denied, trans. denied; City of Evansville v. Old State Utility (1990), Ind. App., 550 N.E.2d 1339, 1342. Further, this court will not rely on, nor are we bound by, an erroneous construction placed upon the contract by a party. City of Evansville, 550 N.E.2d at 1342. Thus, although it is undisputed that real estate agents often use the inspection amendment instead of an inspection report to comply with § 16.01, *1217 this does not govern our decision here. Rather, we are bound by the words of the contract which require a copy of the inspection report to be submitted to the buyer.
Our discussion does not end here. Heredias argue that Sandlers are estopped from asserting their failure to give Sandlers a copy of the inspection report. They argue that Gerke, acting as Sandlers' agent, instructed Heredias to complete the Inspection Amendment form. According to Heredias, Gerke then accepted the Amendment on Sandlers' behalf. Sandlers ratified this acceptance by meeting with Heredias to discuss the alleged defects in the property. Further, Heredias note that Sandlers did not object to the Inspection Amendment until after the five-day period in which they had to submit a copy of the inspection report expired and after negotiations had broken down. Heredias argue that if Sandlers had objected when they met with Heredias, Heredias could have supplied them with the inspection report in time.
We agree with the trial court that there is, at the very least, a question of fact as to whether the Sandlers are estopped from asserting the Heredias' failure to submit a copy of the inspection report. "Estoppel may occur when one party's conduct leads another to believe that a right will not be enforced and thus causes the one misled to act to his detriment." Hammes v. Frank (1991), Ind. App., 579 N.E.2d 1348, 1358. The elements of estoppel are: 1) a representation or concealment of material facts; 2) such representation made with knowledge of the facts; 3) the party to whom it is made must be ignorant of the matter; 4) it must be made with the intent that the other party should act on it; and 5) the other party must be induced to act on the representation to his detriment. Id. Questions of material fact remain as to whether Sandlers themselves or their agent led Heredias to believe that the Inspection Amendment would satisfy the requirements of the Agreement.
We also note that even if the Sandlers are estopped from asserting that the Heredias did not comply with 16.01, several questions of fact remain. Heredias argue that Sandlers were obligated under the Agreement to cure any defect. This is not what the contract provides. Rather, Sandlers were required to cure defects which would reasonably interfere with Heredias' enjoyment of the house. Heredias listed several defects, some of which Sandlers refused to cure. Which defects would have "reasonably interfered" with Heredias' enjoyment of the house is a question of fact. Further, the Sandlers were required to cure the defects to the "reasonable satisfaction" of the buyer. Sandlers did offer to replace the furnace, the exhaust fans, the smoke detectors and the garage walls. Whether Sandlers' offer was to the reasonable satisfaction of the Heredias is a question of fact. Finally, the record reveals a question of fact as to whether the lower level of the house was free from dampness.
The trial court's grant of Sandlers' motion to correct error is AFFIRMED.
SHARPNACK, C.J., and CONOVER, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  The list of repairs included the following: replace furnace; replace defective shingles; provide attic and soffit ventilation; provide attic insulation; unplug downspouts, cap tiles, provide splash blocks; repair basement water leaks; clean out vents and chimney and provide weather caps; service humidifier and water conditioner; locate well head/casing and correct if not above ground; repair exhaust fans; repair smoke detectors; repair/replace dishwasher; add/change to electronic ignition on gas grill and eliminate standing pilot; replace dryer vent hood with flapped one; repaint mildewed porch ceiling; open painted/over soffit vents; refasten 3 section GDO track to ceiling; repair hole in garage.

=== CASE 9737659 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:40.250302+00 ===

Markman, J.
I. INTRODUCTION
Considerable confusion exists in the Michigan judiciary in a significant area of worker’s compensation law—the standards for reviewing decisions of the magistrate and the Worker’s Compensation Appellate Commission (wcac). As a result of this confusion, there is, in our judgment, sometimes the appearance (although we do not believe the reality) that decisions are made in this realm at least partly on the basis of which results are favored by a particular appellate court. In addition, because the decisions of the appellate courts are resultantly more arbitrary and less predictable, the appellate process has become a more *695prolonged one as parties understandably are more inclined to pursue repeated appeals in the hope of eventually achieving a favorable judgment at some level.
Where the WCAC and the magistrate agree on the facts and legal conclusions in a particular worker’s compensation case, the courts will rarely disturb the result. However, the problem arises when the wcac reverses the magistrate on some issue and the judiciary is presented with two conflicting decisions from the administrative level. In that situation, judges are confronted with two distinct lines of case law, each of which sets forth a fundamentally different administrative and judicial standard of review in worker’s compensation cases. Depending upon which of these lines of case law is emphasized, there is a high likelihood that a different appellate result will be reached. Courts that cite case law such as Holden v Ford Motor Co, 439 Mich 257; 484 NW2d 227 (1992), that stresses the extraordinary deference accorded to the wcac in this highly technical area of the law, will more often than not affirm the wcac in its award or denial of benefits to an employee. Meanwhile, courts that cite case law such as Goff v Bil-Mar Foods, Inc (After Remand), 454 Mich 507; 563 NW2d 214 (1997), that stresses the deference accorded by the wcac to the magistrate, will more often than not reverse the WCAC in this decision.1 Because of these conflicting lines of case law, there is inevitably a perception that *696courts may have been tempted to choose which line of cases to emphasize in accordance with the results reached in an individual case. In effect, such conflicting law undermines the appearance of there being a principled and consistent standard defining the proper level of review that should be exercised by the courts. Further, it may appear to the public that the result in a particular case is a function less of well-defined legal principles than of the predispositions of individual judges. In addition, because of the heightened potential for arbitrary decision making, worker’s compensation cases may often take years to work their way back and forth through the administrative and judicial processes and attain finality. The uncertainty concerning Worker’s Disability Compensation Act (wdca) standards of review manifested by such a prolonged reviewing process benefits neither the injured employee nor the employer, while undermining public confidence in the fairness of the judicial system in a sensitive area of decision making.
Therefore, in these combined worker’s compensation cases, we once again face the task of clarifying and definitively setting forth the proper standards of administrative and judicial review, to resolve the confusion currently existing in the law and to further the efficient administration of worker’s compensation cases.2 To that end, we reaffirm our decision in *697Holden, supra, regarding the administrative and judicial standards of review applied in worker’s compensation cases. Because we believe that this Court’s decision in Goff, supra, implicitly contradicted the Holden rule and altered the announced standards of review, we overrule Goff insofar as it is inconsistent with the statutory language and with our decision in Holden. Further, we overrule the holding of Layman v Newkirk Electric Associates, Inc, 458 Mich 494; 581 NW2d 244 (1998), to the extent that it clearly misstated the law with regard to the wcac’s authority to make independent factual findings.3
With respect to the instant cases, in Mudel v Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co, we find that the requirements of MCL 418.861a(11); MSA 17.237(861a)(11) were satisfied because the plaintiff argued alternatively for both occupational disease and personal injury benefits. Further, in Connaway v Welded Construction Co, we find that the successive injury rule requires the plaintiff to pursue worker’s compensation benefits in the state of New York, where her disability arose, rather than in Michigan. After examining the decision of the wcac in each of these cases, we conclude that the wcac acted within its authority in Mudel by affirming the magistrate’s award of benefits, and in Connaway by reversing the magistrate’s award *698of benefits. We therefore affirm the holdings of the wcac in each of these consolidated cases.
II. STANDARDS OF REVIEW
In worker’s compensation cases, there are two separate levels of review: administrative review and judicial review. As explained in Holden, supra, the WCAC reviews the magistrate’s findings of fact under the “substantial evidence” standard, while the judiciary reviews the wcac’s findings of fact under the “any evidence” standard. These two standards of review are separate and distinct; they originate from different statutory sources and serve different purposes.
We must begin with the Michigan Constitution, which provides the underlying basis for both standards of review. Const 1963, art 6, § 28, provides as follows:
Findings of fact in workmen’s compensation proceedings shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud unless otherwise provided by law.
The constitution makes clear that the Legislature has authority to adopt different standards of review in worker’s compensation cases, that is, standards that are “otherwise provided by law,” through the enactment of statutory provisions. Indeed, the Legislature has provided these standards throughout the long and complex evolution of this state’s worker’s compensation statute, now entitled the WDCA; MCL 418.101 et seq.; MSA 17.237(101) et seq. Through 1985 PA 103, effective October 1, 1986, the Legislature adopted the “substantial evidence” standard for the wcac’s administrative review of the magistrate’s fac*699tual findings, replacing the de novo standard of review previously applied by the former Worker’s Compensation Appeal Board (wcab) under earlier versions of the worker’s compensation statute. The “substantial evidence” standard, contained in MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3), provides as follows:
Beginning October 1, 1986 findings of fact made by a worker’s compensation magistrate shall be considered conclusive by the commission if supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record. As used in this subsection, “substantial evidence” means such evidence, considering the whole record, as a reasonable mind will accept as adequate to justify the conclusion.
The surrounding statutory provisions serve to flesh out the proper meaning and application of the “substantial evidence” standard. The “whole record,” for instance, means “the entire record of the hearing including all of the evidence in favor and all the evidence against a certain determination,” MCL 418.861a(4); MSA 17.237(861a)(4), and the wcac’s “review of the evidence pursuant to this section shall include both a qualitative and quantitative analysis of that evidence in order to ensure a full, thorough, and fair review.” MCL 418.861a(13); MSA 17.237(861a)(13). Therefore, the wcac’s review of the magistrate’s decision involves reviewing the whole record, analyzing all the evidence presented, and determining whether the magistrate’s decision is supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence.
An important part of the wcac’s statutory reviewing authority is the “qualitative and quantitative” analysis of the “whole record.” This statutory language, along with that of MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14), *700grants the wcac certain fact-finding powers, and permits it in some circumstances to substitute its own findings of fact for those of the magistrate, if the WCAC accords different weight to the quality or quantity of evidence presented.4 However, application of the clear and plain language of MCL 418.861a(13); MSA 17.237(861a)(13) does not connote a de novo review by the WCAC of the magistrate’s decision, as asserted by the dissent. Clearly, it would be improper for the wcac to engage in its own statutorily permitted independent fact finding if “substantial evidence” on the whole record existed supporting the decision of the magistrate.
In contrast to the standard for administrative review, a separate statutory provision sets forth the standard by which the judiciary reviews the wcac’s findings of fact. MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14) provides that the judiciary must treat the wcac’s factual findings as conclusive on appellate review:
The findings of fact made by the commission acting within its powers, in the absence of fraud, shall be conclusive. The court of appeals and the supreme court shall have the power to review questions of law involved with any final order of the commission, if application is made by the aggrieved party within 30 days after the order by any method permissible under the Michigan court rules.
Strikingly absent from the statutory formulation of the judicial standard of review, in contrast to the administrative standard of review, are any references *701to a review of the whole record, a qualitative or quantitative analysis of the evidence presented on both sides, and a determination of whether competent, material, or substantial evidence supports the decision made below. Despite these marked distinctions, the dissent simply fails to engage in the necessary process of parsing the clear and plain language of the WDCA. While the wcac’s review is a highly fact-intensive examination, judicial review is not. Instead, the judiciary is directed, by constitutional and statutory provisions, to treat the wcac’s findings of fact as conclusive, in the absence of fraud.
In Holden, supra, 439 Mich 263, we examined the above constitutional and statutory provisions and concluded as follows:
The Legislature, by employing the language of the constitution in stating that the fact finding of the wcac is final subject to limited judicial review, made clear that judicial review by the Court of Appeals or this Court of a wcac decision is to be of the findings of fact made by the wcac and not the findings of fact made by the magistrate. And the findings of fact made by the wcac are conclusive if there is any competent evidence to support them. [Emphasis added.]
This is the crucial difference between the administrative and judicial standards of review in worker’s compensation case's: the role of the wcac is to ensure that factual findings are supported by the requisite evidence, while the role of the judiciary is to ensure the integrity of the administrative process. The WCAC is required by MCL 418.861a(13); MSA 17.237(861a)(13) to employ a “qualitative and quantitative analysis” of competing evidence, on consideration of the whole record, and determine the level of *702support for the magistrate’s factual findings. The judiciary does not engage in this type of review, but must accept the wcac’s factual findings as conclusive, in the absence of fraud.5
These two very distinct standards of review created by the Legislature contain very different levels of deference for the decision under review. The “substantial evidence” standard, governing the wcac’s review of the magistrate’s findings of fact, provides for review which is clearly more deferential to the magistrate’s decision than the de novo review standard previously employed. Nevertheless, the wcac has the power to engage in both a “qualitative and quantitative” analy*703sis of the “whole record,” which means that the wcac need not necessarily defer to all the magistrate’s findings of fact.
In contrast, the “any evidence” standard, governing the judiciary’s review of the wcac’s findings of fact, provides for less searching review—one that is deferential to the skill and experience of the wcac in this highly technical area of the law. As this Court explained in Holden, the judicial standard of review is extremely deferential:
If it appears on judicial appellate review that the wcac carefully examined the record, was duly cognizant of the deference to be given to the decision of the magistrate, did not “misapprehend or grossly misapply” the substantial evidence standard, and gave an adequate reason grounded in the record for reversing the magistrate, the judicial tendency should be to deny leave to appeal or, if it is granted, to affirm, in recognition that the Legislature provided for administrative appellate review by the seven-member wcac of decisions of thirty magistrates, and bestowed on the wcac final fact-finding responsibility subject to constitutionally limited judicial review. [439 Mich 269.]
The Holden formulation of judicial review, which requires the courts to ensure that the wcac did not “misapprehend or grossly misapply” the “substantial evidence” standard, means that the judiciary must ensure that the wcac did not misapprehend its administrative appellate role in reviewing decisions of the magistrate. As long as there exists in the record any evidence supporting the wcac’s decision, and as long as the WCAC did not misapprehend its administrative appellate role (e.g., engage in de novo review; apply *704the wrong rule of law), then the judiciary must treat the wcac’s factual decisions as conclusive.6
We continue to believe that the Holden decision correctly established the distinction between the proper standards for administrative and judicial review in worker’s compensation cases, and we expressly reaffirm our decision in that case.7 Unfortunately, decisions of this Court in the wake of Holden effectively overruled that precedent, without doing so expressly. Specifically, this Court’s decision in Goff requires an independent judicial determination whether the magistrate’s findings of fact are supported by the requisite competent, material, and sub*705stantial evidence on the whole record. In Goff, the majority stated:
[W]here a party claims that the wcac has exceeded its power by reversing the magistrate, meaningful review must begin with the magistrate’s decision, because if competent, material, and substantial evidence based on the whole record supports the magistrate’s decision, the wcac need go no further. If it does, the wcac is exceeding its authority. [454 Mich 513.]
In her dissenting opinion in Goff Justice Weaver warned against the effect that the majority opinion in that case would have on the Holden decision and on the standards of review in worker’s compensation matters:
[T]he [Gqff] majority opinion will have the effect of undermining this Court’s decision in Holden v Ford Motor Co, 439 Mich 257; 484 NW2d 227 (1992), and rendering it virtually useless, increasing the backlog of reviewing courts, and depriving the [wcac] of its authority to conduct a qualitative, as well as a quantitative, review of the whole record . . . [and] the majority’s standard will expand judicial appellate review to an extreme unintended by the Legislature and contrary to the legislative scheme for review of worker’s compensation awards .... In effect, the majority’s position has appellate courts stepping into the shoes of the commission by conducting a qualitative and quantitative review of the whole record that the Legislature only intended the commission perform. In so doing, the majority, in the name of further explaining this Court’s Holden analysis, has so deviated from Holden as to render that decision virtually useless. [454 Mich 540-541.]
We axe persuaded that Goff resulted in an errant construction of plain statutory language, erroneously requiring the judiciary to look first at the magistrate’s decision and to determine anew whether that deci*706sion is supported under the substantial evidence standard. This is a direction that is inconsistent with Holden. The rule of law established by Goff is not faithful to the statutory language, which commands that the “findings of fact made by the commission acting within its powers, in the absence of fraud, shall be conclusive.” MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14). The dissent’s assertion that Goff is consistent with the wdca avoids the inconvenience of grappling with the actual statutory language of the act. The judiciary is simply not empowered to look beyond the wcac’s findings of fact. The Legislature has granted to the wcac the authority and responsibility for reviewing the magistrate’s findings of fact, to determine whether those findings are adequately supported by the record. The Legislature has withheld that same authority and responsibility from the judiciary—the role of the Court of Appeals and this Court is to treat the wcac’s findings as conclusive and to “review questions of law involved with any final order of the commission.” MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14).
That the justices of this Court may have come to a different conclusion than the WCAC if we were evaluating a matter de novo, or that we may find the magistrate’s conclusion to be better supported than the wcac’s conclusion, is irrelevant. Given the limited scope of judicial review in worker’s compensation cases, we may not substitute our own judgment for that of the wcac by independently reviewing each magistrate’s decision to determine whether there is competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record supporting the magistrate’s findings of fact. If that were the case, then what would be the *707role of the WCAC as the presumably expert administrative agency in this realm? The courts would routinely be stepping into the wcac’s shoes and conducting an independent review of the entire record, to determine if the magistrate’s decision complied with the “substantial evidence” standard. This cannot be what the Legislature intended when it established a two-tiered reviewing process that principally entrusted factual issues to the wcac and legal issues to the judiciary.
The decision in Goff also contains language that improperly directs the wcac to review a magistrate’s decision under the “any evidence” standard, rather than the “substantial evidence” standard. In Goff, supra, 454 Mich 538, the majority stated:
If the magistrate’s decision is reasonably supported in the record by any competent, material, and substantial evidence, then it is conclusive and the wcac must affirm. If it does not, it is exceeding the scope of its reviewing power and impermissibly substituting its judgment for the magistrate’s. [Emphasis added.]
This language conflates the separate and distinct standards of review employed at the administrative and judicial levels. The dissent’s statement that the “mere use of the word ‘any’ does not have the effect of fusing or confusing the ‘substantial evidence’ standard with the ‘any evidence’ standard,” post at 735, altogether ignores the grammatical application of the adjective; the word “any,” as used in Goff, clearly expresses an attribute of the word “evidence” that follows. Thus, while “any competent, material, and substantial evidence” may not equate with “any evidence” in the dissent’s judgment, it would hardly be irrational for the WCAC, pursuant to Goff, to determine that, if the magistrate’s finding of fact was supported by *708“any” evidence, it must affirm. However, this determination would be contrary to the actual statutory language of MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3), wherein the word “any” is nowhere to be found.
While MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3) established the “substantial evidence” standard for WCAC review over the magistrate’s decision, MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14) established the “any evidence” standard for judicial review over the WCAC’s decision. These two standards of review are clearly separate and distinct, emanating from different statutory sources and imparting different standards of review.
Therefore, unlike the unstated but effective overruling of Holden in Goff, we expressly overrule Goff, insofar as it contradicts the statutory language and departs from our decision in Holden. Yet, we wish to make clear that we do not lightly overrule existing precedent. In People v Graves, 458 Mich 476, 480-481; 581 NW2d 229 (1998), this Court recently discussed the proper circumstances under which it would overrule prior case law:
It is true of course that we do not lightly overrule a case. This Court has stated on many occasions that “[u]nder the doctrine of stare decisis, principles of law deliberately examined and decided by a court of competent jurisdiction should not be lightly departed.” Further, . . . “[bjefore this court overrules a decision deliberately made, it should be convinced not merely that the case was wrongly decided, but also that less injury will result from overruling than from following it.”
When it becomes apparent that the reasoning of an opinion is erroneous, and that less mischief will result from overruling the case rather than following it, it becomes the duty of the court to correct it. Although we respect the *709principle of stare decisis, we also recognize the common wisdom that the rule of stare decisis is not an inexorable command. [Citations omitted.]
Moreover, as we recently explained in Robinson v Detroit, 462 Mich 439; 613 NW2d 307 (2000), a court is most justified in overruling an earlier case if the prior court misconstrued a statute.
Directing the wcac to review the magistrate’s decision under the “any evidence” standard, and requiring the judiciary to review the magistrate's decision and determine anew whether that decision is supported under the “substantial evidence” standard, as espoused in Goff, unequivocally contradicts the clear and plain language of the WDCA. Therefore, allowing Goff to stand, in our judgment, would perpetuate the lack of a principled and consistent standard defining the proper level of review to be applied by the courts and would permit the continuation of a heightened potential for arbitrary, inconsistent, and highly confused decision making in worker’s compensation cases. Such results would be contrary to the statute and far more injurious to the administrative and judicial processes than any effect associated with our statutorily compelled decision to overrule Goff
The wcac must review the magistrate’s decision under the “substantial evidence” standard, while the courts must review the wcac’s decision under the “any evidence” standard. Review by the Court of Appeals and this Court begins with the wcac’s decision, not the magistrate’s. If there is any evidence supporting the wcac’s factual findings, and if the wcac did not misapprehend its administrative appellate role in *710reviewing decisions of the magistrate, then the courts must treat the wcac’s factual findings as conclusive.8
We next consider the holding of Layman, supra, with regard to the wcac’s authority to make independent factual findings.9 In Layman, the WCAC reversed the magistrate’s open award of worker’s compensation benefits to the plaintiff, and the Court of Appeals denied leave to appeal. This Court granted leave to appeal and vacated the wcac’s decision on the grounds that the WCAC lacked the authority to make factual findings, holding that the WCAC must always remand a case to the magistrate where additional factual findings need to be made, even when the record is complete:
Where a factual finding needs to be made, but has not been rendered by the magistrate, the case should be remanded to the magistrate. When the commission finds that the magistrate has failed to make necessary fact findings, it should remand the case to the magistrate for that purpose. [458 Mich 509.]
Contrary to the above language of Layman, this Court cannot abrogate the express statutory language enacted by the Legislature, absent a finding that the statute contravenes the dictates of our state or federal constitution. That the Legislature provided the WCAC with fact-finding powers cannot be denied:
The findings of fact made by the commission acting within its powers, in the absence of fraud, shall be conclu*711sive. [MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14) (emphasis added).]
How can the dissent, in a consistent manner, reconcile “[t]he findings of fact made by the commission” with its statement that the WCAC must avoid independent fact finding, and thus its conclusion that Layman remains “sound”? We are left wanting with regard to an answer to this question because the Legislature clearly and plainly authorized the WCAC to make findings of fact.
Additionally, we believe the Layman holding is insupportable in light of MCL 418.861a(12); MSA 17.237(861a)(12), which provides that the WCAC “may remand a matter to a worker’s compensation magistrate for purposes of supplying a complete record if it is determined that the record is insufficient for purposes of review.” The Legislature’s use of “may” rather than “shall” clearly indicates that the wcac is not required to remand a case to the magistrate in every instance in which the magistrate has failed to make full factual findings. The dissent’s belief that the wcac is precluded from engaging in any independent fact finding effectively substitutes its own public policy choice for those already made by the Legislature and ignores the clear and plain language of MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14). As long as the WCAC is presented with a record that allows it to intelligently make its own factual findings, the Legislature has declared that the wcac is free to do so.
We believe that Layman's reliance on Woody v Cello-Foil Products (After Remand), 450 Mich 588; 546 NW2d 226 (1996), was misplaced. Woody stands for the limited proposition that the WCAC cannot review a decision by a magistrate, if the magistrate’s *712opinion is insufficiently detailed to allow the reviewing body to separate findings of fact from legal determinations. 450 Mich 594-595. Because the magistrate had not sufficiently separated his factual and legal determinations, the wcac was forced to speculate regarding the facts and the legal reasoning relied upon. Contrary to Layman, Woody did not hold that the WCAC lacked authority to make independent factual findings.
Nevertheless, we do recognize that aspects of the Woody opinion are confusing, as they may be read in a manner that conflicts with our current holding. First, the Woody opinion purported to look beyond the wcac’s findings of fact to examine the magistrate’s findings of fact in order to weigh those findings against the “substantial evidence” standard. As explained above, the judiciary’s role is to review the wcac’s findings of fact, not the magistrate’s, and the judiciary is compelled by statute to treat the wcac’s findings of fact as conclusive if supported by any evidence in the record, as long as the WCAC did not misapprehend its administrative appellate role.
Second, the Woody opinion remanded the case to the magistrate for further factual findings. Because the Legislature expressly granted the WCAC fact-finding authority, MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14), and because it is the wcac’s role to conduct a thorough review of the matter, including “both a qualitative and quantitative analysis” of the “whole record,” the case should have been remanded to the wcac, not to the magistrate. While we recognize the confusing aspects of Woody, we nevertheless believe that the opinion focused not on the wcac’s authority to make independent findings of fact, but on *713the need for the reviewing body to avoid speculation, when it is impossible to “separate the facts found from the law applied.” 450 Mich 597. Therefore, Layman’s reliance on Woody was misplaced.
We believe that Layman expressly contradicts the text of the wdca by declaring that the wcac has no authority to make original findings of fact. Given this obvious and express error in the application of statutory language, this Court must overrule the Layman holding. We are convinced that Layman was wrongly decided, as its holding explicitly contradicts the statutory grant of fact-finding authority to the WCAC. Further, we believe that far less injury will result from overruling the case than from following it. Graves, supra at 480-481. It is clear that application of the Layman holding carries the potential for creating a substantial administrative backlog in worker’s compensation cases,10 because Layman requires the WCAC to remand all cases where the magistrate has failed to articulate a specific finding of fact on any issue, regardless of whether the record is sufficient for the WCAC to resolve the matter without resort to speculation. This remand requirement thus threatens to create unnecessary delays in the worker’s compensation system and to dilute some of the benefit of an administrative system designed to make relatively expedi*714tious decisions about compensation for injured employees.
A return to the express language of the Legislature, granting the wcac authority to make independent findings of fact, will further the efficient administration of worker’s compensation cases, in accord with the Legislature’s explicit intent. Because the Legislature clearly granted the wcac authority to make independent factual findings, Layman’s holding to the contrary is clearly erroneous. Because less injury will result from overruling the case than from following it, we expressly overrule Layman here.11
m. MUDEL v GREAT ATLANTIC & PACIFIC TEA CO
In Mudel, plaintiff John Mudel worked for defendant A&P,12 in various capacities, for almost fifty years. He began employment with A&P as a bagger in 1944, at age sixteen. He soon moved to the position of night stocker, which he performed for eleven years. In 1953, Mudel began working as a meat cutter, and he remained in that position for thirty-nine years, until his last day of work. As a meat cutter, Mudel was required to spend a great deal of time standing, walking, and lifting, in cold temperatures. On April 1, 1992, after working most of a typical shift, Mudel *715began to feel ill and left work thirty minutes early. When he arrived home, he told his wife that his left leg felt sore. At 2:00 A.M. the following morning, Mudel awoke in severe pain. His wife drove him to the hospital emergency room, where Doctor Dennis Lynch diagnosed Mudel’s condition as acute deep vein thrombosis (dvt) of the left leg.13 Mudel never returned to work.
Mudel applied for worker’s compensation benefits on July 28, 1992, alleging disabling injuries to his leg and back. The magistrate concluded that Mudel suffered from an occupational disease and entered an open award of benefits. A&P appealed from the magistrate’s decision to the wcac, arguing that Mudel was not entitled to benefits. Alternatively, A&P argued that the magistrate should have entered a closed award of benefits, on the theory that work activities did not cause, but only temporarily aggravated, Mudel’s dvt. Mudel neither appealed nor cross-appealed from the magistrate’s favorable ruling. The WCAC, on administrative appeal, determined that the magistrate’s findings of fact regarding occupational disease were not supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record. However, the wcac affirmed the magistrate’s award of benefits by correcting the statutory basis for that award from an occupational disease compensable under § 401 to a personal injury compensable under § 301.14 As the WCAC held:
*716There was no testimony presented in this matter to suggest that prolonged standing was unique to defendant’s business, or that moving from warm to cold temperatures in and out of the freezer, combined with the prolonged standing, was unique to defendant’s business. While it is clear that plaintiff suffers from a work-related disability, the finding of an occupational disease is not sustainable. We affirm the decision of the Magistrate with a modification to reflect that plaintiff is disabled pursuant to § 301(4). [1997 Mich ACO 1285, 1287.]
A&P sought leave to appeal from the wcac’s decision to the Court of Appeals, which denied leave to appeal.15 A&P then applied to this Court for leave to appeal, which we granted.16
A&P first argues that the wcac committed legal error by addressing issues not raised by either party when it corrected the statutory basis for Mudel’s wage loss benefits from a § 401 occupational disease to a § 301 personal injury. Specifically, A&P argues that the wcac violated MCL 418.861a(ll); MSA 17.237(861a)(ll), which provides:
The commission or a panel of the commission shall review only those specific findings of fact or conclusions of law that the parties have requested be reviewed.
A&P avers that the only issue properly before the wcac was the magistrate’s award of benefits on the basis of an occupational disease. Once the wcac determined that Mudel’s DVT did not qualify as an occupational disease, A&P contends that the WCAC was required to end its analysis there and terminate *717Mudel’s disability benefits, regardless of whether Mudel’s dvt qualified as a compensable personal injury.17
On the contrary, our review of the record reveals that Mudel did request the wcac to review whether he was entitled to benefits for a § 301 personal injury. Mudel filed a brief with the wcac responding to A&P’s appeal, which stated as follows:
However, even if plaintiff does not have a compensable occupational disease, he does have a compensable personal injury pursuant to MCL 418.301(1); MSA 17.237(301)(1) .... Based upon plaintiff’s credible testimony, coupled with that of Dr. Lynch, it is clear plaintiff has a work-related disability, be it on the basis of a personal injury or an occupational disease.
We decline A&P’s invitation to decide whether MCL 418.861a(ll); MSA 17.237(861a)(ll) would prevent the wcac from resolving the issues in this case if Mudel had not raised the alternative grounds in his responsive pleading, because that factual situation is not currently before us.
A&P next contends that the wcac made impermissible factual findings not supplied by the magistrate, regarding the causal relationship between Mudel’s employment and his dvt. Although A&P candidly acknowledges that the wcac may properly engage in independent factual findings, and affirmatively argues for the reversal of Layman, it nevertheless contends *718that the wcac impermissibly conducted independent fact finding in this case, and seeks reversal on that ground.
As set forth above, the wcac has statutory authority to make findings of fact independent of those made by the magistrate. Furthermore, the judiciary applies the “any evidence” standard of review to the wcac’s findings of fact. As long as any evidence exists in the record to support the wcac’s determination that Mudel’s employment caused his dvt, and the wcac did not misapprehend its administrative appellate role in reviewing decisions of the magistrate, this Court must treat the wcac’s factual finding as conclusive. MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14). On review of this case, we are convinced that the wcac properly understood and exercised its administrate appellate reviewing function.
Moreover, it is clear that, contrary to the dissent’s assertion that Layman is not implicated in the present case, the WCAC did clearly engage here in independent fact finding. First, the wcac identified medical testimony that the magistrate ignored—the testimony of Mudel’s treating physician that “the precipitating cause [of Mudel’s dvt] was his occupation” and that standing in cold temperatures for long periods was “a primary cause [of] his dvt.” Second, the wcac appears to have thoroughly reviewed the expert medical testimony presented below and exercised care in its consideration of this case—it did not simply substitute its judgment for that of the magistrate. Further, it articulated adequate reasons grounded in the record for concluding that Mudel’s dvt was caused by his employment. Thus, Layman, holding that it is impermissible for the wcac to make independent factual *719findings, is implicated and we have not “reach[ed] beyond the issues presented to overrule precedent.” Post at 733.
Because we find no clear indication that the wcac misapprehended its administrative appellate role or that it otherwise exceeded its authority, we defer to its findings, which were supported by record evidence.
A&P argues in the alternative that the wcac should have awarded Mudel benefits for a closed period because his dvt was only aggravated and not caused by his employment with A&P. The WCAC expressly rejected this argument, stating as follows:
Defendant next argues that at most, plaintiff experienced an exacerbation of his deep vein thrombosis and should, at most, be entitled only to a closed award of benefits. In making this argument, defendant relies upon the testimony of its examining physician, Dr. Aboulafia. In making this argument, however, defendant ignores the specific testimony of plaintiff’s treater, Dr. Lynch, who testified that the deep vein thrombosis did, in fact, damage plaintiff’s deep venous system. This is clear evidence of a pathological change which is more than a temporary exacerbation of an underlying condition. Moreover, there is competent, material, and substantial evidence to support the Magistrate’s conclusion that the condition remains disabling. [1997 Mich ACO 1287.]
Because the wcac’s factual findings on this issue are supported by record evidence, we must affirm.
Finally, A&P contends that the wcac committed legal error requiring reversal by failing to apply the significant manner standard of MCL 418.301(2); MSA 17.237(301)(2).18 However, this argument was never *720advanced before the magistrate, the wcac, or the Court of Appeals. Because the issue was not preserved, we decline to address it.
For the reasons set forth above, we conclude in Mudel that the wcac acted within its authority when it affirmed the magistrate’s open award of benefits but altered the statutory basis for that award, and we affirm the holding of the wcac.
IV. CONNAWAYv WELDED CONSTRUCTION CO
In Connaway, plaintiff Deborah Connaway worked for defendant Welded Construction Company as a welder’s helper. Connaway is an Illinois resident, and Welded Construction is a company engaged in pipeline construction in several states. In 1989, Welded Construction hired Connaway to work on a project in Gould City, Michigan, by placing a telephone call to her union hall in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Connaway traveled to Michigan for the job and on November 2, 1989, her first day of work at the Michigan job site, she fell off a pipe and injured her right knee. She applied for and received Michigan worker’s compensation benefits as a result of that injury.
Connaway was treated by Dr. Raymond L. Coss, an orthopedic surgeon, who performed arthroscopic surgery on her right knee in February 1990. After several months of physical rehabilitation, including a “work hardening” program, Coss recommended that Connaway return to work, placing no restrictions on job duties she could perform. Welded Construction *721assigned her to a job site in New York state performing the same tasks as a welder’s helper that she performed before her initial injury, and Connaway started working the New York job in August 1990. On September 4, 1990, after she had worked about two weeks on a schedule of ten hours a day and six days a week, she again injured her knee.19
After the New York injury, Connaway received worker’s compensation benefits in the state of New York, but additionally applied for worker’s compensation benefits in Michigan. Addressing the petition for Michigan benefits, the magistrate faced the question whether the New York injury should be characterized as a “recurrence” or an “aggravation” of the Michigan injury. This distinction was critical to the result, under the so-called “Massachusetts-Michigan successive injury rule,” which this Court adopted in Dressler v Grand Rapids Die Casting Corp, 402 Mich 243, 253-254; 262 NW2d 629 (1978), to allocate responsibility for paying worker’s compensation benefits where an injured employee has suffered successive injuries. In this case, if the New York injury was a mere recurrence of the Michigan injury, then the successive injury rule would assign responsibility for Connaway’s worker’s compensation benefits to her Michigan employer. However, if the New York injury aggravated Connaway’s original Michigan injury, independently contributing to her present disability, even slightly, then the successive injury rule would assign responsibility for Connaway’s worker’s compensation benefits to her New York employer. Given that Connaway’s *722employer was the same in both states, the rule would effectively determine which state’s worker’s compensation system applied to Connaway’s claim for disability benefits.
The magistrate determined that Connaway’s second injury was a mere recurrence of the first, concluded that Michigan law applied, and entered an open award of benefits in her favor. Welded Construction appealed from the magistrate’s decision to the wcac, arguing that Michigan lacked jurisdiction to award benefits to an employee who received a disabling injury in New York, particularly where the employment contract was not entered into in Michigan, defendant was not a Michigan corporation, and plaintiff was not a Michigan resident. The WCAC framed the issue as “whether there is a continuing disability from a Michigan injury or a new and separate injury resulting from the work in New York.” 1997 Mich ACO 304.
Applying the “substantial evidence” test, the wcac determined that the magistrate’s factual findings regarding Connaway’s continuing disability and a recurrence of her Michigan injury, were not supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence, and therefore reversed the magistrate. Citing expert medical testimony contained in the record, the wcac determined that the New York injury was truly an aggravation of the Michigan injury, and that the successive injury rule required Connaway to pursue worker’s compensation benefits in the state of New York, rather than Michigan. 1997 Mich ACO 304. Connaway sought leave to appeal from the wcac’s decision to the Court of Appeals, which granted leave and *723affirmed the WCAC in a published opinion.20 Connaway then sought leave to appeal to this Court, which we granted.21
Connaway’s principal argument before this Court is that the magistrate’s findings were supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record, and that the WCAC erred in ruling otherwise. Connaway relies on the language in Goff, supra, 454 Mich 513, which suggests that the courts must begin by reviewing the magistrate’s decision, not the wcac’s decision, and must independently determine whether the magistrate’s findings are supported by the requisite evidence. As set forth above in part II, this suggestion is incorrect. The courts review the wcac’s decision, not the magistrate’s decision, and the judiciary’s role is to ensure that the WCAC properly recognized and exercised its administrative appellate function. For these reasons, we reject Connaway’s invitation to review the whole record anew and determine whether the magistrate’s decision was supported under the “substantial evidence” standard of review.
Connaway next argues that the wcac’s decision is not supported under the “any evidence” standard and that even if the New York injury did aggravate her previous injury, she is entitled to Michigan worker’s compensation benefits. We disagree. The “Massachusetts-Michigan successive injury rule,” adopted in Dressier, supra, was described in Mullins v Dura Corp, 46 Mich App 52, 55-56; 207 NW2d 404 (1973), *724quoting 3 Larson, Workmen’s Compensation, § 95.12, pp 508.130-508.133, as follows:
“The Massachusetts-Michigan rule in successive-injury cases is to place full liability upon the carrier covering the risk at the time of the most recent injury that bears a causal relation to the disability.
“If the second injury takes the form merely of a recurrence of the first, and if the second incident does not contribute even slightly to the causation of the disabling condition, the insurer on the risk at the time of the original injury remains liable for the second....
“On the other hand, if the second incident contributes independently to the injury, the second insurer is solely liable, even if the injury would have been much less severe in the absence of the prior condition, and even if the prior injury contributed the major part to the final condition. This is consistent with the general principle of the compensability of the aggravation of a preexisting condition.” [Emphasis in original.]
The dissent would reverse the wcac’s decision on the “legal basis” that it violated the “legislative command” of MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3), by “fail[ing] to give the appropriate deference to the properly supported factual findings of the magistrate.” Post at 744, n 8. However, the dissent ignores the wcac’s authority, provided by MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14), to conduct a “qualitative and quantitative” analysis of the “whole record” in determining whether the magistrate’s factual findings are supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence. Thus, the wcac cannot be accused of “violating] . . . legislative command” when it attaches more or different weight or credibility to the evidence than that given by the magistrate.
*725Contrary to the dissent’s assertion that Layman is not implicated by the issues presented here, the wcac did make independent findings of fact. Although the WCAC noted that Connaway clearly suffered a work-related injury in November 1989, causing a work-related disability, the record supports its factual finding that this disability “had resolved itself” before Connaway’s New York injury; she was released to return to work without restrictions in August 1990 and was again working as a welder’s helper when she incurred the New York injury. Moreover, the record supports the wcac’s determination that Connaway’s New York injury was neither a mere recurrence nor a temporary aggravation of her Michigan injury: (1) the plaintiff’s physical condition following the New York injury was “subjectively different” than her physical condition before such injury, (2) the plaintiff experienced pain following the New York injury that she had not felt before such injury, (3) following the New York injury,- the plaintiff was incapable of engaging in activities that she was capable of performing before such injury, (4) following the New York injury, the plaintiff’s treating physician restricted her from participating in any “heavy industry,” and (5) an examining physician opined, more than two years following the New York injury, that the plaintiff was incapable of engaging in any prolonged climbing, kneeling, and squatting, and that she would experience difficulty performing any prolonged standing or walking. Further, the WCAC observed that, six years following the New York injury, Connaway had yet to return to work.
The record demonstrates that the New York injury did not simply elevate temporarily the severity of the *726plaintiff’s pre-New York injury physical condition, thus allowing her subsequent return to that condition. Rather, the evidence illustrates that the plaintiff’s current inability to engage in work activity is significantly impacted by the New York injury, an event that occurred almost ten years ago (as opposed to the nine-month period of disability following the Michigan injury). If the New York injury was simply a recurrence of the Michigan injury, or merely temporary in nature, logic would suggest that the plaintiff’s ability to return to work would have been restored to the status quo ante once the effects of that injury ameliorated. However, the evidence demonstrates that the New York injury resulted in an “independent contribution,” permanent in effect, to the plaintiff’s “final condition” (her current disability).
Under the “any evidence” standard of judicial review, Connaway’s New York injury independently contributed, with permanent effect, to the causation of her current disability. Thus, the successive injury rule compels the conclusion that Michigan’s worker’s compensation benefits are not available for Connaway’s current disability. Because the New York injury independently contributed to the causation of her current disabled condition, she must pursue the worker’s compensation benefits available to her in New York, where the independent contributing injury occurred.
Because the wcac’s determination was supported by record evidence, we must treat its factual findings as conclusive. That this Court might come to a different conclusion, as the dissent would do,22 than the wcac, *727if reviewing on a de novo basis, or that it might determine that the magistrate’s decision is better supported than the wcac’s, does not mandate reversal of the WCAC; rather, our limited review function under the law, in contrast to that of the wcac, is not to weigh or balance the evidence, but merely to determine whether “any evidence” exists in support of the wcac’s decision.
Furthermore, we do not believe that the wcac misapprehended its administrative appellate role in reviewing the magistrate’s decision. First, the wcac identified medical testimony that the magistrate ignored. Second, the WCAC exercised care in its consideration of this case, and did not simply substitute its judgment for that of the magistrate. The wcac obviously considered the expert medical testimony at great length, quoting extensively from the record in explaining which testimony the magistrate had ignored. Further, the wcac articulated adequate reasons grounded in the record for concluding that Connaway’s New York injury aggravated her knee condition. Because we find no clear indication that the wcac misapprehended its administrative appellate role or that it otherwise exceeded its authority, we defer to its findings, which were supported by record evidence.
For the reasons set forth above, we conclude in Connaway that the WCAC acted within its authority when it reversed the magistrate’s award of wage loss *728benefits for an injury that occurred in New York, and we affirm the holding of the wcac.
V. THE DISSENT
The dissent denigrates our analyses in these cases and accuses us of “needlessly reach[ing] beyond the issues presented to overrule precedent.” Post at 733. We have attempted, in a highly difficult area of the law, to apply as faithfully as possible the policy decisions reached by the Legislature—policy decisions reflected in the express language of its statutes. In contrast, the dissent departs from the language of these statutes, and appears to be unencumbered by the need to explain or justify such departures.
1. THE DISSENT ASSERTS THAT GOFF MUST BE AFFIRMED.
The dissent fails to reconcile Goff with the policy decisions of the Legislature by failing to give any meaning to the following statutory language:
The findings of fact made by the [wcac] ... in the absence of fraud, shall be conclusive. [MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14).]
The rule in Goff, that the judiciary must first examine the magistrate’s decision in determining whether the “substantial evidence” standard was met, manifestly conflicts with this statutory language. With regard to judicial appellate review, the wcac’s factual findings are to be considered conclusive. Thus, judicial engagement in determining whether the magistrate’s findings of fact are supported by “substantial evidence” violates the “any evidence” standard of review to be applied by the judiciary and exceeds the Legislature’s intended appellate review by looking beyond the conclusive factual findings of the wcac.
*729Rather than engaging in the “extraordinary act of overruling Goff,” as we are accused of doing by the dissent, post at 734, we have simply recognized that Goff is logically inconsistent with Holden. The two cases cannot stand simultaneously, for their interpretations are different. To the extent that Goff is the better-decided case, then Holden cannot stand; to the extent that Holden is the better-decided case, Goff cannot stand. Thus, the failure to overrule one or the other would result in the perpetuation of confusing and conflicting outcomes in this important area of the law, one in which both employees and employers have an interest in a clear and predictable rule of law.
2. THE DISSENT ASSERTS THAT THE WRONG STANDARD OF APPELLATE REVIEW MUST BE APPLIED.
Contrary to the statutorily required wcac “substantial evidence” standard of review, Goff directs the wcac to apply the “any evidence” standard when reviewing the magistrate’s decision
[i]f the magistrate’s decision is reasonably supported in the record by any competent, material, and substantial evidence .... [Id. at 538.]
The word “any” is nowhere to be found in MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3); to insert this word subverts the intent of the Legislature as demonstrated by clear and plain statutory language.
3. THE DISSENT ASSERTS THAT LAYMAN MUST BE AFFIRMED.
The dissent fails to reconcile Layman with the policy decisions of the Legislature by ignoring or failing *730to give any meaning to the following statutory language:
The findings of fact made by the commission ... in the absence of fraud, shall be conclusive. [MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14).]
The rule in Layman, that the wcac is prohibited from making independent factual findings, manifestly contradicts the clear and plain statutory language of § 861a.
VI. CONCLUSION
The Legislature has created two very distinct standards of review for worker’s compensation cases. The “substantial evidence” standard governs the wcac’s review of the magistrate’s findings of fact, while the “any evidence” standard governs the judiciary’s review of the wcac’s findings of fact. The wcac enjoys statutory authority to make independent findings of fact, regarding issues that have been addressed or overlooked by the magistrate, as long as the record is sufficient for administrative review and does not prevent the wcac from reasonably exercising its reviewing function without resort to speculation. The role of the wcac is to ensure that the factual findings in worker’s compensation cases are supported by the requisite evidence. The role of the judiciary is to ensure that the wcac properly recognized and exercised its administrative appellate role.
We expressly reaffirm our decision in Holden, supra, and we overrule Goff, supra, in that it contradicted our decision in Holden. Furthermore, we overrule Layman, supra, to the extent that it clearly mis*731stated the law with regard to the wcac’s authority to make independent factual findings.
Weaver, C.J., and Taylor, Corrigan, and Young, JJ., concurred with Markman, J.
*732appendix
WCAC REVIEW OF THE MAGISTRATE
The wcac treats the magistrate’s findings of fact as conclusive “if supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record.” MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3).
“[Substantial evidence” means “such evidence, considering the whole record, as a reasonable mind will accept as adequate to justify the conclusion.” MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3).
The “whole record” means “the entire record of the hearing including all of the evidence in favor and all the evidence against a certain determination.” MCL 418.861a(4); MSA 17.237(861a)(4).
The wcac’s review “shall include both a qualitative and quantitative analysis of that evidence in order to ensure a full, thorough, and fair review.” MCL 418.861a(13); MSA 17.237(861a)(13).
The wcac has authority to make independent findings of fact, and is not required to remand a case to the magistrate where factual findings necessary to the decision are lacking, as long as the record is sufficient for administrative appellate review and the wcac is not forced to speculate. MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14).
JUDICIAL REVIEW OF THE WCAC
The judiciary treats the wcac’s findings of fact, made within the wcac’s powers, as conclusive absent fraud. If there is any evidence supporting the wcac’s factual findings, the judiciary must treat those findings as conclusive. MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14).
The judiciary reviews the wcac’s decision, not the magistrate’s decision. MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14).
The judicial tendency should be to deny leave to appeal from decisions of the wcac or, if leave is granted, to affirm, in recognition of the wcac’s expertise in this extremely technical area of law. Holden v Ford Motor Co, 439 Mich 257, 269; 484 NW2d 227 (1992).
The judiciary exercises a very narrow scope of review over the wcac’s decisions, designed to ensure that the wcac did not misapprehend its administrative appellate role in reviewing decisions of the magistrate. Id.
The judiciary continues to review questions of law involved in any final order of the wcac under a de novo standard of review DiBenedetto v West Shore Hosp, 461 Mich 394, 401; 605 NW2d 300 (2000).
Contrary to the dissent’s assertion, the standards of review in worker’s compensation cases are far from “settled.” Thus, we attempt to clarify the standards of review in this vexing area of jurisprudence, by construing and implementing the statutory language drafted by the Legislature as faithfully as possible. Although we believe that we have done so as conscientiously as possible, we are not oblivious to the fact that ten*696sions will continue to operate within the act, at least until the Legislature clarifies its language.
The dissent contends that “this Court has been careful to craft workable standards of appellate review.” Post at 733. However, as Judge Whitbeck noted in Connaway v Welded Construction Co, 233 Mich App 150, 160; 592 NW2d 414 (1998), “Few subjects in Michigan jurisprudence have been so thoroughly explored—indeed one might even say dissected'—as the endlessly intricate question of the appropriate standard of *697review in WDCA cases.” Despite that thorough exploration, the current case law fails to provide the bench and bar with clear guidance.
For the sake of assisting the bench and bar, an appendix to this opinion provides a summary of the proper legal principles to be applied regarding the standard of review applied by the wcac and the judiciary over findings of fact in worker’s compensation cases. This Court continues to review questions of law involved in any final order of the wcac under a de novo standard of review. DiBenedetto v West Shore Hosp, 461 Mich 394, 401; 605 NW2d 300 (2000).
We do not attempt to define the parameters of the wcac’s “qualitative and quantitative” review in the instant cases because the facts presented do not require us to do so and because the parties did not address the issue.
This distinction between the administrative and judicial standards of review flows from the long-recognized principle that administrative agencies possess expertise in particular areas of specialization. Because the judiciary has neither the expertise nor the resources to engage in a fact-intensive review of the entire administrative record, that type of detailed review is generally delegated to the administrative body. In the particular context of worker’s compensation cases, a highly technical area of law, the judiciary lacks the expertise necessary to reach well-grounded factual conclusions. Worker’s compensation cases typically involve lengthy records replete with specialized medical testimony. These cases require application of extremely technical and interrelated statutory provisions that determine an employee’s eligibility for disability benefits. The judiciary is not more qualified to reach well-grounded factual conclusions in this arena than the administrative specialists. Therefore, the Legislature has decided that factual determinations are properly made at the administrative level, as opposed to the judicial level.
Further, the courts simply cannot review the record in every worker’s compensation case in the detail required to make conclusions about the sufficiency of the magistrate’s decision. Worker’s compensation cases are typically fact intensive, involving lengthy deposition testimony and medical documentation. If the courts were to attempt a review of each and every worker’s compensation case with an eye toward making detailed factual conclusions, dockets would become impossibly burdened with worker’s compensation cases, further delaying the resolution of injured workers’ claims for benefits. These considerations—lack of appropriate expertise and resources—demonstrate the practical benefits flowing from the Legislature’s creation of a two-tier reviewing process, which delegates to the wcac the role of ultimate factfinder, while limiting the judiciary to the role of guardian of procedural fairness.
Consideration of whether the wcac has misapprehended its administrative appellate role arises from this Court’s attempts to resolve the tensions inherent in the statutory language. Although the dissent fails to recognize the clarifying and defining aspects of today’s holding, we believe that by adhering to the straightforward statutory language relating to judicial review of worker’s compensation cases, these tensions can and will be mollified.
Although we are compelled to overrule Goff, we note that both Chief Justice Mallett, writing for the majority, and Justice Weaver, dissenting in part and concurring in part in that case, observed that a recent Court of Appeals opinion, York v Wayne Co Sheriff's Dep’t, 219 Mich App 370; 556 NW2d 882 (1996), remanded 456 Mich 893 (1997), set forth a correct application of the Holden guidelines:
A recent decision by the Court of Appeals illustrates the correct analysis that the Court must employ in determining whether the wcac exceeded its reviewing authority. . . . Correctly applying the guidelines from Holden, the Court of Appeals held that the wcac properly found that the magistrate’s decision was not based on substantial evidence. [454 Mich 528, n 16.]
[W]hile the majority opinion cites York ... , as an illustration of correct judicial review, and I agree it is, it seems to me that the majority fails to adopt the standard articulated in that case. [454 Mich 543-544.]
These comments hardly demonstrate an intentional rejection of Holden.
See footnote 3.
When granting leave to appeal in Mudel, we directed both parties to address “whether this Court should overrule its decision in Layman v Newkirk Electric Associates, Inc, 458 Mich 494 [581 NW2d 244] (1998).” 460 Mich 851 (1999).
For example, in the instant case, a&p argues that Layman’s requirement of “[rjemand for factual determination of an overlooked point slows the administrative process to a virtual standstill.” A&p contends that docket congestion at the administrative level results in a delay of twelve to eighteen months before the wcac typically resolves an appeal from the magistrate. The administrative process is further delayed when a case is remanded to the magistrate for additional findings of fact because the case returns to the wcac after remand, where another twelve to eighteen months pass before the wcac issues its second opinion and order.
The obvious question avoided by the dissent is as follows: Should we “bow to precedent” where such precedent incorporates a manifestly incorrect interpretation of a statute that is inconsistent with its clear and plain language? The dissent to the contrary, it is the faithful interpretation of the language of a statute, not the reflexive adherence to a conflicting and wrongly decided case law, that promotes “jurisprudential stability.” Robinson, supra.
The defendant in this case has been variously referred to as Farmer Jack’s, Borman’s Inc., Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company, and a&p. For the sake of clarity, we will refer to this defendant simply as “a&p.”
Mudel’s treating physician described this condition as one which led to the development of blood clots in the patient’s veins. Counsel for a&p similarly analogized dvt to a “heart attack in the legs” caused by blood clots and insufficient blood supply in the extremities.
MCL 418.301; MSA 17.237(301).
Mudel v Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Co, unpublished order of the Court of Appeals, entered February 27, 1998 (Docket No. 204028).
460 Mich 851 (1999).
A&p conceded at oral argument that the wcac was presented with the factual basis necessary to resolve Mudel’s case. Further, a&p conceded that the grounds for awarding benefits for a personal injury and an occupational disease were not necessarily exclusive. Thus, the magistrate’s award of benefits to Mudel under § 401 does not necessarily imply a rejection of his qualification for benefits under § 301.
MCL 418.301(2); MSA 17.237(301)(2) provides:
*720Mental disabilities and conditions of the aging process, including but not limited to heart and cardiovascular conditions, shall be compensable if contributed to or aggravated or accelerated by the employment in a significant manner.
For the sake of clarity, we will refer to the November 2, 1989, injury as the “Michigan injury” and the September 4, 1990, injury as the “New York injury.”
Connaway, supra, 233 Mich App 150.
Our order granting leave to appeal directed that this case be argued and submitted to the Court together with Mudel. 461 Mich 870 (1999).
The dissent engages in a lengthy factual review of this case and determines that “the wcac exceeded its reviewing power in overturning *727[the magistrate’s decision].” Post at 747. However, contrary to the straightforward statutory language relating to judicial review of the wcac, the dissent uses the wrong standard, “substantial evidence,” in reviewing the wrong entity, the magistrate.

=== CASE 9737660 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:40.26189+00 ===

*733Kelly, J.
(concurring in part and dissenting in part). I agree with the result the majority reaches in Mudel.
I dissent from the majority’s decision in Connaway and would reverse the holdings of both the Court of Appeals and the Worker’s Compensation Appellate Commission in that case. The wcac exceeded its authority, reversing the decision of the magistrate that was based on competent, material and substantial evidence on the entire record. MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3), MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14), Holden v Ford Motor Co, 439 Mich 257, 269; 484 NW2d 227 (1992).
I write, also, to register my strong disagreement with the majority’s decision to revisit the settled standards of review in worker’s compensation cases. In recent years, this Court has been careful to craft workable standards of appellate review. Holden, Goff,1 and Layman2 are consistent with the Worker’s Disability Compensation Act3 and with each other and do not cause the confusion the majority asserts. It is the majority’s decision in this case that will cause confusion. It will alter the law, expressly overruling Layman and Goff, decisions that are only two and three years old, respectively.
I. GOFF
Today, the majority needlessly reaches beyond the issues presented to overrule precedent. The time-*734honored doctrine of stare decisis strongly encourages courts to adhere to their precedents. A prior decision should be overruled only once a court is convinced that it was both wrongly decided and that less harm will result from overruling than from following it. People v Graves, 458 Mich 476, 480-481; 581 NW2d 229 (1998). In my view, the majority has failed to establish either prong of the Graves test and, thus, has failed to justify the extraordinary act of overruling Goff. I do not think that Goff and Holden can be read as inconsistent with one another.
Holden states that, in reviewing wcac decisions, courts are to ensure that the wcac “did not ‘misapprehend or grossly misapply’ the substantial evidence standard.” If the wcac did not misapprehend its administrative appellate role in reviewing the decision of the magistrate, it should be affirmed. Holden, supra at 269; MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14).
Goff states:
[W]here a party claims that the wcac has exceeded its power by reversing the magistrate, meaningful review must begin with the magistrate’s decision, because if competent, material, and substantial evidence based on the whole record supports the magistrate’s decision, the wcac need go no further. If it does, the wcac is exceeding its authority.
[IcL at 513.]
If the magistrate’s decision is reasonably supported in the record by any competent, material, and substantial evidence, then it is conclusive and the wcac must affirm. If it does not, it is exceeding the scope of its reviewing power and impermissibly substituting its judgment for the magistrate’s. [Id. at 538 (emphasis added).]
*735The majority claims that this language fuses the “substantial evidence” standard, whereby the wcac reviews the magistrate’s decision, and the “any evidence” standard, whereby appellate courts review the wcac’s decision. I disagree.
If a magistrate’s finding of fact is supported by “any” competent, material, and substantial record evidence, then it is supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record. The standard of review stated in Goff is the same as in Holden. The mere use of the word “any” does not have the effect of fusing or confusing the “substantial evidence” standard with the “any evidence” standard. Not to put too fine a point on it, “any competent, material, and substantial evidence” is not equivalent to “any evidence.”
While appellate courts review the wcac’s findings of fact under the “any evidence” standard, they are also directed to determine whether the WCAC misapprehended its administrative appellate role in reviewing magistrates’ decisions. Whether the wcac was acting within its powers of review is a question of law. MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14); Holden, supra at 269. The Court of Appeals and Supreme Court review questions of law de novo. Cardinal Mooney High School v Michigan High School Athletic Ass’n, 437 Mich 75, 80; 467 NW2d 21 (1991).
When it is claimed that the wcac substituted its own findings, we determine whether the wcac exceeded its administrative appellate authority by examining the findings of fact of the magistrate. When the latter are plausibly supported by any competent, material, and substantial evidence in the *736record, the wcac should be reversed and the magistrate’s factual findings should be reinstated. To hold otherwise would leave appellate courts powerless to ensure that the wcac acts within its legislatively defined parameters.
[I]t is quite possible that a reasonably minded magistrate could interpret a record differently than a reasonably minded wcac. However, if the magistrate’s conclusion is derived from competent, material, and substantial evidence, then the wcac may not substitute its judgment for that of the magistrate notwithstanding either the reasonableness or the adequacy of the commission’s conclusion. [Goff, supra at 514; MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3).]
The majority notes:
[C]ourts simply cannot review the record in every worker’s compensation case in the detail required to make conclusions about the sufficiency of the magistrate’s decision. Worker’s compensation cases are typically fact intensive, involving lengthy deposition testimony and medical documentation. If the courts were to attempt a review of each and every worker’s compensation case with an eye toward making detailed factual conclusions, dockets would become impossibly burdened with worker’s compensation cases, further delaying the resolution of injured workers’ claims for benefits. [Ante, p 702, n 5.]
However, where the WCAC makes factual findings that conflict with those of the magistrate, a reviewing court is compelled to examine the findings of the magistrate. How else can it determine whether the WCAC misapprehended its administrative appellate role? As a practical matter, this occurs in the course of ascertaining whether the opinion of the WCAC is supported by “any evidence.”
*737“In reviewing the magistrate’s decision, the wcac must do so with sensitivity and deference toward the findings and conclusions of the magistrate in its assessment of the record. . . . Ultimately, the role of the Court of Appeals and [the Supreme] Court is only to evaluate whether the wcac exceeded its authority.” [Layman, supra at 507, quoting Goff, supra at 538.]
While there are constitutional and statutory restrictions on judicial review of the wcac, they pertain to factual conclusions. Const 1963, art 6, § 28, MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14). And the wcac’s factual conclusions are insulated only if made in the course of a proper exercise of the wcac’s review function.
Under the guise of clarifying the standards of review, the majority has, in fact, eliminated meaningful appellate court oversight of the operation of the wcac. Today’s decision essentially restores to the wcac de novo review of magistrates’ decisions, something the Legislature sought to eliminate in 1985. 1985 PA 103. It removes the ability of appellate courts to examine a magistrate’s decision to determine whether the wcac exceeded its appellate role. And it leaves no means by which to compel the wcac’s compliance with the “substantial evidence” standard that the wdca directs the wcac to employ.
The majority acknowledges that an inherent tension exists between the language of subsections 861a(3) and (14). It acknowledges that appellate courts experience difficulties applying the “any evidence” standard to wcac findings of fact while also ensuring that the wcac has acted within its powers when reviewing magistrates’ decisions. Holden, supra at 263, 269. The majority, in “clarifying and defini*738tively setting forth the proper standards of administrative and judicial review,” admittedly fails to resolve this tension. (Ante, pp 696; 695, n 1 and 704, n 6.) Judicial review of the WCAC is still a tightrope walk in most cases. Thus, the majority seems to have accomplished nothing useful here, only to have upset the settled state of the law.
II. LAYMAN
Layman's holding need not be addressed in deciding these cases. In reversing Layman today, the majority has ignored the basic doctrine of ripeness.4 Layman held that, where findings of fact necessary to support a legal conclusion are incomplete, the WCAC must remand to the magistrate for the requisite fact finding. Id. at 509. Neither Mudel nor Connaway implicates Layman or requires the Court to reach the question whether it was wrongly decided.
A. MUDEL DOES NOT PRESENT ISSUES IMPLICATING LAYMAN
In Mudel, the issue is whether the WCAC erroneously changed the statutory basis for the magistrate’s award of benefits from a § 401 occupational disease to a § 301 personal injury.
The magistrate and the WCAC agree that plaintiff suffered from a work-related disabling condition, entitling him to an open award of benefits. The magis*739trate found the disabling condition to be an occupational disease, and the wcac found it to be a personal injury. The differing legal conclusions are based on the same facts. The majority concludes: “[T]he magistrate’s award of benefits to Mudel under § 401 does not necessarily imply a rejection of his qualification for benefits under § 301.” Ante, p 717, n 17.
When the magistrate found that plaintiff’s deep vein thrombosis was a work-related disease, he necessarily first found that the condition was a personal injury. When the wcac reversed the magistrate’s finding that plaintiff’s disability was caused by a work-related disease, it then had to determine whether plaintiff had a compensable personal injury. This is a broader category, one that includes work-related diseases in its definition. The issue is not one of fact that the magistrate failed to address. Rather, it is a legal issue that the magistrate necessarily addressed before reaching his more specific conclusion that plaintiff had an occupational disease.
No new factual findings were required to make this legal determination.5 The WCAC noted:
There was no testimony presented in this matter to suggest that prolonged standing was unique to defendant’s business, or that moving from warm to cold temperatures in and out of the freezer, combined with the prolonged stand*740ing, was unique to defendant’s business. [1997 Mich ACO 1285, 1287.]
Thus, there was no factual support for the magistrate’s legal conclusion that the work-related disabling condition plaintiff suffered from was compensable as a § 401 occupational disease. The magistrate made no findings of fact to support the conclusion, because there was no competent, material, and substantial evidence on which to base it. In short, Layman is not implicated.
B. CONNAWAY DOES NOT PRESENT ISSUES IMPLICATING LAYMAN
In Connaway, the wcac exceeded its review function under the substantial evidence standard. It substituted its judgment for that of the magistrate by disregarding factual findings that were supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence.
No remand to the magistrate for additional findings of fact is necessary in Connaway. The record is sufficiently complete that this Court can simply reverse the decisions of the WCAC and the Court of Appeals and reinstate the findings and holding of the magistrate. Connaway offers no excuse to overrule Layman.
C. THE LAYMAN DECISION IS SOUND
The WCAC must first determine if there is competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record to support the magistrate’s findings. If there is, the wcac’s review ends, and the magistrate must be affirmed. MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3); Holden, supra at 269; Goff, supra at 513. However, if *741the factual findings lack the specificity to reveal the magistrate’s -winding path through evidence subject to multiple interpretations, the WCAC must remand the matter for additional findings. Layman, supra at 508-509; Woody v Cello-Foil Products (After Remand), 450 Mich 588, 594-595; 546 NW2d 226 (1996).
Before the 1985 legislative amendment of the WDCA, the Worker’s Compensation Appeal Board reviewed magistrates’ factual findings de novo. Since then, its successor’s role has been confined to reviewing for error.
In making factual findings, a magistrate necessarily decides what evidence from an often voluminous record to believe and what to discount. That is the magistrate’s prerogative as the primary finder of fact.6 The WCAC cannot properly review a magistrate’s findings of fact unless they
*742“are sufficiently detailed so that [the commission] can separate the facts . . . found from the law . . . applied, and [determine] that conclusory findings are inadequate because [the commission] need[s] to know the path [the magistrate] has taken through the conflicting evidence, the testimony it has adopted, the standards followed and the reasoning used to reach [the] conclusion.” [Woody, supra at 594.]
“ ‘The findings of fact must include as much of the subsidiary facts as is necessary to disclose the steps by which the factfinder reached its ultimate conclusion on each factual issue. The findings should be made at a level of specificity which will disclose to the reviewing body the choices made as between competing factual premises at the critical point that controls the ultimate conclusion of fact.’ ” [Id. at 595 (brackets omitted).]
Courts cannot adequately determine whether the wcac exceeded the scope of its reviewing power and impermissibly substituted its judgment for the magistrate’s if the factual findings are incomplete.
The majority states Woody “stands for the limited proposition that the wcac cannot review a decision by a magistrate, if the magistrate’s opinion is insufficiently detailed to allow the reviewing body to separate findings of fact from legal determinations.” Ante, pp 711-712. In such a case, “the wcac [is] forced to speculate regarding the facts and the legal reasoning relied upon.” Id., p 712. Compelling the wcac to remand even in these limited circumstances conflicts with the majority’s reading of the “clear and plain” language of the statute:
The commission or a panel of the commission may remand a matter to a worker’s compensation magistrate for purposes of supplying a complete record if it is determined *743that the record is insufficient for purposes of review. [MCL 418.861a(12); MSA 17.237(861a)(12).]
Thus, to be consistent, the majority would have to overrule Woody as well. A second-hand evaluation by the WCAC of the magistrate’s factual determinations in most cases will occasion speculation. For that reason, it is preferable for the wcac to avoid independent fact finding and, where factual ambiguities exist, remand to the magistrate.
It should remand, also, when it concludes that the magistrate missed evidence, rather than made a conscious decision not to consider it because it was unpersuasive or lacked credibility. The commission should remand, rather than make its own findings of fact, given that the appellate courts may need to review the case.
Even if the standards that are in place for appellate court review of WCAC and magistrates’ decisions were confusing, I question whether the majority opinion does anything to alleviate confusion. See ante, pp 702, n 5; 695, n 1; 704, n 6. The majority should leave settled precedent undisturbed, unless it can show that less injury will result from overruling case law than from following it. Graves, supra at 481.
The majority claims Layman has caused delays, relying on the conclusory statements of a party, defendant Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company:
Layman’s requirement of “[r]emand for factual determination of an overlooked point slows the administrative process to a virtual standstill.” [Ante, p 713, n 10.]
However, neither A&P nor the majority has brought forward any objective data to bolster this assertion. *744Moreover, assuming there are delays, they are more than offset by the ultimate accomplishment of more accurate, hence fair, resolution of worker’s compensation cases.7
The wdca requires appellate courts to review the commission’s findings of fact under the “any evidence” standard. Case law requires appellate courts to review the commission’s assessment of the magistrates’ findings de novo, asking whether there was “substantial evidence” for the findings. Layman, supra at 507; Goff, supra at 513-514; MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14); Cardinal Mooney High School, supra at 80. The Legislature has the prerogative to alter our settled case law’s resolution of the standards.8 See ante, pp 698-699. It is in the interest of jurisprudential stability that this Court bow to precedent and abide by its earlier resolution of the standards. To alter them now is to feed the apprehension that the standards change with the makeup of the Court.
*745ffl. THE WCAC EXCEEDED ITS REVIEWING AUTHORITY IN GONNAWAY
Competent, material, and substantial evidence supports the magistrate’s conclusion that the plaintiff never completely recovered from the November 2, 1989, injury. It also supports his conclusion that the September 4, 1990, incident was a mere recurrence of and did not contribute independently to her disability. The wcac erred in not giving these findings due deference.
Plaintiff’s testimony supports the magistrate’s conclusions. She testified that she experienced soreness and swelling in her right knee throughout her work-hardening program. She had to “ice” her knee to control these problems. Between the time that Ms. Connaway stopped work hardening at the end of July 1990 and August 16, 1990, when she resumed work “on a trial basis,” she felt her knee “decreasing again, getting weaker.” She continued to ice the knee in order to control soreness and swelling.
When she reinjured her knee, plaintiff testified that she felt “hot pain . . . kind of like what I felt before,” but that she did not experience the massive swelling that occurred after the Michigan injury. The day after she returned from the hospital, she called Christine Johnson at Hartford Insurance in Grand Rapids, Michigan, from whom she had previously received worker’s compensation. She did this because she “just figured it was the, still the same accident, I hadn’t fully recovered, so I called her, ‘Well, Christine, what do I have to do? My knee didn’t hold up . . . .’” Plaintiff testified that her current symptoms are the same as the symptoms she had between the 1989 *746Michigan injury and her return to work in August of 1990.
The magistrate found the plaintiff’s testimony credible. The testimony supports the magistrate’s conclusion that plaintiff should not have returned to work in mid-August on a trial basis, because she had not recovered from her disability. likewise, it supports the magistrate’s finding that the reinjury did not independently contribute to plaintiff’s disability. The fact that she has not returned to work since reinjuring her knee does not indicate that the second injury contributed independently to her disability. It may be that plaintiff never would have recovered from her initial disability to an extent that she could return to work.
The medical facts, established by all three experts, indicate that the New York incident was simply a reinjury and did not add to her established disability. In his deposition testimony, Dr. Coss stated that, by August 8, 1990, he felt that plaintiff had “achieved maximum benefit from the work hardening and [he] suggested a trial of work.” He was tentative, but nonetheless permitted a work trial with the understanding that Ms. Connaway “would have some increased percentage chance of reinjury or intolerance to the work demands.”
When he saw plaintiff on September 13, 1990, after the second injury, he “felt she had resprained the knee.” On October 18, 1990, Dr. Coss indicated that Ms. Connaway’s knee was more stable than he had ever seen previously. While he continued her restriction of nonparticipation in heavy industry, it was because she had failed her trial return to work. He was unable to find any objective evidence that the *747New York incident caused any further harm to her knee. The magistrate found Dr. Coss’ testimony to be credible.
In Dr. Cisek’s deposition testimony, he stated:
I did not feel that there was any . . . permanency associated with the accident of 9/4/90, I felt that that particular accident represented an aggravation of her preexisting condition ....
Dr. Cisek went on to say that the New York event would result in only temporary aggravation of her preexisting condition. The magistrate found that Dr. Cisek gave credible testimony.
Finally, Dr. Korhonen testified that plaintiff had a laterally tracking patella, a congenital anomaly, which caused plaintiffs chondromalacia. He did not indicate that any damage was caused to plaintiffs anterior cruciate ligament as a result of the September 1990 injury. The magistrate did not comment regarding the credibility of Dr. Korhonen’s testimony.
Because the magistrate’s decision is supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence, it is manifest that the WCAC exceeded its reviewing power in overturning it.
“[W]here the primary compensable injury arises out of and in the course of employment],] compensability may be extended to a subsequent injury or aggravation of the primary injury where it has been established that the subsequent injury or aggravation is the direct and natural result of the primary injury and the claimant’s own conduct has not acted as an independent intervening cause of the subsequent injury or aggravation.” [Feldbauer v Cooney Engineering Co (On Remand), 205 Mich App 284, 288; 517 *748NW2d 298 (1994), quoting Schaefer v Williamston Community Schools, 117 Mich App 26, 37; 323 NW2d 577 (1982).]
Assuming arguendo that the record supports a finding that the September 1990 injury aggravated the primary injury, plaintiffs conduct did not act as an independent intervening cause of the aggravation. The second injury was a natural result of the first. Thus, compensability is properly based on the primary injury.
In its reversal of the magistrate’s decision, the WCAC attached great significance to the fact that Dr. Cisek termed the September 1990 incident an “aggravation” of plaintiff’s prior condition. It found significant, also, that Dr. Coss noted subjective differences between plaintiff’s condition before and after the New York injury. 1997 Mich ACO 304.
The majority, likewise, relies on these details to find that the wcac’s findings of fact are supported by “any evidence.” Ante, pp 726-727. The WCAC and the majority both have failed to consider this fact: plaintiffs deterioration after the second injury is equally consistent with her testimony that her knee continuously deteriorated after she stopped work hardening, and that the second injury contributed independently to her disability. Furthermore, the fact that Dr. Cisek described plaintiff’s September 1990 incident as “an aggravation” is hardly probative of whether the incident contributed to the causation of the disability condition.
The successive injury rule states that a second injury is considered a mere recurrence of the first where “a man has suffered a back strain, followed by a period of work with continuing symptoms indicat*749ing that the original condition persists, and culminating in a second period of disability precipitated by some lift or exertion.” Dressler v Grand Rapids Die Casting Corp, 402 Mich 243, 253; 262 NW2d 629 (1978). In such a case, the carrier responsible for providing coverage for the first injury remains liable for the second. An examining medical expert could well describe the second injury as an aggravation of the first without precluding the first carrier’s liability.
The example of the man with the strained back is wholly analogous to the situation in this case. On the basis of the plaintiff’s testimony and that of the three medical experts, the magistrate was entirely justified in making the factual findings that (1) the September 1990 injury did not contribute to the underlying disability, and (2) plaintiff continued to be disabled when she was working for Welded Construction Company from August 16, 1990, until her second injury on September 4, 1990.
The wcac reinterpreted the evidence and substituted its judgment for that of the magistrate, whereas the magistrate’s findings of fact were based on competent, material, and substantial evidence. This Court should reverse the wcac under the holdings of Holden and Goff. Consequently, the Court need not reach Layman to decide Connaway. The majority has overreached the actual, pertinent issues in these cases in order to overrule a case not implicated by the issues presented.
IV. CONCLUSION
I dissent from the majority opinion, because it needlessly reaches out to overrule Goff. Goff is con*750sistent with Holden and, therefore, should be left intact.
I dissent, also, because the majority overrules Layman, although these two cases do not present issues that implicate its holding. Furthermore, the Layman holding is not erroneous. The majority’s unnecessary change in worker’s compensation law will create, rather than resolve, confusion in the state’s jurisprudence.
Finally, I dissent because the majority errs in affirming the Court of Appeals and wcac decisions in Connaway. The wcac misapprehended its administrative appellate role in reviewing the magistrate’s decision. It erred as a matter of law in substituting its own findings of fact for those of the magistrate. The magistrate’s findings were based on competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record.
Cavanagh, J., concurred with Kelly, J.
Goff v Bil-Mar Foods, Inc (After Remand), 454 Mich 507; 563 NW2d 214 (1997).
Layman v Newkirk Electric Associates, Inc, 458 Mich 494; 581 NW2d 244 (1998).
MCL 418.101 et seq.-, MSA 17.237(101) et seq.
The “ripeness doctrine” requires courts to refrain from adjudicating issues not actually presented by the case or controversy. The doctrine counsels that courts not adjudicate an issue that is only hypothetical or speculative. Black’s Law Dictionary (6th ed), p 1328.
The majority ignores the “clear and plain meaning” of this sentence when it notes that, to the contrary, “the wcac did clearly engage here in independent fact finding.” Ante, p 718 (emphasis in original). As previously stated, Layman held that, where findings of fact necessary to support a legal conclusion are incomplete, the wcac must remand to the magistrate for the requisite fact finding. Id. at 509. Because additional findings of fact were not necessary to support the legal conclusion reached by the wcac, Layman is not implicated.
A primary purpose of [the Legislature’s 1985 amendment of the wdca] is to make the decisions of the magistrates final in most cases. -While an appeal can be filed, it is intended that relatively few appeals will be successful. The number of members of the workers’ compensation appellate tribunal has been reduced because the appellate role has been reduced from factfinder to a limited review for error. The decision of the magistrates will in most cases constitute the final decision. . . .
A magistrate, in hearing a workers’ compensation claim, will have the same role as a judge when the judge acts as trier of fact in an action brought to enforce a right created by statute. A magistrate, like a judge, will find the facts with a large measure of finality and apply the law to the facts, and in so doing will often find it necessary to construe the workers’ compensation act. . . . The findings of fact of a circuit judge are subject to reversal if clearly erroneous (when the Court of Appeals or this Court is left with the definite and firm conviction that a mistake was made), while a magistrate’s findings of fact can be reversed on appeal only if there is not substantial evidence on the whole record to support the decision. [Civil Service Comm v Dep’t of Labor, 424 Mich 571, 621-622; 384 NW2d 728 (1986).]
The majority does not claim that the decisions that appellate courts make involving the wdca are biased to reflect the result favored by a particular court. Thus, I find confusing and contradictory the irauority’s statement that, under the settled standards of review and Layman’s dictate that findings of fact should be made by the magistrate, “decisions of the appellate courts are resultantly more arbitrary and less predictable . . . .” Ante, p 694.
The majority repeatedly claims that this dissent fails to treat the wcac’s factual findings as conclusive on appellate review, in derogation of the statutory language. I reiterate that the Legislature also provided that “findings of fact made by a worker’s compensation magistrate shall be considered conclusive by the commission if supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record.” MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3). The legal basis on which I would reverse the wcac’s decision in Connaway is that it violated this legislative command. It failed to give the appropriate deference to the properly supported factual findings of the magistrate.

=== CASE 9737661 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:42.043522+00 ===

Per Curiam.
Plaintiff-appellant Franklin Historic District Study Committee1 appeals as of right from the trial court’s order dismissing its complaint for declaratory and injunctive relief on the ground that plaintiffs Franklin Historic District Commission and Franklin Historic District Study Committee lack standing to sue defendant. We affirm.
Defendant village of Franklin owns a parcel of open space property located within its historic district, which it established pursuant to the Local Historic Districts Act (luda), MCL 399.201 et seq.; MSA *1865.3407(1) et seq. In February 1998, defendant, through its village council, filed an application with the commission for a permit to build a new police facility on the open space property. The commission denied defendant’s application in March 1998. Although defendant initially appealed the commission’s decision to the Michigan State Preservation Review Board, it withdrew its appeal in July 1998.
In October 1998, defendant passed a resolution requiring the study committee to review and issue a report regarding the elimination of the open space property from the historic district. In February 1999, defendant passed a resolution seeking to amend the historic district ordinance to reflect the removal of the open space property from the historic district in order to construct a police facility on the property. Two days after passage of the resolution, the study committee issued its final report, recommending that the open space property not be eliminated from the historic district. On March 15, 1999, defendant’s council passed an amended ordinance removing the open space property from the historic district.
Plaintiffs filed a complaint seeking declaratory and injunctive relief. Plaintiffs alleged that defendant violated the LUDA by failing to exhaust its administrative appeal of the commission’s decision and, therefore, defendant’s act of removing the open space property from the historic district is invalid. Plaintiffs also challenged defendant’s act of removing the open space property from the historic district as arbitrary and capricious.
The parties each moved for summary disposition. The trial court granted defendant’s motion for summary disposition pursuant to MCR 2.116(C)(5), find*187ing that plaintiffs lacked standing to sue defendant. It ruled that plaintiffs and defendant are not separate legal entities and that plaintiffs failed to present evidence establishing that they suffered an injury different from that of the citizenry at large. The trial court did not address the merits of plaintiffs’ action.
The study committee challenges the trial court’s conclusion that it lacked standing to sue defendant. We find no error.
We review de novo the trial court’s ruling on a motion for summary disposition under MCR 2.116(C)(5). Kuhn v Secretary of State, 228 Mich App 319, 332-333; 579 NW2d 101 (1998). The pleadings, affidavits, depositions, admissions, and any other documentary evidence submitted by the parties must be considered by the court when ruling on the motion. MCR 2.116(G)(5). This Court must review the record to determine whether the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Kuhn, supra, p 333. Further, whether a party has standing to bring an action is a question of law reviewed de novo. Dep’t of Consumer & Industry Services v Shah, 236 Mich App 381, 384; 600 NW2d 406 (1999).
As our Supreme Court has explained, “[t]he concept of standing represents a party’s interest in the outcome of litigation that ensures sincere and vigorous advocacy.” House Speaker v Governor, 443 Mich 560, 572; 506 NW2d 190 (1993). A party must demonstrate more than just a commitment to vigorous advocacy, it must show that it has a substantial interest that will be detrimentally affected in a manner distinct from that of the citizenry at large. Id. That is, the plaintiff must demonstrate an actual injury or likely chance of immediate injury that is different from that *188of the general public. Kuhn, supra, p 333. The plaintiff’s suit is generally precluded if its interests are no different than those of the public. Id.
The study committee first argues that the trial court erred in concluding that it has no standing because it is not a legal entity separate from defendant and, therefore, not capable of suing defendant. An examination of the lhda reveals that the study committee is incorrect. Although historic district commissions and study committees are provided authority to enforce and administer the act with respect to an historic district established by a local unit of government, such as defendant, those entities are not given statutory authority over their local unit. The municipality, here, defendant, appoints the historic district study committee. MCL 399.203(1); MSA 5.3407(3)(1). Section 3 of the lhda similarly provides for the duties of an historic district study committee. This section indicates that the legislative body of the local unit has control over the regulation of historic districts and, thus, is not under the authority of the study committee. Clearly, the study committee was created by and is part of defendant. The trial court did not err in concluding that the study committee is not separate from defendant and therefore could not maintain an action against defendant.
The trial court’s conclusion in this regard is further supported by our Supreme Court’s decision in Oakland Co Bd of Co Rd Comm’rs v Michigan Property & Casualty Guaranty Ass’n, 456 Mich 590; 575 NW2d 751 (1998). There, the Supreme Court held that the road commission, as a creation of the Legislature, cannot assert an equal protection challenge against its creator, the state. Id., p 608. The Court noted that a *189county road commission draws its legal life from the county road law and has no power except that which is legislatively conferred because it is a creation of the Legislature. Id. Similarly, in the present case, the study committee is purely a creature of the local unit of government because the local unit appoints the study committee, MCL 399.203(1); MSA 5.3407(3)(1), and § 14 of the lhda, MCL 399.214; MSA 5.3407(14), makes clear that the local unit may modify boundaries of an existing historic district. Thus, there is nothing in the lhda that indicates that the study committee could maintain an action against the governmental body that created it.
The study committee also argues that it has a substantial interest in this matter, different from that of the citizenry at large. It argues that it is charged with enforcing the provisions of the lhda, which establishes its substantial interest in this matter. However, plaintiffs alleged no injury in their complaint. Rather, the study committee essentially argues that defendant’s action interferes with its right to enforce and administer the lhda.
The study committee must demonstrate an actual injury or likely chance of immediate injury to establish standing. It has failed to make such a demonstration. Defendant followed the procedure for elimination of the open space property from the historic district. Defendant properly applied for a permit to construct the police facility on the open space property when that property was within the boundaries of the historic district. See MCL 399.205; MSA 5.3407(5). It directed the study committee to conduct a study on the elimination of the open space from the historic district, and the study committee followed through *190with a recommendation that the open space property not be eliminated from the historic district. See MCL 399.203(1); MSA 5.3407(3)(1). Further, the study committee exercised its authority by issuing its report. Thus, the study committee did not suffer an injury because it was permitted to carry out its functions under the lhda. Defendant simply failed to follow the recommendation and passed an ordinance eliminating the open space property from the historic district, as permitted by the lhda. MCL 399.214; MSA 5.3407(14).2
The study committee has failed to establish that it suffered an injury that is different from that suffered by the citizenry at large. It was not prevented from carrying out its functions under the lhda, and because the property is no longer within the boundaries of the historic district, there is no likely chance of immediate injury. The trial court correctly concluded that the study committee does not have standing to bring this action against defendant.
Because we affirm the trial court’s decision that the study committee lacks standing to sue, it is not necessary to address the study committee’s remaining arguments.
Affirmed.
Initially, there were two plaintiffs involved in this case: Franklin Historic District Commission and Franklin Historic District Study Committee. Following a stipulation to dismiss, the Franklin Historic District Commission was dismissed from the appeal in an unpublished order dated February 1, 2000. Appellants Virginia Rodgers, Jacqlyn RoMcki, and Diana Bauer intervened following this Court’s order granting their motion to intervene, dated October 29, 1999. They are three of the seven members of the commission, and Rodgers and Rokieki are also members of the study committee. They raise no issues additional to those raised by the study committee.
Subsection 1 of this statute specifically provides that the local unit may modify boundaries of an existing historic district or may eliminate an existing historic district. Moreover, subsection 3(3)(b) of the lhda provides that the legislative body of the local unit may, at its discretion, introduce and pass or reject an ordinance after receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of an historic district.

=== CASE 2211943 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:13.770978+00 ===

11 Cal.App.2d 154 (1936)
LUSIA LOPEZ, Respondent,
v.
M. RICHARD, Appellant.
Civ. No. 1581.
California Court of Appeals. Fourth Appellate District.
January 8, 1936.
Ezra E. Stern and Michael M. Moser for Appellant.
Ray H. Overacker for Respondent.
Barnard, P. J.
This action was brought to recover for certain seed used by the defendants as copartners and for certain services performed for the partnership by Leon Lopez, both of these claims having been assigned to the plaintiff. It fully appears that the defendants, as copartners, were carrying on certain farming operations during the year 1932, and it is not disputed that the seed was furnished and the work was done in connection therewith. The defendant Richard maintains, however, that under their agreement his partner was to furnish the seed. He further maintains that Julian Lopez had agreed to contribute his own work to the enterprise, that in lieu thereof he employed his nephew, Leon Lopez, to do the work in his stead and that he, Richard, is in no way obligated for the wages due to Leon Lopez. The defendant Julian Lopez failed to answer and the action was defended by Richard alone. The court found in all respects in favor of the plaintiff and from the judgment entered against both partners the defendant Richard has appealed.
[1] The appellant contends that the court erred in receiving into evidence an account of the partnership transactions kept by the defendant Julian Lopez, that aside from this account there is no evidence worthy of belief which supports the findings to the effect that the seed and services in question were ordered by and furnished to the copartners and that there is, therefore, no evidence to support the findings and judgment. In effect, it is maintained that the court should have believed the appellant's testimony from which it would appear that his partner was alone obligated with respect to the two items in question.
Julian Lopez testified that he kept this account of the partnership transactions with the amounts owed, including the items in question; that he was asked to do this by the appellant; that the appellant knew he was doing this and frequently looked over the book; and that both used the book whenever one of the men was to be paid. While the appellant maintains that this was a private account kept by his partner, Julian Lopez, and while he testified that he himself *156 kept the real partnership account, which he said had disappeared and which was not produced, the conflict thus raised was for the trial court and, in so far as anything here raised is concerned, the account in question was properly admitted in evidence (Shepard v. Yale, 94 Cal.App. 104 [270 P. 742]).
[2] In addition to the account which was introduced in evidence, Julian Lopez testified that he bought the seed for the copartnership, used it in their business and agreed that they would pay for it, and that he employed Leon Lopez to render these services for the copartnership and agreed that they would pay him as soon as the money came in from the crop. He further testified as to the quantity of seed furnished, the amount of work done, and the prices agreed to be paid therefor. There was some evidence that the appellant agreed to pay the amount allowed by the court for the seed and that he made one payment on the wages due to Leon Lopez.
The evidence, although conflicting, is sufficient to support the findings and judgment.
The judgment is affirmed.
Marks, J., and Jennings, J., concurred.

=== CASE 9737769 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:34:16.234687+00 ===

SACKETT, Judge.
This appeal addresses the issues of modification of child support and the obligation of a divorced parent to support an unmarried adult daughter under the age of twenty-two who is a college student.
Petitioner-appellant David Lloyd Linberg appeals an order modifying his dissolution decree by increasing his obligation for child support and ordering payment of support to his college-age daughter. He also contends the trial court was not correct in its order directing him to pay support for an adult daughter. We affirm as modified.
Respondent-appellee Kathie Lou Junker contends she should have relief on cross-appeal. David contends her notice of cross-appeal was not timely filed. We agree and dismiss the cross-appeal.
In May of 1978 the marriage of John and Kathie Linberg was dissolved. Custody of the two children of the marriage, Katherine born in March 1971, and Beth born in March 1975, was awarded to Kathie. John was ordered to pay child support of $300 per month until Katherine reached eighteen years of age, died, married, or became self-supporting, at which time the support was to be reduced to $150 per month. Katherine became eighteen in March 1989, and David reduced his support to $150 per month.
After Katherine became eighteen, Kathie filed an application to modify the decree. She asked the court to find the support for Katherine did not terminate when Katherine reached eighteen years of age because Katherine continued to be a student. She also sought increased moneys for both girls.
The trial court found the support had not terminated when Katherine reached eighteen years of age. David was ordered to pay $750, to represent the $150 a month the court concluded he owed for Katherine from the time she reached eighteen until the decree was modified. The decree was then modified to provide that David pay $300 a month for each child.
I.
David contends the trial court incorrectly ordered that under Iowa Code section 598.1 (1989) he was responsible to continue the support for Katherine after she turned eighteen, even though the decree provided to the contrary. Kathie contends the trial court was correct, because even though Katherine was an adult, she continued to be a student. We agree with David on this issue. The support obligation for a minor child ceases at age eighteen. The language of section 598.1 provides:
“Support” or “support payments” means an amount which the court may require either of the parties to pay under a temporary order or a final judgment or decree, and may include alimony, child support, maintenance, and any other term used to describe these obligations. The obligations may include support for a child who is between the ages of eighteen and twenty-two years who is regularly attending an accredited school in pursuance of a course of study leading to a high school diploma or its equivalent, regularly attending a course of vocational-technical training either as a part of a regular school program or under special arrangements adapted to the individual person’s needs, or is, in good faith, a full-time student in a college, university, or area school; or has been accepted for admission to a college, university, or area school and the next regular term has not yet begun; or a child of any age who is dependent on the parties to the dissolu*701tion proceedings because of physical or mental disability, (emphasis supplied).
The language of the statute is permissive, not mandatory. The decree clearly cut off support at age eighteen. To continue support past that age requires a provision in the decree that support continue. There was no such provision in this decree. The support terminated at age eighteen. The issue of whether the trial court could have ordered retroactive payments for Katherine was not raised. We modify the trial court’s order to omit the $750 the trial court ordered paid to time of modification.
II.
The trial court ordered support for each child in the amount of $300 a month. David contends this is excessive. David’s argument encompasses two issues. The first is child support for the minor child. The second is support for the adult child still a student.
We find the increase in the parties’ incomes, inflation and the cost of raising older children are such change of circumstances that there should be a modification of the child support award. See Dworak v. Dworak, 195 N.W.2d 740, 742 (Iowa 1972).
To assess the reasonableness of the child support ordered for the minor child Beth, we look to the support guidelines. We remand to the trial court to apply the guidelines. We do not retain jurisdiction. Until a further order is entered, we direct that David pay support for Beth in accordance with the trial court’s order modifying child support.
David argues Kathie should have been required to report her current husband’s financial situation. We agree. The income of a stepparent is relevant. A stepparent’s income is considered as it relates to his or her spouse’s overall financial condition. See Page v. Page, 219 N.W.2d 556, 558 (Iowa 1974); Mears v. Mears, 213 N.W.2d 511, 518 (Iowa 1973); In re Marriage of Mueller, 400 N.W.2d 86, 88-9 (Iowa App.1986). Kathie’s husband’s support obligation to the children is limited to the extent the child being in his home may have increased the cost of the child’s maintenance by reason of the higher living standard she may have experienced by reason of being in his home. Mueller, 400 N.W.2d at 88.
The child support guidelines do not make actual provision for a stepparent’s income; except that under the guidelines, the stepparent’s income is relevant in computing the parent’s actual federal and state income tax liability. We direct that Kathie make this information available to the trial court.
David’s next contention is his ordered contribution to Katherine is excessive. The completion of the child support obligation does not prevent the court from requiring child support for college expenses. In re Marriage of Pieper, 369 N.W.2d 439, 441-442 (Iowa 1985). We determine the child support guidelines are not applicable to determine support for an unmarried adult child under twenty-two years of age who is a student. A divorced parent’s obligation to support his or her child past the age of eighteen years is determined by section 598.1(2). This section imposes an obligation on divorced parents toward their adult offsprings who are students. There is no corresponding statutory obligation imposed on married parents of adult students. See In re Marriage of Byall, 353 N.W.2d 103, 107 (Iowa App.1984); In re Marriage of Lieberman, 426 N.W.2d 683, 685 (Iowa App.1988).
This duty to provide college support extends to both parents. Byall, 353 N.W.2d at 107. The statute does not require support in all cases, but allows the trial court in its discretion to award support of children through college under the proper circumstances. In re Marriage of Vrban, 293 N.W.2d 198, 203 (Iowa 1980); Byall, 353 N.W.2d at 107; see also Lieberman, 426 N.W.2d at 685. (issue of consideration of trust funds available to child different when considering support obligation to minor child and that imposed on divorced parent for expenses beyond majority).
*702In assessing David’s obligation, we consider the ability of the child for college, (2) the age of the child, (3) the financial conditions of the parents, and (4) whether the child is self-sustaining. Vrban, 293 N.W.2d at 203; Byall, 353 N.W.2d at 107. Katherine appears able to do college work, is unmarried under the age of twenty-two years, and currently not self-sustaining. The questions are what are her needs and what are her parent’s financial resources and abilities to pay. See Sandler v. Sandler, 165 N.W.2d 799, 802 (Iowa 1969); Gerk v. Gerk, 259 Iowa 293, 300, 144 N.W.2d 104, 109 (1966); In re Marriage of Frink, 409 N.W.2d 477, 481 (Iowa App.1987).
The original decree provided for David to pay toward an insurance policy which would have provided minimal help with college expenses. David did not follow those dictates, and as part of this modification was relieved from responsibility for the policy. We consider this factor and David’s income of nearly $34,000 annually in assessing his obligation.
Katherine has decided to attend a private Iowa college. Tuition/room and board were nearly $11,000. David contends these expenses are too high. When parents are of limited financial means there is no need to obligate them for college expenses beyond those of attending a state supported institution in the state of the student’s residence. Lieberman, 426 N.W.2d at 686; Frink, 409 N.W.2d at 481. David’s means are such that we consider the costs at a public university and project such costs at about $7,500 a year. We consider a $300 a month contribution to this cost by David to be reasonable, and we affirm the trial court on this issue. In addressing this issue, we have again considered David’s argument that we have no information on Kathie’s husband’s income. Kathie’s husband’s income is relevant to her ability to contribute to her daughter's college education. See Page, 219 N.W.2d at 558; Mueller, 400 N.W.2d at 88-89. However, we do not find a remand on this issue necessary. David has the ability to make the ordered amount and we consider it equitable.
III.
Kathie filed a cross-appeal. David contends it was not timely. Kathie’s cross-appeal was filed more than five days after David’s appeal, and more than thirty days after the decree from which appeal was taken. Iowa R. of App.P. 5 provides:
A cross-appeal may be taken within the thirty days for taking an appeal or in any event within five days after the appeal is taken.
Kathie admits her appeal was not filed during the time frame established by the rules. She asks that her cross-appeal be considered timely. She contends the five-day time following an appeal is not sufficient to decide whether cross-appeal is necessary. What Kathie’s argument ignores is that she had the same rights of appeal as David, and the five-day time is merely an extension of time. Her cross-appeal was not timely. We have no jurisdication to grant the relief requested on cross-appeal. We dismiss the cross-appeal. See Carpenter v. Ruperto, 315 N.W.2d 782, 786 (Iowa 1982).
AFFIRMED AS MODIFIED AND REMANDED.
All Judges concur except HAYDEN, J., who specially concurs.

=== CASE 9737662 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:42.047603+00 ===

O’Connell, P.J.
(concurring). I concur in the majority’s well-reasoned opinion, but write separately to *191explain why I conclude that, even if plaintiffs had standing, their claims are not judicially cognizable.
Defendant had explicit statutory authority to modify the boundaries of the historic district, or even to eliminate it entirely. MCL 399.214(1); MSA 5.3407(14)(1). Defendant’s action was purely legislative and political. As such, judicial review of the merits of that action would be inappropriate. In essence, plaintiffs sought to litigate a political battle that they had already lost. See Bendix v Troy, 215 Mich App 289, 296; 544 NW2d 481 (1996) (O’Connell, J., concurring). Plaintiffs may well be correct in asserting that defendant’s action was not made with the best interests of the historic district in mind. However, even if defendant’s reasons were petty and unwise, no judicial remedy would exist. Id. at 298. “That is the risk and the genius of legislative action in a representative government.” Id. Plaintiffs’ remedy, if any, is to be found in a political forum, not a judicial one. See People v Morris, 450 Mich 316, 336; 537 NW2d 842 (1995).

=== CASE 2211579 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:08.784662+00 ===

183 Cal.App.2d 94 (1960)
CLYDE HARRIS, SR., et al., Respondents,
v.
GRACE GALLANT et al., Appellants.
Civ. No. 18846.
California Court of Appeals. First Dist., Div. Two.
July 25, 1960.
Thiel, Sassone & Howard and Harry D. Miller for Appellants.
Paul D. Morse for Respondents.
STONE, J. pro tem.  [fn. *]
This action was brought by respondents to have a promissory note and deed of trust declared void or in the alternative reformed; to enjoin appellants from foreclosing the deed of trust; for usurious interest penalties; and *96 for exemplary damages. The court, sitting without a jury, granted respondents the relief prayed for by declaring the note and deed of trust void, allowing treble damages under the usury laws and awarding exemplary damages.
The record discloses that respondents were interested in buying a house and got in touch with one Hunter, a real estate broker, and his salesman, Walter Johnson. Respondents told Hunter that they had only $300 for a downpayment and that this had been borrowed. Hunter showed them the home of Thaymon Holley, who wanted $1,500 for his equity, and Hunter told respondents that he could arrange for them to borrow the additional $1,200. Respondents were to assume also a first encumbrance against the property which required payments of $61 per month. Respondents told Hunter that their limited income and fixed obligations prevented them paying more than a total of $70 per month on both the first lien, which they were assuming, and the $1,200 loan. After some negotiation they and Hunter agreed upon monthly payments of $76 to be allotted $61 on account of the assumed encumbrance and $15 on account of the loan. As an inducement to respondents, Hunter promised to help them if they had difficulty in meeting the two monthly payments.
After the respondents orally told Hunter they would buy Holley's property if they could borrow $1,200, Hunter got in touch with appellant Jacobs. Appellant was a licensed real estate broker who made a practice of buying second encumbrances at a discount. He dealt directly with Hunter with whom he had transacted business in the past. Hunter in turn negotiated with respondents and Holley, the seller. Appellant advised Hunter that he would place $1,250 in escrow in return for an $1,800 note secured by second encumbrance on the property respondents were to purchase. He also specified that the note should bear 7 1/2 per cent interest and that monthly payments of $15 should be made for 11 months only, the entire unpaid balance to become due the 12th month. Appellant Jacobs inspected the premises, investigated the first lien thereon and specified his own escrow requirements.
Respondent Harris had a seventh grade education and his wife could neither read nor write. They had had no business experience and they had never bought or sold real property before. Harris was employed in an iron foundry earning approximately $300 per month. Broker Hunter, accompanied by salesman Johnson, took a note, deed of trust and authorization to sign escrow instructions to respondents' home for signature. *97 Respondent Harris asked Hunter to explain the papers and was told they would give him "legal right" to the house. He testified Hunter also told him that all of the "papers" were in accordance with the terms to which respondents had previously agreed. Respondents denied that anything was said about an $1,800 note or about interest at 7 1/2 per cent or about the note maturing after 11 payments of $15 per month. Respondent Harris also testified that he requested an opportunity to read the documents but that Hunter told him he was in a great hurry, that everything was "legal" and that any time respondents wanted to see the papers or secure any information to call at Hunter's office. Respondents then signed the papers without reading them, Mrs. Harris signing by mark. Respondents testified that they signed because they knew and trusted Hunter, the broker, and Johnson, his salesman. Hunter denied "rushing" the respondents or misrepresenting the terms of the note. Johnson, the salesman, did not testify. The note which respondents signed was actually for $1,800, with interest at 7 1/2 per cent, and provided for eleven $15 monthly payments with the entire balance due at the end of one year. The note and deed of trust were made in favor of the seller.
Seller Holley, who insisted upon cash for his equity, executed a deed to the premises and endorsed the note and assigned the deed of trust at the request of the broker, who placed them in escrow. The broker had authorization from seller and buyers to prepare and sign escrow instructions on their behalf.
After the escrow was closed respondents received a payment record card indicating a principal of $1,800 and interest at 7 1/2 per cent. Respondent Harris testified that he then asked Hunter about the discrepancy between these figures and the agreed amounts of $1,200 principal and 6 1/2 per cent interest. He said that Hunter told him not to worry, that he would "take care of that." Subsequently respondents defaulted in their payments and appellant demanded payment in full. Notice of default was filed and respondents instituted this action.
[1a] At the time the transaction occurred Civil Code, section 3081.5, insofar as here pertinent provided: "Any loan, made after the effective date of this act, which provides for installment payments and the maturity date of which is less than three (3) years shall require substantially equal installment payments over the period of the loan, with the final payment not payable until the maturity date thereof; provided, *98 that no installment including the final one shall be greater than twice the amount of the smallest installment." Appellant contends that the trial court erred in finding the note and deed of trust to have been executed in violation of this statute. He denies that he made a loan to respondent buyers, contending that there were two separate transactions, the first a sale by which the seller accepted a note for $1,800 secured by a second deed of trust as consideration for a deed conveying seller's equity in the property, which was followed by a sale of the note and deed of trust by seller to appellant at a discount of $550. Upon this interpretation of the transaction appellant claims the status of a holder in due course.
The question is whether there is evidence to support the trial court's finding that there was but a single transaction by which appellant loaned the buyers the money to pay the seller cash for his equity, in return for a note evidencing the loan plus a $550 bonus. It is uncontradicted that the seller demanded $1,500 cash for his equity and that he refused to accept a note and second deed of trust in lieu of cash. Nor is it questioned that the buyers had only $300 and that Hunter, the real estate broker, advised buyers that he would arrange for a loan to pay the seller cash. It is also uncontradicted that the broker got in touch with appellant, dealer in second mortgages, and gave him all of the information appellant ever received concerning the transaction. Pursuant to information given him by the broker, with whom he had had business relations before, appellant inspected the premises, investigated the first encumbrance and then offered to place $1,250 in escrow in return for the endorsement and assignment to him of a note for $1,800 secured by a second deed of trust on the property, the $1,800 note to bear 7 1/2 per cent interest. It is pertinent that all of the amounts fixed, $1,250 cash to be deposited in escrow, an $1,800 note bearing 7 1/2 per cent interest, eleven $15 monthly payments with unpaid balance due the 12th month, were determined before the note and deed of trust were prepared. From this evidence the trial court determined that appellant fixed the amount of the loan, $1,250, and the amount of the note, $1,800, which he accepted in return for the loan. The inference and finding are not unreasonable since it was only after appellant had stated his terms that the documents were prepared by broker and executed by the buyers and the seller. Furthermore, the money placed in escrow was paid directly to the seller while the note and second trust deed were delivered directly to appellant. *99
Thus there is evidence which supports the trial court's finding that the transaction was a mere subterfuge to circumvent the restrictions of Civil Code, section 3081.5. [2] It is axiomatic that if there is any substantial evidence, contradicted or uncontradicted, which supports the finding of the trial court an appellate court will not set it aside. (Estate of Bristol, 23 Cal.2d 221, 223 [143 P.2d 689].) [3] It was for the trier of fact to determine whether the form of the proceeding was a mere sham and, if so, the true substance of the transaction. (Janisse v. Winston Investment Co., 154 Cal.App.2d 580, 582 [317 P.2d 48, 67 A.L.R.2d 225].) [4] Substance is more important than form and from it the true intent of the parties must be determined. (Thomas v. Hunt Mfg. Corp., 42 Cal.2d 734, 740 [269 P.2d 12].) [5] In ascertaining the facts the court may look to all of the circumstances surrounding the transaction. (Shirley v. Britt, 152 Cal.App.2d 666, 669 [313 P.2d 875].) [6] And an appellate court will indulge all intendments and reasonable inferences which favor sustaining the finding of the trier of fact. (Berniker v. Berniker, 30 Cal.2d 439, 444 [182 P.2d 557].) [1b] Considering the evidence in light of the rules governing the review of findings of a trial court, we cannot say that the finding here that the transaction between respondents and appellant was in the nature of a loan is without support in the record. The $1,800 note clearly violated Civil Code, 3081.5, supra, by providing for 11 monthly payments of $15 with the total balance payable the 12th month. This violation the court decreed made the note and deed of trust null and void and it enjoined enforcement of both.
[7] The court also held the note to be usurious by reason of the $550 bonus which was in addition to interest at 7 1/2 per cent. Respondents were allowed treble the amount of interest paid. This was proper since Civil Code, section 3081.3, subdivision (c) provides: "No loan secured by real property shall be made which provides for payment of interest in excess of ten per cent (10%) per year as provided by section 22 of article XX of the California Constitution, and as implemented by the Statutes of 1919, page LXXXIII, known as the 'Usury Law.' " Although the finding that the note is usurious is correct, it is irreconcilable with the finding that the note is null and void. Under our usury laws interest is uncollectible and penalties are provided, but the principal is not forfeited. (Haines v. Commercial Mortgage Co., 200 Cal. 609, 623 [254 P. 956, 255 P. 805, 53 A.L.R. 725]; 49 Cal.Jur. *100 2d p. 675.) It is quite clear that the Legislature intended the real estate loan statute of 1955, chapter 1791, page 3299 et seq., of which Civil Code, section 3081.5 is a part, to complement the usury statutes which implement article XX, section 22 of the Constitution. Expression of this intent is contained in the act itself (see Civ. Code,  3081.3, subd. (c), supra). The note being usurious, the award of three times the amount of interest paid to appellant was proper (Terry Trading Corp. v. Barsky, 210 Cal. 428 [292 P. 474]). However, enjoining appellant from collecting any interest leaves unanswered the question of what happens to the balance of the unpaid principal. The note itself does not provide an answer since by its terms the entire unpaid balance is due the 12th month. The court found that the respondents believed and relied upon the representation that the $15 monthly payments were to continue until the note was paid in full. We conclude that the principal actually loaned should be paid accordingly. There are cases concerning usury which suggest this answer--in fact the identical problem was presented in Janisse v. Winston Investment Co., supra. In that case a usurious note provided for payments of $47.50 per month for a given number of months after which the unpaid balance became due. The trial court held that the monthly payments of $47.50 should continue without interest until the principal was paid in full, and enjoined defendants from accelerating the note or foreclosing the deed of trust as long as the monthly payments were made. The judgment was affirmed. In our case the trial court should have determined the balance of principal due after deducting the $550 bonus, and crediting the amount paid as interest together with the usury penalty. The rule in Janisse should then have been followed and the balance remaining ordered paid at $15 per month without interest. Appellant should also be enjoined from accelerating or foreclosing so long as the monthly payments are made when due.
[8] The trial court also awarded respondents exemplary damages and appellant argues that the findings of fraud and of his intent to injure respondents are insubstantial. As we have pointed out, there is evidence to support the court's finding that appellant intended to and did make a loan to respondents of $1,250 in return for an $1,800 note. It was also shown respondents agreed to pay 6 1/2 per cent interest while the note provided for 7 1/2 per cent. The agreement was that respondents pay $15 per month on account of interest and principal until the loan was paid in full, while the note he *101 signed provided for 11 monthly payments of $15 with the balance due on the 12th month. These facts support an award of exemplary damages. (Ward v. Taggart, 51 Cal.2d 736, 743 [336 P.2d 534].) The trial court's inference that appellant intended to injure respondents by his willful acts is a finding of fact. [9] The general rule is that if there are substantial facts upon which the trial court has based its findings the appellate court will not reweigh the evidence and the rule applies whether the damages awarded are general or exemplary. (Finney v. Lockhart, 35 Cal.2d 161, 164 [217 P.2d 19]; Berniker v. Berniker, supra.)
The judgment decreeing the promissory note to be usurious and awarding respondents three times the amount of interest paid, being the sum of $376.41, is affirmed. The judgment awarding respondents $500 exemplary damages is affirmed. The decree declaring the promissory note and deed of trust to be void is reversed with directions to the trial court to enter a judgment decreeing that the unpaid balance of the money actually loaned respondents shall be paid at the rate of $15 per month and that appellants be enjoined from accelerating said note or foreclosing the deed of trust as long as the payments are made.
Kaufman, P. J., and Draper, J., concurred.
NOTES
[fn. *]  *. Assigned by Chairman of Judicial Council.

=== CASE 9737663 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:45.222325+00 ===

Taylor, J.
We granted leave to appeal to consider defendants Camp Niobe’s and Joanne Mandell’s claim that the trial court had erred in denying their motion to change venue from Wayne County to Lapeer County. Because we conclude that venue in Wayne County was proper, we affirm the judgment of the trial court.
I. FACTS AND PROCEEDINGS BELOW
Plaintiff’s decedent, nine-year-old Jeremy Massey, was a foster child in Detroit. On June 28, 1998, Jeremy participated in an outing sponsored by the Children’s Center of Detroit at Camp Niobe in Lapeer County. Tragically Jeremy drowned while in the swimming area at the camp. Maureen Massey filed a lawsuit in Wayne County as personal representative of Jeremy’s estate. The lawsuit named as defendants the Children’s Center and one of its employees, Lisa *378Dilg, and Camp Niobe and some of its employees, including Mandell.
The camp and Mandell filed a motion for change of venue, arguing that venue in Wayne County was improper and that, pursuant to MCL 600.1629(l)(a); MSA 27A.1629(l)(a)1 venue in Lapeer County was proper because the camp was located and conducts business in Lapeer County and the drowning took place in Lapeer County. Plaintiff opposed the motion, arguing that the criteria under súbd (l)(a) and (b) of the statute did not apply, but that venue in Wayne County was proper pursuant to subd (l)(c)2 because *379plaintiff resided there and the Children’s Center did business there.
The trial court denied the motion to change venue on the basis that both the plaintiff and the Children’s Center were in Wayne County. Camp Niobe and Man-dell filed an application for leave to appeal, a motion for immediate consideration, and a request for a stay with the Court of Appeals. The Court of Appeals granted immediate consideration and denied the application and stay “for lack of merit in the grounds presented.”3 The camp and Mandell then filed a motion for immediate consideration, an application for leave to appeal, and a motion for stay with this Court. This Court granted immediate consideration and granted a stay and leave to appeal.4
H. STANDARD OF REVIEW
This Court reviews a trial court’s ruling in response to a motion to change improper venue under the clearly erroneous standard. Shock Bros, Inc v Morbark Industries, Inc, 411 Mich 696, 698-699; 311 NW2d 722 (1981). Clear error exists when the reviewing court is left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made. People v Kurylczyk, 443 Mich 289, 303; 505 NW2d 528 (1993).
m. PRINCIPLES OF STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION
In examining a statute, it is our obligation to discern the legislative intent that may reasonably be *380inferred from the words expressed in the statute. White v Ann Arbor, 406 Mich 554, 562; 281 NW2d 283 (1979). One fundamental principle of statutory construction is that “a clear and unambiguous statute leaves no room for judicial construction or interpretation.” Coleman v Gurwin, 443 Mich 59, 65; 503 NW2d 435 (1993). Thus, when the Legislature has unambiguously conveyed its intent in a statute, the statute speaks for itself and there is no need for judicial construction; the proper role of a court is to apply the terms of the statute to the circumstances in a particular case. Turner v Auto Club Ins Ass’n, 448 Mich 22, 27; 528 NW2d 681 (1995). Concomitantly, it is our task to give the words used by the Legislature their common, ordinary meaning. MCL 8.3a; MSA 2.212(1).
IV. THE STATUTE
MCL 600.1629; MSA 27A.1629 in full provides:
(1) Subject to subsection (2) in an action based on tort or another legal theory seeking damages for personal injury, property damage, or wrongful death, all of the following apply:
(a) The county in which the original injury occurred and in which either of the following applies is a county in which to file and try the action:
(i) The defendant resides, -has a place of business, or conducts business in that county.
(ii) The corporate registered office of a defendant is located in that county.
(b) If a county does not satisfy the criteria under subdivision (a), the county in which the original injury occurred and in which either of the following applies is a county in which to file and try the action:
(i) The plaintiff resides, has a place of business, or conducts business in that county.
*381(ii) The corporate registered office of a plaintiff is located in that county.
(c) If a county does not satisfy the criteria under subdivision (a) or (b), a county in which both of the following apply is a county in which to file and try the action:
(1) The plaintiff resides, has a place of business, or conducts business in that county, or has its corporate registered office located in that county.
(ii) The defendant resides, has a place of business, or conducts business in that county, or has its corporate registered office located in that county.
(d) If a county does not satisfy the criteria under subdivision (a), (b), or (c), a county that satisfies the criteria under section 1621 or 1627 is a county in which to file and try an action.
(2) Any party may file a motion to change venue based on hardship or inconvenience.
(3) For the purpose of this section only, in a product liability action, a defendant is considered to conduct business in a county in which the defendant’s product is sold at retail. [Emphasis added.]
V. ANALYSIS
The parties agree that the original injury for purposes of construing § 1629 was the drowning and that the drowning occurred in Lapeer County. The camp and Mandell argue that they satisfy subd (l)(a) of § 1629 because the original injury occurred in Lapeer County and they reside, have a place of business, or conduct business in Lapeer County. The plaintiff argues however that when subd (l)(a) is carefully analyzed the argument for mandatory venue in Lapeer County fails.
Subd (l)(a) provides that, using the place of original injury (Lapeer County) as the referent, the inquiry is then if either of the following apply:
*382(i) The defendant resides, has a place of business, or conducts business in that county.
(ii) The corporate registered office of a defendant is located in that county. [Emphasis added.]
Accordingly, subd (l)(a)(i) requires that “[t]he defendant” reside, have a place of business, or conduct business in the county.5 Here, we have a case with four defendants.6 The camp and Mandell would satisfy subd (l)(a)(i) if either were the only defendant. Moreover, the Children’s Center and Lisa Dilg would not satisfy subd (l)(a)(i) even if they were the only defendant. These circumstances are fatal to the camp’s and Mandell’s reliance on subd (l)(a)(i).7
Having determined that subd (l)(a)(i) does not apply, we next must determine if subd (l)(a)(ii) required venue be established in Lapeer County. *383Under this subdivision, venue would be required to be in the county where the original injury occurred if a defendant is a corporation and its registered corporate office is in the same county. “A,” as the above makes clear, should be understood to cover a case with more than one defendant and one of them is a corporation. In the case at bar none of the defendants has asserted that it is a corporation or that it has its corporate registered office in Lapeer County. Accordingly, subd (l)(a)(ii) is also inapplicable.
The statute next instructs that, if a county does not satisfy the criteria in subd (l)(a), one must look to subd (l)(b). Under subd (l)(b), Lapeer County would be the proper venue if “[t]he plaintiff” resided there, or had a place of business there or conducted business there or if “a plaintiff” had a registered corporate office there. None of these criteria are satisfied.
The statute next instructs that if a county does not satisfy subd (l)(a) or (l)(b) that one must look to subd (l)(c). Under subd (l)(c), the county in which the original injury occurred is no longer a consideration. Rather, if there is a county wherein “[t]he plaintiff” resides, or has a place of business, conducts business or has its registered office, and at the same time “[t]he defendant” resides or has a place of business or conducts business or has its registered corporate office, then such a county is a county in which to try an action. Plaintiff argues that Wayne County comes within subd (l)(c). We cannot agree. There is no question that plaintiff resides in Wayne County. However, subd (l)(c)(ii) also requires that “[t]he defendant” reside, have a place of business, conduct business, or have its registered office in Wayne County before Wayne County would be “a county in *384which to file and try the action . . . MCL 600.1629(l)(c); MSA 27A.1629(l)(c). As before, “the” does not mean “a” and thus the requirements of subd (l)(cXii) are not satisfied merely because one or more of the defendants reside or have a place of business or conduct business in Wayne County.
The statute next instructs that if a county does not satisfy subd (l)(a), (l)(b), or (l)(c) one must look to subd (l)(d), which provides:
If a county does not satisfy the criteria under subdivision (a), (b), or (c), a county that satisfies the criteria under section 1621 or 1627 is a county in which to file and try an ' action.
Thus, we are instructed to consult MCL 600.1621; MSA 27A.1621, which provides:
Except for actions provided for in sections 1605, 1611, 1615, and 1629, venue is determined as follows:
(a) The county in which a defendant resides, has a place of business, or conducts business, or in which the registered office of a defendant corporation is located, is a proper county in which to commence and try an action.
Sections 1605,8 1611,9 161510 do not apply here. This means we must look to § 1629, which by its terms refers us to § 1621 or § 1627.
Applying § 1621 leads to the conclusion that Wayne County was a proper county in which plaintiff was free to file her lawsuit because at least one defendant *385(The Children’s Center) has a place of business and conducts business in Wayne County. Alternatively, applying § 1627 (which, with several exceptions, provides that venue shall be in a county where all or a part of the cause of action arose) also supports a Wayne County venue because plaintiff asserts that part of her cause of action arose in Wayne County.
VI. CONCLUSION
In summary then, because MCL 600.1629; MSA 27A.1629 referred us to MCL 600.1621; MSA 27A.1621 or MCL 600.1627; MSA 27A.1627 and Wayne County satisfies the venue criteria of §§ 1621 and 1627, venue in Wayne County was proper. Thus, the trial court properly denied the camp’s and Mandell’s motion.
Weaver, C.J., and Young and Markman, JJ., concurred with Taylor, J.
MCL 600.1629; MSA 27A.1629 states:
(1) [I]n an action based on tort . . . seeking damages for . . . wrongful death, all of the following apply:
(a) The county in which the original injury occurred and in which either of the following applies is a county in which to file and try the action:
(i) The defendant resides, has a place of business, or conducts business in that county.
(ii) The corporate registered office of a defendant is located in that county. [Emphasis added.]
MCL 600.1629; MSA 27A.1629 states:
(1) [I]n an action based on tort . . . seeking damages for . . . wrongful death, all of the following apply:
(c) If a county does not satisfy the criteria under subdivision (a) or (b), a county in which both of the following apply is a county in which to file and try the action:
(i) The plaintiff resides, has a place of business, or conducts business in that county, or has its corporate registered office located in that county.
(ii) The defendant resides, has a place of business, or conducts business in that county, or has its corporate registered office located in that county. [Emphasis added.]
Unpublished order, entered August 16, 1999 (Docket No. 219751). Judge Gage dissented indicating she would have granted a stay and leave to appeal.
461 Mich 905 (1999).
The use of the word “the” has a meaning that is different than the word “a.” Subd (l)(a)(i) does not say “a defendant” resides, has a place of business, or conducts business in the county. Nor does it say “one of the defendants.” Rather, it says “the defendant.” Thus, in order for the camp’s and Mandell’s position to prevail, we would have to read “the” as if it said “a.” This we decline to do. “The” and “a” have different meanings. “The” is defined as “definite article. 1. (used, esp. before a noun, with a specifying or particularizing effect, as opposed to the indefinite or generalizing force of the indefinite article a or an). . . .” Random House Webster’s College Dictionary, p 1382. Moreover, when, as in subd (l)(a), the Legislature has qualified the same word with the definite article “the” in one instance (subd [l][a][i]) and the indefinite article “a” in another instance (subd [l][a][ii]), and both are within the same subsection of a statute, even more clearly there can be no legitimate claim that this Court should read “the” as if it were “a”
Plaintiff has apparently been unable to serve process on two of the six defendants named in the caption.
Further demonstration that the Legislature itself is familiar with the difference between using “the defendant” and “a defendant” in a venue statute can be seen by the fact that MCL 600.1621(a); MSA 27A.1621(a) says that, in certain circumstances, venue is proper in the county “in which a defendant resides . . . .’’In contrast with such language, MCL 600.1629(l)(a)(i); MSA 27A.1629(1)(a)(i) provides that venue is proper in the county in which “[t]he defendant resides . . . .”
MCL 600.1605; MSA 27A.1605 establishes venue for certain real property lawsuits.
MCL 600.1611; MSA 27A.1611 establishes venue for actions involving probate bonds.
MCL 600.1615; MSA 27A.1615 establishes venue for actions against governmental units.

=== CASE 9737664 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:45.227663+00 ===

Corrigan, J.
I concur in the result reached by the majority, but for a different reason. In my view, the answer to the difficult venue question presented in this case lies in § 1641 of the Revised Judicature Act, which provides in full:
(1) Except as provided in subsection (2), if causes of action are joined, whether properly or not, venue is proper in any county in which either cause of action, if sued upon separately, could have been commenced and tried, subject to separation and change as provided by court rule.
(2) If more than 1 cause of action is pleaded in the complaint or added by amendment at any time during the action and 1 of the causes of action is based on tort or another legal theory seeking damages for personal injury, property damage, or wrongful death, venue shall be determined under the rules applicable to actions in tort as provided in section 1629.
*386Section 1641 applies to claims involving the joinder of multiple “causes of action.” Whether plaintiff’s claim in this case involves the joinder of multiple “causes of action” under § 1641 depends on the proper construction of the statutory phrase “cause of action.”
When examining a statute, our primary task is to discern and give effect to the intent of the Legislature. Sun Valley Foods Co v Ward, 460 Mich 230, 236; 596 NW2d 119 (1999). This task begins by examining the language of the statute itself, as the words of a statute provide “the most reliable evidence of its intent.” See id., quoting United States v Turkette, 452 US 576, 593; 101 S Ct 2524; 69 L Ed 2d 246 (1981). If statutory language is clear and unambiguous, the Legislature will be presumed to have intended the meaning plainly expressed, and the language must be applied as written. “No further judicial construction is required or permitted.” Sun Valley, supra at 236. Only where the statutory language is ambiguous may a court properly go beyond the words of the statute to ascertain legislative intent. Id. The interpretation of individual words and phrases within a statute is governed by MCL 8.3a; MSA 2.212(1), which provides:
All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases, and such as may-have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law, shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
“Cause of action” is a legal term of art. Therefore, it must be understood according to its “peculiar and appropriate meaning.” MCL 8.3a; MSA 2.212(1). Depending on the context in which it is used, the term “cause of action” could mean (1) a particular *387claim against a particular defendant, (2) a legal theory, or (3) a lawsuit. Black’s Law Dictionary (7th ed), p 214, gives three alternate definitions corresponding to these three general ideas:
1. A group of operative facts giving rise to one or more bases for suing; a factual situation that entitles one person to obtain a remedy in court from another person; claim (4) <after the crash, Aronson had a cause of action>.
2. A legal theory of a lawsuit <a malpractice cause of action. Cf. right of ACTI0N>.—Also termed (in senses 1 & 2) ground of action.
* * *
3. Loosely, a lawsuit cthere are four defendants in the pending cause of action>.
Section 1641 describes “causes of action” that are “joined.” For purposes of joinder, this Court has repeatedly defined “cause of action,” as being “the fact or combination of facts giving rise to or entitling a party to sustain an action.” See Multiplex Concrete Machinery Co v Saxer, 310 Mich 243, 253; 17 NW2d 169 (1945); Brewster Loud Lumber Co v General Builders’ Supply Co, 233 Mich 633, 638; 208 NW 28 (1926); Otto v Highland Park, 204 Mich 74, 80; 169 NW 904 (1918). Because § 1641 speaks in terms of the joinder of causes of action, this definition of “cause of action,” which is generally consistent with the word “claim,” best represents the “peculiar and appropriate meaning” of the statutory term in this context.
Understanding “cause of action” to mean “the combination of facts giving rise to or entitling a party to *388sustain an action,” e.g., Multiplex Concrete Machinery, supra at 253, supports the conclusion that separate claims against various defendants amount to separate “causes of action.” In this case, because each of plaintiffs claims involves the alleged negligence of a different person or entity, each claim involves a different “combination of facts” entitling plaintiff to “sustain an action,” and, therefore, each amounts to a separate “cause of action.” The conclusion that each claim amounts to a separate “cause of action” is further supported by the fact that defendant could have elected to sue any one of the defendants alone without joining her claims against the other defendants.1
Section 1641 is not a substantive venue provision. Standing alone, it does not instruct a litigant where to file an action. Rather, it demands reference to the various substantive venue statutes. Section 1641 explains that when a case involves joined “causes of action,” the entire case may be brought in any county in which it would have been proper to bring one of the various joined causes of action, if that cause of action had been sued upon separately. To determine whether a particular county would have been a proper venue for one of the various joined causes of *389action sued upon separately, one must refer to whichever substantive venue statute is applicable.2
Subsection 1641(2) provides an exception to the general rule set forth in subsection 1641(1) that venue for the entire case is proper in any county in which one of the joined causes of action could have been brought separately. In cases involving joined causes of action, where at least one cause of action is “based on tort or another legal theory seeking damages for personal injury, property damage, or wrongful death,” venue must be “determined” according to the rules of § 1629. Section 1629 is the substantive venue statute applicable to causes of action sounding in tort and wrongful death. Subsection 1641(2) creates a preference for § 1629 over the other substantive venue statutes.
Consider, for instance, a complaint that joins a cause of action sounding in tort with a cause of action sounding in contract. The proper venue for the tort cause of action would be determined by reference to § 1629, which is the substantive venue provision applicable to tort actions. The proper venue for the contract cause of action would be determined by reference to § 1621, which is the substantive venue provision applicable to contract actions. Under the general rule set forth in subsection 1641(1), either of these venues would be permissible for the entire case. Under the exception set forth in subsection 1641(2), however, only the venue determined proper by reference to § 1629 would be permissible for the entire case. Thus, the practical effect of subsection *3901641(2) is that, in cases involving the joinder of multiple causes of action, venues determined by reference to § 1629 take precedence over venues determined by reference to the other substantive venue provisions.
Applying the rules of § 1641 and § 1629 to the facts of this case, it becomes evident that the trial court did not clearly err in determining that Wayne County is a proper venue. If plaintiff had brought suit against only the Children’s Center, then venue would have been proper in Wayne County under § 1629. Subsection 1629(l)(a) would not apply, because the original injury occurred in Lapeer County and the Children’s Center is a Wayne County organization. Subsection 1629(l)(b) would not apply because the original injury occurred in Lapeer County and plaintiff is a Wayne County resident. Wayne County would satisfy the criteria of subsection 1629(l)(c), however, because no county satisfied the criteria of subsections (l)(a) or (l)(b), plaintiff is a Wayne County resident, and the Children’s Center has its place of business in Wayne County.
On the other hand, if plaintiff had brought suit against only defendant Camp Niobe, venue would have been proper only in Lapeer County under subsection 1629(l)(a), because the original injury occurred in Lapeer County and Camp Niobe has its place of business in Lapeer County. Because plaintiff elected to bring this suit against both the Children’s Center and Camp Niobe (as well as a number of the individual agents of those entities), this case involves the joinder of multiple “causes of action.” Under the general rule set forth in § 1641, venue would be proper in any county in which one of the joined causes of action could have been brought separately. *391In this case, as set forth above, that would include both Wayne County (for the cause of action against the Children’s Center) and Lapeer County (for the cause of action against Camp Niobe). Because each of these possible venues is “determined” by application of the substantive rules of § 1629, the exception set forth in subsection 1641(2) would have no practical effect in this case.
Cavanagh and Kelly, JJ., concurred with Corrigan, J.
The Court of Appeals, in Schultz v Silver Lake Transport, Inc, 207 Mich App 267, 275; 523 NW2d 895 (1994), reached a different conclusion on this issue. There, the Court of Appeals held that a negligence suit against several defendants residing in different counties did “not involve the joinder of separate claims, but a single claim against multiple defendants.” Schultz did not cite any authority for its conclusion that a tort claim brought against several defendants for damages arising from a single accident does not involve the joinder of separate claims. Nor did the Court of Appeals explain its conclusion. Accordingly, I would reject the conclusion reached in Schultz, supra.
The substantive venue statutes are §§ 1605, 1615, 1621, 1627, 1629, and 1635.

=== CASE 2211591 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:09.006762+00 ===

605 N.E.2d 150 (1992)
Rocky CAMPBELL, et al., Appellant (Plaintiff below),
v.
CRITERION GROUP, et al., Appellee (Defendant below).
No. 29S02-9212-CV-1034.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
December 30, 1992.
*151 Alan K. Mills, Lester H. Cohen, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Dean T. Barnhard, Indianapolis, for appellee.
Legal Services Organization of Indiana, Inc., Norman P. Metzger, Kenneth J. Falk, John Jay Boyce, Indianapolis, amici curiae.
City-County Legal Division, Mary Ann G. Oldham, Andrew P. Wirick, Indianapolis, amici curiae.
SHEPARD, Chief Justice.
We accept transfer in this case to consider important questions about the authority *152 of Indiana courts to permit pauper appeals in civil cases and the method by which such appeals may be brought.
Procedural History and Facts
A number of named and unnamed plaintiffs instituted an action for damages against Criterion Construction, Criterion Group and El Dee Apartments. The original complaint alleged that plaintiffs' personal property had suffered damage by reason of negligence and conversion on the part of some or all of the defendants. A complex of motions, hearings and orders ensued in the Hamilton Circuit Court, the net effect of which continues to be a matter of contention between the parties in a separate appeal.
It suffices to observe that the trial court's orders effected the dismissal of some parties and summary judgment as to others and that among the parties so affected were plaintiff-appellants Rocky Campbell, Jesse Parker, Carolyn Willis, and Marilyn Johnson (collectively, "Campbell"). Campbell, proceeding pro se, timely filed a Praecipe for Record on Appeal along with a Verified Motion to Proceed on Appeal as a Poor Person ("Verified Motion"). The Verified Motion included statements about his indigency and a prayer for relief from all appellate "fees, security, or other costs."
Certain defendants filed an objection to the Verified Motion. Thereafter, the trial court denied the Motion without opinion. Campbell petitioned the Court of Appeals for review of the trial court's denial of his Verified Motion and asked for an order directing that the record of proceedings, including the transcript of evidence, be prepared at public expense. The Court of Appeals granted appellant's petition to proceed on appeal in forma pauperis and also held that an indigent civil appellant is entitled to a record of proceedings prepared without cost to the indigent. Campbell v. Criterion Group (1992), Ind. App., 588 N.E.2d 511.
The Criterion Group's petition for transfer assigns six errors. We consolidate these into two questions: (1) Was Campbell's Verified Motion to Proceed on Appeal as a Poor Person properly denied by the trial court? and, (2) If allowed to proceed in forma pauperis, is Campbell entitled to have the record of proceeding, or a portion thereof, prepared at public expense?
I. Denial of Campbell's Motion to Proceed as a Poor Person
Criterion Group and its co-defendants argue that there exists in Indiana no legal authority vesting in our courts the power to permit the appeal of a civil action in forma pauperis. Campbell disputes this assertion but cites no decision of this Court, statute or rule of procedure which expressly rebuts it. The decision of the Court of Appeals in this case contains an excellent history of the right to appeal and Indiana's accommodation of indigents. 588 N.E.2d at 513-516. We incorporate that history herein. Ind. Appellate Rule 11(B)(3). Because of the importance of the question to indigent litigants and, consequently, to the bench and bar, we treat the issue more fully here.
Our analysis will proceed along three lines: applicable statutes; the common law power of courts; and constitutional and procedural authority.
A. Is There Statutory Authority for Pauper Appeals?
Campbell posits that Ind. Code Ann. § 34-1-1-3 (West 1983) provides authority for civil appeals in forma pauperis.[1] This section of our code has its origin in a 1495 act of the British Parliament which provided, in part, that every poor person with a cause of action might seek a writ, writs original and writs of subpoena, according to the nature of their cause, "paying nothing ... for the seal ..., nor to any other *153 person for the writing of the same writ or writs." 11 Henry 7, ch. 12. The statute also directed courts to "appoint all other officers requisite and necessary to be had for the speed of the said suit... which shall do their duties without any reward." Id. This provision was copied early on by pioneer Hoosier legislators eager to establish for our state a respected and humane system of justice.[2] Their intention in adopting this statute, they wrote, was to ensure "that impartial justice shall be administered to all citizens as well to the poor as to the rich."[3] Though this early language was occasionally amended, its thrust remained intact until the 1852 recodification and revision of the civil code. 2 Ind. Rev.Stat. 1852, Part II, ch. 1, art. 2 § XV (p. 30). Thereafter, suits in forma pauperis suits were regulated by section XV of the reorganized civil code, which provided:
[A]ny poor person, not having sufficient means to prosecute or defend an action, may apply to the court in which the action is intended to be brought, or is pending, for leave to prosecute or defend, as a poor person. The court if satisfied that such person has not sufficient means to prosecute or defend the action, shall admit the applicant to prosecute or defend as a poor person, and shall assign him an attorney to defend or prosecute the cause, and all other officers requisite for the prosecution or defence [sic], who shall do their duty therein without taking any fee or reward therefor from such poor person.
This language is now substantially embodied in section 34-1-1-3. Whether the original British statute, or its many American successors, authorized appeals in forma pauperis has been a matter of much dispute.[4] The crux of the debate is whether an error upon which a writ would lie is an "action" as contemplated by the statute. A number of prominent commentators, including Lord Coke, urged upon courts a distinction between writs and actions. And, as nice as it is, it was on this distinction that the federal in forma pauperis statute, which expressly permitted the plaintiff to "prosecute to conclusion" his action, was found not to contemplate pauper appeals. What is meant by "conclusion," the U.S. Supreme Court said, "is the termination of the suit or action in the court where it is commenced." Bradford v. Southern Ry., 195 U.S. 243, 248, 25 S. Ct. 55, 57, 49 L. Ed. 178 (1904).[5]
In arriving at its decision, the Supreme Court cited approvingly the opinion in Bristol v. United States, 129 F. 87, 88 (7th Cir.1904), where the Seventh Circuit said: "Surely an erroneous ruling by the trial court cannot be held to furnish a `cause of action,' as that phrase is commonly understood." Likewise, the Supreme Court of New York, commenting on a statute similar to ours, earlier opined that "no book holds the ... words cause of action to be identical with a writ of error or cause of a writ of error." Moore v. Cooley & Blackman, 2 Hill 412, 413 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1842).
Nonetheless, some states with statutes like ours did allow civil pauper appeals early on. In Philips v. Rudle & Carmicheal, 1 Yerger 121 (Tenn. 1826), a Tennessee court rejected the contention that their pauper statute (which the court characterized as co-extensive with 11 Henry 7, ch. *154 12) applied only to plaintiffs suing out writs at the commencement of a suit. Instead, the court said, the act extended to the suing out of writs of error, or obtaining appeals in the nature of writs of error. See also Wilson v. Melcroft Coal Co., 226 Ky. 744, 11 S.W.2d 932 (1928). These opinions appear to be based on what might loosely be termed public policy grounds.
For our part, we observe that at its inception, the statute 11 Henry 7, ch. 12 had application only in the common law courts, Daniell, ante at 35, where a system of writs formed the sole method of review. 2 Pollock and Maitland, History of English Law 664-66 (1968 Reissue) (2d ed.). This system had its origin in the writ of false judgment by which a disappointed litigant could accuse a judge of rendering a corrupt judgment. Id. at 666.[6] A debate would then occur in king's court, not between the litigants but between the complainant and the trial court. Id. at 667.
Originally, judges of the king's courts could not themselves be accused of false judgment. Id. at 668. Seeking to bridge this gap, early common law lawyers formulated what came to be known as the writ of error. The key to the writ was its fiction that one might complain against a judgment without directly accusing the royal judge who had rendered it. Id. The object of the proceeding was not the issue between the parties, rather it constituted a trial of the final judgment at law which had been rendered by the court below. 4 C.J.S. Appeal and Error § 12 (1957). Consequently, the suing out of a writ of error was generally held to signal the commencement of a new suit, albeit one which did not constitute an action. Id. at § 11(c).
In Indiana, the legislature has substituted the appeal for the writ of error. Pittsburgh, C.C. & St.L.R.R. v. Hoffman (1928), 200 Ind. 178, 162 N.E. 403. The appeal was unknown to common law courts, City of Indianapolis v. Hawkins (1913), 180 Ind. 382, 103 N.E. 10, but is of Roman origin and was introduced to our jurisprudence through the civil law-based equity, ecclesiastical and admiralty courts. Edson R. Sunderland, Problems of Appellate Procedure, 3 Notre Dame Law. 50, 50 (1927); 4 C.J.S. Appeal and Error § 18a (1957). An appeal is not the commencement of a new suit, like a writ of error, but is a step in the original cause. Id. at § 20b.[7] This helps explain why the equity, ecclesiastical and admiralty courts considered the prosecution of a suit in forma pauperis to include the taking of an appeal[8] even while common law courts debated whether 11 Henry 7, ch. 12 permitted *155 the suing out of a writ of error in forma pauperis.
Today, of course, we need not decide whether Ind. Code § 34-1-1-3 extends to writs of error. Instead, we begin by acknowledging that our contemporary judicial system springs from a fusion of law and equity. Our legislators elected to cap this hybrid process with equity's appeal and not the common law's writ of error and that was within their prerogative. Pittsburgh, C.C. & St.L.R.R., 200 Ind. at 194, 162 N.E. 403. As a result, today in all cases, whether legal or equitable by nature, an appeal constitutes nothing more than the continued prosecution of the original action. A fortiori, a statute which permits a court to admit an indigent to prosecute or defend an action conveys the power to permit an appellant to appeal in forma pauperis.
We are fortified in this belief by the words we delivered some 130 years ago in Falkenburgh v. Jones (1854), 5 Ind. 296, another case in which we were called upon to explicate § 34-1-1-3. There, we said
in arriving at our conclusions, we have felt constrained to give a liberal construction to our statutes in favor of the pauper, for we can scarcely conceive of a system of law so inhuman and cruel that would consign the destitute and friendless to conviction and infamy, without affording full and ample means for investigation... . [T]hat part of our constitution, which provides that "justice shall be administered freely, and without purchase, completely and without denial," would be an empty boast, and worse than mockery to the poor.
Id. at 299.
B. Do Indiana Courts Have Common Law Authority for Pauper Appeals?
Indiana Code Ann. § 1-1-2-1 (West 1981) stipulates that, with some exceptions not relevant here, "[t]he common law of England, and statutes of the British Parliament made in aid thereof" shall be among the bodies of law which govern our state. See generally Ketelsen v. Stilz (1915) 184 Ind. 702, 704-09, 111 N.E. 423, 424-25. As a result, within permissible bounds, those powers wielded by common law judges are now vested in Indiana courts. Correspondingly, then, our ability to accommodate indigent litigants is also in part a function of the authority afforded common law judges similarly confronted with destitute suitors.
In Falkenburgh v. Jones, 5 Ind. at 297, we located pauper suits within the common law tradition, characterizing Indiana's in forma pauperis statute as being merely declaratory of an otherwise existing, traditional court power. Simplex dicta in other cases, however, describes the authority to grant dispensations to poor suitors as a creature of statute, first introduced with the adoption in 1495 of 11 Henry 7, c. 12, and theretofore unavailable to common law judges. Hoey v. McCarthy (1890), 124 Ind. 464, 24 N.E. 1038; see also Harrison v. Stanton (1896), 146 Ind. 366, 45 N.E. 582. A review of the authorities dictates this conflict be resolved in favor of Falkenburgh. Pollock and Maitland state that it was accepted practice as early as the reign of Henry III (1216-1273) to excuse the poor from the costs of writs. Pollock and Maitland, ante at 195. Case law predating the statute 11 Henry 7, c. 12 bears this out, see, e.g., Y.B. 15 Edw. Ch. 4, fol. 26b (1476), and in Brunt v. Wardle, 133 Eng.Rep. 1254, 1257 (1841), Chief Judge Tindal remarked "[a]fter all, is St. 11 H. 7, c. 12 any thing more than confirmatory of the common law?"[9]
In reflecting on this same question, the Supreme Court of California has stated that
the power of the English common-law courts to remit fees on petition in forma *156 pauperis did not have its origin in any statute, but was in fact exercised as one of the inherent powers of the courts themselves quite independently of statute... . Imperfect as was the ancient common-law system, ... it would strike one with surprise to be credibly informed that the common law courts of England shut their doors upon all poor suitors who could not pay fees, until Parliament came to their relief.
Martin v. Superior Court, 176 Cal. 289, 168 P. 135, 137 (1917). We believe this to be an accurate statement of the common law as it exists in Indiana, Hoey and Harrison notwithstanding.[10]
The gravamen of the case at bar, of course, is whether one may proceed on appeal in forma pauperis. As was observed above, our legislature engrafted review by appeal upon our common law scheme. Effectuating this mandate requires that we manage Indiana's common law, not as a frozen mold of ancient ideas, but as a dynamic force which keeps pace with progress. Brooks v. Robinson (1972), 259 Ind. 16, 284 N.E.2d 794. Moreover, the supplementation of the law with novel statutory arrangements or provisions does not necessarily preempt the common law system along side of which those provisions must operate. Picadilly v. Colvin (1988), Ind., 519 N.E.2d 1217. Finally, the traditions of equity have force in Indiana under Ind. Code Ann. § 1-1-2-1 just as do those of the common law proper. Union Trust Co. v. Curtis (1914), 182 Ind. 61, 105 N.E. 562.
As such, we believe the legislative conjoining of our common law nisi prius scheme with an appeals process worked a corresponding fusion of the common law power to allow in forma pauperis suits and the equitable tradition of pauper appeals. Correspondingly, the appeal in forma pauperis has now become rooted in the common law of our state. A number of our sister courts have reached similar conclusions. See, e.g., Silvestro v. Almonte, 484 A.2d 900 (R.I. 1984) (court has inherent power to waive costs of appeal by indigent defendant in any civil action); Melder v. Carreiro, 541 A.2d 1293 (Me. 1988) (same); O'Connor v. Matzdorff, 76 Wash.2d 589, 458 P.2d 154 (1969) (same).
This holding is not necessarily conclusive as to the question before us, however, for only that common law which is not repugnant to our Constitution and statutes has force in Indiana. Therefore, we must examine pertinent statutes to determine whether they disclose a legislative intent to deprive the appellate courts of the power to admit indigents in forma pauperis. Only the plainest declaration of legislative intent will be construed as an effort to deprive the courts of their common law authority. Grusin v. Stutz Motor Car Co. (1933), 206 Ind. 296, 187 N.E. 382.
We find no such express intent. The statute dealing with the payment of fees, Ind. Code Ann. § 33-15-5-2 (West Supp. 1991), directs the clerk of the Supreme Court to "tax and charge a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250) in each cause filed in either the supreme court or the court of appeals." See also Ind. Code Ann. 33-15-5-1 (West 1983) (accounting of fees).[11] These statutes are general in nature and have to do with the orderly collection and disposition of fees. None of them pertains to the subject of the payment of filing fees by paupers, and none expressly denies to the appellate courts the power to waive those fees. Therefore, we believe the appeal in forma pauperis to be both congenial to our common law tradition and unpreempted by current statutory enactment.
*157 C. Is There Constitutional Authority for Pauper Appeals?
The Indiana Constitution, Article VII, § 4 provides that "[t]he Supreme Court shall exercise appellate jurisdiction under such terms and conditions as specified by rules." The Court of Appeals exercises its jurisdiction "under such terms and conditions as the Supreme Court shall specify." Id. at § 6. The Judicial Study Commission's commentary accompanying the foregoing provisions states that appellate power should be governed by the "flexible mechanism" of rules so that its exercise may be adjusted to accord with the demands of the times. Judicial Study Commission, Article VII of the Constitution of Indiana, reprinted in REPORT OF THE JUDICIAL STUDY COMMISSION, at 5 (1970) [hereinafter JUDICIAL STUDY COMM'N REPORT].[12] The Legislature has acknowledged this prerogative. Ind. Code Ann. §§ 34-5-1-2 to -2-1 (West 1983 & Supp. 1992) and 33-2-1-3 (West 1983).
In exercising rule-making authority, our lodestar is the duty to ensure the orderly and expeditious conduct of court business as well as to secure the rights of the parties. Smith v. State ex rel. Hamill (1894), 137 Ind. 198, 36 N.E. 708. This imperative of regular and equal justice is undercut when meaningful access to general, procedural entitlements is conditioned upon a party's financial means. The people of Indiana legitimately expect more, and this Court has repeatedly acted to avoid such results.
In Webb v. Baird (1854), 6 Ind. 13, for example, we affirmed an order directing a county to meet the expense of an indigent defendant's representation despite the absence of particularly specific statutory authority. Id. at 20. We observed that our courts must of necessity have the power to make those orders needed to "accomplish the ends of public justice." See id. Faced again with this question in Gordon v. Board of Comm'rs (1876), 52 Ind. 322, we affirmed that the power to accommodate the indigent is "inherent in the court, to be exercised whenever the administration of justice judicially requires it to be done." See also Thompson v. Thompson (1972), 259 Ind. 266, 277, 286 N.E.2d 657, 663 (The Court "necessarily" has the authority to make in forma pauperis "exemption meaningful and to require that ... costs be paid from public funds when necessary to permit an indigent person access to our courts and the legal remedy they afford."); Hoey v. McCarthy, 124 Ind. at 466, 24 N.E. 1038 ("It is manifestly the duty of the courts to see to it that justice is not allowed to fail... .").[13]
We think it clear that, taken together, these cases stand for the proposition that this Court possesses the authority to ensure indigent suitors access to that process to which they would otherwise be due. It remains to be asked whether an appeal is part of the process to which Campbell was due. Indiana Code Ann. 34-1-47-1(a) (West Supp. 1992) provides: "Appeals may be taken from the circuit courts ... from *158 all final judgments." The right to an appeal is also mentioned in Article VII, § 6 of the Indiana Constitution.[14] These measures disclose that Hoosiers consider the right to an appeal one of the tools indispensable to meaningful participation in the judicial process.[15]
A ruling that this right is divested by the inability to pay a few dollars in courts costs would fall far short of what is expected in a state which has "[f]rom the date of its admission to the Union ... been a leader in providing indigent persons with ... fair treatment while in court." Thompson, 259 Ind. at 273, 286 N.E.2d at 661. Therefore, we find an appeal in this case to be an integral part of our process and thus one which we have the authority to guarantee Campbell through the exercise of our constitutional power.[16]
D. Procedural Default
Criterion Group next argues that even if the in forma pauperis appeal is permissible, the trial court's denial of Campbell's petition should nonetheless be upheld because Campbell lost by procedural default his right to proceed in that status. This argument relies on the proposition that plaintiff's Verified Motion was governed by, yet not in compliance with, Ind. Code Ann. § 33-19-3-2 (West Supp. 1992). Section 33-19-3-2 provides:
A person entitled to bring a civil action ... may do so without paying the required fees or other court costs upon filing in court, under oath and in writing, a statement:
(1) declaring that the person is unable to make the payments or to give security for them because of the person's indigency;
(2) declaring that the person believes that the person is entitled to the redress sought in the action; and
(3) setting forth briefly the nature of the action.
Petitioner's argument is without merit. Section 33-19-1-1 (West Supp. 1992) makes plain that the provisions of Article 19 govern only those proceedings conducted in circuit, superior, county, probate, municipal and city and town courts. That this is the case is reinforced by a review of the original language of § 33-19-3-2 which, as adopted in 1949, read "[a]ny person entitled to institute any civil action or proceeding in the circuit, superior or probate courts, may, upon order of the court, commence any such action or proceeding without being required to make the payment provided for". Act of Mar. 7, 1949, ch. 128, § 2, 1949 Ind. Acts 338. In view of these facts, it is clear to us that Ind. Code § 33-19-3-2 applies solely to the waiver of fees and costs assessed attendant to the resolution of matters within nisi prius courts and has no application to the litigant preparing to prosecute or defend an appeal.
Moreover, we hold that litigants seeking to proceed on appeal in forma pauperis need only convince the court of their indigency in order to have their application *159 granted. Appellee would have us go farther, urging that we augment this standard with a requirement that applicants make a showing as to the objective merit, or at least lack of frivolousness, of their case on appeal. We are unpersuaded, however, that the incidence of fraud by indigent appellants will be high or that trial courts ought be placed in the awkward position of having to make such determinations. Therefore, we decline petitioner's invitation to require anything more than a showing of indigency.[17]
We emphasize, however, that each litigant wishing to proceed on appeal in forma pauperis must make this showing. This includes those permitted to proceed at trial under § 33-19-3-2, who must reapply in order to retain their pauper status on appeal.[18] As to this point, we reiterate our holding in Meeker v. State (1979), 182 Ind. App. 292, 302 & n. 5, 395 N.E.2d 301, 307 & n. 5, that the standard governing a finding of indigency is closely related to the purpose for which the status is sought. See also Moore v. State (1980), 273 Ind. 3, 7, 401 N.E.2d 676, 678 (Consideration of pauper application should be commensurate with the right at stake.).
We are unable to say that a finding of indigency under § 33-19-3-2 necessitates permitting an applicant to proceed on appeal in forma pauperis, the right at stake under the former being more deeply established than that of the latter. The determinations are related, but independent, and are to be left to the discretion of the courts for review under the procedures outlined in Offutt v. Sheehan (1976), 168 Ind. App. 491, 344 N.E.2d 92, which we now adopt.[19]See also Campbell, 588 N.E.2d 513 at n. 3.
E. Conclusion
Thirty years ago this state was favored by Justice Stewart's majority opinion in Lane v. Brown: "In the administration of its criminal law, Indiana seems to have long pursued a conspicuously enlightened policy in the quest for equal justice to the destitute." 372 U.S. 477, 478, 83 S. Ct. 768, 769, 9 L. Ed. 2d 892 (1963). Judge Baker, writing for the Court of Appeals, correctly gauged this spirit when he wrote: "Arbitrary economic discrimination in the halls of justice is wrong." Campbell, 588 N.E.2d at 518. In light of this, and the admixture of statute, common law power, and constitutional obligation described above, we hold that Indiana courts have authority to make those orders which will ensure that a party is not denied, by reason of indigency, access to that appellate process which the law would otherwise afford.
Thus, if Campbell possessed the requisite level of indigency, he was entitled to have his in forma pauperis application granted. Indigency determinations present a subject for the sound discretion of the trial court, Moore, 273 Ind. at 7, 401 N.E.2d at 678, and a very clear case of abuse must be shown before this discretionary power can be interfered with. Hoey v. McCarthy, 124 Ind. at 465-66, 24 N.E. at 1038. A search of the record in this case, however, presents no valid ground upon which the *160 Verified Motion could have been denied. Campbell is, by any standard, indigent. He is unemployed due to physical disability, has no bank account, owns no real estate, and relies on government assistance. The denial of his Verified Motion, therefore, constituted an abuse of discretion by the trial court.
II. What Is the Entitlement of an Indigent on Appeal?
Campbell next asks us to find that, as a matter of law, a pauper civil appellant is entitled to have the record of proceedings, including a transcript of the evidence, prepared at public expense. In reviewing the matter we apply the standard articulated above, namely, whether failure to provide a pauper appellant with a record of the proceedings gratis is tantamount to denying the party, by reason of indigency, access to that process to which the party would otherwise have claim.
The Rules of Appellate Procedure require appellants to provide reviewing courts with a record of the proceedings sufficient to disclose the issues asserted on appeal. Ind.Appellate Rules 3 & 7.1; Moore v. State (1981), Ind. App., 426 N.E.2d 86. Failure to provide this record is fatal to an appeal, depriving the reviewing court of jurisdiction. See, e.g. Hepp v. Hammer (1982), Ind. App., 439 N.E.2d 735. Generally, a transcript of the evidence and proceedings at trial must be included in the record for it to be deemed sufficient. See App.R. 7.2(A). Although not fatal to the appeal, Quinn v. State (1972), 258 Ind. 399, 281 N.E.2d 478, failure to include a transcript works a waiver of any specifications of error which depend upon the evidence. Registration & Management Corp. v. City of Hammond (1972), 151 Ind. App. 471, 280 N.E.2d 327.
Our experience tends to confirm the Court of Appeals' assertion that the expense of preparing transcriptions often runs in the hundreds or thousands of dollars, thereby exceeding even the appellate filing fee. Clearly, costs of this magnitude would be prohibitive to most indigent appellants. As such, we agree that the failure to accommodate paupers in this regard would be tantamount to denying them, by reason of their indigency, access to process upon which they would otherwise have claim. This finding does not dictate, however, the conclusion that indigent civil appellants are entitled to have a complete record of the proceedings, including a transcription, prepared for them at public expense.
We think our appellate rules afford a narrowly tailored solution. Appellate Rule 7.2(A)(3)(c) provides a mechanism for presenting a record to an appellate court in the event that "no report of all or part of the evidence or proceedings at the hearing or trial was or is being made, or if a transcript is unavailable." In such cases, a party may prepare a statement of the evidence of proceedings from the best available means, including his recollection. Id. The trial court has the duty to approve and settle such statements and once it has done so, it becomes a part of the record. Id.; Herrera v. Collection Serv. (1982), Ind. App., 435 N.E.2d 88, 90. We agree with amicus curiae Marion County, Indiana, that this mechanism should also be made available to indigent appellants seeking to perfect their appeals.
We have typically relied on Rule 7.2(A)(3)(c) when a transcription of the evidence is unavailable due to equipment failure or the destruction of records. See, e.g., Wilburn v. State (1986), Ind. App., 499 N.E.2d 1173, 1175 (defective audio tape). We think that physical unavailability of transcript need not be the sole fact which will trigger the rule. Rather, we hold that a transcript is also unavailable for purposes of App.R. 7.2(A)(3)(c) when an indigent is unable to bear the costs of its preparation. Accord State ex rel. Motley v. Capers, 23 Ohio St. 3d 56, 491 N.E.2d 311 (1986).
Granting an application to proceed in forma pauperis does entitle the pauper to special accommodation with respect to creation of the record. As far as transcription of the evidence is concerned, that accommodation should center on the utilization of Appellate Rule 7.2(A)(3)(c). Agreed statements, *161 as provided for in Appellate Rule 7.3, may also be an acceptable alternative. We believe that resort to one of these two mechanisms will enable most appellants to perfect their appeals. Moreover, we believe these mechanisms strike the proper balance between our obligation to protect the procedural entitlements of indigent suitors and the legitimate fiscal needs of our counties. When one of these methods proves inadequate in a particular case, trial courts may authorize additional accommodations, including transcripts, to assure indigents the right of appeal.
Order
We direct that Campbell be admitted to appeal in forma pauperis. Campbell, however, failed to demonstrate that his appeal could not have been perfected through the preparation of a statement of the evidence and proceedings as contemplated by Rule 7.2. Therefore, we affirm the trial court's refusal to order a transcription of the evidence at public expense.
DeBRULER, GIVAN, DICKSON and KRAHULIK, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Campbell asserts that this section also applies to criminal proceedings, but this Court has usually regarded this statute as applying only to civil appeals. See, e.g., State ex rel. Morris v. Wallace (1872), 41 Ind. 445. The Criminal Code contains a comprehensive scheme providing for indigent criminal defendants. See Ind. Code Ann. §§ 35-33-7-5 to 7-6 (West 1986) (assignment of counsel); §§ 35-38-1-18 (West Supp. 1992) & 35-38-3-2(b)(3) (West 1986) (fines and costs). See also Ind. Code Ann. § 33-1-4-1 (West Supp. 1992) (transcript); XX-X-XX-X et seq. (West 1986 & Supp. 1992) (legal counsel); XX-XX-X-X (West Supp. 1992) (costs).
[2]  Although the Indiana statute generally paralleled its British antecedent, note that Indiana borrowed from equity the practice of permitting defendants, as well as plaintiffs, to proceed as paupers. Edmund Daniell, Pleading and Practice of the High Court of Chancery 35 (3rd Amer. ed. 1865); George A. Bicknell, Indiana Civil Practice 501 (1864).
[3]  Reprinted in 20 Indiana Historical Collections, Laws of Indiana Territory, 1809-1816, at 303-305 (Louis B. Ewbank & Dorothy L. Riker eds., 1934). The preface to the original British statute set out that "the king, our sovereign lord, of his most gracious disposition, willeth and intendeth indifferent justice to be held and ministered according to his common laws to all his true subjects, as well to the poor as rich." 11 Henry 7, ch. 12.
[4]  For a review of this debate as it unfolded in British courts, see generally Drennan v. Andrew (1866) L.R.-Ch. 300, 301-02 n. 7.
[5]  Six years after the Bradford ruling, Congress amended the federal in forma pauperis statute to provide expressly for appeals. 36 Stat 866, ch. 435 (1909-11) (now codified as amended at 28 U.S.C. § 1915 (1988)); Kinney v. Plymouth Rock Squab Co., 236 U.S. 43, 35 S. Ct. 236, 59 L. Ed. 457 (1915).
[6]  The logic here ran somewhat along the lines that the judgment constituted an actionable libel of the litigant.
[7]  See also L.L. Bomberger, Comments on the Report of the Committee on Jurisprudence and Law Reform, 17 Ind.L.J. 417, 418 (1942) ("[n]o modern authority treats an appeal as a separate law suit. It is nothing more or less than an additional step in the original case.
... .
Roscoe Pound, in his very late work entitled `Appellate Procedure in Civil Cases,' states the whole case in this language: `A case goes up on appeal and the parties go with it.'"
[8]  The Anglo-American appellate system has its origin in the graduated hierarchy of the ecclesiastical courts. Pollock and Maitland, ante at 664. Maguire argues that these courts had worked out an in forma pauperis procedure not later than the end of the thirteenth century, John MacArthur Maguire, Poverty and Civil Litigation, 36 Harv.L.Rev. 361, 365 (1923), and it was established in ecclesiastical procedure that a person might take their appeal in forma pauperis. 2 Phillimore, The Ecclesiastical Law 957 (2nd ed. 1895); Grindall v. Grindall, 4 Hagg. Ecc.Rpts. 5 (1831).
The ecclesiastical appellate model was adopted for use in the emerging equity courts. Accordingly, in Drennan v. Andrew, (1866) L.R.-Ch. 300 (1866), the court observed that, although there was some conflict among the precedents, where a common order to sue in forma pauperis had been obtained at any time during the suit, such order was sufficient to carry the pauper through all the stages of the suit including an appeal. See also Ferguson v. Dent, 15 F. 771, 773-4 (W.D.Tenn. 1883) (Equity, unlike common law, observes the more liberal in forma pauperis procedures of the civil law.). A similar parallel can be drawn with American admiralty practice where, prior to being superseded by federal statute, the suit in forma pauperis was governed by "more liberal" civil law rules. See Roy v. Louisville N.O. & T.R. Co., 34 F. 276, 277 (W.D.Tenn. 1888); Polydore v. Prince, 19 F. Cas. 950, 950 (D.Me. 1837) (No. 11,257).
[9]  See also 7 Encyclopedia of the Laws of England 192 ("This common law right [to sue in forma pauperis] was affirmed by 11 Statute Henry 7, c. xii."); Ferguson v. Dent, 15 F. at 773; Maguire, supra, at 365-66, and cases cited therein ("Judges and commentators intimate that until the statutes requiring award of costs, common law courts had inherent power to entertain gratuitously the plaints of the needy."); Note, Proceedings In Forma Pauperis, 31 Harv.L.Rev. 485, 485 (1917).
[10]  By statute, Indiana courts are not limited to referring solely to the common law unmodified by statute (lex non scripta) but instead are also authorized to consult those acts of the British Parliament "made in aid thereof" prior to 1607. Ind. Code Ann. § 1-1-2-1. Having found that the suit in forma pauperis was known to the common law, it follows that 11 Henry 7, c. 12 is a statute made "in aid thereof" as contemplated by the statute. Id.
[11]  The filing fee prescribed by § 33-15-5-3 appears to be the only fee imposed by the state upon those prosecuting an appeal. All other charges were repealed by Pub.L. No. 286-1989, 1989 Ind. Acts 1995.
[12]  Our law regarding which sources provide permissible indicia of the meaning of our constitution's provision is somewhat unsettled. See, e.g., Whitcomb v. Young (1972), 258 Ind. 127, 279 N.E.2d 566 (probative value of various common sources doubted). That question, however, is not implicated here, for the judicial article adopted in 1970 specified that "[t]he report of the Judicial Study Commission and the comments to the article contained therein may be consulted by the Court of Justice to determine the underlying reasons, purposes and policies of this article and may be used as a guide in its construction and application." 1969 Ind. Acts ch. 457 at schedule, 1969 Ind. Acts 1853. Nor do we think the repeal of this language in 1984 affects this fact. Pub.L. No. 383-1983, 1983 Ind. Acts 2213.
[13]  In Square D. Co. v. O'Neal (1947), 225 Ind. 49, 72 N.E.2d 654, we were asked to find that our rules superseded a statute requiring appellants to pay a $50 deposit which would later be paid over to the successful party to defray the costs of the appeal. 225 Ind. at 51, 72 N.E.2d at 655. We rejected the request, holding that "the requirement of the deposit of money ... is neither a matter of practice nor procedure but is a part of our substantive law." 225 Ind. at 52, 72 N.E.2d at 655. Without reviewing our holding there, we would note the distinction between excusing indigents from payment of fees and costs which are essentially state interests and excusing them from posting bond or paying a deposit  provisions designed to protect successful litigants. Greer v. Dillard, 213 Va. 477, 193 S.E.2d 668, 670-71 (1973).
[14]  Article VII, § 6 provides in pertinent part that the Court of Appeals "shall exercise appellate jurisdiction under such terms and conditions as the Supreme Court shall specify by rules which shall, however, provide in all cases an absolute right to one appeal." Although we first had occasion to take note of this clause in Soft Water Utilities v. LeFevre (1973), 261 Ind. 260, 269, 301 N.E.2d 745, 750, we have yet to confront it squarely. The Judicial Study Commission commentary indicates that the "one appeal" provision was to ensure that the rules allocating appellate jurisdiction would not "infringe the traditional right to one appeal." JUDICIAL STUDY COMM'N REPORT, at 7 (emphasis added). But see Campbell v. Criterion Group (1992), Ind. App., 588 N.E.2d 511, 515 n. 6 (discussing historical background of right to appeal). The clause appears not as an enumerated right in Article I but as a restriction on our rule-making authority in Article VII. Because neither of the parties fully briefed these matters, we decline in this case to demarcate the scope of § 6.
[15]  See generally Gary Stein, Note, Expanding the Due Process Rights of Litigants: Will Texaco Trickle Down?, 61 N.Y.U.L.Rev. 463, 494 (1986) (Some state procedural entitlements are adopted because they "reflect[] society's notion of what is fair and appropriate process.").
[16]  This holding was prefigured by our January 24, 1992, amendment of Appellate Rule 3(A) to the effect that the appellate filing fee "is not applicable in a case prosecuted as a pauper cause."
[17]  In making his argument, Petitioner relies on dicta in Hoey, 124 Ind. 464, 24 N.E. 1038. We pause to note that, with respect to costs and fees, hindsight calls into doubt our assertion there that "it can rarely happen that any one with a good claim will be deprived of his legal right" since "[t]here is probably no profession where benefactions to the poor, in the way of ... material respects, exceed those of the legal profession." Id. at 466, 24 N.E. 1038. Nonetheless, we are not, by way of this holding, shrinking from our "duty not to encourage unnecessary and fruitless litigation," id., and we note that Ind. Code Ann. § 34-1-1-4 (West 1983), permits a court, in its discretion, to vacate an order admitting a party to proceed on appeal in forma pauperis.
[18]  Campbell did not apply for indigent status when he initiated his lawsuit. He seeks it for purposes of appeal only.
[19]  Trial courts have the authority and the duty to rule on motions to proceed on appeal in forma pauperis, at least where a statement of the evidence or proceedings is sought. See infra. Nonetheless, we understand Offutt as recognizing that it is solely within the province of the appellate courts to waive appellate fees and costs. A trial court's determination of indigency is, however, customarily considered by appellate courts to be highly probative.

=== CASE 9737665 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:49.824437+00 ===

Gerrard, J.
INTRODUCTION
John Dixon was convicted pursuant to a jury verdict in the district court of attempted first degree murder, use of a deadly weapon to commit a felony, and attempted theft by unlawful taking of property with a value in excess of $1,500. The district court thereafter sentenced Dixon to a combined sentence of not less than 49 nor more than 62 years’ imprisonment. Dixon timely appealed. The primary issue in this appeal is whether the evidence adduced at trial was sufficient to entitle Dixon to a jury instruction on attempted second degree murder. Based on our holding in State v. Al-Zubaidy, 253 Neb. 357, 570 N.W.2d 713 (1997), we answer this question in the affirmative, and for the reasons stated herein, we affirm Dixon’s conviction for attempted theft by unlawful taking, reverse Dixon’s convictions for attempted first degree murder and use of a deadly weapon to commit a felony, and remand this cause for a new trial on those two counts.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
The evidence viewed in a light most favorable to the State reveals that on the evening of February 7, 1995, Chad Vasa, Ramon Morales, and Dixon met at an apartment in Omaha, Nebraska. When Vasa first met Morales, Morales was carrying a duffelbag containing a sawed-off shotgun and some shells for the shotgun. Dixon arrived after Morales. Shortly thereafter, Vasa, Morales, and Dixon (hereinafter collectively the trio) decided to leave the apartment and abandon the duffelbag containing the shotgun at the house of a mutual acquaintance; the trio then drove to western Omaha in search of a car to steal.
The initial attempt to steal a car went awry, as Morales and Dixon were chased away from the car by someone appearing to *979have a weapon. The trio decided that before they attempted to steal another car, they would retrieve the shotgun and shells. After doing so, they set out toward West Point, Nebraska. The trio stopped in Decatur, Nebraska, where they stole another car, a Chevrolet Celebrity, and then again in Oakland, Nebraska, where Dixon used the shotgun to shoot the windows out of a parked car, before they finally arrived in West Point.
Upon arriving in West Point early on the morning of February 8,1995, the trio decided to attempt to steal yet another car. They parked the Chevrolet Celebrity in an alley adjacent to the garage and behind the home of Bill and Cheryl Weiler. Vasa testified that he remained in the car while Morales and Dixon got out to steal the Weilers’ 1985 Buick Electra Park Avenue automobile, which was parked next to the garage. According to Vasa, Morales let himself into the car while Dixon stood at the comer of the Weilers’ garage, holding the shotgun.
Cheryl Weiler awoke when her dog began to bark at approximately 6:15 a.m. She went to the kitchen and attempted to quiet her dog by tapping on the window when she noticed that the interior light of the Park Avenue was on and that someone was behind the steering wheel. Cheryl Weiler also noticed that there was another person standing outside of her car between the car and the garage. She alerted her husband, Bill Weiler, and dialed the 911 emergency dispatch service on the telephone.
Bill Weiler then went to the door and ordered the intruders to get out of the car. There was a brief hesitation and a muffled response before one of the intruders asked, “Now?”; Bill Weiler then shouted, “Yeah, now.” At this point, a shot was fired in Bill Weiler’s direction, striking him with at least 180 shotgun pellets, causing him severe injuries. The remainder of the shotgun pellets struck the area of the Weilers’ home near the doorway from which Bill Weiler had emerged. Before authorities arrived at the Weilers’ home, the trio had escaped and were headed back toward Omaha.
Hours after the shooting, Vasa was arrested near Tekamah, Nebraska, for possessing a stolen vehicle. After his arrest, Vasa met with police several times and was questioned regarding the February 8, 1995, shooting in West Point. On February 21, Vasa gave a statement to Investigators Ron Hilliges and Doug Johnson *980of the Nebraska State Patrol, in which Vasa indicated that he and Dixon were involved in the shooting. Vasa asserted that he was not the shooter and voluntarily took two polygraph examinations in an attempt to exonerate himself, failing both of them.
Hilliges and Johnson informed Vasa of the polygraph results and told Vasa that they did not believe his story. Still maintaining his innocence, Vasa offered to make a tape-recorded telephone call to Dixon, during which Vasa believed Dixon would admit to the shooting. Johnson and Hilliges explained that Vasa was to ask questions in a manner that would not allow Dixon to merely give “yes” or “no” answers and then allowed Vasa to place the call. During the ensuing telephone conversation, Vasa asked Dixon, “Wasn’t you just supposed to scare him though, man?” Dixon replied, “Yeah.” Later in the conversation, Vasa asked Dixon, “How come you shot him?” Dixon responded, “I don’t know, dude. ... I just felt like blasting on him.” Dixon concluded their discussion by stating, “That’s the point of having a gun.” Hilliges and Johnson were present when the conversation between Vasa and Dixon was recorded.
Johnson and Hilliges later discovered that portions of the tape-recorded conversation were indiscernible because the voices sounded “like chipmunks.” The investigators then approached Brian Kreikemeier, an experienced sound technician, to “clean up” the recording and make the conversation more intelligible. Kreikemeier “cleaned up” the recording by slowing the tape speed down, adjusting the frequency of the recorded sounds through an equalizer, and recording the slower version onto another tape. Kreikemeier testified at trial that no changes could have been made to the original tape because it was received by him in such a condition that it could not be recorded over.
Dixon was ultimately brought to trial on charges of attempted first degree murder, use of a deadly weapon in the commission of a felony, and attempted theft by unlawful taking. At trial, the State sought to introduce both the partially unintelligible tape recording (exhibit 4) and the “cleaned-up” version (exhibit 3), and both were admitted into evidence over Dixon’s objections. Exhibit 3 was played in court and was then explained and corroborated by Vasa’s testimony. Vasa, Johnson, and Hilliges all *981testified that exhibit 3 was an accurate depiction of the conversation between Dixon and Vasa. Dixon’s attorney then attempted to cross-examine Vasa about the failed polygraph examinations, but the State objected, and the objection was sustained.
Dixon also objected to the introduction of three photographs the State sought to admit into evidence. Two of these photographs (exhibits 22 and 23) depict Bill Weiler’s injuries, and the third photograph (exhibit 44) illustrates the field of vision of Debra Harstick, a neighbor of the Weilers who testified at trial. Dixon argued that exhibits 22 and 23 were cumulative and would inflame the jury and that exhibit 44 should not be admitted because it was taken during a season different from that in which Bill Weiler was shot and depicts automobiles not present on the day of the shooting. The photographs were admitted into evidence over Dixon’s objection.
At the conclusion of the State’s case, Dixon made a motion to dismiss all three counts of the information, which motion was recharacterized by the court as a motion for a directed verdict and then overruled. Prior to the submission of the case to the jury, the district court instructed the jury on attempted murder in the first degree. Dixon did not request a jury instruction on attempted murder in the second degree, and no such instruction was given. After the case was submitted to the jury but before a verdict had been reached, the district court acceded to the jury’s request for a tape player, “presumably to listen to Exhibit 3.” Thereafter, the jury returned verdicts of guilty on all three counts.
Dixon made a motion for a new trial, which was overruled upon sentencing. After a presentence investigation, the district court sentenced Dixon to not less than 40 nor more than 50 years’ imprisonment for the crime of attempted first degree murder, not less than 8 nor more than 10 years’ imprisonment for the crime of using a firearm to commit a felony, and not less than 1 nor more than 2 years’ imprisonment for the crime of attempted theft by unlawful taking. The district court ordered the sentences to be served consecutively. Dixon timely appealed.
ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
Dixon contends, summarized and restated, that the district court erred in (1) failing to instruct the jury on the lesser-*982included offense of attempted second degree murder; (2) admitting various audiotapes, photographs, and testimony into evidence; (3) allowing the jury to take an electronic tape recorder into their deliberations; (4) not allowing Dixon to cross-examine Vasa regarding the results of Vasa’s polygraph examinations; (5) giving a jury instruction which improperly minimized the burden of proof on the element of intent; (6) declining to give a jury instruction tendered by Dixon on the inherent problems with verbal communications; (7) conducting an ex parte communication with the jury; (8) overruling Dixon’s motions for a directed verdict and for a new trial; (9) finding sufficient evidence to uphold Dixon’s convictions; and (10) imposing excessive sentences.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
Whether jury instructions given by a trial court are correct is a question of law. State v. Bjorklund, 258 Neb. 432, 604 N.W.2d 169 (2000). In an appeal based on a claim of erroneous jury instructions, the appellant has the burden to show that the questioned instructions were prejudicial or otherwise adversely affected a substantial right of the appellant. State v. Brown, 258 Neb. 346, 603 N.W.2d 456 (1999).
ANALYSIS
Duty to Instruct Jury on Lesser-Included Offense
Dixon first contends that the district court erred by failing to instruct the jury that it could find him guilty of the lesser-included offense of attempted second degree murder. We must therefore determine whether the district court was correct in instructing the jury on only attempted first degree murder or whether the evidence also warrants an instruction on the lesser-included offense of attempted second degree murder, notwithstanding Dixon’s failure to request such an instruction.
It is the duty of a trial judge to instruct the jury on the pertinent law of the case, whether requested to do so or not, and an instruction or instructions which by the omission of certain elements have the effect of withdrawing from the jury an essential issue or element in the case are prejudicially erroneous. State v. Brown, supra. Jury instructions must be read as a whole, *983and if they fairly present the law so that the jury could not be misled, there is not prejudicial error. Id.
This court has delineated a two-step procedure for trial courts to follow when determining whether to instruct the jury on a lesser-included offense. See State v. Williams, 243 Neb. 959, 503 N.W.2d 561 (1993). In State v. Williams, 243 Neb. at 965, 503 N.W.2d at 566, we stated:
[A] court must instruct on a lesser-included offense if (1) the elements of the lesser offense ... are such that one cannot commit the greater offense without simultaneously committing the lesser offense and (2) the evidence produces a rational basis for acquitting the defendant of the greater offense and convicting the defendant of the lesser offense.
As charged in the present case, the statutory elements of attempted first degree murder are these: a substantial step in a course of conduct intended to culminate in the commission of a purposeful, malicious, premeditated killing of another person. Neb. Rev. Stat. §§ 28-201 and 28-303 (Reissue 1995). The statutory elements of attempted second degree murder are these: a substantial step in a course of conduct intended to culminate in the commission of an intentional killing of another person. § 28-201 and Neb. Rev. Stat. § 28-304 (Reissue 1995).
Applying the Williams test, we held in State v. Al-Zubaidy, 253 Neb. 357, 570 N.W.2d 713 (1997), that attempted second degree murder is a lesser-included offense of attempted first degree murder. Having satisfied the initial inquiry of the Williams test, we now address the crucial question in this appeal as to whether the evidence in the instant case produces a rational basis for acquitting Dixon of attempted first degree murder and convicting him of the lesser-included offense of attempted second degree murder.
State v. Al-Zubaidy, supra, is instructive. In State v. AlZubaidy, we determined that the evidence warranted an instruction on the lesser-included offense of attempted second degree murder. The sole evidence upon which we based our conclusion was the defendant’s statement that he did not intend to kill the victim upon entering her residence. We determined that the defendant’s statement made it possible for the jury to find that *984he went to the victim’s home with no premeditation to kill, which entitled the defendant to a jury instruction on attempted second degree murder. Because the district court did not give such an instruction, we reversed Al-Zubaidy’s conviction and remanded the cause for a new trial.
Similarly, the evidence in the instant case provides a rational basis upon which the jury could have acquitted Dixon of attempted first degree murder and convicted him of attempted second degree murder. Vasa’s testimony conveys that the trio retrieved the shotgun for the purposes of protection and intimidation after the first attempt to steal a car had gone awry. The trio did not know they would again be confronted by the owner of a car they were attempting to steal, but considered it prudent to have the shotgun in case they were. Further, Dixon maintained that he was “just supposed to scare” anyone who might discover them. Consistent therewith, after Bill Weiler shouted, Dixon shot just one time from over 70 feet away after a short verbal exchange.
There is no doubt that a jury could reasonably infer from the foregoing evidence that Dixon possessed the requisite premeditation to be convicted of attempted first degree murder. The evidence, however, is also such that a jury could reasonably have drawn contrary inferences and concluded that Dixon did not possess the requisite premeditation for attempted first degree murder. Where the evidence and circumstances of a crime are such that different inferences may properly be drawn therefrom as to the degrees, it becomes the duty of the court to submit the different degrees to the jury for them to draw the inferences, whether requested to do so or not. State v. Ellis, 208 Neb. 379, 303 N.W.2d 741 (1981). The failure of the district court in this case to instruct the jury on attempted second degree murder precluded the jury from considering the lesser-included offense of attempted second degree murder, thereby creating the situation in which the jury had to either convict Dixon of attempted first degree murder or acquit him when the evidence at least supported an instruction on the lesser-included offense.
There is ample evidence in the instant case from which the jury could have drawn inferences that would potentially have led to a conviction for either attempted first degree murder or *985attempted second degree murder, and the jury should have been allowed to consider the lesser-included offense of attempted second degree murder. See State v. Al-Zubaidy, 253 Neb. 357, 570 N.W.2d 713 (1997). Because the evidence adduced at Dixon’s trial warranted a jury instruction on attempted second degree murder, we conclude that the failure of the district court to so instruct constituted prejudicial error. It is the duty of the trial judge to instruct the jury on the pertinent law of the case, whether requested to do so or not. Id. Thus, Dixon’s convictions for attempted first degree murder and the related count of use of a deadly weapon to commit a felony must be reversed, and this cause is remanded for a new trial on those two counts.
We do note that Dixon assigned as error that there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction for attempted theft by unlawful taking. Dixon, however, did not support this assigned error with any argument; errors that are assigned but not argued will not be addressed by this court. See State v. Baue, 258 Neb. 968, 607 N.W.2d 191 (2000). Moreover, upon reviewing the record, we conclude that there is sufficient evidence beyond a reasonable doubt for a jury to convict Dixon of attempted theft by unlawful taking of property with a value in excess of $1,500.
Provision of Audiotape Player to Jury
Although the foregoing determinations resolve this appeal, we nonetheless consider one of the other issues that Dixon assigns as error because it is likely to recur as an issue during a retrial. An appellate court may, at its discretion, discuss issues unnecessary to the disposition of an appeal where those issues are likely to recur during further proceedings. Gestring v. Mary Lanning Memorial Hosp., ante p. 905, 613 N.W.2d 440 (2000).
Dixon asserts that the district court erred in admitting exhibits 3 and 4 of his recorded conversation with Vasa on February 21, 1995, because there was inadequate foundation to do so. Dixon also argues that there was insufficient foundation for exhibits 59 and 60, which are redacted copies of exhibits 3 and 4, respectively, that were submitted to the jury. Suffice it to say that if Dixon is retried and adequate foundation is elicited *986at that trial, tape recordings of relevant and material conversations may properly be admitted into evidence. See, State v. Pearson, 215 Neb. 339, 338 N.W.2d 445 (1983); State v. Loveless, 209 Neb. 583, 308 N.W.2d 842 (1981); State v. Myers, 190 Neb. 146, 206 N.W.2d 851 (1973). The tape recordings were critical items of evidence and are likely to be offered when Dixon is retried; we therefore proceed to address the procedure by which such exhibits should be presented to the jury if properly admitted into evidence.
Five minutes after the jury retired to deliberate in the instant case, the jury requested that the trial judge provide it with an audiotape playback machine. The trial judge, in open court outside of the presence of the jury, advised Dixon and counsel for both parties that “I’ve received a request from the jury for a recorder or player and speaker, which is presumably to listen to Exhibit 3.” We digress to note that the record reflects that exhibit 3 (later redacted and submitted to the jury as exhibit 59) was played in open court at trial and that immediately after it was played, Vasa testified again regarding portions of the conversation, including Dixon’s statement, “I just felt like blasting on [the victim].” While testifying at trial, Vasa was reading from a transcript of the very same conversation contained in exhibit 3. This procedure was allowed at trial because there were places on the tape recording where the conversational exchange was very quick and the conversation between Dixon and Vasa was difficult to understand when heard only once.
Dixon objected to the jury’s request for the audiotape playback machine; his objection was overruled, and the jury was provided a tape player and exhibits 59 and 60 for unsupervised use in the jury room. Dixon contends on appeal that by letting the jury hear and rehear exhibits 59 and 60, the court allowed the jury to place undue emphasis on a small portion of the evidence adduced at trial. The precise question to be answered in this appeal is whether the district court erred in the procedure it utilized before the court in allowing the jury to rehear portions of exhibits 59 and 60 during deliberations.
The general rule is that allowing a jury to rehear only portions of the evidence after they have commenced deliberations is not to be encouraged, but it is a matter within the discretion of the *987trial court. State v. Halsey, 232 Neb. 658, 441 N.W.2d 877 (1989). Although trial courts have been given latitude in deciding whether to allow a jury to reexamine exhibits such as audiotapes, we think that it would be instructive to review the principles that we utilize in reviewing whether such reexamination constitutes an abuse of discretion. The traditional common-law rule is that a trial court has “no discretion to submit depositions and other testimonial materials to the jury room for unsupervised review, even if properly admitted into evidence at trial.” (Emphasis supplied.) Chambers v. State, 726 P.2d 1269, 1275 (Wyo. 1986).
Thus, previously played portions of tape recordings, like testimony of an actual witness at trial, generally should not be reheard by jurors. See State v. Jacob, 253 Neb. 950, 574 N.W.2d 117 (1998). Jurors must rely upon their memory of what they heard the witness say, be it from a live witness or a tape recording. Id. The common-law rule is designed to curtail the principal danger involved in allowing the jury to rehear only a part of the evidence; that is, the jury may give undue emphasis to the part of the evidence which is reheard. State v. Halsey, supra.
We do not ordinarily stray from the common-law rule, i.e., a trial court should not allow unrestricted review of previously played portions of tape recordings, any more than a court would allow unrestricted rereading of the testimony of an actual witness at trial. State v. Jacob, supra. When a jury makes a request to rehear certain evidence, the common-law rule requires that a trial court discover the exact nature of the jury’s difficulty, isolate the precise testimony which can solve it, and weigh the probative value of the testimony against the danger of undue emphasis. If, after this careful exercise of discretion, the court decides to allow some repetition of the tape-recorded evidence for the jury, it can do so in open court in the presence of the parties or their counsel or under other strictly controlled procedures of which the parties have been notified. Chambers v. State, supra.
Accordingly, once a tape recording is properly admitted as testimonial evidence, such evidence should be marked as any other exhibit and included in the record for review in the event of an appeal. After being admitted, however, the exhibit should be played once in open court so that the jury can hear the tape *988in the same manner that it does other evidence. See, State v. Myers, 190 Neb. 146, 206 N.W.2d 851 (1973); 75B Am. Jur. 2d Trial § 1689 (1992 & Cum. Supp. 2000). It is only under circumstances where the jury makes a request to rehear certain evidence during deliberations that the trial court must proceed to weigh the probative value of the evidence against the danger of undue emphasis, in open court in the presence of both parties or their counsel, before determining whether portions of the evidence should be reheard by the jury.
Applying these established principles, we conclude that the district court erred in not conducting an examination into the reasons for the jury’s request to rehear portions of exhibit 59 or 60 and in not weighing the probative value of the requested evidence against the danger of undue emphasis before the court granted the jury’s request to rehear certain evidence. Moreover, the district court erred in submitting exhibits 59 and 60 to the jury for unsupervised and unrestricted review within the confines of the jury room, under any circumstances. In reaching these conclusions, we do not share the dissent’s view that the playing of Dixon’s tape-recorded statements and Vasa’s subsequent reading from a verbatim transcript of the tape recording at trial were akin to playing at trial a tape recording of an actual crime in progress. See, e.g., State v. Myers, supra. We express no opinion as to whether any portion of exhibits 59 or 60 should have been reheard by the jury because the record does not reflect the reasons for the jury’s request. This court, however, has observed on many other occasions that such a practice is “ ‘fraught with some danger to a fair trial, and ought to be indulged in with caution.’ ” State v. Halsey, 232 Neb. 658, 663, 441 N.W.2d 877, 881 (1989) (quoting Barton v. Shull, 70 Neb. 324, 97 N.W. 292 (1903)).
For the sake of completeness, we note that the evidence contained in exhibits 59 and 60 does not pertain to the attempted theft by unlawful taking conviction, and our affirmance of that count remains intact. We do not consider any other errors assigned by Dixon in this appeal.
CONCLUSION
We conclude, in accord with State v. Al-Zubaidy, 253 Neb. 357, 570 N.W.2d 713 (1997), that Dixon was entitled to a jury *989instruction on the lesser-included offense of attempted second degree murder and that the failure of the district court to so instruct constituted prejudicial error. Dixon’s assignment of error relating to the conviction for attempted theft by unlawful taking of property is without merit. Accordingly, we affirm Dixon’s conviction for attempted theft by unlawful taking, reverse Dixon’s conviction for attempted first degree murder and the related conviction for use of a deadly weapon to commit a felony, and remand this cause to the district court for a new trial on those two counts.
Affirmed in part, and in part reversed AND REMANDED FOR A NEW TRIAL.

=== CASE 9737666 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:49.832255+00 ===

Stephan, J.,
concurring in part, and in part dissenting.
I agree with and concur in that portion of the majority opinion which holds that Dixon’s convictions for attempted first degree murder and the related count of use of a deadly weapon to commit a felony should be reversed and the cause remanded for a new trial on those counts because the trial court erred in not instructing on the offense of attempted second degree murder. I also concur in the affirmance of Dixon’s conviction of attempted theft by unlawful taking of property with a value in excess of $1,500. However, I respectfully dissent from that portion of the majority opinion under the subheading “Provision of Audiotape Player to Jury.” I do so for two reasons.
First, I do not regard the issue as properly before us under accepted principles of appellate review. We generally adhere to the rule that an appellate court is not obligated to engage in an analysis which is not needed to adjudicate the case and controversy before it. In re Interest of Battiato, ante p. 829, 613 N.W.2d 12 (2000); Springer v. Bohling, ante p. 71, 607 N.W.2d 836 (2000). I acknowledge our discretionary power to depart from this rule in order to resolve issues which are unnecessary to the disposition of an appeal but are likely to recur during further proceedings. See Snyder v. Contemporary Obstetrics & Gyn., 258 Neb. 643, 605 N.W.2d 782 (2000). However, I disagree with the majority’s invocation of this power as the basis for discussing the issue of when an audiotape player may be provided to a jury for the purpose of listening to tape-recorded evidence. This issue cannot recur on retrial of this case unless the *990State offers sufficient foundation to establish the admissibility of the tape recordings. The issue of foundational sufficiency for this evidence in the first trial was assigned as error in this appeal but not discussed in the majority opinion. If it is unnecessary to reach the issue of whether the tapes are admissible, I cannot discern a reason for addressing the question of how they should be published to the jury. Even if we assume that on retrial the State will offer the tapes and that the district court will correctly determine that foundation is sufficient to establish admissibility, it is entirely speculative as to whether the jury on retrial will request playback equipment for the purpose of listening to the tape recordings during its deliberations. Thus, it seems to me that this cannot be accurately characterized as an issue likely to recur during further proceedings and that reaching it in this appeal amounts to issuing an advisory opinion, which is not our proper function. See US Ecology v. State, 258 Neb. 10, 601 N.W.2d 775 (1999).
Second, assuming for the sake of argument that the issue is properly before us, I disagree with its resolution on the merits. The majority cites Chambers v. State, 726 P.2d 1269, 1275 (Wyo. 1986), for the “traditional common law rule” that a trial court has “no discretion to submit depositions and other testimonial materials to the jury room for unsupervised review, even if properly admitted into evidence at trial.” However, the Chambers court also noted that a trial court “has broad discretion in deciding whether to submit non-testimonial exhibits, such as non-testimonial writings, audiotapes, or videotapes, to the jury during its deliberations.” (Emphasis in original.) Id. Although the majority apparently regards the tape-recorded conversations between Dixon and Vasa as testimonial in nature, I do not. To “testify” is “[t]o give evidence as a witness.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1485 (7th ed. 1999). Dixon certainly was not giving evidence as a witness during his taped telephone conversation with Vasa. Rather, he was engaging in what he probably believed to be a private conversation with a person who, unbeknown to him, had admitted his own involvement in the crimes for which Dixon was eventually charged and was cooperating with law enforcement authorities. Dixon’s statements to Vasa were certainly incriminating, but they were not testimonial in nature.
*991The majority cites State v. Jacob, 253 Neb. 950, 574 N.W.2d 117 (1998), in support of its statement that “previously played portions of tape recordings, like testimony of an actual witness at trial, generally should not be reheard by jurors.” In that case, the tape recording at issue was a taped statement given by a crime scene witness to police which the defendant had introduced and played in order to impeach the witness during his trial testimony. In State v. Halsey, 232 Neb. 658, 441 N.W.2d 877 (1989), also relied upon by the majority, we held that the trial court did not err in refusing to allow the jury to listen to tape-recorded testimony of certain trial witnesses during its deliberations because of the danger that undue emphasis would be placed upon that part of the evidence if reheard. Both Jacob and Halsey involved tape recordings of testimony, or matters utilized during testimony, of nonparty witnesses. I do not read these cases as supporting a proposition that a jury generally should not be permitted to rehear a properly admitted tape recording of nontestimonial incriminating statements made by a defendant in a criminal proceeding.
Assuming their admissibility, Dixon’s tape-recorded statements to Vasa were not testimonial in nature, but, rather, constituted substantive evidence of his guilt, much like a tape recording of a crime in progress. Most jurisdictions permit trial judges broad discretion in allowing the jury to have unlimited access to evidence of this nature after it has been properly received. See, e.g., U.S. v. Puerta Restrepo, 814 F.2d 1236 (7th Cir. 1987) (finding no error in permitting jury to have transcripts of tape-recorded conversations in which defendant made incriminating statements to police informant); State v. Castellanos, 132 Wash. 2d 94, 935 P.2d 1353 (1997) (finding no error in allowing jury unlimited access to audiotapes of a drug buy and a playback machine during deliberations); Pino v. State, 849 P.2d 716 (Wyo. 1993) (finding no error in allowing jury to have tape recording of drug transaction and playback machine during deliberations); State v. Halvorson, 346 N.W.2d 704 (N.D. 1984) (holding tape recordings of conversations between defendant, his mother, and law enforcement officers were properly received in evidence and submitted to jury with playback equipment); State v. Barbo, 339 N.W.2d 905 (Minn. 1983) (finding trial court *992did not err in permitting jury to have tapes and typewritten transcript of conversation between defendant and person cooperating with police during which defendant made incriminating statements).
If the tape recordings of Dixon’s telephone conversations with Vasa were properly received in evidence, an issue which neither the majority nor I decide, I would hold that the trial court had broad discretion in deciding whether to submit the tapes and playback equipment to the jury for unrestricted review during its deliberations, and I would conclude that it did not abuse its discretion in doing so.

=== CASE 9737667 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:53.067884+00 ===

(AFTER REMAND)
Taylor, J.
At issue is whether application of East Lansing’s sign code to Adams Outdoor Advertising’s rooftop signs effects a taking. The trial court and Court of Appeals concluded that the code resulted in a taking with respect to Adams’ rooftop signs. We reverse.
In 1975, East Lansing adopted its current sign code. As pertinent to this appeal, the code prohibited rooftop signs. Subsection 8.38(12). The code’s amortization provision required removal of nonconforming signs by May 1, 1987. Subsection 8.39(8).
Adams acquired Central Advertising in 1983. It renewed the leases associated with the off-premises rooftop signs at issue several times after the enactment of the 1975 sign code, most recently in 1993 and 1996.
Adams and other entities (who had nonconforming on-premises signs) sued East Lansing for relief from denial of their requests for variances from the sign code. The trial court granted plaintiffs’ motion for summary disposition on the basis that East Lansing lacked statutory authority for the code’s amortization provision. The Court of Appeals affirmed. Unpublished opinion per curiam, issued April 20, 1990 (Docket No. 110816). This Court reversed, holding that East Lansing has authority under the home rule *22act to regulate signs, including eliminating nonconforming signs through the use of an amortization provision. 439 Mich 209, 219; 483 NW2d 38 (1992) (Adams I). We remanded this matter to the trial court to determine whether application of the code to the signs at issue effected a taking.
On remand, the trial court concluded that application of the sign code to Adams’ rooftop signs and to certain of its freestanding signs effected a taking.1 The Court of Appeals affirmed regarding the rooftop signs, but reversed and remanded regarding the freestanding signs. 232 Mich App 587; 591 NW2d 404 (1998). This appeal relates only to the application of the sign code to the rooftop signs.
In Adams I, this Court concluded:
We are simply holding that the amortization provision of the East Lansing sign code is a police power ordinance, properly enacted under MCL 117.4i(5); MSA 5.2082(5), that enables cities the authority to regulate signs and billboards in the interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the community and to promote the aesthetic value of the city. [439 Mich 218, n 14.]
It is therefore established that the code is a legitimate exercise of East Lansing’s police power. The only question is whether this regulation goes so far as to result in a taking.2
*23US Const, Am V and Const 1963, art 10, § 2 prohibit the taking of private property for public use without just compensation. Drawing on United States Supreme Court precedent, this Court recently reiterated the appropriate analyses for determining whether a taking has occurred in K & K Construction, Inc v Dep’t of Natural Resources, 456 Mich 570; 575 NW2d 531 (1998). The K & K Court noted that land use regulations effect a taking in two general situations: when they do not substantially advance a legitimate state interest or when they deny an owner “economically viable use of his land.” Id. at 576. It then differentiated the second type of taking further at 576-577:
The second type of taking, where the regulation denies an owner of economically viable use of land, is further subdivided into two situations: (a) a “categorical” taking, where the owner is deprived of “all economically beneficial or productive use of land,” Lucas v South Carolina Coastal Council, 505 US 1003, 1015; 112 S Ct 2886; 120 L Ed 2d 798 (1992); or (b) a taking recognized on the basis of the application of the traditional “balancing test” established in Penn Central Transportation Co v New York City, 438 US 104; 98 S Ct 2646; 57 L Ed 2d 631 (1978).
It defined categorical takings at 577:
*24In the former situation, the categorical taking, a reviewing court need not apply a case-specific analysis, and the owner should automatically recover for a taking of his property. Lucas, supra at 1015. A person may recover for this type of taking in the case of a physical invasion of his property by the government (not at issue in this case), or where a regulation forces an owner to “sacrifice all economically beneficial uses [of his land] in the name of the common good . . . .” Id. at 1019 (emphasis in original).
Next, it explained the balancing test analysis at 577:
In the latter situation, the balancing test, a reviewing court must engage in an “ad hoc, factual inquir[y],” centering on three factors: (1) the character of the government’s action, (2) the economic effect of the regulation on the property, and (3) the extent by which the regulation has interfered with distinct, investment-backed expectations. Penn Central, 438 US 124.
However, before we apply these tests, there is a preliminary question: does the claimant possess the interest that he alleges is being taken by the regulation? Here, the Court of Appeals clarified that Adams’ theory at trial was that the sign code effected a taking of its real property interests in the rooftop leaseholds. 232 Mich App 596. As a lessee, Adams’ property interest rights are limited to the rights possessed by the lessors, i.e., the owners of the buildings who leased the two rooftop sites at issue to Adams.3 It is fundamental property law that a lessor can transfer no greater rights than he possesses. See, e.g., McMillan v Mich S & N I R R Co, 16 Mich 79 (1867). Here, the *25lessors never had an absolute right to display signs on the rooftops of their buildings. They had no right to prevent the imposition of regulations that represented reasonable exercises of the police power and that did not effect a taking.4 Thus, they could not convey to Adams an absolute right to display signs on the leased rooftops because they never possessed such a right in the first place. Accordingly, even before enactment of the sign code, the leases at issue did not include an absolute right to display signs on the rooftops. At most, the leases included a right to display signs on the rooftops subject to reasonable police power regulations that did not effect a taking of the lessors’ interests.
A property owner cannot determine the efficacy of a regulation by the manner in which he structures leases of his property. For example, a property owner, with respect to whom a particular regulation would not constitute a taking, cannot transform such regulation into a taking simply by transferring a narrow parcel or interest in his property to a lessee.5 Under the constitution, we do not believe that a property owner, confronted with an imminent property regulation, can nullify such a legitimate exercise of the police power by leasing narrow parcels or interests in his property so that the regulation could be characterized as a taking only because of its disproportionate effect on the narrow parcel or interest leased.
*26Here, East Lansing enacted a sign code in 1975. As noted above, this Court has previously concluded that the code represents a valid exercise of East Lansing’s police power. 439 Mich 218, n 14. The code’s provision prohibiting rooftop signs only removes one “stick” from the lessors’ total “bundle” of rights in their property because the vast majority of the lessors’ property is unaffected by this provision. Because this provision does not deprive the lessors of “all economically beneficial or productive use of land,” it would not effect a categorical taking of the lessors’ interests. Nor would it effect a taking under the three-part balancing test. Regarding factor 1 (the character of the government’s action), this Court has concluded that the code is a reasonable police power regulation. Regarding factor 2 (the economic effect of the regulation on the property), any economic effect would be limited because the rooftop is only a small portion of the lessors’ property. Regarding factor 3 (interference with investment-backed expectations), any interference would be limited because the rooftop is only a small portion of the lessors’ property and because they never had an absolute right to display signs on the rooftop. For these reasons, the provision of the code prohibiting rooftop signs would not effect a taking of the lessors’ interests under either the categorical test or the balancing test.6 Thus, the lessors would have had no right to display a sign on their roof after the May 1, 1987, date designated in the code and would have had no valid claim that the code effected a taking. Adams can possess no greater *27rights under the lease than the lessors possessed. Accordingly, Adams has no right to display signs in contravention of the code and has no valid claim that the code effected a taking of its interest in the rooftop leases.
Further, Adams acquired the rooftop signs and leases at issue in 1983 and renewed the leases as recently as 1993 and 1996. In 1983, 1993, and 1996, Adams was aware of the 1975 sign code7
8and could have had no reasonable expectation that it could maintain the signs at the rooftop locations after the date designated in the code. Under these circumstances, Adams’ property interests in the leases clearly did not include a right to display signs on a rooftop after May 1, 1987.8
For these reasons, we conclude that Adams’ leasehold interests did not include the right to display signs on rooftops after May 1, 1987. Accordingly, the sign code did not effect a taking of Adams’ interests in its rooftop signs. We reverse the Court of Appeals decision, which concluded otherwise. We instruct the trial court to conduct its proceedings regarding Adams’ freestanding signs in accordance with this opinion.
*28Corrigan, Young, and Markman, JJ., concurred with Taylor, J.
East Lansing entered into a consent judgment with the other plaintiffs; accordingly, Adams was the only remaining plaintiff on remand.
We point out that there is no issue regarding nonconforming use because nonconforming use analysis only applies in the context of zoning regulations. Adams I held that the sign code is not a zoning regulation, but a police power regulation in the interest of public health and safety. Accordingly, nonconforming use analysis is inapposite here. To understand this distinction (that nonconforming use analysis applies only to *23zoning regulations and not to public health and safety regulations), one need only consider the unprecedented handcuffing of the government that would ensue if public health and safety regulations were subject to nonconforming use analysis. This would leave governments powerless to immediately terminate existing hazardous or dangerous activities because any preexisting facility engaged in these activities would be able to claim nonconforming use status and continue indefinitely in spite of the regulation.
We analyze the interests of the lessors (who are not parties to this matter) solely to determine the interests of Adams, the lessee and plaintiff-appellee in this matter.
Note that in order to demonstrate a taking with respect to the lessors, the relevant parcel for analysis would be the lessors’ entire property interest, i.e., the building and grounds, not just the portion of the rooftop that was leased to Adams.
We do not address here the situation in which a property owner transfers an ownership interest, as opposed to a lease interest, in property.
During oral argument, Adams conceded that the lessors may not have a taking claim.
People are presumed to know the law. Mudge v Macomb Co, 458 Mich 87, 109, n 22; 580 NW2d 845 (1998). Moreover, Adams received personal notice in the form of February 1987 notices from East Lansing instructing Adams to remove its nonconforming rooftop signs by May 1, 1987, as required by the sign code.
Moreover, to the extent that Adams might be interpreted as making a taking claim with respect to its personal property interests in the signs, such a claim fails. The code forbids displaying signs on rooftops, but it does not confiscate Adams’ existing signs or appropriate them for public use. They are still available for use in other locations. Thus, application of the code to the rooftop signs obviously does not effect a taking of the signs themselves.

=== CASE 9737668 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:53.074717+00 ===

Kelly, J.
Qconcurring). In this taking case, defendant, the city of East Lansing, appeals from a Court of Appeals decision affirming the trial court in part and reversing it in part in favor of plaintiff, Adams Outdoor Advertising. The issue is whether defendant’s sign ordinance resulted in a regulatory taking of plaintiff’s billboards and rooftop leaseholds.
I would reverse the Court of Appeals decision insofar as it holds that defendant’s sign ordinance resulted in a taking and reverse the trial court order granting compensation to plaintiff. I write separately because I disagree with the majority’s analysis. It is premised on the rights of the lessor who is not before the Court and whose rights were not litigated.
BACKGROUND
This dispute concerns rooftop billboards at two different locations in East Lansing. Plaintiff owns the billboards and leases the rooftop locations where they are installed. The billboards were erected in 1968 and 1955, respectively. The leases at issue in this dispute were entered into in 1996 and 1993.
In 1975, defendant enacted a new ordinance to regulate signs and billboards throughout the city. The ordinance made plaintiff’s rooftop billboards nonconforming and prohibited plaintiff from displaying them after May 1, 1987.1
*29In 1987, defendant advised plaintiff that it would enforce its sign ordinance. After exhausting its appeals with defendant, plaintiff initiated this action seeking declaratory and injunctive relief. The trial court granted plaintiff’s motion for partial summary disposition, finding that the sign ordinance was enacted without legislative authority. Defendant appealed, and the Court of Appeals affirmed.
This Court reversed the decision of the Court of Appeals, finding that the city had the authority to enact its sign code. The Court remanded the case to the trial court to resolve the issue whether enforcement of the sign code resulted in a taking without just compensation. 439 Mich 209; 483 NW2d 38 (1992).
On remand, the circuit court ruled that, with regard to the rooftop leaseholds, enforcement of the sign code resulted in a taking without just compensation. It reasoned that plaintiff was deprived of all economically viable use of that property. The Court of Appeals affirmed. 232 Mich App 587; 591 NW2d 404 (1998).2
*30ANALYSIS
I
The issue is whether a regulatory taking has occurred that requires defendant to compensate plaintiff when defendant’s sign ordinance prohibits plaintiff from using its existing rooftop billboards. The federal constitution and the Michigan Constitution require a governmental entity to pay just compensation for any private property it takes for public use. US Const, Am V;3 Const 1963, art 10, § 2.4
Those constitutional prohibitions against taking private property without just compensation can be implicated by governmental regulation that overburdens private property. We have held that such regulation can result in a taking in two general situations:
(1) where the regulation does not substantially advance a legitimate state interest, or (2) where the regulation denies an owner economically viable use of his land. Keystone Bituminous Coal Ass’n v DeBenedictis, 480 US 470, 485; 107 S Ct 1232; 94 L Ed 2d 472 (1987).
The second type of taking, where the regulation denies an owner of economically viable use of land, is further subdivided into two situations: (a) a “categorical” taking, where *31the owner is deprived of “all economically beneficial or productive use of land,” Lucas v South Carolina Coastal Council, 505 US 1003, 1015; 112 S Ct 2886; 120 L Ed 2d 798 (1992); or (b) a taking recognized on the basis of the application of the traditional “balancing test” established in Penn Central Transportation Co v New York City, 438 US 104; 98 S Ct 2646; 57 L Ed 2d 631 (1978).
In the former situation, the categorical taking, a reviewing court need not apply a case-specific analysis, and the owner should automatically recover for a taking of his property. Lucas, supra at 1015. A person may recover for this type of taking in the case of a physical invasion of his property by the government ... , or where a regulation forces an owner to “sacrifice all economically beneficial uses [of his land] in the name of the common good . . . .” Id. at 1019 (emphasis in original). In the latter situation, the balancing test, a reviewing court must engage in an “ad hoc, factual inquir[y],’’ centering on three factors: (1) the character of the government’s action, (2) the economic effect of the regulation on the property, and (3) the extent by which the regulation has interfered with distinct, investment-backed expectations. Penn Central [supra at] 124. [K & K Construction, Inc v Dep’t of Natural Resources, 456 Mich 570, 576-577; 575 NW2d 531 (1998).]
A
Before determining whether a compensable taking has occurred, we must first classify the property rights under consideration. The Court of Appeals found them to constitute real property. It stated;
[A] review of the record makes it abundantly clear that this case was tried on the theory that the property interests claimed to have been taken by East Lansing’s sign code are Adams’ real property interests, whether leasehold or fee simple, in the places where its billboards are located. East Lansing’s argument that no taking occurred because the billboards are personal property misapprehends the nature *32of the property interests claimed to have been taken in this case and is therefore rejected. [232 Mich App 596.]
Plaintiff asserts that defendant’s sign ordinance results in a taking of its billboards and also interferes with its leaseholds on which its billboards are attached. Defendant continues to argue that its sign ordinance is directed solely toward plaintiff’s personal property, its billboards. Defendant points out that, unlike the city’s action in In re Acquisition of Billboard Leases & Easements5 where the city condemned leaseholds on which billboards were located, its ordinance does not condemn any real property. It regulates only the placement of billboards.
I find that defendant’s ordinance comes to bear on two different property interests of plaintiff: plaintiff’s property interest in its billboards and also plaintiff’s property interest in the leaseholds on which its billboards are located.
I proceed without considering defendant’s arguments regarding the proper “denominator parcel” to use. Those arguments were first raised in the Court of Appeals, so they are unpreserved for our review. Booth Newspapers, Inc v Univ of Michigan Bd of Regents, 444 Mich 211, 234; 507 NW2d 422 (1993). Furthermore, consideration of the issue is an inherently factual inquiry that falls within the province of the trial court. K & K Construction, supra at 580. Thus, I concentrate my focus on the specific billboards and leaseholds at issue.
*331
Plaintiffs interest in its billboards is an interest in personal property. Personal property is broadly defined as
everything that is the subject of ownership, not coming under denomination of real estate. A right or interest in things personal, or right or interest less than a freehold in realty, or any right or interest which one has in things movable. [Black’s Law Dictionary (6th ed), p 1217; see also City of Holland v Fillmore Twp, 363 Mich 38, 42; 108 NW2d 840 (1961).]
The fact that plaintiffs billboards are affixed to the rooftops of the buildings on which they are located does not bring them within the “denomination of real estate.” I agree with the recent Court of Appeals decision in Outdoor Systems Advertising, Inc v Korth,6 holding that a lessee’s billboards located on a rooftop are trade fixtures, and trade fixtures are the personal property of the lessee. Accordingly, I would hold that plaintiff’s billboards are personal property.
2
Plaintiff’s other property interest affected by defendant’s sign ordinance is its rooftop leases. We have previously determined that leases are interests in real property. See Fidelity Trust Co v Wayne Co, 244 Mich 182; 221 NW 111 (1928).
Plaintiff leased the rooftops for the sole purpose of mounting its billboards upon them. Defendant’s ordinance prohibits rooftop billboards. Thus, defendant’s *34ordinance has rendered plaintiff’s leases useless, adversely affecting plaintiff’s real property interest in them.
B
Having defined the property rights,7 I consider whether defendant’s sign ordinance was a taking of plaintiff’s personal property interest in its billboards or its real property interest in its leaseholds. First, we analyze plaintiff’s personal property interest in its billboards.
Defendant’s ordinance did not result in a regulatory taking of plaintiff’s billboards. “ ‘The general *35rule ... is, that while property may be regulated to a certain extent, if regulation goes too far it will be recognized as a taking.’ ” K & K Construction, supra at 576, quoting Pennsylvania Coal Co v Mahon, 260 US 393, 415; 43 S Ct 158; 67 L Ed 322 (1922). That same principle applies to the regulation of personal property. See Andrus v Allard, 444 US 51; 100 S Ct 318; 62 L Ed 2d 210 (1979).
I see no need to perform an extended analysis of whether a regulatory taking sufficient to require compensation has occurred. Defendant’s ordinance prohibits plaintiff from displaying its billboards from only two rooftop locations. As such, it affects merely one “strand” of plaintiff’s “bundle” of rights in its billboards. Plaintiff is free to move the billboards elsewhere and continue to use them for its economic benefit. Significantly, plaintiff remains free to possess and transfer its billboards. See Andrus, supra at 66.
The fact that a substantial effort may be involved in removing and relocating the billboards does not result in a taking. See Outdoor Systems Advertising, supra at 671-672, citing Wentworth v Process Installations, Inc, 122 Mich App 452, 465; 333 NW2d 78 (1983).8 Therefore, I would hold that defendant’s sign ordi*36nance does not go so far as to result in a taking of plaintiff’s billboards.
c
i
Neither does defendant’s sign ordinance result in a regulatory taking of plaintiff’s leaseholds. “[E]ven if a regulation denies a landowner all economically productive use of the land, there is no compensable taking unless the landowner’s ‘bundle of rights’ previously included the right to engage in the restricted activity.” Outdoor Graphics, Inc v City of Burlington, 103 F3d 690, 694 (CA 8, 1996). Thus, where the proscribed use was not part of a property owner’s title to begin with, there can be no taking of the property when the proscription is enforced. Lucas, supra at 1027.
In Outdoor Graphics, the defendant’s sign ordinance prohibited billboards in residential areas. Id. at 692. The plaintiff’s billboards were erected before the sign ordinance was enacted but, at the time the plaintiff purchased them, they already constituted nonconforming uses under the defendant’s zoning code. Id. Thus, when the defendant required the plaintiff to remove them, compensation was not due because the plaintiff had never included in its “bundle of rights” the right to display the billboards. Id. at 694. The use of the billboards was illegal when the plaintiff purchased them. Id.
Here, plaintiff entered into the leases at issue after the effective date of defendant’s sign ordinance. Upon entering into these leases, plaintiff had full knowledge that the ordinance prohibited billboards from being displayed on its rooftop location after May 1, 1987. *37Plaintiff never had the right, among its leasehold “bundle of rights,” to display the rooftop billboards after that date. Thus, defendant’s sign ordinance takes something that plaintiff never had. In such a situation, there is no categorical taking. See Outdoor Graphics, supra at 694. See also Loveladies Harbor, Inc v United States, 28 F3d 1171, 1177 (CA Fed, 1994).9
Plaintiff argues, however, that the Court must consider its expectation that it would renew its leases. In certain instances, the expectation of future lease renewals is considered in a taking analysis. See Almota Farmers Elevator & Warehouse Co v United States, 409 US 470; 93 S Ct 791; 35 L Ed 2d 1 (1973).
Here, however, plaintiff entered into its current leases for the rooftops after defendant’s sign ordinance had gone into effect. That fact distinguishes this case from Almota, where the government sought to condemn a leasehold interest that had arisen before condemnation proceedings began and ran for another Tk years. See Almota, supra at 471.
It cannot be said that plaintiff had an expectation that it could continue to renew its leases while defendant’s ordinance was in effect. Under the circumstances presented, plaintiff had no realistic expectancy that the leases it entered into after the effective date of defendant’s ordinance would last their full term or be renewable. Thus, I do not find that plain*38tiff’s asserted expectancy of lease renewals is a protected legal right.10
2
Having found no categorical taking of plaintiff’s leasehold interests, I next examine whether there was a compensable taking pursuant to the balancing test outlined in Penn Central, supra. That test requires me to consider 1) the economic effect of the regulation on plaintiff, 2) the extent to which that regulation has interfered with distinct, investment-backed expectations, and 3) the character of the government regulation. Penn Central, supra at 124.
There is no set formula for determining whether a taking has occurred under the balancing test. K & K Construction, supra at 588. However, I will first consider whether plaintiff had any distinct, investment-backed expectations in its leaseholds.
Here, plaintiff never had a legitimate expectation that its leaseholds or billboards would continue to produce income in perpetuity. The fact that plaintiff continued to invest in new leaseholds after defendant enacted its sign ordinance does not compel this Court to find a taking. Plaintiff was well aware that the enforcement of defendant’s sign code could, at any time, render its leasehold interests worthless.11
*39Plaintiff argues that several Michigan cases gave it the expectation that, if challenged, defendant’s sign ordinance would be struck down or defendant would be required to pay plaintiff just compensation. See Central Advertising Co v Ann Arbor, 391 Mich 533; 218 NW2d 27 (1974); Wolverine Sign Works v Bloomfield Hills, 279 Mich 205; 271 NW 823 (1937). The court in Naegele Outdoor Advertising v City of Durham12 addressed this issue directly:
“A person who purchases land with notice of statutory impediments to the right to develop that land can justify few, if any, legitimate investment-backed expectations of development rights which rise to the level of constitutionally protected property rights . . . the state cannot be the guarantor by inverse condemnation proceedings, of the investment risk which people choose to take in the face of statutory or regulatory impediments.” Claridge v New Hampshire Wetlands Bd, 125 NH 745 [750]; 485 A2d 287, 291 (1984). . . . This is especially true in the case of . . . leases for sign locations. [Id. at 1079.]
I agree with the Naegele court that constitutional protections are not meant to insure risky investments. Here, plaintiff entered into lease agreements with full knowledge that at anytime defendant could enforce its sign code and render the leaseholds useless. Plaintiff had no legitimate or reasonable investment-backed expectation in them.
Turning to the character of the governmental regulation, defendant’s ordinance constitutes an outright ban on rooftop billboard advertising. Courts, however, have recognized the social benefits that such bans promote. See Outdoor Graphics, supra at 695. *40The United States Supreme Court cited aesthetic or safety reasons to justify the prohibition of billboards. Metromedia, Inc v San Diego, 453 US 490, 512; 101 S Ct 2882; 69 L Ed 2d 800 (1981). Therefore, I find that the character of the governmental regulation “tilts the scales” even further toward a finding that no taking has occurred.
I realize that the economic effect on the plaintiff in this case is substantial because defendant’s ordinance precludes plaintiff from using its leaseholds. I balance that fact against the absence of any investment-backed expectation and the recognized social benefit of improving safety and aesthetics. I conclude that defendant’s sign ordinance did not result in a taking of plaintiff’s leaseholds. Accordingly, no compensation is due plaintiff for the regulatory effect of defendant’s sign ordinance on its leasehold interests.13
CONCLUSION
I would hold that defendant’s sign ordinance proscribing all rooftop billboards within defendant’s city *41limits does not result in a taking per se of plaintiffs rooftop billboards. There has been no per se taking of plaintiff’s property, because defendant’s ordinance does not authorize defendant to take title to or physically occupy plaintiff’s property. There has been no regulatory taking, because plaintiff retains an economically beneficial use of its billboards. It had no protected right to continue to use its leaseholds to display rooftop billboards when those leases were entered into after the effective date of defendant’s ordinance.
Defendant’s sign ordinance did not result in a taking of plaintiff’s rooftop billboards or leaseholds that requires just compensation. Accordingly, I would reverse the Court of Appeals decision to the contrary and would vacate the trial court order granting compensation to plaintiff for the taking of its rooftop billboards.
Cavanagh, J., concurred with Kelly, J.
The ordinance stated at § 8.39:
*29Any existing sign on the effective date of this Chapter or any amendment hereto, which does not at that time comply with all of the provisions here, including any amendment
* ** *
Shall not be placed, maintained, or displayed by any person on or after May 1, 1987.
Several freestanding billboards owned by plaintiff and located on land owned by plaintiff had also been the subject of the litigation up to this point. The trial court found that defendant’s ordinance resulted in a taking of the freestanding billboards, as well. The Court of Appeals reversed the trial court’s decision with regard to the freestanding billboards. It found that all economic use of the property was not foreclosed, because defendant’s ordinance did not prohibit plaintiff from displaying all its billboards at that location. There is no issue before this Court regarding the freestanding billboards. We proceed to consider defendant’s appeal from the *30Court of Appeals finding that defendant’s ordinance resulted in a taking of plaintiff’s rooftop billboards.
The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides: “nor shall private property be taken for public use without just compensation.” The Fifth Amendment is applicable to the states through the Fourteenth Amendment. Penn Central Transportation Co v New York City, 438 US 104, 122; 98 S Ct 2646; 57 L Ed 2d 631 (1978).
Const 1963, art 10, § 2 provides:
Private property shall not be taken for public use without just compensation therefor being first made or secured in a manner prescribed by law. Compensation shall be determined in proceedings in a court of record.
205 Mich App 659; 517 NW2d 872 (1994).
238 Mich App 664, 667; 607 NW2d 729 (1999).
This is an important issue over which both the majority and Chief Justice Weaver in her concurrence stumble. The majority relies on an analysis of the property owner’s rights to determine that no taking has occurred. The problem with it is that the property owner is not and has not been a party to this dispute.
Chief Justice Weaver as well fails adequately to identify the property interests at issue. She refers to the plaintiffs billboards and leaseholds as nonconforming uses that became vested rights when they preexisted defendant’s sign ordinance. However, she fails to recognize that the leases in effect at the time defendant’s ordinance was enacted or became effective had long since expired when plaintiff initiated this suit. She also fails to recognize that the billboards at issue axe the personal property of plaintiff. Her analysis of a vested nonconforming land use does not apply to them because plaintiff has no real property interest to which the billboards are attached.
Plaintiff is before the Court as a lessee. “A lease is a conveyance by the owner of an estate of a portion of the interest therein to another for a term less than his own for a valuable consideration.” De Bruyn Produce Co v Romero, 202 Mich App 92, 98; 508 NW2d 150 (1993). Accordingly, plaintiff’s real property interest is limited to the duration of its lease. A lessee does not stand in the shoes of or have rights identical to those of a real properly owner that might be entitled to continue a nonconforming use indefinitely. Thus, the questions relevant to this case are whether plaintiff had a vested right to renew its nonconforming leasehold interests. Also, did defendant’s ordinance result in a taking of plaintiff’s personal property, the billboards, or plaintiff’s real property interest, its leaseholds. Those are the issues properly before the Court and which I consider in resolving this case.
As demonstrated above, plaintiffs billboards are trade fixtures. The Supreme Court in Cameron v Oakland Co Gas & Oil Co, 277 Mich 442, 459-460; 269 NW 227 (1936), stated:
Indeed, it is difficult to conceive that any fixture, however solid, permanent, and closely attached to the realty, placed there for the sole purpose of trade, may not be removed at the end of the term.
Thus, plaintiffs billboards remain personal property that plaintiff can remove. Defendant’s ordinance does not take the billboards merely because it prohibits plaintiff from using them where they are currently located.
The federal circuit court of appeals stated:
[T]he owner who bought with knowledge of the restraint could be said to have no reliance interest, or to have assumed the risk of any economic loss. In economic terms, it could be said that the market had already discounted for the restraint, so that purchaser could not show a loss in his investment attributable to it.
Accordingly, it is unnecessary to consider whether Michigan recognizes reasonable amortization periods as a method to preclude a taking.
Plaintiff is presumed to have known the law. See Mudge v Macomb Co, 458 Mich 87, 109, n 22; 580 NW2d 845 (1998). Moreover, plaintiff received personal notice in the form of February 1987 notices from defendant instructing plaintiff to remove its nonconforming rooftop signs by May 1, 1987, as required by the sign ordinance.
803 F Supp 1068 (MD NC, 1992).
Chief Justice Weaver, in her concurrence, states that Wolverine Sign Works v Bloomfield Hills, 279 Mich 205; 271 NW 823 (1937), “recognized that billboard regulation could run afoul of the prohibition against taking private property without just compensation.” Post at 42. While I agree that there are certain instances where billboard regulation could result in a taking, Wolverine does not stand for that proposition.
The Court in Wolverine struck down a city ordinance that regulated billboard maintenance. Id. at 208. It did not, however, perform a taking analysis. Id. Instead, it relied on its finding that the city’s ordinance vested a municipal officer with the power to arbitrarily limit the use of billboards through a permit process. Id. The Court expressly recognized that billboards may be prohibited pursuant to zoning regulations to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. Id. Thus, if relevant to this case at all, Wolverine supports my holding that no taking occurred. Defendant’s sign ordinance did not vest any type of arbitrary authority in the city or in any of its employees.

=== CASE 9737669 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:53.079288+00 ===

Weaver, C.J.
I concur in the result only of the majority opinion. I am concerned that this Court has failed to give due consideration to the private property interests related to billboard ownership and leases.
The rooftop billboards at issue were constructed in 1955 and 1968. They, and the leases for their use, preexisted the 1975 ordinance and became nonconforming after the ordinance’s enactment. “A prior nonconforming use is a vested right in the use of particular property that does not conform to zoning restrictions, but is protected because it lawfully existed before the zoning regulation’s effective date.” Heath Twp v Sall, 442 Mich 434, 439; 502 NW2d 627 *42(1993). “Though the ordinance be reasonable, it cannot operate to oust the property owner of his vested right.” Dusdal v City of Warren, 387 Mich 354, 359-360; 196 NW2d 778 (1972). Specifically, in Wolverine Sign Works v Bloomfield Hills, 279 Mich 205, 208; 271 NW 823 (1937), this Court held that while billboards were subject to reasonable regulation, a city may not destroy, by a billboard maintenance ordinance, the property right in a lease use. In other words, Wolverine recognized that billboard regulation could run afoul of the prohibition against taking private property without just compensation.
In Adams Outdoor Advertising v East Lansing, 439 Mich 209; 483 NW2d 38 (1992) (Adams I), this Court held that the City of East Lansing had the power to “forcibly terminate nonconforming billboards and signs over a reasonable period of time.” Id. at 212 (emphasis added). The implication of the “reasonable period of time” proviso of this holding is that, on its face, the ordinance effected a taking. The Court remanded to consider the compensating effect of amortization. However, the effect of amortization would not change the nature of the underlying governmental action.

=== CASE 9737670 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:54.663422+00 ===

ON PETITION TO TRANSFER
KRAHULIK, Justice.
Aaron Alva (Defendant-Appellant) was found guilty by a jury of child molesting, a class C felony, Ind. Code § 35-42-4-3. He received a sentence of eight (8) years. The Court of Appeals, in a memorandum decision, affirmed the conviction. Alva v. State (1992), Ind.App., 594 N.E.2d 533. In his petition to transfer, he raises the following issues: (1) Whether the trial court violated the Patterson rule by admitting the mother’s testimony giving details of the incident; (2) whether the trial court erred by permitting an expert to accredit the child’s testimony; and (3) whether the sentence was manifestly unreasonable;
The relevant facts are not disputed that on two consecutive weekends Alva took a shower with his nine-year-old former stepson. During each of the showers, Alva washed the entire body of the boy, including his penis, with a washcloth. Other facts are provided as necessary.
Patterson Rule1
Alva asserts that the trial court improperly permitted the boy’s mother to testify to details of the shower incident because the requirements of Patterson v. State (1975), 263 Ind. 55, 324 N.E.2d 482, were not satisfied. More specifically, he claims that the challenged testimony contravened Patterson because the boy did not acknowledge making the statements. Lambert v. State (1989), Ind., 534 N.E.2d 235.
At trial, the boy testified that he showered with Alva approximately five (5) times, that during the last two showers, Alva washed him, that Alva washed the boy’s penis “long and slow,” and that he *171told his mother about the showers, but could not remember what he had told her, although he thought the conversation occurred the night of the last shower. The boy also demonstrated how Alva washed him. The boy’s mother (Alva’s ex-wife) testified that she and the boy talked about the showers the Friday after the second shower in which Alva washed the boy, that Alva made the boy take showers with him, that the boy told Alva that he did not want to take showers with him, that the boy told his mother that he did not feel comfortable taking the showers with Alva, that the boy' told her it did not feel right when Alva washed him, although the boy did not know why, about the manner in which Alva washed the boy’s penis, that the washing took longer than it normally would take the boy, that the boy after the shower incident became a distant child who fought with his stepsister, and the mother demonstrated how Alva washed the boy’s penis.
In Patterson, we held that out-of-court statements by a declarant who is present and available for cross-examination may be used as substantive evidence. 263 Ind. at 58, 324 N.E.2d at 484. The party offering the out-of-court statement as substantive evidence has the burden of proving the proper foundation which requires that the declarant, at trial, acknowledge making the statement and offer live testimony consistent with it. Traver v. State (1991), Ind., 568 N.E.2d 1009, 1012. The purpose of the foundational requirement is to insure that the statement was actually made and to preserve the defendant’s right to cross-examination. Id. If the declarant denies having made the statement or denies having a memory of making the statement, the statement generally is inadmissible under the Patterson rule. Lambert v. State (1989), Ind., 534 N.E.2d 235, 237. The evidence, however, may be admissible under Patterson where there is evidence from which the trial court can conclude that the witness made the statement and remembered making the statement, but is feigning lack of memory. Traver, 568 N.E.2d at 1012. The trial court is to determine the admissibility of the out-of-court statement as substantive evidence on the basis of the witness’ entire testimony. Hodges v. State (1988), Ind., 524 N.E.2d 774, 782. The obvious benefit of the Patterson rule is that it permits the admission of testimonial evidence of guilt that would otherwise be lost. Traver, 568 N.E.2d at 1012.
The boy’s testimony acknowledged that at some point he had talked to his mother about the shower incident. The boy, however, could not remember what he had told his mother, nor could he remember when the conversation took place. Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, the boy’s testimony does not adequately acknowledge the existence and content of the purported out-of-court statements and, therefore, the mother’s testimony relating to the boy’s out-of-court statements was not admissible under the Patterson exception to the hearsay rule.
As a result of the inadmissible evidence being part of the record, we must consider the effect that the evidence had on the trier of fact to determine if the erroneous admission of evidence requires reversal. The erroneous admission of evidence will result in reversal only if there was prejudice to defendant’s substantial legal rights. Bustamante v. State (1990), Ind., 557 N.E.2d 1313, 1317. In determining whether a reversal is appropriate due to erroneously-admitted evidence, this Court has the duty to assess the probable impact of the evidence. Short v. State (1982), Ind., 443 N.E.2d 298, 308. Where the inadmissible evidence is merely cumulative and not decisive of guilt, the introduction of the evidence is not prejudicial error. Watkins v. State (1984), Ind., 460 N.E.2d 514, 515. Reversal is compelled, however, where the record as a whole discloses that the erroneously-admitted evidence “was likely to have a prejudicial impact upon the mind of the average juror, thereby contributing to the verdict.” Mitchell v. State (1972), 259 Ind. 418, 424, 287 N.E.2d 860, 863.
The actual washing in the shower is not disputed. The boy and Alva testified to the shower and the washing. Alva, however, maintained that he did not have an *172intent to gratify sexual desires during the incident. The mother’s testimony described the incident in greater detail and provided the evidence, although scant, from which intent could be inferred. Thus, the Patterson statements were not merely cumulative. Consequently, we conclude that the erroneously-admitted evidence contributed to the conviction and resulted in prejudicial error. Mitchell, 259 Ind. at 424-25, 287 N.E.2d at 863. Therefore, the conviction for child molesting is reversed and a new trial is ordered. See Irons v. State (1979), 272 Ind. 287, 290-91, 397 N.E.2d 603, 605-606.
Additionally, Alva asserts that it was improper to allow an expert to “vouch” for the child’s testimony and that his sentence was manifestly unreasonable. Our resolution of the Patterson issue renders a ruling on these arguments unnecessary.
CONCLUSION
Accordingly, we grant transfer, vacate the opinion of the Court of Appeals, reverse the conviction of child molesting, and remand this case to the trial court with instructions to grant a new trial.
SHEPARD, C.J., and DeBRULER, and DICKSON, JJ., concur.
GIVAN, J., dissents, with separate opinion.
. This Court abolished the Patterson rule in Modisett v. State (1991), Ind., 578 N.E.2d 649, but specifically noted that the change in the law would not be given retroactive application. Alva was tried in January of 1991, before Modi-sett was decided; consequently, the Patterson rule was in effect.

=== CASE 9737672 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:56.914998+00 ===

RATLIFF, Judge.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Columbus Board of Zoning Appeals, its individual members, and Steve Rucker (collectively “BZA”) appeal from a judgment reversing the BZA’s decision denying applications for zoning variances filed by Tom Wetherald. We reverse and remand.
ISSUES
We restate and consolidate the issues on appeal as:
•1. Is the instant appeal moot because the BZA failed to obtain a stay pending appeal, and in the interim, Wetherald obtained a building permit, completed improvements, and is currently operating his business on the lot in question in accordance with the trial court’s grant of the variances?
2. Did the trial court improperly reverse the BZA’s decision and enter its own findings, since the BZA provided no findings of fact to substantiate its decision as required by statute?
FACTS
Wetherald purchased the lot involved in this appeal (“Lot”) to construct a drive-through restaurant (“Restaurant”). The Lot is zoned B-4 under the Columbus Zoning Ordinances (“Ordinances”), which permit the construction of a drive-through restaurant. Record at 48, part 2, p. 29.1 The Lot consists of approximately 12,000 square feet of property, but only approximately 650 square feet would be useable *210under the present setback regulations.2 In early 1991, Wetherald applied for a building permit to make some improvements to the Lot necessary to complete the Restaurant.
The Code Enforcement Officer denied the application and told Wetherald that he first needed to obtain developmental standards variances (“Variances”) before receiving a building permit. Wetherald applied for the Variances. These applications requested:
a. To construct a building in front of a setback line (State Street) and to permit parking in front of a setback line of a local street (Illinois Street).
b. To construct a building with parking based on kitchen floor area only.
c. To vary the landscape buffer requirements.
Record at 48, part 2, pp. 42-43, 45-46, and 49-50.
The BZA considered Wetherald’s applications (“Applications”) at its June 25, 1991 meeting. However, the BZA failed to reach a decisive vote on the Applications, so decision thereon was postponed until the BZA’s July 23, 1991 meeting. On July 23, 1991, the BZA denied the Applications, but no written findings of fact were made. Record at 48, part 2, pp. 1-15.
Wetherald filed a petition for writ of certiorari (“Writ”) seeking review of the BZA’s decision on August 21, 1991. The Writ was granted and following a hearing, the trial court determined that the evidence before the BZA supported the granting of the Applications, and that denial by the BZA was illegal, arbitrary, and contrary to the weight of the probative evidence presented to the BZA. Record at 49-53. The trial court also noted that the BZA had made no findings supporting its decision. Record at 50.
After the trial court’s orders approving the Applications and thereby granting the Variances, Wetherald obtained a building permit, constructed the Restaurant, and opened for business. Wetherald has continued operating the Restaurant during the pendency of this appeal. Other relevant facts will be stated in our discussion of the issues.
DISCUSSION AND DECISION
Issue One
Wetherald argues that this appeal is moot because the BZA failed to obtain a stay pending appeal, and in the interim, he obtained a building permit, completed improvements, and is currently operating the Restaurant in accordance with the trial court’s grant of the Variances. We disagree.
An issue becomes moot when it is no longer live or when the parties lack a legally cognizable interest in the outcome. Bartholomew County Hospital v. Ryan (1982), Ind.App., 440 N.E.2d 754, 757, trans. denied. Where we are unable to grant effective relief on an issue, the issue is deemed moot. Id.
Here, contrary to Wetherald’s contention, the appeal is not moot. If relief were granted to the BZA reversing the trial court’s grant of the Variances, then the BZA’s decision denying the Variances would be reinstated. Wetherald would then be required to bring the Restaurant into compliance with the regular developmental standards, including removing structures already completed. We cannot sanction Wetherald’s construction pending appeal as creating mootness; otherwise, those seeking variances for construction purposes could circumvent zoning requirements by simply constructing in accordance with permits issued, although final resolution of the propriety of such variances was still pending on appeal. Wetherald proceeded to build at his own peril prior to a final resolution of the variance issues. See Petrosky v. Zoning Hearing Board (1979), 485 Pa. 501, 507, 402 A.2d 1385, 1388 (factor to consider in determining whether permit holder has vested right because of detrimental reliance by making improvements on property is that time period in which issuance of permit could have been appeal*211ed had passed when improvements begun); see also Bird v. Delaware Muncie Metropolitan Plan Commission (1981), Ind. App., 416 N.E.2d 482, 490 (severe remedy of removal of assembled structures on property may be mandated in some circumstances involving zoning ordinances); B. & G. Construction Corp. v. Board of Appeals (1955), 309 N.Y. 730, 731-32, 128 N.E.2d 423, 424 (construction company not entitled to permit to continue operations where harmful to public merely because it invested in facility under valid permit issued by municipality); cf. Mattson v. Chicago (1980), 89 Ill.App.3d 378, 381, 44 Ill.Dec. 636, 638, 411 N.E.2d 1002, 1004 (where landowner substantially changed position in good faith in justifiable reliance on probability of building permit’s issuance, vested right acquired to use property for desired purpose, although zoning classifications subsequently introduced); Peru v. Querciagrossa (1979), 73 Ill.App.3d 1040, 1042, 30 Ill.Dec. 123, 125, 392 N.E.2d 778, 780 (city estopped from enjoining landowners’ construction where building permit issued and advice given by building inspector later proved erroneous; landowners justified in relying on express instructions from building inspector and receipt of permit and made substantial construction expenditures in reliance thereon). Thus, the appeal is not moot.3
Issue Two
The BZA contends that the trial court improperly reversed its decision and entered its own findings, since the BZA provided no findings of fact to substantiate its decision as required by statute and the evidence on Wetherald’s compliance with the four criteria needed to sustain his burden on the Variances was not uncontradict-ed. We agree and find that reversal and remand are mandated.
In examining a decision of a county board of zoning appeals to determine whether it was incorrect as a matter of law, a trial court does not conduct a trial de novo and does not substitute its decision for that of the board; our review of a trial court’s ruling on review of such a decision is governed by the same considerations. McBride v. Board of Zoning Appeals (1991), Ind.App., 579 N.E.2d 1312, 1315. Unless the BZA’s decision was illegal, it must be upheld; in essence, an abuse of discretion standard applies. Id. We cannot reweigh evidence or substitute our discretion for that of the BZA. Id. We are governed by the presumption that an agency’s decision is correct in view of its expertise. Id.
For reasons that exist independently of statute, boards of zoning appeals are required to set out findings of fact which support their determinations to make possible an adequate judicial review of administrative decisions. Id. at 1316. Moreover, our statutes require that the BZA make written findings of fact to support its determinations to make possible an intelligent judicial review of the administrative decision without speculations as to its factual basis. Habig v. Harker (1983), Ind. App., 447 N.E.2d 1114, 1116; IND.CODE § 36-7-4-915.4 The proper action of the trial court is to remand for the entry of findings where the agency has failed to do so. Habig, 447 N.E.2d at 1117.
Here, the record of the BZA proceedings does not contain any findings of fact supporting the BZA’s decision to deny the Applications. See Record at 48. Such findings would not be necessary, however, if *212Wetherald had met his burden of showing the four criteria required for the Variances and such evidence were uncontradicted. See Maxey v. Board of Zoning Appeals (1985), Ind.App., 480 N.E.2d 589, 592, trans. denied (burden on petitioner for variance to show that each prerequisite met, and evidence supporting each must be “such that no reasonable man could fail to accept that prerequisite as proved”). Our perusal of the record shows that contradictory evidence was presented on one of the criteria, making a reversal and remand for appropriate findings necessary.
To prevail on his Applications, Wetherald was required to show four criteria:
1. the approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community;
2. the use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner;
3. the strict application of the terms of the zoning ordinance will result in practical difficulties in the use of the property; and,
4. the variance requested is the minimum necessary and does not correct a hardship caused by the owner, previous or present, of the property.
Columbus City Code § 35-328; see also IND.CODE § 36-7-4-918.5. The BZA essentially concedes that Wetherald met his burden on the latter three criteria. See Appellant’s Brief at 13-14; Reply Brief at 13. Thus, the pivotal issue is whether Wetherald showed by uncontradicted evidence that his Applications met the first criterion.
The record of the BZA proceedings shows that several of the BZA members, including a city engineer, expressed reservations about the Variances because of traffic safety concerns, which are encompassed in the first criterion. See Record at 48, part 2, pp. 8-9, 20, 23-24, 26, 29-31. Although many of these comments may seem peripheral in the context of the entire discussion, they do demonstrate that the evidence which Wetherald presented was contradicted. Because the evidence was contradicted, the trial court could not enter findings which conflicted with the BZA’s decision, since agency decisions are afforded great weight by virtue of an agency’s inherent expertise in its given area. See McBride, 579 N.E.2d at 1315; Boffo v. Boone County Board of Zoning Appeals (1981), Ind.App., 421 N.E.2d 1119, 1125 (in order to upset BZA’s determination when it has denied variance, reviewing court must find, after resolving all doubts in evidence in favor of BZA’s decision, that each statutory prerequisite has been established as matter of law). Thus, the trial court exceeded its powers of review when it entered findings; rather, the proper action would have been to remand to the BZA for the entry of the required findings. See Habig, 447 N.E.2d at 1117. We similarly may not now review the BZA’s decision without findings on which its decision rests.
We note that Wetherald’s reliance on Town of Merrillville Board of Zoning Appeals v. Public Storage, Inc. (1991), Ind. App., 568 N.E.2d 1092, trans. denied, is misplaced. In Public Storage, the BZA entered findings four days late, and we held that the late entry was harmless error. Id. at 1093, n. 2. Here, however, the BZA did not enter its findings late, but failed to make any findings at all. Therefore, the harmless error analysis in Public Storage is inapplicable to Wetherald’s case.5
Because we cannot say that the evidence was without contradiction and Wetherald satisfactorily proved all of the criteria, we reverse and remand to the trial court to remand to the BZA for the entry of findings supporting its denial of the Applications to allow for proper review, and for further proceedings in accordance with this opinion. If, as Wetherald urges, there is *213insufficient evidence in the record to support the BZA’s denial of the Applications, its findings will be unsupported by the evidence, and the trial court may on certio-rari again reverse the BZA’s decisions; our statutes demand, however, that the appropriate statutory procedure be followed and findings be entered. See I.C. § 36-7-4-915.
Reversed and remanded.
BAKER, J., concurs.
STATON, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. Page 48 of the record consists of two parts, which together form the record of proceedings from the BZA hearing. The pages contained within page 48 are separately numbered.
. The Lot’s configuration is peculiar and its placement between a local street and a main arterial way results in the small area available for development under the current setback standards. See Record at 48, part 2, pp. 1-2 and 17.
. Additionally, Wetherald’s reliance on Ind.Trial Rule 61(d)(i) [sic] and Ind.Appellate Rule 6(B) is misplaced. As the BZA points out, these rules do not mandate that the BZA seek an immediate appeal of the denial of the requested stay to prevent preclusion of this appeal because of mootness.
Moreover, the sole case Wetherald cites to support this issue is inapposite to the situation here. See Letz Manufacturing Co. v. Public Service Commission of Indiana (1936), 210 Ind. 467, 471, 4 N.E.2d 194, 196 (court declined to apply mootness doctrine because constitutionality of certain acts involved).
. I.C. § 36-7-4-915 reads in full:
"Board of zoning appeals; minutes and records Sec. 915. The board of zoning appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings and record the vote on all actions taken. All minutes and records shall be filed in the office of the board and are public records. The board shall in all cases heard by it make written findings of fact.”
. Additionally, we note that we cautioned in Public Storage that the finding of harmless error was not to be construed as condoning the late entry of findings by boards of zoning appeals; rather, the timely entry of findings by boards of zoning appeals is a statutory mandate with which all boards of zoning appeals must comply. See Public Storage, 568 N.E.2d at 1093, n. 2.

=== CASE 9737673 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:31:56.91935+00 ===

STATON, Judge,
dissenting.
I dissent. The record is devoid of substantial evidence to support the board’s determination that granting the variance would be injurious to the public health, safety or general welfare.
IND.CODE 36-7-4-1009 prohibits the trial court from conducting a trial de novo upon a writ of certiorari from a board of zoning appeals determination. However, when appealing from an adverse decision at the trial court level, the board bears the burden of persuading this court that the board’s determination was supported by substantial evidence and was thus not clearly erroneous. Town of Beverly Shores v. Bagnall (1992), Ind., 590 N.E.2d 1059, 1062.
The board claims that its denial of a variance — unaccompanied by findings of fact — is predicated upon Wetherald’s failure to establish that: “the approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community.” At the public hearings, board members expressed “concern” about traffic congestion at the site. Record, p. 48, Minutes, pp. 19-20, 23. This is so despite the Board’s admission that Wetherald complied with the local requirement of 10 vehicle “stacking positions” to keep customers ordering or receiving food on the parking lot and off the street. Minutes, p. 16. It is uncontro-verted that Wetherald thereby complied with the traffic safety standard established by the City of Columbus.
The “evidence” in support of the board’s determination as to public safety consists of testimony by Steve Rucker, City of Columbus engineer:
“Our only concern is that kind of development on such a small site. Uh, I think it’s, uh, a problem we get very cramped site plan and, and use that tends to generate large volumes of traffic, as a drive thru restaurant does. And the memo didn’t intend to say that kind of cars were going to be there every hour, uh, use some comparisons to show other kinds of uses. The drive thru restaurant does tend to generate a lot of cars.” (emphasis added)1
Minutes, p. 6.
“If we have one more conflict and the 'possibilities of cars colliding.” (emphasis added)
Minutes, p. 9.
Although there exists conjecture and speculation as to “possibilities” and “tendencies,” there is no substantial evidence of a safety hazard specifically related to the location under consideration. However, the record discloses uncontroverted evidence of the public health and safety benefit flowing from Wetherald’s acquisition and use of the site: the drive-through operation replaced a worthless, abandoned, roach and rodent-infested structure. Minutes, p. 11. Moreover, the owner of the adjacent property (a doughnut shop) testified that his traffic generation peak occurred in the early morning, in contrast to the peak traffic hours at Wetherald’s hamburger establishment. Minutes, pp. 8, 11.
I would affirm the decision of the trial court setting aside the board’s determination as illegal, arbitrary and contrary to the weight of the probative evidence.
. The memo referenced by Rucker discloses "trip generation data” from the Institute of Traffic Engineers, estimating an "average" of 78.8 trips during the peak hour for a drive-through restaurant. Minutes, p. 26.

=== CASE 2211616 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:09.327097+00 ===

614 N.W.2d 666 (2000)
241 Mich. App. 64
Karen POWELL, Personal Representative of the Estate of Gary Tomic, Deceased, Plaintiff-Appellee, and
Michigan Department of Community Health, Intervening Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
ST. JOHN HOSPITAL, Defendant-Appellant, and
Michael Davis, M.D., Jennifer Appleyard, M.D., Sambamurty Kalahasty, M.D., Robert Borchak, M.D., Akash Sheth, M.D., Dr. Anton, and David Hoerle, M.D., Not Participating.
Docket No. 208928.
Court of Appeals of Michigan.
Submitted February 8, 2000, at Detroit.
Decided May 9, 2000, at 9:25 a.m.
Released for Publication July 26, 2000.
*667 David J. Cooper, West Bloomfield, for the plaintiff on appeal.
John P. Jacobs, P.C. (by John P. Jacobs), Southfield, for the defendant.
Before GRIBBS, P.J., and MARK J. CAVANAGH and GAGE, JJ.
PER CURIAM.
A jury returned a verdict in favor of plaintiff, Karen Powell, in this wrongful death action. Defendant St. John Hospital appeals as of right the trial court order granting its motion for remittitur and denying its motion for a new trial. We reverse and remand for a new trial.
Plaintiff, as personal representative of the estate of her son, Gary Tomic, brought *668 this action on the basis of defendant's alleged malpractice in treating Tomic.[1] Powell alleged that Tomic died because defendant's staff failed to timely diagnose and properly treat a perforation in his colon.
Tomic was hospitalized at St. John Hospital (hereinafter defendant) from October 8 to October 14, 1991, after suffering multiple seizures attributed to alcohol withdrawal. During this time, Tomic did not complain of abdominal pain.
On October 20, 1991, Tomic arrived at defendant's emergency room and reported that he had suffered severe abdominal pain during the previous five days and had been vomiting profusely during the preceding twenty-four hours. Tomic was admitted; defendant's employees administered fluids intravenously and inserted a nasogastric tube. In addition, various tests were conducted to determine the cause of his distress. These tests included a series of abdominal x-rays and a computer topography (CT) scan to discover whether "free air" was present. "Free air" is air present in the abdominal cavity, as opposed to air present in an organ, and is a sign of a perforated organ. The radiologist's report on the x-rays stated that free air was not present; a radiologist's report on the CT scan was not found among Tomic's medical records.
Because Tomic had significant electrolyte abnormalities and was experiencing acute renal failure, defendant's surgeon, Dr. Robert Borchak, decided that exploratory surgery was too risky. However, after Tomic's white blood cell count dropped while his condition did not otherwise improve, Borchak performed exploratory surgery on October 21,1991, approximately twenty-nine hours after Tomic had been admitted.
During surgery, it was determined that Tomic had diverticulosis, the formation of small pouches along the colon; furthermore, the pouches were infected, causing diverticulitis. In addition, there was an actual perforation of the sigmoid colon and peritonitis as a result of the leakage of the colon contents into the peritoneal cavity. Dr. Borchak resected the colon and also performed a decompressive enterotomy, in which he made a hole in the small bowel in order to drain fluid, then closed the hole with sutures.
On October 28, 1991, surgery was again performed on Tomic, and it was discovered that the hole made during the enterotomy had opened. As a result, small bowel contents and pus had leaked into the abdominal cavity, and four separate abscesses had formed. Tomic remained in the surgical intensive care unit (ICU) until his death on December 26, 1991, from multiple organ failure.
At trial, plaintiff claimed that the twenty-nine-hour delay in performing exploratory surgery constituted malpractice. Plaintiff presented four experts who testified that both the x-rays and the CT scan taken on October 20, 1991, showed the presence of free air. Plaintiff further asserted that performing the enterotomy had been both unnecessary and a breach of the standard of care.
Defendant maintained that Tomic had not displayed symptoms that would be expected in a person suffering from a perforated bowel, such as an elevated temperature and an abnormal white blood cell count. In fact, plaintiff's expert, Dr. David Befeler, agreed that most patients with perforations "are sicker than Gary appeared initially when he was seen in the emergency room." Accordingly, defendant argued that exploratory surgery was properly delayed until October 21, 1991, when Tomic's condition had not improved and the risk of not proceeding outweighed the risk of surgery. In addition, defendant presented testimony from both the physicians *669 who treated Tomic and expert witnesses; these witnesses asserted that neither the x-rays nor the CT scan films revealed the presence of free air and that the treatment of Tomic had been in compliance with the standard of care.
A key witness for plaintiff was Dr. Peter Tiernan, who had been employed by defendant as a surgical resident during the period that Tomic was a patient. Tiernan began treating Tomic on November 1, 1991; however, the ultimate responsibility for Tomic's care remained with Borchak.
It was undisputed at trial that Tomic had been gay. Tiernan testified that some doctors employed by defendant were reluctant to associate with or touch homosexuals and that he heard certain physicians refer to Tomic as a "dirt bag." Members of the staff similarly disparaged women, "people of color," and uninsured patients.
Tiernan also testified that there was a pattern of delay in treating Tomic because Borchak did not come to the hospital regularly. Tiernan further explained that when an operation was unsuccessful, subsequent surgical procedures would often be performed in the nonsterile ICU, rather than the surgery, in order to hide that fact. Tiernan stated that he and Dr. Larry Lloyd performed such a surgical procedure on Tomic in the ICU, without anesthesia, during which they removed feces and pus from Tomic's abdomen by hand while Tomic "grimaced in pain." Moreover, Tiernan asserted that he and the other surgical residents had made numerous complaints about the care given to Tomic and other patients, which were ignored by the hospital. In Tiernan's opinion, certain aspects of the treatment given to Tomic constituted "bad medicine."
Additionally, Tiernan testified that he had observed the removal of compromising documents from medical charts and that he had noticed that progress notes and reports of test results often were missing when medical charts were subsequently reviewed. Tiernan stated that a note that he recalled writing was absent from Tomic's chart.
Tiernan admitted that he had been required to repeat the third year of his residency and that, midway through the repeated year, his residency had been terminated. Tiernan asserted that he was required to repeat his third year because he repeatedly complained to the hospital administration about deficiencies in patient care. Tiernan further acknowledged that, following his termination, he had filed a lawsuit against defendant that had been dismissed, but stated that the dismissal had been because of the expiration of the period of limitation. The trial court refused to allow defense counsel to impeach Tiernan by presenting evidence that Tiernan had been required to repeat his third year, and had been eventually discharged, because he was incompetent. In addition, the trial court refused to permit defendant to enter into evidence the trial court opinion and order dismissing Tiernan's lawsuit against the defendant for the purpose of demonstrating that only one of Tiernan's claims had been dismissed on the basis that it was not timely filed.
Lloyd denied that there had been a procedure where pus and feces had been removed from Tomic's abdomen by hand. Borchak testified that he had regularly visited his patients in the ICU, including Tomic. Defendant's doctors all stated that they had never heard staff members refer to anyone as a "dirt bag" and that treatment was never altered because of a patient's race, gender, or sexual orientation. No one except Tiernan testified that patient notes and records regularly disappeared and were sometimes deliberately destroyed. Lloyd testified that the only instance he was aware of where a note was purposely removed from a chart occurred when a senior staff member would not allow Tiernan to do "crazy things" to a patient and Tiernan became angry and wrote "inflammatory statements" in the chart.
*670 The jury returned a verdict in favor of plaintiff, awarding $392,476.87 in economic damages, $6,700,000 for Tomic's pain and suffering, $3,150,000 for past loss of society, and $3,150,000 for future loss of society for a total award of $13,392,476.87. Defendant moved for remittitur and for a new trial on the basis that the trial court erred in refusing to permit Tiernan to be questioned regarding his bias and because of the alleged misconduct of plaintiff's counsel. The trial court denied defendant's motion for a new trial; however, it granted the motion for remittitur in part and reduced the award for Tomic's pain and suffering to $3,500,000, the award for past loss of society to $1,750,000, and the award for future loss of society to $1,750,000, thus reducing the total award to $7,392,476.87.
I
Defendant first argues that the trial court erred in refusing to permit it to cross-examine Dr. Peter Tiernan to reveal his bias. A trial court's decision to admit or exclude evidence is reviewed for an abuse of discretion. Ellsworth v. Hotel Corp. of America, 236 Mich.App. 185, 188, 600 N.W.2d 129 (1999).
The credibility of a witness is an appropriate subject for the jury's consideration. People v. Coleman, 210 Mich.App. 1, 8, 532 N.W.2d 885 (1995). Evidence that shows bias or prejudice on the part of a witness is always relevant. See Popp v. Crittenton Hosp., 181 Mich.App. 662, 664, 449 N.W.2d 678 (1989). Accordingly, "[t]estimony ... which touches the bias or interest of the witness[ ] is always admissible, and can be shown upon his cross-examination, and, if denied by him, can be proven on rebuttal; the proper foundation being laid for such proof." Swift Electric Light Co. v. Grant, 90 Mich. 469, 475, 51 N.W. 539 (1892); see also Foster v. Krause, 187 Mich. 630, 632, 153 N.W. 1066 (1915) ("The testimony bore on the interest of the witness, and was admissible for that purpose...."). As our Supreme Court explained over a century ago:
It is true that where a witness is cross-examined on matters purely collateral, the cross-examiner cannot inquire of other witnesses whether the answers are truthful, because the inquiry would open irrelevant issues. But the interest or bias of a witness has never been regarded as irrelevant. It goes directly to his credit, and must determine with the jury how far facts depending on his evidence are to be regarded as proven. A party cannot be compelled to put up with the statements of a witness concerning his own interest or personal relation to the case and parties, where it becomes necessary to know his position.... The administration of justice would be very defective if every witness could, without contradiction, make himself out impartial and disinterested, and run no risk of exposure. [Geary v. People, 22 Mich. 220, 222-223 (1871).]
We conclude that the trial court abused its discretion in refusing to allow defendant to present evidence demonstrating the alleged basis of Tiernan's bias against defendant.[2] The trial court believed *671 that because Tiernan's bias against defendant was evident from his demeanor, the jury did not need to know the origin of that bias. We find this reasoning to be flawed. The only evidence presented to the jury concerning Tiernan's animus against defendant was Tiernan's own testimony. Tiernan stated that the hospital was poorly managed and provided substandard care to patients and, furthermore, that it had dismissed him when he repeatedly complained about these problems. If these allegations were the sole basis for Tiernan's hostility toward defendant, the jury would have had little reason to doubt his testimony regarding Tomic's care and the disappearance of records from patient files. If, however, the jury believed that defendant had dismissed Tiernan for incompetence, it could easily have concluded that Tiernan's testimony, or at least his more inflammatory charges, had been fabricated in an attempt to pay back defendant for derailing his surgical career.[3]
We cannot conclude that the trial court's error was harmless. Without Tiernan's testimony, this case was a routine "battle of the experts." However, Tiernan made scandalous charges, not corroborated by any other witness, regarding the alleged biases against homosexuals, women, and "people of color" displayed by defendant's employees; appalling lapses in patient care, including the care given to Tomic; and the deliberate destruction of patient records to cover up wrongdoing. By the trial court's refusal to allow defendant to present evidence concerning the true reason for Tiernan's termination, Tiernan was permitted "to make himself out impartial and disinterested," id., a righteous doctor whose only concerns were for justice and patient care. Indeed, when plaintiff's counsel asked Tiernan why he was testifying, the latter replied, "Justice and conscience," and further cited his duties as a physician and as a military officer. Because the outcome may well have been affected by defendant's inability to present evidence concerning a different motivation for Tiernan's testimony, the jury verdict must be reversed and defendant given a new trial.
II
We briefly address several other issues raised by defendant on appeal, because they may recur at a new trial.
A
The trial court did not abuse its discretion in refusing to admit the trial court opinion and order dismissing Tiernan's lawsuit against defendant. The opinion and order do not indicate that a judicial finding was made that Tiernan had been dismissed on the basis of incompetence. Moreover, the opinion and order were not admissible to impeach Tiernan because he accurately stated that one claim had been dismissed because it was filed too late, and he testified that he did not know the basis for the dismissal of the remaining claims. Finally, after reviewing the opinion and order, we find no corroboration of defendant's claim that Tiernan was assessed $76,000 in costs and sanctions in that lawsuit.
B
The trial court did not err in instructing the jury that, should it find that defendant's negligence was a proximate cause of the loss of a substantial opportunity for Tomic to survive, it could award damages for the reduction in his chance of survival. Defendant's own witnesses provided testimony that Tomic's chances of survival had been diminished because of *672 various factors. Contrary to defendant's argument, the lost chance of survival doctrine is not a separate theory of recovery from plaintiff's medical malpractice claim, and, therefore, plaintiff was not required to plead it. See Falcon v. Memorial Hosp., 436 Mich. 443, 461-462, 469, 462 N.W.2d 44 (1990) (Levin, J.), 472-473 (Boyle, J.) (holding that the loss of the opportunity to survive is compensable in medical malpractice actions, provided that the negligence of the defendant, more probably than not, caused the loss of opportunity).
C
At trial, plaintiff repeatedly asked why Tomic's records did not contain a report from the CT scan performed on October 20, 1991. Plaintiff argued that a report had been completed and charged that defendant had destroyed it because it noted the presence of free air.[4] In addition, plaintiff made multiple references to the "missing" guaiac tests. During Tomic's first hospitalization from October 8 to October 14, 1991, an order for three guaiac stool tests was included in his chart. However, there was nothing in the chart indicating that the tests had been done.[5] Plaintiff's theory was that the tests had been performed and showed the presence of blood in Tomic's stool and that defendant had subsequently destroyed the records because its failure to follow up on the test results was negligent.
At plaintiff's request, the trial court, using a slightly modified version of SJI2d 6.01(c), instructed the jury as follows:
The defendant in this case has not offered the CAT scan report, Dr. Tiernan's report, and the guaiac stool reports, if they exist. As this evidence was under the control of the defendant and could have been produced by it, you may infer that the evidence would have been adverse to the defendant, if you believe that no reasonable excuse for defendant's failure to produce the evidence has been shown.
Defendant argues that the trial court erred in giving this instruction. We agree. MCL 600.2146; MSA 27A.2146 provides in pertinent part, "The lack of an entry regarding an act, transaction, occurrence, or event in a writing or record so proved may be received as evidence that the act, transaction, occurrence, or event did not, in fact, take place." SJI2d 4.12 states, "The committee recommends that no instruction be given concerning hospital and business records." MCR 2.516(D)(3) provides:
Whenever the SJI committee recommends that no instruction be given on a particular matter, the court shall not give an instruction on the matter unless it specifically finds for reasons stated on the record that
(a) the instruction is necessary to state the applicable law accurately, and
(b) the matter is not adequately covered by other pertinent standard jury instructions.
Our Supreme Court reconciled these three provisions in Siirila v. Barrios, 398 Mich. 576, 594-597, 248 N.W.2d 171 (1976).[6] The Siirila Court held that, while counsel was free to argue the issue, the trial court properly refused to instruct the *673 jury that the absence of a hospital record could be considered as evidence that an event had not taken place. Applying Siirila and the above provisions to the instant case, we conclude that the trial court erred in giving the modified adverse inference instruction. At retrial, plaintiff is free to argue that the missing records existed and would have been favorable to her. However, the trial court should not provide an instruction regarding the records.
D
Finally, we address defendant's claim that the trial was tainted by the improper conduct of plaintiff's counsel. We recognize that this case has controversial aspects and that the trial was hotly contested; however, in such situations, the importance of professional courtesy and civility increases exponentially. Here, after carefully reviewing the record, we must agree with defendant that the conduct of plaintiff's counsel frequently exceeded permissible bounds.[7] Because we have already determined that defendant is entitled to a new trial, we need not determine whether the inappropriate behavior of plaintiff's counsel, standing alone, would require reversal of the jury verdict. However, we admonish plaintiff's counsel to refrain from the inappropriate actions discussed below in the future.
Plaintiff's counsel twice gratuitously inserted the issue of race into the trial. Counsel's emphasis on the alleged prejudice at the hospital, exemplified by his statement that he was "standing up to defend against prejudice," the accusation that defense counsel was "act[ing] on prejudice," and the reminders that defendant's employees allegedly referred to certain classes of people as "dirt bags" reflect a deliberate strategy to incite the jurors to punish defendant for its bigotry, rather than to carefully consider the facts of the case.[8] See Joba Constr. Co., Inc. v. Burns & Roe, Inc., 121 Mich.App. 615, 637, 329 N.W.2d 760 (1982).
Moreover, counsel regularly accused witnesses of fabricating their testimony; charges that defense witnesses were "making up" what they were saying were plentiful. Such conduct does not constitute proper advocacy. Counsel is not entitled to belittle a witness or to make unsubstantiated accusations that the witness is lying.[9]Badalamenti v. William Beaumont Hospital-Troy, 237 Mich.App. *674 278, 290-291, 602 N.W.2d 854 (1999); Shemman v. American Steamship Co., 89 Mich.App. 656, 667, 280 N.W.2d 852 (1979).
In addition, counsel indulged in inappropriate hyperbole by repeatedly saying that Tomic "was tortured." Indeed, at one point plaintiff's counsel said that Tomic "literally was tortured." The word "torture," when used as a verb, signifies the deliberate infliction of severe pain.[10] Although Tomic undoubtedly suffered greatly during his hospitalization, there is nothing in the record to indicate that any of his agony was intentionally inflicted.[11] See Means v. Jowa Security Services, 176 Mich.App. 466, 477, 440 N.W.2d 23 (1989). While the jury may have recognized that counsel was engaging in hyperbole, the use of the word should be avoided on retrial. See Firchau v. Foster, 371 Mich. 75, 78, 123 N.W.2d 151 (1963); Elliott v. A. J. Smith Contracting Co., 358 Mich. 398, 418-420, 100 N.W.2d 257 (1960).
Finally, we agree with defendant that counsel's relentless attacks on defense counsel were completely improper. The objections of plaintiff's counsel were regularly accompanied by charges that defense counsel was "lying" or "misrepresenting" something or "making things up." Plaintiff's counsel asked a defense witness, "Was it you or Mr. Arnone that came up with ... this?" and stated in closing argument, "Of course, Mr. Arnone would go and say anything." The record does not support the claim that defense counsel "act[ed] on prejudice." Likewise, there is nothing in the record to support the speculation of plaintiff's counsel that defense counsel "and his cronies go to football games and laugh about what they're going to say about Gary Tomic." Lastly, counsel repeatedly and inappropriately assigned blame to defense counsel for defendant's alleged misdeeds. Needless to say, there is no support in the record for the charges that defense counsel "literally killed Gary Tomic" and then "destroy[ed] records."[12]
Reversed and remanded for a new trial. We do not retain jurisdiction.
NOTES
[1]  The complaint in this case was filed by Tomic's father, Milomir Tomic. However, before trial, Powell, as personal representative of Gary Tomic's estate, was substituted for Milomir Tomic.
[2]  On appeal, plaintiff argues that this issue is not preserved because Tiernan never specifically stated that he believed he was terminated because of his whistle-blowing activities, although he did identify those activities as the reason he was required to repeat his third year, and defendant never specifically asked him why he had been terminated. We believe that plaintiff's distinction between the repetition of a year of training and the ultimate dismissal is unduly technical. At trial, Tiernan denied that he had been told that he had been fired because of his incompetence. Furthermore, plaintiff's counsel elicited from Tiernan a catalogue of the complaints that the latter had made, then immediately asked, "Were you fired?," and Tiernan responded affirmatively. The impression left is that Tiernan was fired because he refused to keep quiet about the hospital's lapses in patient care. Defense counsel informed the court that he wanted to introduce evidence regarding Tiernan's termination because it was relevant to his motive or bias and made an offer of proof that Dr. Lloyd would have testified that Tiernan's termination was due solely to his "lack of performance and his inability to function as a third- or fourth-year resident in a general surgery residency training program." We conclude that this issue is sufficiently preserved.
[3]  Tiernan testified that he was currently in general practice in California.
[4]  Defendant acknowledged that the radiologist should have prepared a report concerning the results of the CT scan, but argued that, for unknown reasons, this had not occurred. No one testified that a report on the CT scan had actually been seen. Dr. Akash Sheth, the surgical resident, recalled personally reviewing the film with one of the radiologists, although he could not recall which one, and Tomic's medical records contained a note confirming that the consultation occurred.
[5]  Dr. Jennifer Appleyard, who treated Tomic during his first hospitalization, testified that Tomic may not have had a stool to be tested. In the alternative, it was possible that the test results had not been recorded or had been lost.
[6]  In Siirila, the Supreme Court actually addressed SJI 2.12 and GCR 1963, 516.6(3), the predecessor versions of SJI2d 4.12 and MCR 2.516(D)(3).
[7]  The trial court denied plaintiff's motion in limine to exclude references to the theories propounded by two defense experts regarding a possible cause of Tomic's perforated colon. We think it likely that the denial of this motion contributed to the unfortunate tone of the trial. Because there appears to be no dispute that the cause of the perforation was irrelevant to the issue whether Tomic was treated properly, we believe that the trial court would do well to reconsider the admissibility of the defense experts' theory on remand.
[8]  The comments about the homophobia allegedly prevalent at the hospital were based on Tiernan's testimony. It was undisputed that Tomic had been gay. Accordingly, if Tomic were not given treatment that complied with the standard of care because of his sexual orientation, that fact would be relevant. However, while Tiernan testified that some staff members were unconcerned about delays in Tomic's postoperative treatment because he was gay, Tiernan attributed the delays themselves to the senior staff's lengthy absences from the ICU. There was no evidence that the approximately twenty-nine-hour delay in performing exploratory surgery on Tomic occurred because of his sexual orientation; likewise, there is no evidence that the surgeon decided to perform the enterotomy because Tomic was gay.
[9]  Defendant also complains that plaintiff's counsel leveled pervasive allegations of dishonesty against it. However, Tiernan's testimony provided an evidentiary foundation for counsel's charges that defendant destroyed or suppressed records to cover up the alleged malpractice. Tiernan testified that he had witnessed the removal of compromising documents from medical charts, he had noticed that notes and reports were often missing when he later reviewed a medical chart, and a note that he had written was missing from Tomic's chart. On the basis of this testimony, it was appropriate for plaintiff's counsel to argue that defendant had attempted to cover up its malpractice by destroying records.
[10]  The Random House Webster's College Dictionary defines "torture" as follows:
n. 1. the act of inflicting excruciating pain, as punishment or revenge, as a means of getting a confession or information, or for sheer cruelty. 2. a method of inflicting such pain. 3. Often, tortures the pain or suffering caused or undergone. 4. extreme anguish of body or mind; agony. 5. a cause of severe pain or anguish. v.t. 6. to subject to torture. 7. to afflict with severe pain of body or mind. 8. to twist, force, or bring into some unnatural shape.
[11]  Even Tiernan, whose testimony was generally hostile to defendant, stated that he would not equate the medical treatment given to Tomic with "torture."
[12]  Our Supreme Court has stated:
"One attack [abusing opposing counsel] may not constitute prejudicial error, but where there are many improper remarks concerning counsel for the defense they may, in the aggregate, prove so prejudicial as to require a new trial." [Wayne Co. Bd. of Bd. Comm'rs v. GLS Leasco, Inc., 394 Mich. 126, 131, 229 N.W.2d 797 (1975), quoting 58 Am.Jur.2d, New Trial, § 69, pp. 258-259.]

=== CASE 9737674 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:00.270313+00 ===

BUCHANAN, Judge.
CASE SUMMARY
Defendant-appellant Kash Vanover (Van-over) appeals from his conviction for child molesting, claiming the trial court erred when it admitted evidence of prior uncharged allegations of molestations under the depraved sexual instinct rule.
We reverse.
FACTS
The facts most favorable to the jury’s verdict reveal that on September 15, 1990, the fifteen year old victim was visiting the home of her great-grandmother. Vanover, the victim’s great-uncle, also lived in the home. When the victim went to bed, Van-*219over came into her room and rubbed her vagina with his hand. The victim left the room, and when she returned, Vanover began hugging her and breathing heavily. Vanover was arrested and charged with child molesting,1 a class D felony.
At trial, the victim testified that when she was fourteen, Vanover had attempted to grab her breast. The victim’s mother testified that when she was between the ages of eleven and twelve, Vanover had also fondled her vagina. Vanover was convicted and received a one and one-half year sentence.
ISSUE
Vanover raises several issues for our consideration, but because we reverse, we need only address one:
Whether the trial court erred when it allowed into evidence Vanover’s prior acts of touching the victim and her mother?
DECISION
PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS — Vanover claims the trial court should not have admitted evidence of prior incidents with the victim and her mother under the depraved sexual instinct rule, arguing the rule should be overturned. The State concedes that our Supremé Court has recently abolished the depraved sexual instinct rule, but argues that the Supreme Court’s decision should not be given retroactive application.
CONCLUSION — The Supreme Court’s decision applies to Vanover’s case, and he must be retried.
Our Supreme Court has recently abolished the depraved sexual instinct rule which would have allowed the admission of the disputed evidence. Lannan v. State (1992), Ind., 600 N.E.2d 1334.2
We first consider whether the Supreme Court intended its decision in Lannan to be applied retroactively. Our consideration of the retroactivity of Lannan, however, is necessarily limited to its retroactive application to pending cases, and is unrelated to the issue of whether Lannan would be applied retroactively on collateral review of previously decided cases. See Daniels v. State (1990), Ind., 561 N.E.2d 487.
The issue is clouded by certain statements in the Lannan opinion. After observing that its decision echoed the reasoning of Justice DeBruler’s dissent in Kerlin v. State (1970), 255 Ind. 420, 265 N.E.2d 22, the Court in Lannan continued: “Twenty-two years later, Justice DeBruler has carried the day. His reasoning tracks the language of Federal Rule of Evidence 404(b), which we hereby adopt in its entirety, effective from this day forward.” Lannan, supra at 1339 (footnote omitted) (emphasis supplied).
While this language might suggest that the abolition of the depraved sexual instinct rule was to be given only prospective application, the Court went on to apply Rule 404(b) to the facts in Lannan and concluded that evidence was improperly admitted, Id. at 1341, which constituted a retroactive application of its new rule.3
Any doubt that might exist as to the retroactive application of the Lannan decision was settled by another opinion issued on the same day by the Supreme Court. In Pirnat v. State (1992), Ind., 600 N.E.2d 1342, the Court stated:
“Pirnat’s petition for transfer alleges error in the introduction of certain evidence admitted to show his depraved sexual instinct. We have today in Lannan v. State [600 N.E.2d 1334] No. 71S03-9210-CR-836, October 16, 1992, revisited *220the depraved sexual instinct exception and announced a new rule concerning the admissibility of prior bad acts in sex offense cases. Inasmuch as Pimat’s appeal is currently pending as this new rule is announced, the rule of Lannan should be applied to his case. [Citations omitted].
Therefore we remand to the Court of Appeals for reexamination of Pimat’s appeal in light of our holding today in Lannan v. State.”
Pimat, supra (emphasis supplied).
Based on the Supreme Court's command in Pimat, we therefore must apply Lan-nan to Vanover’s appeal, as it was pending when the new rule was announced. While the State hopes the Supreme Court will reconsider its decision in Pimat, we must apply the law as it stands. Vanover and Pirnat are in precisely the same position, and we can discern no difference in circumstances between them that would justify disparate treatment of their cases.
Following the analysis used in Lannan, we cannot say that the evidence of Vanover’s prior sexual misconduct with the victim and her mother, record at 292, 351, was admissible under Federal Rule of Evidence 404(b). The State contends that the evidence of Vanover’s touching of the victim a year earlier and the incident with her mother more than twenty years before trial was evidence of Vanover’s intent to arouse himself during the present crime. Like Chief Justice Shepard in Lannan, we believe such an argument is an attempt to force “a square peg in a round hole.” Lannan, supra at 1341. We must therefore conclude that the trial court erred when it allowed the testimony.
When assessing the probable impact of the improperly admitted evidence in Lan-nan, the Supreme Court had this to say:
“Ordinarily, evidence of uncharged crimes of the character introduced in this case could be said to have a major impact on the jury. Today we are persuaded otherwise, however, in large measure because of the testimony of Alfred Sage, an uncle of V.E. and T.W. Sage testified that in May 1990, Lannan drove to the home where the molest [sic] occurred and shouted, ‘I’m going to f*** them again.’ Record at 274. This declaration, coupled with the victim’s testimony and T.W.’s corroboration, lead us to conclude that the impact of this other evidence on the jury was not of sufficient weight to require reversal.”
Lannan, supra at 1341.
Comparing the evidence presented here to that considered in Lannan, we cannot come to a similar conclusion. There was no incriminating declaration made by Vanover. Also, there was no corroborating testimony from third parties. In fact, the only corroborating testimony from a third party supported Vanover. Vanover’s son testified that he saw Vanover in the victim’s bedroom on the night in question and that Vanover merely turned off a radio in the room and patted the victim on the head. Record at 442. Our assessment of the probable impact of the improperly admitted testimony leads us to conclude that reversal is required.
Judgment reversed and remanded for a new trial.
SULLIVAN, J„ concurs.
HOFFMAN, J., dissents with separate opinion.
. Ind.Code 35-42-4-3.
. Anticipating the Supreme Court’s decision in Lannan, Vanover objected to the disputed evidence at trial, record at 281-91, 343-50, and specifically argued on appeal that the depraved sexual instinct rule should be abolished. Appellant's brief at 9.
.This application is in sharp contrast to the Supreme Court’s decision in Modesitt v. State (1991), Ind., 578 N.E.2d 649, in which the Court abolished the Patterson exception to the hearsay rule. The Court did not apply its new rule to the facts in Modesitt and expressly stated that it would not have retrospective application to pending or previously decided cases.

=== CASE 9737675 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:00.292322+00 ===

HOFFMAN, Judge,
dissenting.
I dissent. The majority’s opinion is illogical and irrational. Lannan v. State (1992), 600 N.E.2d 1334, expressly states that the adoption of Federal Rule of Evidence 404(b) is “effective from this day forward.” 600 N.E.2d at 1339. (Emphasis supplied.) This language does not merely suggest prospective application as the majority contends, it requires prospective application. See Gray v. State (1991), Ind., 579 N.E.2d 605, 608. Furthermore, contrary to the majority’s statement in footnote 3, the Supreme Court’s application of the new rule in Lannan is no different from the court’s application of the new rule in Modesitt v. State (1991), Ind., 578 N.E.2d 649. The new rules not only took effect in Lannan and Modesitt, they also applied to the facts of the cases. If we were to adopt *221the reasoning of the majority, there would be no such thing as prospective application.
In support of its opinion, the majority cites Pirnat v. State (filed October 16, 1992), Ind., 600 N.E.2d 1342, a case the Supreme Court handed down on the same day as Lannan. However, Pirnat was pending on transfer in the Supreme Court at the same time as Lannan; therefore, it is distinguishable from the case at bar. As discussed above, the Lannan court clearly set out the prospective nature of its opinion, and as the instant case was tried prior to the effective date of Lannan, the new rule does not apply.

=== CASE 2211620 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:09.395781+00 ===

414 Mass. 66 (1992)
605 N.E.2d 287
JOHN OLIVEIRA[1]
vs.
PAUL PEREIRA & others.[2]
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Bristol.
September 14, 1992.
December 31, 1992.
Present: LIACOS, C.J., WILKINS, ABRAMS, O'CONNOR, & GREANEY, JJ.
Brian R. Corey for the plaintiff.
Robert E. Allen, Jr., for Thomas Pereira & another, submitted a brief.
*67 ABRAMS, J.
The plaintiff, John Oliveira, appeals from a decision of a Superior Court judge that his claim against the defendants for reimbursement of clean-up costs arising from the contamination of property was barred by the statute of limitations. The judge determined[3] that the defendants, prior owners of the property, were liable for clean-up costs under the Massachusetts Oil and Hazardous Material Release Prevention Act (Act), G.L.c. 21E (1990 ed.), but the judge concluded that the complaint was not timely filed under G.L.c. 260, § 2A. The judge also ruled that the plaintiff's cause of action accrued at the time G.L.c. 21E was enacted. We transferred the plaintiff's appeal to this court on our own motion. The plaintiff argues that the judge erred in concluding that the statute had a three-year period of limitations. He also challenges the judge's determination of the date the claim accrued. For the reasons stated in this opinion, we affirm the judge's ruling that the three-year statute of limitations is applicable, but we reverse and remand for a determination of the date or dates that the plaintiff's cause of action accrued.
We summarize the judge's findings of fact. The plaintiff is the owner of a piece of property in Westport. The defendants Thomas and Cora Pereira owned the property from 1952 to 1981. Thomas Pereira owned and operated a filling station, used automobile lot, and automobile repair shop on the property until 1971. In 1971, the other defendant, Paul Pereira, leased the service station from his father, operating it until he purchased it in 1981. In 1981, the plaintiff operated the service station. Then Paul Pereira sold it to him on December 31, 1982. The plaintiff continues to use the property as a service station, used automobile business, and automobile repair shop.
Initially, the property contained two underground storage tanks, each with a 2,000-gallon capacity. Shell Oil Company *68 (Shell) owned these storage tanks. At some time in the early 1960's, Shell added one 4,000-gallon underground storage tank and piped the two smaller ones together. Around 1965, two 4,000-gallon tanks replaced the two smaller tanks.
In 1965 or 1966, after the underground tanks had been replaced, Thomas Pereira noticed an odor of gasoline in the water of the service station. A well that was approximately thirty-nine feet deep supplied the water. Thomas Pereira informed his Shell sales representative. Shell arranged to have the well pumped out, but the odor of gasoline persisted. Then, in 1972, while Paul Pereira operated the service station, Shell sandblasted and "fiberglassed" the underground storage tank. Subsequently, in the presence of his Shell representative, Paul Pereira was able to ignite water piped into the service station restroom. Shell transferred ownership of the underground storage tanks to Paul Pereira in 1979.[4] The odor of gasoline still persisted.
The judge found that gasoline had leaked out of the underground storage tank and contaminated "the site, a well and the ground water." He found that the contamination occurred while Thomas Pereira and Cora Pereira owned and operated the property and that it continued while they owned and Paul Pereira operated the service station. The judge also found that the plaintiff did not contribute to or cause the contamination of the property.
In 1987, the plaintiff wished to refinance. He approached a lender who required that he get a G.L.c. 21E inspection certificate. Therefore, the plaintiff engaged Clean Harbors, Inc. (Clean Harbors), to assess the property. Clean Harbors performed an assessment and determined that the presence of gasoline in the soil and well water contaminated the site. The plaintiff provided this information to the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), as the Act requires. G.L.c. 21E, § 7 (1990 ed.). The DEP has placed the property on its list of confirmed contaminated sites, and has determined *69 that the property is a priority site. Wells have been dug to monitor the cleanup.
The judge found that the following were the expenses of the cleanup:
Phase I    -   Limited Site Assessment:         $ 26,000
Phase II   -   Comprehensive Site Assessment     340,000
Phase III  -   Development of Remedial
Response Plan
and
Phase IV   -   Implementation of Remedial
Response Plan                     400,000
________
$766,000
In addition, he found that the plaintiff had expended $18,000 on preliminary assessments.
Finally, the judge determined whether the defendants were responsible parties under the Act. He found that Thomas Pereira was a responsible person because he owned the property and operated the property as a service station at the time the contamination occurred. Although aware of the condition, Thomas Pereira did not "assess, contain, or clean up the contamination" nor did he notify the DEP of the problem. The judge found Cora Pereira, as joint owner of the land with her husband, to be jointly and severally liable for the costs of assessment, containment, and removal of contamination at the site. The judge then found that Paul Pereira had operated the service station from 1971 to 1981 and that he was aware at all times that gasoline leakage had contaminated the site. The judge determined that Paul Pereira did not assess, contain or clean up the site and also did not notify the DEP of the contamination. He too was a responsible person under the Act. As responsible persons under the Act, the defendants were liable for the "costs of assessment, containment and removal" of contamination at the site. Because they failed to notify the DEP, they were not able to *70 avail themselves of the defense provided by G.L.c. 21E, § 5 (c) (3) (1990 ed.), to limit liability.[5]
Finding that the contamination damaged the plaintiff's property, the judge ruled that the plaintiff had a private cause of action, having undertaken assessment action regarding the release of oil. The judge ruled that the plaintiff was entitled to reimbursement. The judge also found that the plaintiff was entitled to reimbursement for clean-up costs not yet incurred, but that in order to recover he would have had to include a complaint for declaratory relief. The judge declared that the defendants were jointly and severally liable for containment and removal costs the plaintiff incurred, once they were incurred.
Continuing his findings, the judge discussed the appropriate statute of limitations. The judge ruled that the three-year statute of limitations under G.L.c. 260, § 2A (1990 ed.), controlled.[6] He then applied the "discovery rule" and ruled *71 that the plaintiff had knowledge that the site was contaminated when he leased it in June, 1981, and at least when he purchased it in December, 1982. The judge noted, however, that the Legislature did not enact the provisions of G.L.c. 21E, until March 24, 1983. He ruled therefore that the statute of limitations began to run on that date. Because the action was commenced on July 25, 1988, the judge found that it was barred by the statute of limitations. On that basis, he ruled in favor of the defendants.
1. The statute of limitations under the Act. A. The proper length of the limitations period. The judge analyzed the plaintiff's claim under § 4 of the Act as a tort, applying the statute of limitations found in G.L.c. 260, § 2A. The plaintiff insists that this was error, asserting that his action is not in the nature of a tort, but is, according to the language of the Act, an action for reimbursement. The plaintiff claims that his action should be allowed to proceed under G.L.c. 260, § 2 (1990 ed.), which states that "[a]ctions of contract, other than those to recover for personal injuries, founded upon contracts or liabilities, express or implied ... shall, except as otherwise provided, be commenced only within six years next after the cause of action accrues."[7] In the alternative, the plaintiff suggests that the action for reimbursement is equitable. If so, to succeed on a time-bar defense, the defendants would have had to plead laches and show that they had experienced some prejudice because the plaintiff unreasonably delayed in bringing his action. Jubinville v. Jubinville, 313 Mass. 103, 105 (1943).
*72 Prior to 1992, the Act contained no statute of limitations for actions brought under § 4. See G.L.c. 21E, §§ 1-18.[8] See also Rosenblatt, Settlement Procedures and Strategy in Chapter 21E Private Party Cases, Environmental Litigation '91 21, 27-28 (Mass. Continuing Legal Educ. 1991). Section 4 of the Act, as it read at the time of trial, provided that "[a]ny person who undertakes assessment, containment or removal action regarding the release or threat of release of oil or hazardous material shall be entitled to reimbursement from any other person liable for such release or threat of release for the reasonable costs of such assessment, containment and removal. If such release resulted from the negligence of two or more persons, each shall be liable to the others for his pro rata share of the costs of assessment, containment and removal" (emphasis added). The United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts, interpreting this language, stated that an action under this section was not in the nature of tort, but rather was an action for statutory indemnification. Hays v. Mobil Oil Corp., 736 F. Supp. 387, 396 (D. Mass. 1990).
"Under Massachusetts law, the determination of whether the contract or tort statute of limitations applies is controlled by the essential nature of a party's claim. See Hendrickson v. Sears, 365 Mass. 83, 85 (1974); Kagan v. Levenson, 334 Mass. 100, 103 (1956). See also Desmond v. Moffie, 375 F.2d 742, 743-744 (1st Cir.1967)." Royal-Globe Ins. Co. v. Craven, 411 Mass. 629, 636 (1992). The flaw in the plaintiff's claim is in reading § 4 alone. Determining liability for contamination is not the focus of § 4 of the Act. The language of the section presupposes liability when it states that one who "undertakes assessment ... shall be entitled to reimbursement from any other person liable for such release" (emphasis added). G.L.c. 21E, § 4. Section 4 simply allows for reimbursement[9] of expenditures made. Id. The statute, *73 read as a whole, suggests that the essential nature of claims under G.L.c. 21E sounds in tort. For example, § 5 (a) talks of joint and several liability in some instances, and § 5 (c) (3) provides an exception to liability where a "person establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that he exercised due care with respect to the oil or hazardous material, that he took precautions against for[e]seeable acts or omissions of any third party and the consequences that could for[e]seeably result from such acts or omissions." In addition, § 7 requires a party to notify DEP when "he has knowledge of a release or a threat of release of oil or hazardous material." We conclude that the statute, read as a whole, sounds more in tort than in contract. See Pentucket Manor Chronic Hosp., Inc. v. Rate Setting Comm'n, 394 Mass. 233, 240 (1985); Commonwealth v. Adams, 389 Mass. 265, 273 (1983) ("basic principle of statutory construction [is] that a statute must be read as a whole"); Holbrook v. Holbrook, 1 Pick. 248, 250 (1822). There is no error in the judge's determination.
B. The proper date of accrual. The judge found that the plaintiff knew the property was contaminated when he leased it or at least when he purchased it in December, 1982. Because the Legislature had not then passed the Act, the judge found that the plaintiff's cause of action accrued on March 24, 1983, the date the Act became effective.
An action under § 4 of G.L.c. 21E, is an action for reimbursement. The plaintiff brought this case in order to be reimbursed for the "reasonable costs of such assessment, containment and removal." G.L.c. 21E, § 4. We have defined "reimbursement" as "repaying or making good the amount paid out." Boston v. Commonwealth, 322 Mass. 177, 179 (1947). Thus, to be reimbursed, the plaintiff must have paid *74 the sum due.[10] The proper date or dates of accrual of the actions for reimbursement of assessment costs is the date or dates the assessment costs were paid.[11] Accord Hays v. Mobil Oil Corp., supra at 397 (judge found that the "limitations period on plaintiff's [c.] 21E cause of action did not begin to run when plaintiff first learned of the soil contamination ... but when plaintiff's liability for the cleanup of the site was finally fixed").[12] The judge made no findings, however, as to the date or dates the clean-up costs were paid. We therefore remand for a determination of the date or dates the plaintiff made payments.
2. The availability of attorneys' fees under the Act. The plaintiff argues that the judge erred in refusing to award attorneys' fees and expert opinion fees under G.L.c. 21E, § 15. Because the judge did not have the benefit of our opinion in Sanitoy, Inc. v. Ilco Unican Corp., 413 Mass. 627, 631 (1992), we also remand this issue for reconsideration.
In sum, the judgment is reversed and the case is remanded to the Superior Court for determination of the date or dates on which the plaintiff paid reimbursement for the clean-up costs to determine whether the claims are barred by the three-year statute of limitations and for reconsideration of his claim for attorneys' fees and expert witness fees if the *75 plaintiff is entitled to reimbursement of the assessment costs. The statute of limitations to be applied is three years.[13]
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  Doing business as Four Square Village Garage.
[2]  Thomas Pereira and Cora Pereira.
[3]  The plaintiff moved for leave to file an amended complaint, seeking declaratory relief. The judge granted the motion and the plaintiff filed an amended complaint.
[4]  Beginning in 1987, Precision Testing Company has tested the tanks and lines each year and they have been sound.
[5]  General Laws c. 21E, § 5 (c) (3), states that, "[s]ubject to the limitation provided in paragraph (d) there shall be no liability under paragraph (a) for a person otherwise liable who can establish by a preponderance of the evidence, (A) that the release or threat of release of oil or hazardous material and the damages resulting therefrom were caused by: ... (3) an act or omission of a third party other than an employee or agent of the person, or than one whose act or omission occurs in connection with a contractual relationship existing directly or indirectly, with the person, except where the sole contractual arrangement arises from a published tariff and acceptance for carriage by a common carrier by rail, if the person establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that he exercised due care with respect to the oil or hazardous material, that he took precautions against for[e]seeable acts or omissions of any third party and the consequences that could for[e]seeably result from such acts or omissions, and that he complied with all notification requirements of section seven." The judge found that the defendants had a contractual relationship with Shell. He found that Shell, which "owned and maintained the underground storage tanks along with the defendants caused the contamination by the release of oil." The judge also found that the defendants had failed to "take precautions against foreseeable acts or omissions of any third party and the consequences that could foreseeably result from such acts or omissions." In addition, the judge found that, in order to use the defense of this section, the defendants would have had to comply with the notification procedures. Id.
[6]  General Laws c. 260, § 2A, states that, "[e]xcept as otherwise provided, actions of tort, actions of contract to recover for personal injuries, and actions of replevin, shall be commenced only within three years next after the cause of action accrues."
[7]  The plaintiff argues that he should receive the benefit of a six-year statute of limitations under G.L.c. 260, § 2. The record does not reveal a contract between the parties indicating the proper allocation of responsibility for clean-up costs. Thus, we reject the plaintiff's suggestion that a contract statute of limitations should apply. At least one commentator has noted, however, that cost recovery actions under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), the Federal analogue to the Act, are quasi-contractual. 3 R. Steinberg & R. Mays, RCRA and Superfund 37-12 (1992).
[8]  We note that, initially, Congress did not include a statute of limitations in CERCLA. See 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq. (1988).
[9]  In its 1992 amendments, the Legislature more clearly defined the nature of an action under § 4 of the Act. While still articulating that a party would be entitled to "reimbursement," the statute allows for an equitable sharing of the costs of any response actions. St. 1992, c. 133, § 293. It continues, directing that any "claims and actions for contribution, reimbursement or equitable share" be brought pursuant to the procedure outlined in the new § 4A. Id.
[10]  The judge ruled that Oliveira had "incurred costs in evaluating pollution on his property." We have defined costs "incurred" as meaning those costs that one is "personally obligated to pay." Lincoln St. Realty Co. v. Green, 374 Mass. 630, 632 (1978). The implication of the judge's language, however, is that Oliveira had paid out assessment costs and therefore was entitled to reimbursement.
[11]  Because the action is one for reimbursement, it is possible to have more than one cause of action and more than one accrual date. The 1986 amendments to CERCLA contemplate that claims for recovery of costs might be brought in more than one action. See 42 U.S.C. § 9613(g)(2) (1988). In the new statute of limitations under G.L.c. 21E, § 11A, an individual may bring suit within three years of payment. St. 1992, c. 133, § 309.
[12]  At least one commentator has noted that "[i]t may take several years of sophisticated environmental studies before the plaintiff can determine whether he has a claim or has a claim serious enough to warrant suit." Rosenblatt, supra at 27.
[13]  In July, 1992, the Legislature enacted significant additions to and alterations of the Act. See, e.g., St. 1992, c. 133, §§ 293, 294, 309. Among them was G.L.c. 21E, § 11A, which provides a statute of limitations for actions under § 4 of the Act. St. 1992, c. 133, § 309. This new statute of limitation reads: "Notwithstanding any other general or special law to the contrary, civil actions pursuant to this chapter shall be brought in accordance with the following deadlines: ... (2) Actions brought by persons other than the commonwealth pursuant to sections four or four A to recover reimbursement, contribution or equitable share shall be commenced within three years after the date the person seeking recovery discovers or reasonably should have discovered that the person against whom the action is being brought is a person liable pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for the release or threat of release for which such costs or liability were incurred, or within three years of the time when the person bringing the action first learns of a material violation of an agreement entered into pursuant to section four A, or within three years after the person bringing the action incurs all response costs, or within three years after payment by the person seeking contribution, reimbursement, or an equitable share for liability pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or within three years after sending notice pursuant to the first paragraph of section four A, whichever is later."

=== CASE 9737679 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:03.204831+00 ===

JUSTICE KNECHT, dissenting: I disagree with the majority opinion. The trend of modem cases is to reject the natural accumulation of snow and ice rule. One reason may be no one understands the difference between a natural accumulation of ice and snow and an unnatural accumulation. Another reason may be business customers deserve better treatment from business owners. The question presented is whether J.C. Penney’s duty of reasonable care to business invitees is to be ignored in favor of an archaic rule. I believe the Illinois Supreme Court answered that question in Ward v. K mart Corp. (1990), 136 Ill. 2d 132, 554 N.E.2d 223. Justice Ryan’s scholarly review and analysis of section 343 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts (Restatement (Second) of Torts §343 (1965)) is fully applicable to the question presented in this case. The majority suggests plaintiff is arguing his position in the wrong forum, and an intermediate court of review ought be particularly cautious in dabbling in such fundamental policy questions. I agree caution is appropriate, but logic suggests the Ward analysis no longer permits the peaceful coexistence of section 343 and the natural accumulation rule. If the operator of a business owes a duty of reasonable care to his customers, then that duty should extend to the kind of risk encountered by plaintiff here. This would not impose any greater burden than already imposed on defendant as to other sorts of conditions. It would not make defendant absolutely liable because a customer slipped on ice or snow. It would simply leave it for a jury to decide whether the parties acted reasonably. Instead of a drastic change, this would simply be a return to traditional analysis no longer skewed by a special exception that has no meaningful basis in law or public policy.

=== CASE 2211627 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:09.497697+00 ===

183 Cal. App. 2d 586 (1960)
GENERAL METALS CORPORATION (a Corporation) et al., Respondents,
v.
PRECISION LODGE 1600 OF THE INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF MACHINISTS (an Unincorporated Association) et al., Appellants.
Civ. No. 24051.
California Court of Appeals. Second Dist., Div. Three.
Aug. 5, 1960.
Rose, Klein & Marias and Alfred M. Klein for Appellants.
Sheppard, Mullin, Richter & Hampton for Respondents.
SHINN, P. J.
This is an appeal by Precision Lodge 1600 of the International Association of Machinists, and Fred J. Goodman from an order vacating the award of an arbitrator and denying a petition for confirmation of the award.
Pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement between the Union and General Metals Corporation, the grievance of an employe named Goodman was referred to an impartial arbitrator selected by the parties. Article VII, section 2 of the *587 agreement provided: "Said arbiter shall render his decision in writing not later than fifteen (15) days after he has taken the matter under submission." The arbitrator took the matter under submission on May 9, 1958 and rendered his decision in favor of Goodman on July 10th. The company petitioned the court to vacate the award and the Union petitioned to confirm it. (Code Civ. Proc.,  1287, 1288.) The court ordered the award annulled upon the ground that it had not been rendered within 15 days, as required by the arbitration agreement.
[1] The decisive question presented on the appeal is whether the court correctly vacated the award because it was not rendered within the 15- day period. The question must be answered in the affirmative. [2] It has been the law of California since 1866 that when the time for making an award has been fixed by agreement of the parties, the arbitrator has no jurisdiction to make an award after the time has expired and the same must be vacated by the court upon proper application. (Ryan v. Dougherty, 30 Cal. 218; In re Abrams & Brennan, 2 Cal. App. 237 [84 P. 363]; Matter of Silliman, 159 Cal. 155 [113 P. 135]; Willis Finance & Const. Co. v. Porter, 88 Cal. App. 523 [263 P. 842].) This view is in accord with the weight of authority. (See cases collected in 154 A.L.R. 1392.) [3] Appellants frankly concede that the provision that the arbiter shall render his decision within 15 days is both mandatory and jurisdictional.
Appellants insist, however, that no harm resulted. Since the arbitrator was without jurisdiction to act on July 10th it is immaterial whether the company suffered prejudice by reason of the delay. The award was a nullity and it was properly set aside.
The order is affirmed.
Vallee, J., and Ford, J., concurred.

=== CASE 2211643 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:37:09.684293+00 ===

605 N.E.2d 132 (1992)
John N. DONEGAN, Appellant (Respondent),
v.
Katherine DONEGAN, Appellee (Petitioner).
No. 49S02-9202-CV-112.
Supreme Court of Indiana.
December 22, 1992.
Charles B. Huppert, Indianapolis, for appellant.
Franklin I. Miroff, Monty K. Woolsey, Ancel, Miroff & Frank, P.C., Indianapolis, for appellee.
*133 ON PETITION FOR REHEARING
DICKSON, Justice.
In our prior opinion in this case, we granted transfer to recognize and clarify the authority of a post-dissolution trial court to complete consideration of an initial petition for educational needs filed before a child's emancipation. Donegan v. Donegan (1992), Ind., 586 N.E.2d 844. Finding waiver of John N. Donegan's emancipation defense, we declined to address his appellate claim that the trial court erred in finding, without any evidentiary basis, that his daughter Jennifer was emancipated on June 17, 1988. John now seeks rehearing, urging that in dismissing a petition seeking to fix the date of emancipation so as to terminate his child support obligation, he did not waive his emancipation defense to his former wife's initial petition for educational needs. We grant rehearing.
John declares that he abandoned his modification petition due to mootness because Jennifer had subsequently reached age 21. However, he contends that any waiver of the emancipation issue in his modification petition should bear only upon when regular child support terminated, and not prevent him from disputing the later petition filed by his former wife, Katherine Donegan, seeking contribution to Jennifer's college expenses. Directing us to dialogue between counsel and the trial court before and during the hearing on Katherine's petition, John argues that he clearly did not intend to waive the issue of emancipation as a defense to her petition for educational needs. He also stresses that evidence presented at the hearing on her petition established the defense that prior to the filing of her petition, the initial petition for educational needs, Jennifer had become fully emancipated under Ind. Code § 31-1-11.5-12(d) and (e).
Katherine urges that John waived his right to argue that Jennifer was emancipated prior to the filing date of the petition for educational needs by reason of his consent to continuances in this dispute and his statement on the record that he had no objection to the trial court entering an order obligating him to contribute toward Jennifer's educational needs.
We first observe that, unlike a claim of changed circumstances requiring modification of support,[1] the assertion of emancipation will be effective as of the date of emancipation rather than as of the date of filing. Extinguishing a parental support obligation due to the emancipation of a minor does not constitute an impermissible retroactive modification of a support order. Ross v. Ross (1979), Ind. App., 397 N.E.2d 1066. A support obligor may assert emancipation of the child as a defense to a petition seeking an order which provides for the educational needs where no order providing for educational needs was entered prior to emancipation. See Wittwer v. Wittwer (1989), Ind. App., 545 N.E.2d 27, 29. In the present case, no order addressing Jennifer's educational needs existed prior to the filing of Katherine's petition seeking John's payments toward college expenses.
We reject Katherine's claim that John waived his emancipation defense by consenting to continuances and by his testimony that he had no objection to contributing to Jennifer's college expenses. In John's testimony at the hearing, he stated only that he was willing to voluntarily contribute but expressly opposed a court-ordered contribution. We also decline to find an implied waiver from his consenting to continuances.
Concluding that John's emancipation defense to Katherine's petition for educational needs was not abandoned or waived, we must now address John's appellate contention that there was an absence of any evidence to support the trial court's determination of June 17, 1988, as the date Jennifer was emancipated for purposes of *134 child support. On appeal, the specific findings and conclusions of the trial court will be affirmed unless they are clearly erroneous. Ind. Trial Rule 52(A). The appellate reversal of a judgment predicated upon a finding may result when there exists no competent evidence to support such a finding. Heckman v. Heckman (1956), 235 Ind. 472, 134 N.E.2d 695, 698.
John argues that because Jennifer's emancipation status remained essentially unchanged during a period well before Katherine's June 15, 1988, filing of her petition for contribution, the trial court erred in selecting June 17 as the date of emancipation, rather than a date prior to the filing of her counter-petition. We agree.
Here, an accurate determination of emancipation date is particularly crucial. As we concluded in our opinion to transfer this case,
While a trial court may not first make an order for educational needs when the petition seeking such relief is filed after the child's emancipation, it is authorized to complete consideration of petitions filed before emancipation.
Donegan, 586 N.E.2d at 846 (emphasis in original).
The trial court found that Jennifer was emancipated based upon evidence that in February, 1988, Jennifer was no longer enrolled in college; that until May, 1988, Katherine was without knowledge of her daughter's withdrawal from school; that 4by March, 1988, Jennifer earned $6.50 per hour while employed as a hotel reservationist; and that by May, 1988, she was paying rent to live in her mother's apartment. There was no evidence of any change in her status thereafter and Katherine concedes that the June 17 date does not coincide with any material changes in circumstances. Brief of Appellee to the Court of Appeals at 16.
In view of these evidentiary factors and upon re-examination of the entire record, we find that from May, 1988, through June 17, 1988, there were no changes in the facts or inferences relevant to the issue of emancipation. Thus, because there is a complete absence of evidence to support the trial court's finding that Jennifer was emancipated after June 15 but not before, it was clearly erroneous for the trial court to have determined that Jennifer's date of emancipation occurred after the filing date of the petition for contribution toward college expenses. With the evidence insufficient to establish that Jennifer's emancipation occurred after the filing of Katherine's petition for educational expenses, it was error to grant the petition.
Rehearing is granted. The trial court's order for contribution toward college expenses is reversed. In all other respects we leave undisturbed our earlier opinion on petition to transfer. Cause remanded to the trial court for entry of judgment for respondent John N. Donegan.
SHEPARD, C.J., and DeBRULER and KRAHULIK, JJ., concur.
GIVAN, J., dissents without opinion.
NOTES
[1]  The general rule in Indiana is that retroactive modification of support payments is erroneous if the modification relates back to a date earlier than the filing of a petition to modify. Reeves v. Reeves (1992), Ind. App., 584 N.E.2d 589, 594. A trial court has the discretion to make a modification of support payments effective either at or any time after the filing of the petition. Talarico v. Smithson (1991), Ind. App., 579 N.E.2d 671.

=== CASE 9737680 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 19:32:09.500789+00 ===

Markman, J.
We granted leave to consider whether the Court of Appeals properly held an employer vicariously liable under the Civil Rights Act (cra), MCL 37.2101 et seq.-, MSA 3.548(101) et seq., for sexual harassment by a supervisory employee against a subordinate employee. A divided Court of Appeals panel affirmed the judgment on a jury verdict returned in plaintiffs favor. The majority utilized vicarious liability principles articulated in two recent United States Supreme Court decisions applying the federal Civil Rights Act. We hold that the principles stated in the federal cases relied on by the Court of Appeals do not apply to claims brought under Michigan’s Civil Rights Act. Instead, we adhere to prior Michigan precedent and the specific language of the Michigan statute. We also hold that defendant was entitled to a directed verdict on plaintiff’s claim of quid pro quo sexual harassment. Accordingly, we vacate the Court of Appeals opinion and remand to the Court of Appeals for reconsideration of plaintiffs claim of hostile environment sexual harassment in light of this opinion.
I
Defendant Trettco, Inc., a corporation that manages food service operations for a number of businesses, *304hired plaintiff as a cook in June 1995, planning to use her in various locations, pending possible placement in a permanent position. Plaintiff was initially assigned to replace a cook who was on medical leave. During her second week in this position, a temporary supervisor, Paul Wolshon, was assigned to cover the duties of the regular on-site supervisor, Jennifer Hos-tutler, who was on vacation. Wolshon was a “float manager” for defendant, meaning that he moved from location to location working as an interim manager as needed. Wolshon lacked the authority to hire, fire, or discipline other employees. Plaintiff, however, believed that Wolshon had the authority to fire her.
According to the trial testimony, during the four-day period that Wolshon was at the facility,1 he engaged in a course of offensive conduct toward plaintiff, including rubbing plaintiffs buttocks, grabbing her breasts, and repeatedly propositioning plaintiff for sexual favors. Plaintiff testified that she felt intimidated and threatened by Wolshon’s behavior. Defendant had a written sexual harassment policy in its company handbook, which all employees were required to read and sign. The policy defined sexual harassment, explained that persons engaging in sexual harassment were subject to discipline, including immediate termination, and instructed all employees experiencing or witnessing an incident that they considered sexual harassment or discrimination were to report the incident to defendant’s vice president. All defendant’s managers were also required to attend a yearly management-development seminar that included a segment on sexual-harassment education.
*305On Wednesday, July 6, 1995, defendant’s regional director, Kevin McLaughlin, called the facility and plaintiff answered the telephone. After sensing something “wrong” in plaintiff’s voice, McLaughlin inquired whether there was a problem. Without specifying the nature of the problem, plaintiff indicated that something was wrong and that she needed to talk to him. When McLaughlin sought to get more information over the telephone, plaintiff refused to elaborate. Plaintiff later testified that this was because Wolshon was standing next to her. There was conflicting testimony regarding whether McLaughlin did anything further to determine the nature of the undescribed problem. According to McLaughlin, he called the following day and plaintiff again refused to say what was wrong. Plaintiff testified that he only called on Wednesday. They both agree that McLaughlin said that he would come to the facility on Friday. McLaughlin testified that he did so, but did not speak to plaintiff. Plaintiff and others testified that they did not see him on that day. It is undisputed, however, that at no time during the week did plaintiff ever specifically tell McLaughlin about the sexual harassment perpetrated by Wolshon. Nor did she follow the process outlined in the policy manual for reporting sexual harassment. McLaughlin testified that it never occurred to him that plaintiff might be having problems with her male supervisor.
On the following Monday, when Hostutler returned from vacation, and plaintiff informed her of Wolshon’s conduct. Hostutler immediately telephoned McLaughlin and relayed the news. McLaughlin instructed Hos-tutler to prevent Wolshon from entering the facility, where he was scheduled to work that morning, and to send him directly to the home office. McLaughlin then *306commenced an investigation of the incident. He instructed Hostutler to have plaintiff prepare a written statement, which was then submitted to McLaughlin. Shortly thereafter, McLaughlin met with plaintiff and Hostutler, and assured plaintiff that she would never have to work with Wolshon again. Thus, as soon as plaintiff reported the sexual harassment, Wol-shon was removed from the facility and plaintiff never again had contact with Wolshon. When the permanent cook returned, plaintiff was transferred to another facility operated by defendant. Plaintiff was eventually discharged in September 1995 when she failed to show up for work for several consecutive days.
Plaintiff then brought suit against defendant, alleging assault, sexual assault, sexual harassment, and retaliatory discharge. Wolshon was not named as a defendant. The trial court dismissed the assault and sexual assault charges on defendant’s motion for a directed verdict. Plaintiff voluntarily dismissed her retaliatory discharge claim before the case went to the jury. Thus, plaintiff advances no claim that the discharge had any connection to the sexual harassment. The trial court denied defendant’s motions for a directed verdict on plaintiff’s claim of sexual harassment, both after plaintiff’s proofs and at the close of all the evidence.
The case was submitted to the jury on separate theories of liability — quid pro quo sexual harassment and hostile environment sexual harassment. The jury verdict form required the jury to answer two specific interrogatories corresponding to these theories, and to only proceed to assess damages if it held for plaintiff on either of these two questions. The jury *307answered both interrogatories in plaintiffs favor and then assessed damages at $150,000.
n
Defendant appealed, and the Court of Appeals affirmed in a two-to-one decision.2 The majority rejected defendant’s argument that plaintiff had failed to prove the existence of a hostile work environment, reasoning that the severe and pervasive sexual harassment occurring during Wolshon’s week in charge was sufficiently outrageous to qualify as a hostile work environment. With respect to defendant’s vicarious liability, rather than analyzing the case pursuant to Radtke v Everett, 442 Mich 368; 501 NW2d 155 (1993), the majority adopted Faragher v Boca Raton, 524 US 775; 118 S Ct 2275; 141 L Ed 2d 662 (1998), and Burlington Industries, Inc v Ellerth, 524 US 742; 118 S Ct 2257; 141 L Ed 2d 633 (1998). In those cases, the United States Supreme Court, applying the federal Civil Rights Act, held:
An employer is subject to vicarious liability to a victimized employee for an actionable hostile environment created by a supervisor with immediate (or successively higher) authority over the employee. When no tangible employment action is taken, a defending employer may raise an affirmative defense to liability or damages, subject to proof by a preponderance of the evidence .... The defense comprises two necessary elements: (a) that the employer exercised reasonable care to prevent and correct promptly any sexually harassing behavior, and (b) that the plaintiff employee unreasonably failed to take advantage of any preventive or corrective opportunities provided by the employer or to avoid harm otherwise. ... No affirmative *308defense is available, however, when the supervisor’s harassment culminates in a tangible employment action, such as discharge, demotion, or undesirable reassignment. [Faragher, supra, 524 US 807-808; Ellerth, supra, 524 US 765.]
The Court of Appeals majority concluded that defendant could properly be found to be vicariously liable, because Wolshon’s conduct created a hostile work environment and defendant could not have established the necessary affirmative defense. Regarding defendant’s ability to establish an affirmative defense under Faragher and Ellerth, the majority explained that “the jury could have, and apparently did, reject McLaughlin’s testimony and accept plaintiff’s testimony regarding defendant’s attempts to prevent or correct Wolshon’s sexually harassing behavior.” 232 Mich App 567. Thus, reasoned the majority, “the jury could reasonably infer that defendant was vicariously liable for Wolshon’s sexually harassing behavior because defendant failed to exercise reasonable care to prevent and correct promptly Wolshon’s behavior.” Id. The majority did not address plaintiffs quid pro quo claim because it relied on Faragher and Ellerth for the proposition “that the labels ‘quid pro quo’ and ‘hostile work environment’ are not controlling for purposes of establishing employer liability.” 232 Mich App 562-563 and n 3.
The dissent, asserted that this was not a case of quid pro quo harassment, but only one presenting a claim of hostile environment harassment. It further noted that, in such a case, pursuant to this Court’s precedent, a plaintiff must establish that the employer bears the responsibility for the alleged harassment under the doctrine of respondeat superior, which ordinarily requires a showing of either a recurring *309problem or that repetition of an offensive incident was likely, and that the employer failed to correct the problem upon receiving notice. Radtke, supra at 382, 395. The dissent found that the evidence in this case was insufficient to satisfy that burden.
We granted leave to appeal and directed the parties to address, among other things, whether the principles adopted in Faragher and Ellerth should apply in cases brought under the Michigan Civil Rights Act. 461 Mich 905 (1999).
m
A
We begin our analysis by reviewing the current principles of Michigan law regarding sexual harassment in employment because this is the law that the trial court and the Court of Appeals were obligated to follow.3 Through the Civil Rights Act, Michigan law recognizes that, in employment, freedom from discrimination because of sex is a civil right. MCL 37.2102; MSA 3.548(102). Employers are prohibited from violating this right,4 MCL 37.2202; MSA 3.548(202), and discrimination because of sex includes sexual harassment, MCL 37.2103(i); MSA 3.548(103)(i). In turn, “sexual harassment” is specifically defined to include
*310unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct or communication of a sexual nature under the following conditions:
(i) Submission to the conduct or communication is made a term or condition either explicitly or implicitly to obtain employment ....
(ii) Submission to or rejection of the conduct or communication by an individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting the individual’s employment ....
(iii) The conduct or communication has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual’s employment.... [MCL 37.2103(f); MSA 3.548(103)(i).]
The statute expressly addresses an employer’s vicarious liability for sexual harassment committed by its employees by defining “employer” to include both the employer and the employer’s agents. MCL 37.2201(a); MSA 3.548(201)(a).
Sexual harassment that falls into one of the first two of these subsections is commonly labeled quid pro quo harassment. Champion v Nation Wide Security, Inc, 450 Mich 702, 708; 545 NW2d 596 (1996). Sexual harassment that falls into the third subsection is commonly labeled hostile environment harassment. Radtke, supra at 381. We have previously identified the elements that a party must establish in order to make out a claim for sexual harassment with respect to each of these categories.
In order to establish a claim of quid pro quo harassment, an employee must, by a preponderance of the evidence, demonstrate:
(1) that she was subject to any of the types of unwelcome sexual conduct or communication described in the statute, and (2) that her employer or the employer’s agent used her submission to or rejection of the proscribed conduct as a factor in a decision affecting her employment. [Champion, supra at 708-709.]
*311In order to establish a claim of hostile environment harassment, an employee must prove the following elements by a preponderance of the evidence:
(1) the employee belonged to a protected group;
(2) the employee was subjected to communication or conduct on the basis of sex;
(3) the employee was subjected to unwelcome sexual conduct or communication;
(4) the unwelcome sexual conduct or communication was intended to or in fact did substantially interfere with the employee’s employment or created an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment; and
(5) respondeat superior. [Radtke, supra at 382-383.]
Whichever category of sexual harassment is at issue, it is always necessary to determine the extent of the employer’s vicarious liability when harassment is committed by an agent. Because the Civil Rights Act expressly defines “employer” to include agents, we rely on common-law agency principles in determining when an employer is liable for sexual harassment committed by its employees. Vicarious liability exists in the case of quid pro quo harassment because the quid pro quo harasser, by definition, uses the power of the employer to alter the terms and conditions of employment. Champion, supra.
By comparison, we have noted that such strict imposition of vicarious liability on an employer “is illogical in a pure hostile environment setting” because, generally, in such a case, “the supervisor acts outside ‘the scope of actual or apparent authority to hire, fire, discipline, or promote.’ ” Radtke, supra at 396, n 46 (citations omitted). Hence, we have explained:
*312Under the Michigan Civil Rights Act, an employer may avoid liability [in a hostile environment case] “if it adequately investigated and took prompt and appropriate remedial action upon notice of the alleged hostile work environment.” Downer v Detroit Receiving Hosp, 191 Mich App 232, 234; 477 NW2d 146 (1991) (applying the standard to a Civil Rights Act claim). See also Babcock [v Frank, 783 F Supp 800, 809 (SD NY, 1992)]. Such prompt and appropriate remedial action will permit an employer to avoid liability if the plaintiff accuses either a co-worker, McCarthy v State Farm Ins Co, 170 Mich App 451, 457; 428 NW2d 692 (1988), or a supervisor of sexual harassment. McCalla v Ellis, 180 Mich App 372, 380; 446 NW2d 904 (1989), citing [Meritor Savings Bank, FSB v Vinson, 472 US 57, 72; 106 S Ct 2399; 91 L Ed 2d 49 (1986)]; Downer, supra at 234. An employer, of course, must have notice of alleged harassment before being held liable for not implementing action. Katz v Dole, 709 F2d 251, 255 (CA 4, 1983); Henson [v City of Dundee, 682 F2d 897, 905 (CA 11, 1982)]. [Radtke, supra at 396-397.]
The bottom line is that, in cases involving a hostile work environment claim, a plaintiff must show some fault on the part of the employer. That is the essence of Radtke’s requirement that a plaintiff prove that the employer failed to take prompt and adequate remedial action upon notice of the creation of a hostile work environment.
Therefore, under current Michigan law, whether analyzing quid pro quo harassment or hostile environment harassment, the question is always whether it can be fairly said that the employer committed the violation — either directly or through an agent. The fact that the answer to that question may differ depending on whether the harassment is of the quid pro quo or hostile environment type is not a result of arbitrary rulemaking, but, rather, is firmly rooted in traditional agency principles.
*313To summarize, an employer is strictly liable only for quid pro quo sexual harassment. In terms of the statute, this means that an agent of the employer must have used submission or rejection of unwelcome sexual conduct or communication “as a factor in decisions affecting [the plaintiffs] employment.” MCL 37.2103(i)(ii); MSA 3.548(103)(i)(ii). When the submission to or rejection of the unwelcome sexual conduct or communication has not been factored into an employment decision, but a hostile work environment has nevertheless been created because unwelcome sexual communication or conduct substantially interferes with an individual’s employment, the violation can only be attributed to the employer if the employer failed to take prompt and adequate remedial action after having been reasonably put on notice of the harassment. Radtke, supra.
Against this backdrop of the current state of controlling legal principles regarding sexual harassment under Michigan law, we turn our attention to whether the principles adopted by the United States Supreme Court in Faragher and Ellerth should now apply in cases brought under the Michigan Civil Rights Act.
B
We are many times guided in our interpretation of the Michigan Civil Rights Act by federal court interpretations of its counterpart federal statute. See, e.g., Sumner v Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co, 427 Mich 505, 525; 398 NW2d 368 (1986). However, we have generally been careful to make it clear that we are not compelled to follow those federal interpretations. See, e.g., Radtke, supra at 381-382. Instead, our primary obligation when interpreting Michigan law is *314always “to ascertain and give effect to the intent of the Legislature, ... ‘as gathered from the act itself.’ ” McJunkin v Cellasto Plastic Corp, 461 Mich 590, 598; 608 NW2d 57 (2000). Although there will often be good reasons to look for guidance in federal inteipretations of similar laws, particularly where the Legislature has acted to conform Michigan law with the decisions of the federal judiciary, see, e.g., Koes-ter v City of Novi, 458 Mich 1, 15-16; 580 NW2d 835 (1998), we cannot defer to federal interpretations if doing so would nullify a portion of the Legislature’s enactment. See Piper v Pettibone Corp, 450 Mich 565, 571-572; 542 NW2d 269 (1995), quoting Turner v Auto Club Ins Ass’n, 448 Mich 22, 27-28; 528 NW2d 681 (1995) (ascertaining legislative intent starts with the unambiguous statutory language and, where judicial interpretation is permitted, such interpretation must avoid denying effect to portions of the statute).
If this Court were to adopt the principles announced by the United States Supreme Court in Faragher and Ellerth, it would represent a significant change in our approach to determining employers’ vicarious liability for sexual harassment. Specifically, the holdings issued by the United States Supreme Court in those cases both: (1) conflate the concepts of quid pro quo harassment and hostile environment harassment, and (2) shift the burden of proof from the employee to the employer regarding whether the employer should be held vicariously hable “for an actionable hostile environment created by a supervisor with immediate (or successively higher) authority over the employee.” Faragher, supra, 524 US 807; Ellerth, supra, 524 US 765. To avoid vicarious liability under this new federal rule, an employer, essentiahy, must establish affirmatively that it was not negligent *315in failing to prevent the harassment and that the victim was negligent in failing to avail herself of opportunities provided by the employer to avoid the harm from such harassment. Id.
The Court’s decision to conflate quid pro quo sexual harassment and hostile environment sexual harassment was based upon its view of federal law. In Ellerth, the Court noted that § 703(a) of title vn provides only that an employer may not discriminate against an individual “ ‘because of such individual’s . . . sex.’ 42 USC § 2000e-2(a)(l).” Ellerth, supra, 524 US 751-752. The terms “quid pro quo” and “hostile work environment” are nowhere found in the federal statute, nor is “sexual harassment.” The Court found that these labels were useful for roughly grouping different types of cases, but, beyond that, they held limited utility. Id.
As noted earlier, the Michigan Civil Rights Act expressly includes sexual harassment as a prohibited form of sex discrimination, and further provides detailed definitions for sexual harassment that can be easily identified by the labels “quid pro quo” and “hostile work environment.” This stands in contrast to the analogous federal law. Even if we thought it sound policy to blur the distinctions between these types of sexual harassment in order to announce a common rule on vicarious liability that encompasses all sexual harassment, our limited role in interpreting statutes would preclude us from essentially “legislating” in this manner. McJunkin, supra at 598; Piper, supra at 572. Finally, adopting the principles announced in Faragher and Ellerth would be inconsistent with our decision in Radtke, in which we applied agency principles to hold that it is the plaintiff’s burden to prove that the employer failed to take prompt and adequate *316remedial action upon reasonable notice of the creation of a hostile environment, even where the harassing conduct is committed by a supervisor.
We find no statutory basis for singling out sexual harassment cases, as opposed to other classes of prohibited discrimination, for the application of a new rule of vicarious liability. For example, in cases brought under the Civil Rights Act alleging disparate treatment on the basis of membership in a protected class, the overall burden of proving the elements of a discrimination claim always remains with the plaintiff (although a framework exists for temporarily placing a burden of production on the defendant). See Lytle v Malady (On Rehearing), 458 Mich 153, 177-178 (Weaver, J., joined by Boyle and Taylor, JJ.), 185 (Brickley, J., concurring); 579 NW2d 906 (1998); Town v Michigan Bell Telephone Co, 455 Mich 688, 695-696 (Brickley, J., joined by Boyle and Weaver, JJ.), 707 (Riley, J., concurring in relevant part); 568 NW2d 64 (1997). Absent some articulable basis in our statutory law for treating sexual harassment claims differently than other forms of discrimination, we see no justification for imposing upon defendants the burden of affirmatively disproving vicarious liability, or conditioning the success of that defense on factors not necessarily rooted in traditional agency principles. Instead, we adhere to the established principles of Michigan law regarding sexual harassment and agency that are summarized in part iii(a) of this opinion.
IV
Having established that the legal principles the trial court and the Court of Appeals were obligated to fol*317low are the same principles that control our review of this case, we next address their application by these two courts in this case.
A
We initially note that the trial court erred by not granting defendant a directed verdict with regard to plaintiffs quid pro quo claim of sexual harassment. In Champion, we held that the rape of an employee by her supervisor amounted to a constructive discharge. We reasoned that the supervisor’s decision to rape the employee, in response to her refusal to comply with his requests for sexual favors, amounted to a decision to discharge her on the basis of her submission to or rejection of those requests. Champion, supra at 710-713.
In this case however, there was no tangible (adverse or otherwise) employment action that was shown to be causally related to plaintiff’s submission to or rejection of Wolshon’s harassment. As explained previously, the sine qua non of a quid pro quo harassment claim is a decision affecting the plaintiffs employment. The tangible employment action in Champion was the plaintiff’s constructive discharge. Here, there was no termination of employment.5 As we explained in Jacobson v Parda Federal Credit Union, 457 Mich 318, 327; 577 NW2d 881 (1998), “[wjhile an employer’s action may lead to a constructive discharge, such a discharge itself generally cannot become evident until the employee has, in fact, left the employment. . . . Until the employee resigns, *318the employer’s action has yet to prove to be one of discharge.”6 Viewing all reasonable inferences in plaintiffs favor, Kubczak v Chemical Bank & Trust Co, 456 Mich 653, 663; 575 NW2d 745 (1998), we conclude that the trial court erred in denying defendant’s motion for a directed verdict with respect to plaintiff’s theory of quid pro quo sexual harassment. Because there was no decision affecting plaintiff’s employment, plaintiff’s proofs were insufficient, as a matter of law, to put such a theory of liability at issue.
B
Finally, because the Court of Appeals erroneously failed to apply controlling Michigan legal principles regarding sexual harassment claims brought under Michigan law, and instead applied the federal principles announced in Faragher and Ellerth, it is necessary that we remand this case to the Court of Appeals for reconsideration of defendant’s challenge to plaintiff’s hostile environment claim under the proper legal framework.
Plaintiff’s testimony clearly established the existence of a hostile work environment. The central question to be addressed on remand is whether plaintiff presented sufficient evidence to demonstrate that defendant “failed to rectify a problem after adequate notice.” Radtke, supra at 395. That is, whether defendant failed to take prompt and appropriate remedial action after receiving adequate notice that Wolshon *319was sexually harassing plaintiff. As an additional word of clarification, we observed in Radtke that a reasonableness inquiry, accomplished by objectively examining the totality of the circumstances, is necessary to fulfill the purposes of the Michigan Civil Rights Act. Id. at 386-387. This also holds true for an inquiry into the adequacy of the notice. Therefore, notice of sexual harassment is adequate if, by an objective standard, the totality of the circumstances were such that a reasonable employer would have been aware of a substantial probability that sexual harassment was occurring. See Perry v Harris Chernin, Inc, 126 F3d 1010, 1014 (CA 7, 1997) (the law against sexual harassment is not self-enforcing; although an employee has no duty under the law to report discriminating harassment, an employer cannot be expected to correct such harassment unless the employer has reason to know that it is occurring). Finally, we emphasize that the relevant inquiry concerning the adequacy of the employer’s remedial action is whether the action reasonably served to prevent future harassment of the plaintiff.
V. THE DISSENT
In our view, the dissent badly misstates our explanation of the distinctions that cause certain types of misconduct by employees to be attributable to an employer, while leaving employers free from liability for other types of employee misconduct. One initial flaw in the dissent’s criticism is its implicit premise that our decision today relegates the misconduct at issue in this case to the lesser of two categories of sexual harassment. In reality, employers are equally prohibited from engaging in hostile environment sex*320ual harassment and quid pro quo sexual harassment; both of these types of harassment encompass a spectrum of misconduct from least to most egregious. To categorize a given pattern of misconduct as only of the type that possibly gives rise to a claim of hostile environment harassment does not mean that the misconduct is less egregious than other harassment. Rather, it simply allows this Count to determine whether the sexual harasser’s employer, in addition to the sexual harasser himself, is to be held responsible for the misconduct.
The dissent asserts that the majority has added an element to what constitutes a prima facie case of quid pro quo sexual harassment because the dissent disputes that such a showing includes a decision regarding a “tangible employment action.” This appears to be an argument supported only by semantics. A tangible employment action is simply “a decision affecting the individual’s employment,” which is an element of quid pro quo harassment that is explicitly required by the statute.7 MCL 37.2103(i)(ii); MSA 3.548(103)(i)(ii). In Champion, we said that “quid pro quo harassment occurs only where an individual is in a position to offer tangible job benefits in exchange for sexual *321favors or, alternatively, threaten job injury for a failure to submit.” Id. at 713. The dissent’s attempt to distinguish this passage from Champion by asserting that it merely defines those “individuals who have the ability to impose quid pro quo sexual harassment on employees,” post at 329, n 2, is baseless inasmuch as it ignores why the ability to engage in such harassment is limited to persons with supervisory powers. The dissent would have us believe that quid pro quo harassment is limited to persons with supervisory power by happenstance or coincidence, rather than by the fact that a decision regarding a tangible employment action is an indispensable element of quid pro quo harassment, and only persons with supervisory powers could ever effectively make such a decision.
The dissent further argues that in Champion, quid pro quo sexual harassment was a fait accompli when the supervisor, on the basis of his victim’s rejection of unwelcome sexual advances, decided to engage in conduct that we presumed amounted to a constructive discharge. From this, the dissent argues that our opinion is flawed because quid pro quo harassment is determined when the decision affecting employment is made and not when the effect of that decision is felt by the individual.8 We do not decide whether an *322employee must be constructively or actively terminated in order for an employer to be liable, nor do we suggest that the employee’s reaction to harassment is the touchstone of quid pro quo harassment. Instead, we disagree with the dissent’s suggestion that every sexual assault or molestation by a supervisor will automatically amount to quid pro quo harassment. Champion did not hold that all sexual assaults will result in a constructive discharge. In fact, Champion expressly stated that its holding was not intended to “extend unlimited liability to employers whose supervisors rape subordinates.” Id. at 713. Rather, Champion made clear that an action leading to constructive discharge, like an active discharge, can constitute a decision affecting employment.
In Champion, the rape of the employee constituted quid pro quo harassment because, when the decision to rape was made in response to the employee’s rejection of her supervisor’s sexual advance, a constructive discharge contemporaneously occurred. There, the employer’s “decision to use force, in other words, was the equivalent of a decision to discharge because Mr. Fountain should have expected that it would lead to Ms. Champion’s resignation.” Champion at 711. It was this “decision to discharge” that constituted a decision affecting employment. In the present case, there was no “decision to discharge.” This case is therefore, distinguishable from Champion. Yet, our recognition that there was no decision to discharge here is not equivalent to an assertion that the employee loses the quid pro quo protections of the CRA when the employee chooses to continue working. It instead is a recognition that an employee who continues working must bear the burden of proving that the employer nonetheless made a decision affecting *323employment. We think the dissent misapprehends Champion’s holding by concluding that sexual harassment in the form of sexual assaults or molestation will always be quid pro quo harassment when committed by a supervisor. Some acts of harassment by a supervisor, though statutorily proscribed, fit more readily within the hostile environment protections of the CRA than the quid pro quo protections.
The dissent also argues that a supervisor’s decision to engage in conduct that creates a hostile work environment can suffice as the decision that affects employment and thereby establish quid pro quo harassment — even when there is no other effect on employment other than the substantial interference with employment that qualifies the environment as hostile. However, the plain language of the statute requires that, in cases of quid pro quo harassment, an individual’s “[s]ubmission to the conduct or communication [be] made a term or condition ... to obtain employment” or that “[s]ubmission to or rejection of the conduct or communication by an individual [be] used as a factor in decisions affecting the individual’s employment . . . .” MCL 37.2103(i)(i), (ii); MSA 3.548(103)(i)(i), (ii). This language explicitly distinguishes between the decision to harass and the subsequent decision affecting employment that results from the victim’s reaction to the harassment. Even if we contemplated Wolshon’s pattern of behavior as a series of discrete incidents, there is no evidence suggesting that he engaged in one incident of misconduct on the basis of plaintiff’s reaction to a previous incident. To the contrary, it is manifestly evident that Wolshon understood that his overtures were unwelcome and was indifferent to both plaintiff’s rejection of them and the fact that, as he engaged in this con*324duct, he was interfering with her employment; this is the very essence of hostile environment sexual harassment.
Although we recognize that plaintiff might well continue to be affected in some way after defendant took steps to assure that she would no longer be subject to Wolshon’s conduct, this does not support the conclusion that her employment would continue to be affected. By the dissent’s reasoning, any unwelcome sexual contact to an employee by a person in a higher position would strictly subject the employer to liability for that contact, regardless of the fact that the employer could not have anticipated the incident, took every precaution to avoid such incidents, disciplined employees responsible for such incidents, and ensured afterward that the victim’s employment was not altered by the incident. The dissent would have us rewrite the statute so as to make employers responsible for any decision occurring at work that affects an individual, rather than only for decisions affecting the individual’s employment.
The dissent simply ignores the statutory definitions of sexual harassment and would simply label all harassment by individuals possessing supervisory authority as “quid pro quo” and all harassment by coemploy-ees as “hostile work environment.” This is an interesting proposition, but it lacks any basis in law. Rather, imposing liability on an employer is predicated on the application of agency principles to the categories of conduct described by the statute, and not on the basis of the dissent’s supervisor/nonsupervisor distinction. It is clear that supervisors can engage in hostile environment sexual harassment, that is distinct from quid pro quo harassment.
*325Further, the dissent, reasoning that whether plaintiff actually knew of the policy was a significant issue to be resolved by the jury, makes much of the fact that plaintiff testified that she did not actually know of defendant’s policy against sexual harassment. As much as anything else, this demonstrates that the dissent misses the point. Whether defendant can be held responsible for acts perpetrated by Wolshon turns on: (1) the nature of defendant’s relationship with Wol-shon; and (2) any failings on the part of defendant that contributed to Wolshon’s success in harassing plaintiff. Hence, it would be relevant to demonstrate that plaintiff was unaware of defendant’s policy because of an omission on the part of defendant. However, if defendant had done all that could reasonably be expected in order to make plaintiff aware of its policy, it matters little to the issue of vicarious liability if, for reasons not attributable to defendant, plaintiff was not actually aware of the policy. Hence, absent evidence attributing plaintiff’s claimed lack of knowledge to a failing by defendant, the dissent’s argument in this regard carries little weight. To the extent that the dissent’s arguments are relevant, they pertain primarily to the sufficiency of the evidence issues to be considered on remand.
Finally, the dissent disagrees with our decision to remand this case to the Court of Appeals for reconsideration of plaintiff’s hostile environment claim. The dissent perceives that it can glean all it needs to know from the earlier Court of Appeals opinion applying the principles announced in Faragher and Ellerth. Inasmuch as the Court of Appeals placed the burden of proving vicarious liability on the wrong party, we cannot confidently draw the same conclusion as the dissent.
*326CONCLUSION
In sum, we decline to engraft the principles stated in Ellerth and Faragher to actions for sexual harassment brought under the Michigan Civil Rights Act. Rather, we adhere to the specific statutory language of Michigan law and to prior Michigan precedent construing that language. We also find no basis in law, statutory or otherwise, for deviating from our past incorporation of traditional agency principles to actions brought under the Civil Rights Act or for having different burdens of proof in sexual harassment cases than in other cases alleging other forms of discrimination prohibited under the same act.
Further, we find that the evidence adduced at trial was insufficient, as a matter of law, to make out a claim for quid pro quo harassment because of the absence of any tangible employment action taken with respect to plaintiff. Finally, because the Court of Appeals erroneously failed to follow Michigan law when reviewing defendant’s challenge to plaintiff’s hostile environment claim, we vacate the judgment of the Court of Appeals and remand this case to that Court for reconsideration in light of this opinion. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Weaver, C.J., and Cavanagh, Taylor, Corrigan, and Young, JJ., concurred with Markman, J.
Monday of that week was the July 4 holiday.
232 Mich App 560; 591 NW2d 413 (1998).
“[I]t is the Supreme Court’s obligation to overrule or modify case law if it becomes obsolete, and until this Court takes such action, the Court of Appeals and all lower courts are bound by that authority.” Boyd v W G Wade Shows, 443 Mich 515, 523; 505 NW2d 544 (1993).
“A person alleging a violation . . . may bring a civil action for appropriate injunctive relief or damages, or both.” MCL 37.2801(1); MSA 3.548(801)(1).
Plaintiff also fails to demonstrate any other “decision affecting employment” as required by the statute.
Jacobson involved a dispute over when the constructive discharge in that case took place. That issue is not presented here. Both the majority and dissent in Jacobson appear to have agreed that no constructive discharge has taken place if the employment was never terminated.
“Tangible employment action” has become a term of art in cases involving sexual harassment, and is analogous to the term “adverse employment action” in employment discrimination cases based on disparate treatment, but it allows for the idea that, in sexual harassment cases, a decisionmaker could secure an employee’s submission to unwelcome sexual advances by conditioning a beneficial (rather than adverse) change in an individual’s employment status on that submission. See, e.g., Ellerth at 761 (explaining that “[a] tangible employment action constitutes a significant change in employment status, such as hiring, firing, failing to promote,” and comparing this to the holdings in a string of federal cases that stand for the proposition that, in disparate treatment cases, in order for an employment action to be adverse, it must be materially and objectively adverse).
The dissent also argues that plaintiff was discharged, albeit several months later and ostensibly for unrelated reasons, and that because plaintiff disputed the reasons given by defendant for that discharge, the question whether plaintiff suffered a tangible employment action should have been left to the jury. This requires us to again explain what should have already been clear. To show quid pro quo harassment, it is not enough to demonstrate harassment and a tangible employment action — there must be a causal relationship between the two. Plaintiff presented nothing to demonstrate that her eventual discharge was a consequence of her rejection of, or submission to, Wolshon’s harassment.