=== CASE 9739557 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:29.948502+00 ===

JUSTICE GREIMAN delivered the opinion of the court: Following a bench trial, defendant Larry Jennings was convicted of possession with intent to deliver cocaine and heroin and sentenced to concurrent terms of seven and four years in prison. Defendant appeals from both his convictions and sentences, contending that the State’s evidence was insufficient to support his convictions, that the trial court relied on improper evidence in finding him guilty, that his sentencing hearing was improper, and that the compulsory extraction and storage of his. DNA, pursuant to section 5 — 4—3(a) of the Unified Code of Corrections (730 ILCS 5/5 — 4—3 (West 2002)), was unconstitutional. For the reasons that follow, we affirm in part and reverse in part. At trial, Chicago police officer Trevor Stotts testified that on July 10, 2002, at approximately 5:08 p.m., he and Officers Roman and Creed responded to a call of domestic violence at the Robert Taylor homes. As he entered the building, Stotts observed defendant standing with another man approximately 40 feet away. Defendant handed the other individual a small object and accepted an unknown amount of United States currency in exchange. Stotts and the other officer approached and defendant and the other individual fled up the north stairwell. Stotts pursued them as Officer Roman ascended the central stairwell. While he gave chase, Stotts observed defendant drop a small plastic bag. Stotts recovered the bag and continued his pursuit. Officer Roman intercepted defendant on the sixth floor and placed him in custody. Officer Stotts conducted a search of defendant’s person and recovered a bag containing six smaller plastic bags of a substance Stotts believed to be cocaine. The bag Stotts had recovered in the stairwell contained 25 smaller plastic bags of suspected heroin. A search subsequent to processing yielded $705 in cash. Officer Stotts stated that he inventoried the bag containing the 25 smaller packets of suspected heroin under number 2734281 and the bag containing the 6 smaller packets of suspected cocaine under number 2734282. He thereafter placed the suspected contraband in heat-sealed evidence envelopes, placed them in a vault, and had them sent to the state crime lab for analysis. The parties then stipulated that Officer Stotts would proffer the above testimony as to his handling of the suspected controlled substances and that Dorothy Kernan, a forensic scientist with the Illinois State Police crime lab, would testify that she received the items under the aforementioned inventory numbers in their respective envelopes, which did not exhibit any signs of tampering. Kernan opened the envelopes, removed the enclosed items, and performed tests commonly accepted in the scientific community for ascertaining the presence of controlled substances. Kernan tested all six items contained in envelope number 2734282, which had a total weight of 1.1 grams and tested positive for the presence of cocaine. She tested one of the items contained in envelope number 2734281 and found that it tested positive for the presence of heroin. The total weight of the 25 items contained in envelope number 2734281 was 3.7 grams. Kernan would have further testified that her opinions were based upon a reasonable degree of scientific certainty and that the equipment and instruments she used in testing the items were in proper working order and were certified and calibrated. Following closing arguments, the trial court found defendant guilty of possession with intent to deliver more than 1 gram but less than 15 grams of cocaine, in violation of section 401(c)(2) of the Controlled Substances Act (720 ILCS 570/401(c)(2) (West 2002)), and possession with intent to deliver less than 10 grams of heroin, in violation of section 401(d) (720 ILCS 570/401(d) (West 2002)). Defense counsel initially requested a presentence investigation report and a hearing date. Following an off-record conversation between the court and counsel, the judge had the following colloquy with defendant: “THE COURT: Mr. Jennings, do you understand what a presentence investigation is, sir? THE DEFENDANT: Yes, sir. THE COURT: And that’s your decision to give that up? THE DEFENDANT: Yes, sir.” The sentencing hearing ensued immediately thereafter. In aggravation, the State presented evidence of defendant’s five prior felony convictions. In mitigation, defense counsel stated that at the time of his arrest, defendant had been out of prison for two years, was married and employed, and had been doing volunteer work since his release. Defendant stated to the court that he had “just got caught up in the wrong place at the wrong time” and that he “just so happen[ed] to be there.” The court then remarked that “the amount you are credited with having on your person is certainly much more than a person would have for their [szc] own individual use. *** It’s possession with intent, and you certainly fit that any time you have that much.” The judge went on to state that defendant was eligible for sentencing as a Class X offender and that his comments to the court were “pretty insulting” and that sentencing should be continued because the judge was “subject to drop a hammer on you [defendant] more so than if I [the judge] calm[ed] down.” The judge remarked that he “might be inclined to be a little more unfair with Mr. Jennings than [he] would ordinarily be” and that it would be in defendant’s best interest to let the judge “just cool out.” At a subsequent hearing, defendant apologized to the court for his previous comments. The court then sentenced defendant as a Class X offender to seven years in prison for possession of cocaine with intent to deliver and a concurrent term of four years in prison for possession of heroin with intent to deliver and ordered that defendant submit to DNA analysis. Defendant thereafter filed a motion for new trial, which the circuit court denied. This appeal followed. Although defendant’s initial argument on appeal concerns the propriety of his sentencing hearing, we deal first with the validity of his convictions. Defendant challenges the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain his convictions for possession of controlled substances with intent to deliver by contending that the State failed to establish a sufficient chain of custody over the suspected contraband, that the State failed to provide an adequate foundation for Kernan’s stipulated expert testimony, and that the State failed to prove intent to deliver beyond a reasonable doubt.  In assessing the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain a defendant’s conviction, a reviewing court must determine whether, after viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. People v. Smith, 185 Ill. 2d 532, 541 (1999). We may not substitute our judgment for that of the trial court and will not reverse a conviction unless the evidence is so improbable or unsatisfactory as to create a reasonable doubt of the defendant’s guilt. People v. Lundy, 334 Ill. App. 3d 819, 825 (2002). In order to sustain a conviction for possession of a controlled substance with intent to deliver, the State’s evidence must show beyond a reasonable doubt that: (1) the defendant knew drugs were present; (2) the defendant was in immediate possession or control of the drugs; and (3) the defendant intended to deliver them. People v. Robinson, 167 Ill. 2d 397, 407 (1995). Defendant first contends that his convictions should be reversed because the State failed to establish a sufficient chain of custody to connect the substances recovered from the scene of his arrest to the items found by Kernan to be cocaine and heroin. He argues that the State failed to present any evidence as to the handling and safekeeping while in the police’s possession, the circumstances under which the lab received the items, or the safekeeping of the bags while they were at the lab. Defendant relies on this court’s decision in People v. Cowans, 336 Ill. App. 3d 173 (2002), where another panel held that the State is required to demonstrate that evidence has not been altered or substituted by showing that the police took reasonable protective measures to ensure that the substances taken from defendant were the same ones later tested by chemists and that any failure to establish such a connection renders the evidence insufficient to prove the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Cowans, 336 Ill. App. 3d at 177-82. The State responds that defendant has waived this issue for purposes of appeal by failing to object to the admission of the evidence at trial and failing to incorporate the objection into a posttrial motion. See People v. Enoch, 122 Ill. 2d 176, 186 (1988). Defendant counters, pursuant to Cowans, that his argument cannot be waived because it is a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, not its admissibility. Cowans, 336 Ill. App. 3d at 175-76. We disagree.  Our supreme court recently held that a challenge to the chain of custody of an alleged controlled substance in possession cases is considered an attack on the admissibility of the evidence rather than an attack on its sufficiency to uphold a conviction, and is thus subject to the ordinary rules of waiver. People v. Woods, 214 Ill. 2d 455 (2005). The court reasoned that the chain of custody over a purported controlled substance establishes a foundation for such evidence as reliable and admissible; it does not function as proof of the existence of an element of the crime of possession of a controlled substance. Therefore, a defendant’s challenge to the State’s chain of custody does not function as a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence to support a conviction and is therefore not exempt from waiver. Woods, 214 Ill. 2d at 470.  In this case, the trial court heard Officer Stotts’ unchallenged testimony that he inventoried and sealed the suspected narcotics and placed them in a vault to await delivery to the crime lab. Defendant stipulated to that testimony as well as to Kernan’s statement that she received the items under the same inventory numbers in a sealed condition and that they did not exhibit any signs of tampering. In general, a defendant is precluded from attacking or otherwise contradicting any facts to which he has previously stipulated. People v. Gibson, 287 Ill. App. 3d 878, 880 (1997). In narcotics cases, stipulations may remove from the case any issues as to the chain of custody of any incriminating evidence. People v. Hill, 345 Ill. App. 3d 620, 631 (2003). Moreover, by stipulating to the fact that evidence was in the same condition and under the proper inventory numbers, and then objecting only on appeal, defendant may have injected error into the trial. By consenting to the admission of the stipulated testimony, defendant agreed to proceed in one direction and cannot now object to its admission for the first time. Active participation in the direction of proceedings goes beyond mere waiver. People v. Besz, 345 Ill. App. 3d 50, 57 (2003); Hill, 345 Ill. App. 3d at 633. By conceding the proposition that the same items inventoried and stored by Officer Stotts were the same ones received and examined by Kernan, and that they showed no evidence of tampering or alteration, defendant is now estopped from arguing that there was insufficient evidence to establish a sufficient chain of custody over the narcotics he was accused of possessing. See Besz, 345 Ill. App. 3d at 58; Woods, 214 Ill. 2d at 471. Accordingly, we conclude that defendant has waived this issue for consideration on appeal.  Defendant next contends that his convictions were improper because the State failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the substances seized at the scene of his arrest were in fact controlled substances, specifically in that Kernan’s stipulated testimony failed to establish her qualifications to proffer opinions as an expert witness and failed to establish that the tests she performed were carried out with appropriate due caution such that they produced reliable results. Defendant argues that the State failed to lay a proper foundation for admitting Kernan’s testimony as expert opinion because it failed to present any evidence that she possessed the requisite expertise upon which to base her opinion that the items found in defendant’s possession were indeed cocaine and heroin. He further argues that the State failed to present sufficient evidence to establish the reliability of the tests Kernan purportedly used to analyze the substances at issue. Again, the State responds that defendant has waived this issue for purposes of appeal by stipulating to the admissibility of Kernan’s opinion at trial and failing to object and raise the issue in a subsequent posttrial motion. We agree. Our supreme court has recently held that, where a defendant invites and acquiesces to the admission of an analyst’s opinion that an item in question tested positive for a controlled substance, without any timely objection, the defendant cannot be heard on that issue for the first time on appeal. People v. Bush, 214 Ill. 2d 318, 332 (2005). Relying on People v. Jones, 16 Ill. 2d 569 (1959), People v. Richardson, 123 Ill. 2d 322 (1988), and People v. Jones, 60 Ill. 2d 300 (1975), the court reasoned that a defendant’s failure to raise a timely objection to stipulated testimony, only to allege a violation for the first time on appeal, deprives the State of the opportunity to cure any alleged defects, either by modifying the stipulation to include additional foundational support or by calling the analyst to testify in person. The court went on to state that, where a party stipulates to the admissibility of evidence, the need for the other party to lay a foundation no longer exists and that it is the stipulation by an allegedly aggrieved party, not any neglect by the opposing party, that is responsible for any resulting error. Bush, 214 Ill. 2d at 332-33. In accordance with the supreme court’s decision, we find that defendant has waived the issue of foundation for purposes of appeal. In addition to being waived for purposes of our consideration, defendant’s contention lacks merit. He argues that the State failed to establish an adequate foundation for Kernan’s stipulated testimony where it did not introduce any evidence of her qualifications to offer an expert opinion or any evidence of the reliability of the methods she had used to reach her conclusions. We do not agree. Defendant did stipulate to the following facts: that Kernan was a forensic scientist with the Illinois State Police crime lab; that Kernan performed tests commonly accepted in the scientific community; that all of the equipment and instruments she used were in proper working order, certified, and calibrated; and that her opinions were based on a reasonable degree of scientific certainty. While there was no explicit stipulation that Kernan was indeed qualified to testify as an expert on the presence of controlled substances, we fail to see how the stipulation that she was in fact a forensic scientist with the crime lab would not do so. Forensic scientists in crime labs routinely perform such analysis and routinely offer their opinions thereon in criminal trials. The fact that Kernan was such a professional would not qualify her to do much of anything other than these tasks. Moreover, we fail to see how the stipulations that the tests Kernan performed were commonly accepted in the scientific community, that her equipment was functioning properly, and that her opinions were based on a reasonable degree of scientific certainty would render her methodology anything other than “reliable.” We highly doubt that the scientific community would accept testing methods that it did not believe were reliable, that properly functioning and calibrated instruments would produce unreliable results, or that an opinion offered by a forensic scientist and reached with a reasonable degree of scientific certainty would not be reliable. Accordingly, we reject defendant’s contention that Kernan’s stipulated testimony lacked an adequate foundation.  Defendant next contends that the State’s evidence was insufficient to support his convictions and that they should be reduced to simple possession because the State failed to present adequate evidence of an intent to deliver on defendant’s part. In reliance on this court’s decision in People v. Cooper, 337 Ill. App. 3d 106 (2003), defendant argues that Officer Stotts’ testimony that he saw defendant hand another individual an unidentified item in exchange for money was insufficient to demonstrate his intent to deliver the narcotics later found in his possession. He also argues that the amounts of each drug found in his possession were small enough that they could have been for his personal use and that the circumstances surrounding his arrest did not indicate an intent to distribute. Because direct evidence of intent to deliver a controlled substance is rare, intent is commonly inferred from circumstantial evidence such as the nature, quantity, and packaging of the contraband. People v. Neylon, 327 Ill. App. 3d 300, 310 (2002). Other factors considered probative of an intent to deliver are a high level of purity of the recovered narcotics, the defendant’s possession of weapons, large amounts of cash, drug paraphernalia, police scanners, beepers, or cellular phones, and the manner in which the substance is packaged. Robinson, 167 Ill. 2d at 408. The court in Cooper held that the failure by the State to identify the objects the arresting officer observed defendant handing to other individuals in exchange for money rendered its evidence insufficient to demonstrate an intent to deliver the drugs later found in the defendant’s possession. The court reasoned that, because the police did not seize or test the items the defendant had been seen distributing, it could not assume that those items were indeed controlled substances. Cooper, 337 Ill. App. 3d at 114. The supreme court in Bush, in addition to rejecting subsequent challenges to the foundations for stipulated expert testimony, explicitly rejected the decision in Cooper. The supreme court emphasized that the standard of review on criminal convictions is “ ‘whether, after viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt.’ (Emphasis in original).” Bush, 214 Ill. 2d at 326, quoting Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 318-19, 61 L. Ed. 2d 560, 573, 99 S. Ct. 2781, 2788-89 (1979); People v. Collins, 106 Ill. 2d 237, 261 (1985). Under that standard, the court stated, in reviewing all criminal cases, courts must allow all reasonable inferences from the record in favor of the prosecution. The court concluded that, on facts very similar to those elucidated in this case, the evidence easily supported an inference by the trial court that the defendant intended to deliver the cocaine found in her possession. Bush, 214 Ill. 2d at 326-27, 329. Here, defendant was observed retrieving a small object from a bag and handing it to another individual in exchange for cash. A bag containing 6 individual packets of cocaine and $705 in cash were found on his person, and he was observed dropping another bag containing 25 individual packets of a suspected controlled substance. There was no other evidence of anything else found in defendant’s possession. Considering that the only items found in defendant’s possession at the time of his arrest were several individual packages of what was later found to be cocaine and over $700 in cash, that he at one time possessed another 25 individual packages of what was later found to be heroin, and that he did not possess anything else that he could reasonably have sold for cash, we conclude that it was not unreasonable for the trial court to infer that defendant intended to deliver the narcotics found in his possession and that the evidence adequately supported such an inference. Accordingly, we reject defendant’s arguments and find that the State’s evidence adequately supported his convictions for possession of controlled substances with intent to deliver.  Defendant’s next contention is that he was denied his right to a fair trial when the circuit court improperly considered evidence outside the record to conclude that he intended to deliver the drugs found in his possession. He argues that the trial judge arrived at guilty findings based on his own assertion that the amount of narcotics found in defendant’s possession was “certainly much more than a person would have for their [sic] own personal use” and that this observation indicated a reliance on evidence outside the record. We note that the remark to which defendant now objects was delivered during the sentencing phase of defendant’s trial, well after the trial court had arrived at its guilty determination. It appears from the record that the court was considering the amount of controlled substances in defendant’s possession only as a factor in determining the severity of the offense vis-a-vis sentencing and that the remarks were delivered in response to defendant’s statement that he “just happened to be” at the scene of his arrest. However, defendant’s theory that the remark was made in reference to the judge’s inclination toward finding him guilty should not be completely disregarded. Ordinarily, because defendant did not object to the judge’s remark at the sentencing hearing or raise it as an issue in a subsequent motion, this argument would be waived for purposes of appellate review. See Enoch, 122 Ill. 2d at 186. However, where a claim of error involves judicial conduct, reviewing courts will relax the waiver rule. People v. Dunn, 326 Ill. App. 3d 281, 286 (2001). In such an instance, we review the trial court’s conduct for plain error. Dunn, 326 Ill. App. 3d at 286. However, even if the error is plain, such an error is harmless where we can safely conclude that the trial would have produced the same result had the error not occurred. People v. Traina, 230 Ill. App. 3d 149, 154 (1992). For a judge’s comments to constitute reversible error, the defendant must show that such remarks were prejudicial and defendant suffered harm as a result. People v. Campbell, 252 Ill. App. 3d 624, 631 (1993). In a bench trial, a judge’s determination based on his or her own private knowledge, that is untested by cross-examination or the rules of evidence, constitutes a denial of due process. People v. Wallenberg, 24 Ill. 2d 350, 354 (1962). Reversal is warranted where a defendant was not told the facts of which the court took notice, did not know the evidence upon which he was convicted, and was unable to dispute the truth of the facts on which the court relied. People v. Smith, 176 Ill. 2d 217, 238 (1997). Nevertheless, we will uphold a court’s judgment where there is no indication that the judge considered any evidence that was not produced at trial. People v. Nelson, 58 Ill. 2d 61, 67-68 (1974). Considering the record before us, as well as our previous determination that the State’s evidence was sufficient to support defendant’s convictions, we find that no error occurred in this case. Defendant was entirely aware of the amount of drugs he was alleged to have possessed and was afforded the opportunity to cross-examine and refute the State’s evidence. The fact that he stipulated to those amounts only further convinces us that the trial judge’s comment on the subject was not erroneous. Even if the remark did constitute error, the evidence before the court was sufficient to prove that defendant possessed controlled substances with the intent to deliver them beyond a reasonable doubt, and no comments by the judge would likely have affected the guilty finding. Accordingly, we ascertain no error on the trial judge’s part, and even if error had been committed in this instance, we would hold it harmless.  Defendant next contends that his sentence must be vacated and the cause remanded because the trial court sentenced him without conducting or considering a presentence investigation. He argues that the colloquy he had with the trial judge prior to sentencing did not constitute a valid waiver because the parties had not agreed to a specific sentence. In response, the State offers only a cursory response that defendant suffered no prejudice, that he has raised no issues in regard to his sentence, and that remand for a new sentencing hearing would be a waste of judicial resources. Under the Unified Code of Corrections, a defendant may not be sentenced for a felony before a written presentence investigation is presented and the court considers the report. This requirement may only be waived where both parties agree to the imposition of a specific sentence and where there is a finding in the record as to the defendant’s history of criminality. 730 ILCS 5/5 — 3—1 (West 2002). Our supreme court has held that the requirements of the statute are mandatory and that the defendant’s right to a written presentence investigation report is not a personal right and cannot be waived unless both the State and the defendant agree to the imposition of a specific sentence. People v. Youngbey, 82 Ill. 2d 556, 561, 565 (1980). “Substantial compliance” with the statutory requirements through the inclusion in the record of information that would have appeared in such a report does not excuse the express requirement of a written report. People v. Harris, 105 Ill. 2d 290, 303 (1985). Waiver cannot be inferred from the defendant’s failure to object at the time of sentencing. Harris, 105 Ill. 2d at 302. Moreover, where the prosecution and the defense do not agree to a specific sentence, the parties are without authority to waive a written presentence report, and the trial court is without authority to accept any purported waiver. People v. Zozak, 101 Ill. App. 3d 590, 594-95 (1981). Here, while the record does indicate the defendant agreed to waive the presentence report requirement and that the parties agreed to his criminal history, there is no indication that the parties agreed to the imposition of a specific sentence. That possibility may have been discussed during the off-the-record conversation, but without affirmative evidence to that effect, we cannot find that the requirement of a written presentence investigation report was properly waived in this instance. Because there is no indication from the record that the parties agreed to a specific sentence, the State and defendant were without authority to waive the written presentence investigation report requirement, and the trial court was without authority to accept their purported waiver. Accordingly, we remand this cause to the trial court with instructions to conduct a full presentence investigation and produce a written report of its findings, excepting that the State and defendant explicitly agree to the imposition of a specific sentence and to a finding of his criminal history and other facts that would be contained in a written presentence report.  Defendant lastly contends that the compulsory extraction of his blood and the perpetual storing of his DNA profile, pursuant to section 5 — 4—3 of the Unified Code of Corrections (730 ILCS 5/5 — 4—3 (West 2002)), violates his constitutional right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. He claims that the ordered extraction and analysis constitute a search conducted without the generally required individualized suspicion, that the intrusion into his bodily integrity and privacy outweighs the State’s interest in law enforcement, that it does not meet a “special need” beyond aiding law enforcement, and that there is no legitimate nexus between the State’s interests and extracting his DNA, as there might be in the case of a sexual or violent offender. Section 5 — 4—3(a) provides that any person convicted or found guilty of any felony offense under Illinois law on or after August 22, 2002, must submit a blood, saliva, or tissue specimen to the Illinois Department of State Police for DNA analysis. 730 ILCS 5/5 — 4—3(a) (West 2002). The purpose of the provision is to create a database containing the genetic identity of recidivist criminal offenders. People v. Garvin, 349 Ill. App. 3d 845, 853 (2004), appeal allowed, 212 Ill. 2d 541 (2004). Since we issued the Garvin decision, this court has repeatedly rejected constitutional challenges to section 5 — 4—3. See People v. Foster, 354 Ill. App. 3d 564 (2004); People v. Butler, 354 Ill. App. 3d 57 (2004); People v. Edwards, 353 Ill. App. 3d 475 (2004); People v. Smythe, 352 Ill. App. 3d 1056 (2004), appeal denied, 213 Ill. 2d 573 (2005); People v. Peppers, 352 Ill. App. 3d 1002 (2004); People v. Hall, 352 Ill. App. 3d 537 (2004). We continue to adhere to the holding that section 5 — 4—3 is not unconstitutional and similarly reject defendant’s argument in this case. Upon the imposition of sentence on remand, we order that plaintiff must submit to DNA extraction and profiling in accordance with the statute. For the reasons set forth above, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court as to defendant’s convictions, but vacate his sentences and remand for a new sentencing hearing in accordance with our instructions. Affirmed in part and reversed in part; cause remanded with instructions. THEIS, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739575 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:44.988283+00 ===

JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH, dissenting: I dissent. I agree with the statement of Chief Justice Clark in People ex rel. Judicial Inquiry Board v. Hartel (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 225, 239, that section 15(c) of article VI of the Constitution “was intended exclusively for the protection of judges under investigation.” As did Chief Justice Clark, “I find it persuasive that, in explaining the intent of the confidentiality provision, the drafters made no mention of an intent to protect witnesses and complainants.” 72 Ill. 2d 225, 239. On the theory that it is essential to the free flow of information concerning complaints against members of the judiciary, the majority has created a privilege obviously not contemplated by the framers of the Constitution. This free flow of information, according to the majority, depends in part on the informant’s expectation of confidentiality “to shield him from possible recrimination by an individual subject to investigation.” 105 Ill. 2d at 533. The majority has failed to cite any authority which supports the proposition that, once the informer is identified, the content of the information is protected from discovery. To the contrary, Professor Wigmore’s treatise on evidence makes it clear that the privilege, when it exists, applies only to the identity of the informer and not to the content of communication received from him. 8 Wigmore, Evidence sec. 2374 (McNaughton rev. ed. 1961). Here, the identity of the informant was not confidential. His former client, in motions filed in litigation pending in the Twentieth Judicial Circuit, stated that a Judicial Inquiry Board petition had been filed against Judge Starnes and that the client believed that the petition was filed by its former trial counsel (petitioner here). If protection from possible recrimination is the purpose of confidentiality, it is accomplished by concealing the identity of the informer. When, as here, the informer broadcasts the fact that he has filed the complaint, neither logic nor the authorities proscribe the discovery of the content of the complaint. The majority opinion serves to subject a member of the judiciary to a malicious, false and frivolous complaint without recourse on his part or fear of retribution on the part of his accuser. This, it seems to me, is too high a price to pay for the benefits allegedly derived from the free flow of information.

=== CASE 2220347 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:40.78225+00 ===

475 N.E.2d 1167 (1985)
Susan J. ASHLOCK, Administratrix of the Estate of Anthony Joseph Ashlock, Deceased, and Individually, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Robert F. NORRIS, Defendant-Appellee.
No. 4-184 A 2.
Court of Appeals of Indiana, Third District.
March 28, 1985.
Rehearing Denied June 19, 1985.
*1168 Jay T. Seeger, Heide, Gambs & Mucker, Lafayette, for plaintiff-appellant.
John W. Barce, Barce, Vann & Ryan, Fowler, for defendant-appellee.
GARRARD, Judge.
This is a wrongful death case premised upon the gratuitous furnishing of alcoholic beverages to a person who subsequently struck and killed plaintiff's decedent with an automobile. The trial court granted summary judgment for the defendant.
The facts favorable to the plaintiff disclose that after work on April 13, 1982, Cindy Morrow went to Butterfield's Restaurant and Lounge in Lafayette. She arrived at the lounge about 3:45 p.m. and ordered a tequila mixed drink. About 5:00 p.m. appellee Norris arrived at the lounge. He was previously acquainted with Morrow and joined her at the bar.
At 7:30 p.m. Morrow had consumed two tequila mixed drinks as well as three shots of tequila purchased for her by Norris. At about that time Morrow fell down while attempting to pick up her purse which she dropped. After resting for several moments Morrow was able to regain her feet only with Norris' assistance. He then assisted her in leaving the lounge and helped her into her car. He then spent several minutes in an unsuccessful attempt to persuade Morrow not to drive. She, however, insisted that she had to leave, and she did.
About a mile from the lounge Morrow attempted to pass a car on the right. As she did she struck and killed Anthony Ashlock who was jogging along the shoulder of the road about ten feet from the travelled portion of the highway. Morrow continued to drive down the road, approximately two miles, until she drove into a ditch.
On June 21, 1982 Susan Ashlock, individually and as administratrix of the estate of Anthony Ashlock, deceased, commenced this action for wrongful death, naming as defendants the corporate owner of the lounge, two of its bartenders and Norris. On November 8, 1983 the actions against the lounge and the two bartenders were dismissed with prejudice upon plaintiff's motion. Summary judgment was then sought by Norris and granted.
Restated, the issues presented by this appeal are whether the law permits Ashlock to pursue a claim against Norris and, if so, whether there are genuine issues of fact that preclude summary judgment.
The focal point of the first question is whether Norris owed any duty to Ashlock which he may have breached by his conduct. Ashlock cites IC 7.X-X-XX-XX as creating such a duty. This statute, which is a part of the criminal penalties provisions of our alcoholic beverages statutes, provides:
"It is unlawful for a person to sell, barter, deliver or give away an alcoholic beverage to another person who is in a state of intoxication if the person knows that the other person is intoxicated."
Typically, the question of whether such a provision imposes a civil duty is the critical determination to be made. In Indiana that essential determination was made nearly *1169 twenty years ago in Elder v. Fisher (1966), 247 Ind. 598, 217 N.E.2d 847 when our Supreme Court determined that a companion section of the statute which prohibited a person from selling, bartering, exchanging, providing or furnishing an alcoholic beverage to a minor[1] had the public safety as one of its purposes and did create a civil duty, 217 N.E.2d at 851. That case involved a retail sale by a drugstore to a minor. Subsequently, in Brattain v. Herron (1974), 159 Ind. App. 663, 309 N.E.2d 150 the First District of this court extended liability to a private person furnishing alcoholic beverages to a minor.
In Parrett v. Lebamoff (1980), Ind. App., 408 N.E.2d 1344 we recognized that IC 7.X-X-XX-XX imposed a civil duty upon a retailer of alcoholic beverages, as did Judge Ratliff writing for the First District in Elsperman v. Plump (1983), Ind. App., 446 N.E.2d 1027.
Most recently our Supreme Court, while affirming a verdict for the defendants in a claim brought under IC 7.X-X-XX-XX, cited Parrett and Elsperman stating, "Indiana law clearly endorses the proposition that a violation of the liquor laws will result in a civil action." Whisman v. Fawcett (1984), Ind., 470 N.E.2d 73, 80.
It is true that all these decisions, except Brattain, have been litigated against either an establishment engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages or the bartender allegedly involved in the sale. On the other hand, as Judge Lowdermilk observed in Brattain, the legislature has chosen to draw no distinction between one who sells in violation of the statute and one who gives or furnishes in violation. Indeed the legislature has specifically defined "person" to include any "natural person" (IC 7.1-1-3-31) and has made the statutory proscription applicable to a person, rather than to a "permittee." See IC 7.1-1-3-30.
In sum, the plain language of the statute prohibits a person from giving alcoholic beverages to an intoxicated person where the donor knows the other person is intoxicated.
Having so stated we nevertheless recognize a legitimate question may be posed as to whether the legislature intended to, and whether sound public policy supports, the extension of civil liability to family, friend or acquaintance who merely furnishes "one more drink" to an intoxicated person. Considering the carnage on our public highways involving intoxicated drivers, the answer to both questions may be "yes."[2] Certainly, the legislature has had ample time to respond to either Elder or Brattain if it desired to do so.
Accordingly, we conclude that Ashlock properly stated a claim for relief against Norris premised upon the alleged violation of IC 7.X-X-XX-XX.
The remaining question is whether there was a genuine issue of fact which would avoid summary judgment concerning Norris' knowledge of Morrow's intoxication at the time he last furnished her a drink. He urges there was not. In support, he points *1170 to his deposition, answers to interrogatories and affidavit filed in support of his motion for summary judgment. In sum these materials assert that Norris last furnished Morrow a drink about 7:00 p.m., that she did not appear to him to be intoxicated at that time, and that it was not until thirty to forty minutes later that her intoxication became apparent.
As Judge Staton explained in Jones v. City of Logansport (1982), Ind. App., 436 N.E.2d 1138, 1143 summary judgment procedure should be applied with considerable caution so that a party's right to the fair determination of a genuine issue is not jeopardized. Thus, any doubt as to a fact, or an inference to be drawn therefrom is to be resolved in favor of the party opposing the motion for summary judgment.
On the other hand, in a number of cases we have recognized that once a party has moved for summary judgment with supporting materials as required by the rule, the opposing party may not merely rest on his pleadings. Instead he must be filing his own materials, or otherwise, demonstrate that a genuine issue does exist. See, e.g., Durakool, Inc. v. Mercury Displacements Indus., Inc. (1981), Ind. App., 422 N.E.2d 680. Of course, it is enough if from the record taken as a whole it appears that a genuine issue remains. See Dallas Co. v. Tobias Studio, Inc. (1974), 162 Ind. App. 213, 318 N.E.2d 568.
It would be proper to prove by circumstantial evidence that Norris knew Morrow was intoxicated before he last provided her a drink. As the court pointed out in Elsperman, supra, there are many factors which can be considered in determining whether a person was intoxicated to another person's knowledge, including what and how much the person was known to have consumed, the time involved, the person's behavior at the time, and the person's condition shortly after leaving. 446 N.E.2d at 1031.
In the case before us the question is extremely close. Norris' knowledge of Morrow's condition is not capable of simple emphatic proof as would be the execution of a written instrument or the placement of a stop sign. It is a very fact sensitive determination.
The record bearing upon the propriety of the summary judgment consists of Norris' answers to interrogatories, affidavit and deposition.[3] As previously indicated they disclose that when Norris arrived at the lounge about 5:00 p.m. Morrow was sitting at the bar with a half-consumed tequila sunrise before her. Between then and 7:00 p.m. when Norris last purchased her a drink she finished that drink, had another of the same, and had the three straight shots of tequila purchased for her by Norris. According to Norris during this time she did not appear at all intoxicated. Her speech was ordinary. About 6:00 p.m. she went to the restroom and did not stagger or appear unstable. Then about 7:30 p.m.[4] she attempted to go to the waitress station to converse with someone. On the way she dropped her purse, spilling its contents. When she attempted to pick it up she "just kind of sat down backwards like she lost her balance" and could not rise without assistance. Norris said at that point she "seemed to be quite out of control [and] appeared to be possibly going to get ill." Norris then helped her outside to her car where he attempted to dissuade her from driving. She then left and minutes later struck and killed Mr. Ashlock.
There was some evidence from which an inference might be drawn opposing Norris' declaration that Morrow did not appear intoxicated. Norris was in her presence for *1171 a period of two and a half to three hours. During this time she consumed five drinks, each of which contained one ounce of tequila. However, nothing was placed before the court on the motion for summary judgment to establish the probable effect of that much alcoholic beverage in that time span upon either Morrow or an average person of her physical makeup. Nevertheless, within about one half hour after receiving the fifth drink she was so intoxicated that she could not maintain her balance or walk without assistance, and appeared to be "out of control." Norris, of course, was not a disinterested bystander, and there was a conflict in his testimony between the affidavit and the deposition as to the times Morrow had her last drink and when she became apparently drunk.
We are inclined to agree with the trial court's assessment which we interpret to mean that the foregoing evidence standing alone would be insufficient to avoid judgment on the evidence in favor of Norris, if presented to a jury. Only speculation based upon the circumstances supports the determination that Norris was aware Morrow was intoxicated when he last provided her a drink.
Should we, then, sustain the summary judgment because the nonmovant has failed to show there is a genuine factual dispute concerning Norris' lack of knowledge of Morrow's intoxicated condition when he last provided her a drink? The question is extremely close, but the underlying purposes of Trial Rule 56 persuade us that the summary judgment should not stand.
Because summary judgment deprives the non-moving party of the right to a trial, the burden is upon the movant to establish that no genuine issue of fact exists. McKenna v. City of Ft. Wayne (1981), Ind. App., 429 N.E.2d 662. A fact issue is genuine if it cannot be completely resolved by reference to undisputed facts. American Family Mut. Ins. Co. v. Kivela (1980), Ind. App., 408 N.E.2d 805. Thus, summary judgment is inappropriate where the information before the court reveals a good faith dispute as to the inferences to be drawn from the evidence. Sink & Edwards, Inc. v. Huber, Hunt & Nichols, Inc. (1984), Ind. App., 458 N.E.2d 291. If after considering the factual materials any doubt remains as to the existence of a genuine issue of material fact, summary judgment is inappropriate. Carrell v. Ellingwood (1981), Ind. App., 423 N.E.2d 630. Summary judgment should not be used as an abbreviated trial wherein conflicting inferences are resolved and evidence is weighed. Id.
Here a doubt remains; a doubt that may be fairly resolved when the testimony of all the witnesses is heard and credibility determinations can be properly made. Therefore the summary judgment must be reversed.
Finally, Ashlock argues that independently of any liability premised upon furnishing alcoholic beverages to Morrow, a negligence claim exists against Norris for his actions in helping Morrow to her automobile and then permitting her to drive.
This contention is resolved by determining whether under the circumstances Norris owed a duty to the public including Ashlock's decedent. We believe Judge Neal's opinion in Sports, Inc. v. Gilbert (1982), Ind. App., 431 N.E.2d 534 carefully considers those situations in which such a duty might be imposed, and concludes that absent some special relation, not here present, between Norris and Morrow or the right of Norris to control the use of the automobile, no duty to the public exists. See also Fugate v. Galvin (1980), 84 Ill. App.3d 573, 406 N.E.2d 19.
The summary judgment is reversed and the case is remanded for further proceedings consistent herewith.
Reversed.
STATON, P.J., and HOFFMAN, J., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Burns Ind. Stat. Anno. Section 12-438 [Repealed]. For present version, see IC 7.1-5-7-8. For the former version of IC 7.X-X-XX-XX see Burns Ind. Stat. Anno. Section 12-615. Although the section has had several minor amendments, it is worthy of note that Acts of 1975, P.L. 74, Sec. 1, amended the section by adding a paragraph stating that the section should not impose civil liability upon "any educational institution of higher learning" unless the institution or its agent actually sold, etc. an alcoholic beverage to a minor.
[2]  In Coulter v. Sup.Ct. of San Mateo Co. (1978), 21 Cal.3d 144, 145 Cal. Rptr. 534, 577 P.2d 669, 675 the court observed:
"Doubtless, the spectre of civil liability may temper the spirit of conviviality at some social occasions, especially when reasonably observant hosts decline to serve further alcoholic beverages to those guests who are obviously intoxicated and perhaps becoming hostile. Nonetheless, in this context, we must surely balance any resulting moderation of hospitality with the serious hazard to the lives, limbs, and property of the public at large, and the great potential for human suffering which attends the presence on the highways of intoxicated drivers. In doing so we need not ignore the appalling, perhaps incalculable, cost of torn and broken lives incident to alcohol abuse, in the area of automobile accidents alone."
[3]  A reference in the record indicates that a number of other depositions had been taken in the case. It does not appear, however, that they were published and none are included in the transcript. Accordingly, it appears that they were not before the trial court and are not germane to the appeal. See Augustine v. First Federal S. & L.A. (1979), 270 Ind. 238, 384 N.E.2d 1018.
[4]  Norris' deposition fixes these times. His affidavit filed in support of summary judgment places the last drink purchase at 7:30 p.m. and the incident with the purse about 8:00 p.m.

=== CASE 9739576 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:48.373913+00 ===

GIVAN, Chief Justice.
Appellant was charged with Murder and Felony Murder. He was also charged with being an Habitual Offender. In a trifur-cated hearing, before a jury, appellant was found guilty of both Murder and Felony Murder. In a subsequent hearing the jury recommended the imposition of the death penalty. In the last hearing the jury found appellant to be an Habitual Offender. The trial court imposed the death penalty.
The facts are: At about 4:00 P.M. on December 10, 1982, Phillip Lee borrowed the car of his girlfriend, Carolyn Lamb. *1141He was joined in the car by appellant and a second friend, Briddie Johnson. The three left in the automobile to steal food and cigarettes from local food markets. After several unsuccessful attempts they decided to steal purses from the patrons of a local restaurant.
In preparation for this they drove appellant to his sister's home where he obtained a .82 caliber handgun. They then drove to the parking lot of the Elegant Farmer Restaurant in Fort Wayne, Indiana. They parked the car in a secluded location and awaited the arrival of likely victims.
Eventually appellant and Johnson left the car and placed stockings over their heads. Shortly thereafter, Brenda Chandler and Carmine Zink arrived in separate cars to attend a company Christmas party at the restaurant. Johnson approached Chandler while appellant sought out Zink. Johnson and Chandler struggled for her purse while appellant placed the gun at Zink's head and demanded her purse. During her struggle Chandler heard one gunshot. At that point her assailant fled. Chandler began to search for Zink whom she found on the ground with a wound to her head. Zink died as a result of a .32 caliber wound to her head.
The police, through their investigations, later arrested all three men. Lee and the State entered into an agreement under which Lee was to testify against the appellant. Lee testified as follows. Appellant obtained the gun at his sister's home and retained control over the gun for the course of the evening. Appellant sat in the backseat of the car toying with the gun and making sounds pretending he was fir ing the gun. Appellant left the automobile with a stocking over his head and the gun in his hand. Appellant placed his arm around the neck of the victim and the gun at her head. Appellant returned to the car with the gun and a purse which matched the description of the one used by Zink that evening. Lee did not see the actual firing of the gun; however, appellant told him he shot the woman and would shoot others in the future.
Appellant raises a sufficiency of the evidence question as to each of the findings of the jury. He argues there was a lack of sufficient evidence to support the finding on the underlying felony charges, the finding on a recommendation to impose the death penalty and the finding appellant was an habitual offender.
We will not weigh the evidence or judge the credibility of witnesses. McCann v. State (1984), Ind., 466 N.E.2d 421.
Appellant argues the testimony of Lee, the driver and only witness to place appellant at the scene and identify appellant as the assailant, is inherently unbelievable and thus insufficient to support the verdict. He argues Lee's testimony was tainted by the immunity grant and thus Lee had an incentive to provide testimony calculated to produce a conviction of appellant.
Appellant contends in capital cases the court must engage in a preliminary inquiry of the probative value of the evidence.
We decline appellant's invitation to establish a separate standard of review in capital cases. The uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice is sufficient to support a conviction. Smith v. State (1983), Ind., 455 N.E.2d 346. When the accomplice testifies, pursuant to a grant of immunity, the nature of the agreement must be fully disclosed and the testimony must be subjected to close scrutiny. Where disclosure has been made, the credibility and the weight to be accorded the testimony are matters for the trier of fact. Kelley v. State (1984), Ind., 460 N.E.2d 187.
In the case at bar the jury was fully informed of the nature of the agreement. The testimony of Lee was sufficient to support the verdict of the jury. We find no error.
At the onset of the hearing concerning the imposition of the death penalty the State properly moved to incorporate the evidence presented during the trial on the underlying felonies. Ind.Code § 85-50-2-9(d) expressly permits the trier of fact to consider this testimony. The State offered *1142no additional evidence. Appellant offered no testimony in his behalf. Appellant now contends the mere incorporation of trial evidence is insufficient to meet the standards outlined in Ind.Code § 85-50-2-9(a). The statute provides:
"'The state may seek a death sentence for murder by alleging, on a. page separate from the rest of the charging instrument, the existence of at least one (1) of the aggravating cireumstances listed in subsection (b) of this section. In the sentencing hearing after a person is convicted of murder, the state must prove beyond a reasonable doubt the existence of at least one (1) of the aggravating circumstances alleged."
The State contends the incorporated evidence was sufficient to support a finding under Ind.Code § 85-50-2-9(b)(1) which states:
"The aggravating circumstances are as follows: (1) The defendant committed the murder by intentionally killing the victim while committing or attempting to commit arson, burglary, child molesting, criminal deviate conduct, kidnapping, rape, or robbery."
We hold the evidence introduced through incorporation was sufficient to support the conclusion appellant intentionally killed the victim while committing or attempting to commit robbery.
During the habitual offender phase of the proceedings, the State moved to incorporate the prior testimony. Within that testimony was appellant's admission of his participation in two prior unrelated felonies. Additionally, the State moved the admission of court records documenting these two felony convictions. The State had sought the admission of these exhibits earlier during the trial phase. However, the court found their introduction, at that point, to be premature and the State indicated a desire to wait until the habitual offender phase to introduce the records.
Appellant objected again to the introduction of the records during the habitual phase on the grounds the records were redundant or repetitive and an attempt to further inflame the jury. The court overruled the objection and the exhibits were admitted.
Appellant argues there was a lack of foundation to support the admission of the records. Additionally, he contends it was error to incorporate the prior testimony in the habitual offender phase of the trial.
We find appellant has waived the issue of an absence of a proper foundation by failing to object on those grounds at trial. Wallace v. State (1983), Ind., 453 N.E.2d 245. Moreover, these exhibits were properly admissible under Ind.R.Tr.P. 44(A)(1).
As to the incorporation question, appellant maintains the statute, Ind.Code § 35-50-2-8, does not expressly provide for the use of this device. He contends the State was obliged to demonstrate the existence of two unrelated prior felonies without the use of this device.
We first note the State did demonstrate the existence of the felonies with evidence apart from appellant's statements, during the trial, through the use of the two properly admitted exhibits discussed above.
Secondly, appellant has produced no authority to support his proposition of law. See Ind.R.App.P. 8.8(A)(7). Failure to comply with the rule results in waiver of the issue. Hurley v. State (1983), Ind., 446 N.E.2d 1826. We find sufficient evidence to support the finding of the jury that appellant is an habitual offender.
Appellant contends the trial court erred in the method used to select venireman. The court utilized a computer to generate a random list from the registered voters of Allen County. This was done pursuant to Ind.Code § 88-4-5-2. See Pitman v. State (1982), Ind., 486 N.E.2d 74. Appellant, a black male under thirty years of age, contends a list of this nature will not produce a jury of his peers. He suggests, without providing data to support the allegation, that the registered voters of the county are predominately white and over the age of thirty.
*1143We have dealt with challenges to the method of jury selection on numerous occasions. Recently, in Lloyd v. State (1983), Ind., 448 N.E.2d 1062, we again considered the use of voter registration lists. Reiterating prior holdings, we stated:
" must be a practical method of choosing prospective jurors. The use of lists, whether they be property taxpayers or registered voters, so long as they represent a reasonable cross section of the people in the county, cannot be said to violate the rights of the accused, in the absence of showing that such use is made in a deliberate attempt to exclude certain groups from jury selection.'" Id. at 1069 See also Smith v. State (1984), Ind., 465 N.E.2d 1105.
Appellant has offered no showing that the use of such lists deliberately exclude jurors based either on race or age. We find no error in the manner the trial court developed to produce lists of potential jurors.
Appellant argues the trial court erred by failing to sequester the jury in a capital case. The law in Indiana requires sequestration when it is requested in such cases. -It is reversible error to deny such a request over timely objection. Lowery v. State (1982), Ind., 484 N.E.2d 868 (Givan, C.J., and Pivarnik, J., dissenting).
Appellant was represented by counsel; however, he also filed several pro se motions. One of these was a Motion to Sequester the Jury. Appellant would have his motions filed in the clerk's office and a file stamped copy returned to him at his cell. For reasons unknown to the court, this motion was not brought to the attention of the court during the course of the trial.
The court first became aware of the motion when the Motion to Correct Error alleged the failure to sequester the jury. The court reviewed its records, at that time, and found no record of the motion in its docket sheets or in the order book. Appellant's counsel did not request sequestration nor did he object on the occasions when the jury was allowed to separate with proper admonition.
To file a motion of this nature with the clerk and then fail to object when the jury is allowed to separate is to waive the right to allege error. The court did not err in not sequestering the jury.
Appellant maintains the court erred when it engaged in conduct and made remarks which were prejudicial to appellant. He cites to four specific instances of alleged prejudicial conduct. Appellant failed to object to each of these alleged errors at the proper time. Three of the four comments were made to the parties during discussions at the bench and out of the hearing of the jury. Appellant suggests the jury may have been unduly influenced by observing these discussions. We find no merit in this argument.
The last specific allegation of prejudicial conduct occurred when the court asked counsel for appellant to move away from the jury so the jury could see the witness.
This Court has stated:
"A trial court should refrain from making unnecessary comments and should remain impartial. Moreover, a trial judge's conduct should be such that his remarks or apparent attitude do not impart to the jury an appearance of partiality. It is important, however, that the trial court control the proceedings by taking responsible steps to insure that proper discipline and order exist in the courtroom." Marbley v. State (1984), Ind., 461 N.E.2d 1102, 1107.
We find the trial court did not act to impart to the jury any appearance of partiality. We find no error.
Appellant argues the court erred when it admitted State's exhibits five and six. These exhibits were two pre-autopsy photographs showing the wounds to the head of the victim. Appellant maintains the photographs were cumulative to the testimony of the physician who conducted the autopsy. He contends they were also unduly gruesome and highly inflammatory.
*1144Appellant did not object to the introduction of the photographs. To preserve an issue for appeal it is necessary for appellant to object and specifically state the grounds for the objection. Wallace v. State (1983), Ind., 453 N.E.2d 245.
Appellant's failure to object constituted a waiver of the issue. We, however, note the admission of the photographs would have survived a challenge on the merits. A decision to admit evidence of this nature is at the discretion of the trial court and will be reversed only by a showing of the abuse of that discretion. Jewell v. State (1974), 261 Ind. 665, 309 N.E.2d 441. The trial court's ruling will not be disturbed absent a showing of an imbalance between the relevance of the exhibit and the tendency of the exhibit to improperly inflame the jury. Akins v. State (1981), Ind., 429 N.E.2d 282. The photographs were highly relevant as they demonstrated the nature and the location of the wound. There was no error in the admission of the photographs.
Appellant alleges error was committed when the jury was permitted to view appellant in handcuffs, shackles and ankle irons. He maintains potential jurors were able to view him in handcuffs and shackles as he was being transported to the courthouse. He contends three of these potential jurors were impaneled in his case. Additionally, he alleges he was restrained by ankle irons during the course of the trial. The record does not support these assertions.
The general rule precludes the presentation to the jury of the defendant in bonds or shackles. In Walker v. State (1980), 274 Ind. 224, 410 N.E.2d 1190, citing Illinois v. Allen (1970), 397 U.S. 337, 90 S.Ct. 1057, 25 L.Ed.2d 858, this Court adopted certain exceptions to this general rule. We permitted the trial court to use its discretion when necessary to prevent the escape of the prisoner, to protect those in the courtroom or to maintain order. There is no showing in this record that the trial court abused his discretion.
Following trial both trial counsel and appellate counsel prepared separate Motions to Correct Error. Appellate counsel has briefed arguments selected from both motions. This is permissible. However, he has also asked this Court to review all other issues raised in appellant's Motion to Correct Error. These arguments were not briefed although appellant prepared a Memorandum of Law to support each issue. We decline counsel's invitation to review these un-briefed issues. Ind.R.App.P. 8.8(A)(7) specifically requires the briefing of all issues to be reviewed.
The United States Supreme Court recently found an appellant did not have an absolute right to require appellate counsel to raise and argue every issue on appeal that the appellant desired to be raised. Jones v. Barnes (1983) 463 U.S. 745, 103 S.Ct. 3308, 77 L.Ed.2d 987. In Jones the Court focused on the function of appellate counsel to review the record and the issues preserved for appeal and then to winnow the more promising from the least promising. The Court noted the danger in burying a strong argument under a verbal mound of both strong and weak contentions. Appellate counsel has properly engaged in the winnowing process. We decline to review the issues not in the appellate brief.
The trial court is affirmed in all things. This cause is remanded to the trial court for the purpose of establishing a date for the execution of appellant.
HUNTER, PRENTICE and PIVARNIK, JJ., concur.
DeBRULER, J., concurring and dissenting with separate opinion.

=== CASE 9739577 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:48.378714+00 ===

DeBRULER, Justice,
concurring and dissenting.
Intent to kill, like other states of mind, may be inferred from circumstances which legitimately permit it. Stanley v. State (1969), 252 Ind. 37, 245 N.E.2d 149. There is a substantial question presented here as to whether the evidence proved an intent to kill as well as an intent to rob. Since opinions in death cases are likely to be used *1145for comparison purposes, I set forth here my own view of the evidence supporting the intent to kill.
Appellant took a gun in hand to use in carrying out a plan to go out and steal something. He thus had time to contemplate possible harmful consequences to others. He loaded that gun. While handling it he said "Bang," "Pow", from which it may be inferred that he contemplated its operation and the act of firing it. After observing the victim, he got out of the car; he approached her and seized her, holding her head under one arm while holding the gun against her head with his other hand. According to appellant her body went limp while he so held her. There was no struggle between the two. A very short time expired between the time he left the car and the shot was fired. When appellant returned to the getaway car he held a purse.
The trial judge concluded as trier of fact, beyond a reasonable doubt, that appellant intended to kill his victim. I agree that that determination was warranted. The shot was to a vital part of the body at point blank range. The immediate goal was to force the victim to relinquish control of her property. To accomplish this purpose, while both hands were occupied, appellant deliberately fired. This was a robbery by killing, and satisfies the subjection of appellant as provided by statute, to the next step of weighing the aggravating circumstance against mitigating circumstances. 1.C. 85-50-2-9(e)(2).
With regard to the sentencing process required by 1.0. 85-50-2-9, I find that the trial court applied an irregular legal standard, one not contemplated by the death statute, and that the sentence of death must be vacated. According to the death sentence statute, aggravating cireumstanc-es are restricted to those enumerated in 1.C. 85-50-2-9(b), alleged in a separate count of the charge, and proved to the satisfaction of the judge beyond a reasonable doubt. In this case there is but one single and discrete aggravating circumstance. There are no others. And appellant's death sentence must rest solely upon that aggravating circumstance. One cannot be confident that under the trial court's finding and conclusions that such is the case. In them the court makes two express references to aggravating circumstances outweighing mitigating circumstances, a reference to his awareness through the presentence report of the defendant's criminal history, and a reference to the fact that the defendant "executed a defenseless female victim who was offering no resistance to the robbery." As is clear from the death sentence statute and the charge in this case, there is only one aggravating circumstance and therefore the reference to aggravating circumstances in the plural is wrong and presents the possibility of unfairness. Schiro v. State (1983), Ind., 451 N.E.2d 1047. The references to criminal history and to the very seriousness of the crime by there very nature are elements which tend to weigh in favor of an enhancement of penalty. Yet they are not accorded that weight in the death sentencing statute, and the court has no authority to put them there and to permit the death decision to rest to any degree upon them.
I hasten to point out that this defect in the sentencing process was not presented to the trial court or this court in the briefs. Even without such presentation and complaint, however, I believe it essential to the automatic review process in death cases for this court, on its own, to require strict compliance with each step required by the death sentence statute.

=== CASE 9739578 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:51.834501+00 ===

JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH delivered the opinion of the court: In an indictment returned in the circuit court of Cook County, defendant, George W. Del Vecchio, was charged with murder (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(a)(2)), rape (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 11 — 1), deviate sexual assault (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 11 — 3), and burglary (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1975, ch. 38, par. 19 — 1). Following a jury trial, defendant was found guilty of each of the charged offenses. In a hearing requested by the People, the jury found that there existed one or more of the factors set forth in section 9 — 1(b) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(b)) and that there were no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude a sentence of death. Defendant was sentenced to death, and the sentence was stayed (87 Ill. 2d R. 609(a)) pending appeal to this court (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, sec. 4(b); 87 Ill. 2d R. 603). The defendant was also sentenced to 15 years for rape, 6 years for deviate sexual assault, and 7 years for burglary. At trial, Karen Canzoneri testified that she and her six-year-old son, Tony, occupied the first-floor and attic levels in a two-flat building in Chicago. On the evening of December 22, 1977, Mrs. Canzoneri, Tony, and Santo Falcone had driven to Lombard, where Mrs. Canzoneri purchased a stereo receiver. When they returned to Chicago they stopped at a tavern, and while there they saw defendant and his wife, Rose, both of whom they knew. When they left the tavern approximately a half hour later, Rose Del Vecchio came with them. After assembling the stereo which Mrs. Canzoneri had purchased, Falcone put Tony to bed downstairs. When Falcone returned upstairs, defendant was with him. Defendant brought with him a briefcase containing marijuana which he, Falcone, and Rose Del Vecchio smoked. After approximately an hour, Mrs. Canzoneri asked them to leave. At about dawn, Mrs. Canzoneri was awakened when she heard footsteps. When she asked who was there, defendant identified himself, stating he “wanted to talk.” Mrs. Canzoneri attempted to shoot defendant with a pistol which Falcone had given her, but defendant slapped it out of her hand. Defendant would not permit her to check on Tony, responding that Tony was sleeping peacefully. When she attempted to leave the room to check on her son, defendant pushed her back on the bed, kissed her face, breasts, vagina, and legs, and despite her request to stop, had intercourse with her. During the intercourse, she heard a telephone ring. She asked defendant to let her answer it because it was probably her mother, who lived across the street. She told him that unless she answered the telephone, her mother would come over. Defendant did not respond. Mrs. Canzoneri could not determine which of the three telephones in the apartment was ringing. The ringing stopped. The telephone rang again and defendant went downstairs. Mrs. Canzoneri looked for the telephone but could find only the cord. The telephone, severed from the cord, was found later when the police searched the premises. She ran downstairs and across the street to her mother’s house. Mrs. Canzoneri told her mother she had been raped and called the police. Chicago police officer William Sacco testified that five police officers responded to the call of a rape in progress. Mrs. Canzoneri told the officers that there was a man with a gun in her house, that she knew the man and that it was defendant. After searching the first floor, the officers went up to the attic bedroom. Alerted by the sound of snow crunching outside the window, Officer Sacco saw defendant crawling on the roof and ordered him inside. Defendant responded by blurting, “I didn’t kill nobody.” Defendant was arrested, given Miranda warnings, and handcuffed. Officer Richard Elmer testified that, after searching various areas of the building and interviewing a neighbor, he and other officers discovered a crawl space located under the stairs. They opened the door and found the body of Tony Canzoneri. Later examination showed that the boy’s trachea, carotid artery, jugular vein and vagus nerve were completely severed, and the third and fourth cervical vertebrae were fractured. It appears from the testimony that when she entered her home earlier that evening Mrs. Canzoneri left her purse on the kitchen table. Her purse, among other things, contained her keys, and a credit card. When defendant was taken into custody, the credit card was in his possession. Defendant contends first that he did not receive effective assistance of counsel. The record shows that prior to trial defense counsel had indicated that the defense would be insanity. Counsel attempted to determine whether the circuit court would permit the People to rebut the insanity defense with evidence of defendant’s 1965 convictions for murder, robbery and attempted robbery. The circuit court stated that until the evidence of insanity was presented it could not determine whether evidence of the prior convictions was relevant. Defendant contends that defense counsel should have made an offer of proof concerning the evidence which would be presented and that the failure to do so constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. Defendant argues that because of the failure to make an offer of proof counsel did not learn whether the circuit court would exclude evidence of the prior convictions and therefore were unable to make an informed tactical decision concerning the defense to be presented. Defendant contends that, as a result, counsel withdrew a meritorious insanity defense and instead relied on an intoxication defense for which the evidence did not present a prima facie case. The People contend that defendant received excellent representation. They state that defense counsel interviewed 30 to 40 witnesses, filed numerous pretrial motions, obtained court-ordered psychiatric examinations of defendant, vigorously cross-examined the People’s witnesses, and called 24 witnesses to testify on behalf of defendant. The People further note that prior to the People’s cross-examination of Dr. Stipes, who had testified concerning the effect of the ingestion of PCP, defense counsel, in limine, indicated they would tender an insanity instruction. The court offered defense counsel a choice of an insanity instruction, in which event the People would be permitted to rebut the defense with evidence of defendant’s prior convictions, or forgoing an insanity instruction, thereby precluding introduction of evidence of the prior convictions. It was at this point, and for this reason, that defense counsel elected to withdraw the insanity defense and proceed on an intoxication theory. In People v. Albanese (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 504, after reviewing the Supreme Court’s recent opinion in Strickland v. Washington (1984), 466 U.S. _, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 104 S. Ct. 2052, and this court’s opinion in People v. Greer (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 103, the court said: “Although we do not foresee that application of the Strickland rule will produce results that vary significantly from those reached under Greer, we hereby adopt the Supreme Court rule for challenges to effectiveness of both retained and appointed counsel (see People v. Royse (1983), 99 Ill. 2d 163, 170) and reject the single-component test of Twomey. To assist lower courts, the Supreme Court also offered the following guidelines for applying its two-component standard: ‘[A] court need not determine whether counsel’s performance was deficient before examining the prejudice suffered by the defendant as a result of the alleged deficiencies. *** If it is easier to dispose of an ineffectiveness claim on the ground of lack of sufficient prejudice, which we expect will often be so, that course should be followed.’ 466 U.S. _., _, 80 L. Ed. 2d 674, 699, 104 S. Ct. 2052, 2069-70.” 104 Ill. 2d 504, 526-27. On this record, we are unable to say that defendant was prejudiced by counsel’s alleged ineffectiveness. Clearly, defendant’s contention that the evidence presented with respect to the intoxication defense failed to establish a prima facie case is without merit because an instruction was given on the intoxication defense and the jury chose to reject it. Obviously the jury also rejected the evidence of defendant’s insanity adduced at the sentencing hearing because it failed to find the existence of the mitigating factor that “defendant was under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(c)(2)). Thus, we are unable to say that counsel’s performance caused substantial prejudice to the defendant without which the result of the trial would probably have been different. Defendant contends next that he was denied a fair trial because of the assistant State’s Attorneys’ personal attacks on defense counsel and their improper argument that the defense was a fraud. In the cross-examination of a police officer, defense counsel attempted to show that the officer had refused to discuss the case with one of defendant’s attorneys. On redirect examination the assistant State’s Attorney asked the officer if it was “his practice to talk to defense attorneys, people who represent murderers?” In closing argument the assistant State’s Attorney asserted that the jury had heard “many different defenses,” with the defenses shifting first to one and then back to the other. Comment was made to the effect that the insanity defense had been withdrawn “because it wasn’t working.” In several instances objections were sustained, and in one instance a motion for mistrial was denied. It would have been better if the comments of which defendant complains had not been made, but on this record we conclude that the comments did not result in prejudice which requires reversal. Defendant has not denied that he committed the homicide, and the context in which the improper argument was made is unlikely to have influenced the jury in deciding the crucial question whether defendant’s intoxication from the ingestion of POP rendered him unable to form the intent necessary to commit the offense. As the court said in People v. Smothers (1973), 55 Ill. 2d 172: “The character and scope of argument to the jury is left very largely to the trial court, and every reasonable presumption must be indulged in that the trial judge has performed his duty and properly exercised the discretion vested in him. (North Chicago Street Ry. Co. v. Cotton, 140 Ill. 486.) The general atmosphere of the trial is observed by the trial court, and cannot be reproduced in the record on appeal. The trial court is, therefore, in a better position than a reviewing court to determine the prejudicial effect, if any, of a remark made during argument, and unless clearly an abuse of discretion, its ruling should be upheld.” (55 Ill. 2d 172, 176.) We find no such abuse of discretion here. Defendant contends next that the circuit court committed reversible error in permitting the People to introduce irrelevant testimony that defendant had committed adultery and to argue, without any basis in the evidence, that defendant and his wife engaged in deviate sexual activity. The testimony to which this contention refers was elicited during the cross-examination of defendant’s wife, Rose Del Vecchio, who stated that Mary Blackstone had lived in their home and that during that period she had slept with defendant. The reference to improper prosecutorial comment concerns a remark to the effect that defendant, his wife, and another woman were in bed together. This comment was in turn based on an attempt to elicit from Mrs. Del Vecchio the admission that there had been a lesbian relationship between the witness and Ms. Blackstone. In the context of the entire record it is difficult to see that the relationship of either defendant or his wife with Ms. Blackstone was material to the issues in the case, but an argument can be made that in view of the wide-ranging direct testimony of Mrs. Del Vecchio the cross-examination concerning defendant’s adultery with Ms. Blackstone may have been proper. In our opinion, however, neither question warrants lengthy analysis or discussion. Defendant’s evidence shows that he was an admitted narcotics dealer, a regular user of PCP, and on the night of the occurrence in question, he asserts that he was so completely intoxicated by reason of the ingestion of PCP that he has no recollection of what occurred. In view of those circumstances we conclude that evidence of his adultery with Ms. Blackstone or the possibility that the jury may have concluded there was a lesbian relationship between defendant’s wife and Ms. Blackstone would have had no prejudicial effect on the jury. This was not a situation where defendant denied the commission of the offenses; the only issue involving defendant’s credibility was whether he was intoxicated at the time of the homicide. Under the circumstances we hold that if any error was committed, it was, beyond a reasonable doubt, harmless. Defendant contends next that the circuit court erred in refusing to grant a mistrial or to excuse veniremen who overheard a juror state her personal opinion of the accused. Defendant contends that the circuit court should have interrogated the remaining veniremen concerning the effect of the remark. Upon commencement of voir dire, the court instructed the prospective jurors that defendant was presumed innocent, that this presumption would be overcome only by proof of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, and that they were to base their decision solely on the evidence presented at trial. The court then posed several questions to the prospective jurors collectively, regarding whether any had discussed the case. The court instructed them to answer by standing. If a prospective juror stood he would then be examined individually by the court. Following that questioning period, jurors were called to the jury box 12 at a time and examined individually in panels of four. One of the prospective jurors said she had read about and discussed the case. When asked whether she had reached an opinion of defendant’s guilt, she responded, “I think the guy shouldn’t be out walking the streets.” The court then excused all five prospective jurors who had previously responded that they had knowledge of the case through pretrial publicity. While our system of jurisprudence requires the participation of fair and impartial jurors, it is not necessary that they be totally ignorant of the facts of the case before they assume their roles as jurors. (Irvin v. Dowd (1961), 366 U.S. 717, 722, 6 L. Ed. 2d 751, 756, 81 S. Ct. 1639, 1642.) The court excused those who had responded that they had previous knowledge of the case. The remaining veniremen who heard the comment had not otherwise heard about the case. We are unable to say that because of this single, isolated comment the jurors were unable to reach a verdict based solely on the evidence. Defendant has also argued that the systematic exclusion of veniremen opposed to the death penalty denied him his right to a jury drawn from a fair cross-section of the community and resulted in a jury biased toward the prosecution. We have considered and rejected this latter contention that qualifying a jury according to the principles of Witherspoon v. Illinois (1968), 391 U.S. 510, 20 L. Ed. 2d 776, 88 S. Ct. 1770, results in a jury biased in favor of conviction (People v. Lewis (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 129, 147, cert. denied (1982), 456 U.S. 1011, 73 L. Ed. 2d 1308, 102 S. Ct. 2307) and decline to reconsider it here. Implicit in that holding was our conclusion that a jury chosen in accordance with the principles of Wither-spoon does not deny defendant a jury drawn from a fair cross-section of the community. We consider next defendant’s contention that his sentence must be vacated because it was imposed by a jury which was selected in violation of the principles established in Witherspoon v. Illinois (1968), 391 U.S. 510, 20 L. Ed. 2d 776, 88 S. Ct. 1770. In Witherspoon, the Supreme Court held that a sentence of death cannot be carried out if the jury that imposed or recommended it was chosen by excluding veniremen for cause simply because they voiced general objections to the death penalty or expressed conscientious or religious scruples against its infliction. The court said: “Unless a venireman states unambiguously that he would automatically vote against the imposition of capital punishment no matter what the trial might reveal, it simply cannot be assumed that that is his position.” (391 U.S. 510, 516 n.9, 20 L. Ed. 2d 776, 781-82 n.9, 88 S. Ct. 1770, 1774 n.9.) Defendant contends that one juror was improperly excused during voir dire in violation of the standard set forth in Witherspoon. The following colloquy, in pertinent part, occurred: “THE COURT: *** Now, with respect to— I asked some questions with respect to the juror’s views on the death penalty. Is there anyone here who feels that— who feels that after you— if you sat on a jury that found a defendant guilty of murder, is there anyone here who feels that he or she would automatically set the penalty at death after a— after a finding of guilty of murder? (No responses.) THE COURT: Okay, yes, sir. PROSPECTIVE JUROR RADEK: Russell Radek, 397. You know, I thought about it last night, you know, about the statement, and the death penalty, and I just don't think I— that I could do that. * * * THE COURT: Is your feeling such that no matter what the circumstances, no matter what the background of the defendant is, is your feeling such that you consider a set of facts under which you would consider signing— consider signing a verdict affixing the punishment of death? PROSPECTIVE JUROR RADEK: I don’t think I have that right to do that.” Defendant argues that “at no time did Mr. Radek make it unmistakably clear that he would vote against the death penalty regardless of the evidence.” The circuit court is in a superior position to ascertain the meaning a venireman intends to convey. In our opinion the standards of Witherspoon were met and the prospective juror’s inclusion of “I think” did not render his answers ambiguous. We are persuaded that regardless of what the evidence showed, he would have voted against the imposition of the death penalty, and we conclude that the circuit court did not err in excusing him. Defendant contends next that the circuit court erred in holding a single hearing at which the jury heard evidence of statutory aggravating factors along with evidence of mitigation and nonstatutory aggravating factors. Defendant contends that this resulted in prejudice requiring reversal. He points out that with reference to the statutory aggravating factors the People’s burden of proof is beyond a reasonable doubt, and the rules of evidence apply; whereas on the question whether the mitigating factors are sufficient to preclude a death sentence, information is admissible without regard to the rules of evidence, and the statute specifies no burden of proof. Defendant argues that evidence of defendant’s prior convictions for armed robbery and attempted armed robbery, which were introduced as evidence of nonstatutory aggravating factors, were irrelevant to the question of the statutory aggravating factors. While we do not exclude the possibility that a factual situation might arise which would require a hearing bifurcated in the manner for which defendant contends, we are of the opinion that no such bifurcation was required here, and that defendant was not prejudiced. The two statutory aggravating factors alleged were that the defendant had been convicted of two intentional or premeditated murders, and that the murder of Tony Canzoneri occurred in the course of the commission of another felony. We fail to perceive in what manner the evidence of nonstatutory aggravating matters could have affected the verdict of the jury on these two questions. The testimony shows that, in the 1965 murder of which defendant was convicted, he fired several shots at the deceased while he lay helpless on the sidewalk. With respect to the other aggravating factor, the evidence is overwhelming of defendant’s guilt of rape and deviate sexual assault. On the record before us we conclude that defendant’s contentions are without merit. Defendant contends next that the circuit court erred in admitting evidence at the sentencing hearing of his allegedly involuntary confession and subsequent guilty plea to the 1965 murder of Fred Christiansen without first conducting a hearing on his motion to suppress the confession on voluntariness grounds. While defendant contests the voluntariness of his inculpatory statement, he does not contend that the guilty plea was involuntarily entered. This court has held that “a constitutional right, like any other right of an accused, may be waived, and a voluntary plea of guilty waives all errors or irregularities that are not jurisdictional.” (People v. Brown (1969), 41 Ill. 2d 503, 505.) Thus, the issue was waived by the voluntary plea of guilty. Defendant next contends that the circuit court improperly sustained the People’s objections to evidence which would have shown the manner in which defendant had helped other persons. Defendant argues that the evidence was relevant to mitigation and to show his potential for rehabilitation. The first ruling of which defendant complains occurred during the following exchange between defense counsel and defendant’s half-sister, Laura Rosiles: “MR. QUEENEY [defense counsel]: In what ways would he help those men in jail? LAURA ROSILES [half-sister]: Well, I talked to Howie. From what I understand he was suffering— MR. THEOBALD [assistant State’s Attorney]: Objection. THE COURT: Sustained.” The defense also presented testimony of Marilyn Berg that defendant had helped her oldest son in his problems with the police, and had talked to her about her husband’s problems. The second allegedly erroneous ruling occurred during the following colloquy: “MR. QUEENEY [defense counsel]: Did George ever talk to you about your husband? A: Yes, he did. Q: What kind of problems does your husband have? MR. OBBISH [prosecuting attorney]: Objection, Judge. THE COURT: Objection sustained.” As the People point out, defense counsel was at no time precluded from eliciting testimony regarding the help defendant offered to these men. In the first instance, the circuit court properly sustained an objection to the witness’ nonresponsive answer. In the second instance, it correctly sustained the objection to defense counsel’s irrelevant questions regarding the nature of Mrs. Berg’s husband’s problems. There was no offer of proof concerning the evidence sought to be introduced, and absent such offer we are unable to review the matter. Defendant contends next that the People improperly introduced irrelevant and prejudicial evidence that Fred Christiansen, the 1965 murder victim, was survived by a spouse and a child. At the death penalty hearing, during the assistant State’s Attorney’s interrogation of a Chicago police officer, the following ensued: “Q: And while you were at the Belmont Hospital, did you have occasion to see Helen and Geraldine Christian-sen? A: Yes, I did. Q: And did they make an identification of their husband and their father at the Belmont Hospital? A: Yes, they did.” The People respond that this testimony was relevant for the purpose of showing the victim’s identity. Defendant contends that it cannot be argued that this testimony was offered for the purpose of identification because the victim had already been identified by Officer Cavanaugh, who had appeared at the scene and who testified that he knew Christiansen. There was no further interrogation on the matter, and we conclude that the error, if any, was harmless. The next reference to the victim’s family to which defendant objects occurred during closing argument, when the assistant State’s Attorney commented: “Mrs. Christiansen in 1965 lost her husband, and for that life she got the short end of the stick. Mrs. Christiansen got shortchanged by the criminal justice system in Illinois, because for that life, for that precious life, eight years was the penalty that he paid for that, and not only did Mrs. Christiansen suffer from that, but now the Canzoneri family has had to suffer from that.” Citing People v. Bernette (1964), 30 Ill. 2d 359, defendant argues that, despite the fact that defense counsel did not object, the reference to the victims is prejudicial error requiring reversal. In Bernette the court held that the evidence relating to the victim’s family had no relevance to guilt or innocence. What occurred here, both in the testimony and in argument, is clearly distinguishable from Bernette. In Bernette the People elicited detailed testimony concerning the deceased’s surviving family and commented on it in argument. Moreover, although remarks regarding a deceased’s family are generally improper, we have held that where, as here, the comments occurred during the sentencing hearing, the ordinary rules controlling the admissibility of evidence do not apply. (People v. Davis (1983), 95 Ill. 2d 1, 37.) In Davis, the defendant’s death sentence was upheld despite similar comments. (See also People v. Free (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 378, cert. denied (1983), 464 U.S. 865, 78 L. Ed. 2d 175, 104 S. Ct. 200.) Furthermore, the jury was fully aware of the prior murder and the circumstances surrounding it, and we doubt that its verdict was influenced by the argument. We consider next defendant’s argument that certain comments made by the People during both opening and closing arguments improperly referred to the possibility of defendant’s parole in the event the jury chose not to impose the death sentence. During opening argument, the assistant State’s Attorney argued: “The so-called experts who are in charge of the criminal justice system decided that Mr. Christiansen’s life was worth fourteen to twenty years. That’s the sentence that George Del Vecchio received for the murder of Mr. Christiansen. Well, you can see that if George Del Vecchio from 1965 had served even the minimum of that sentence, fourteen years, Tony Canzoneri would be alive today and looking forward to Thanksgiving tomorrow. The so-called experts have said, let George Del Vecchio out after serving eight years in custody, various juvenile facilities and then the Illinois State Penitentiary. They decided George Del Vecchio had been rehabilitated. Those decisions from those so-called experts cost Tony Canzoneri his life.” During closing arguments, he argued: “You have a right, ladies and gentlemen, to protect yourself from people like George Del Vecchio. You should demand that you be protected from people like George Del Vecchio. You must, you can’t leave it up to the experts. You can’t trust the experts. People like George Del Vecchio— MR. QUEENEY: Objection. THE COURT: He may argue. MR. OBBISH: —can fool the experts. He’s a manipulator, he’s a malingerer, he fools other people, he uses other people. Don’t put the decision on somebody else, because you can’t count on them, because you can bet a few years from now there will be another expert who will be willing to come along and say he’s fine.” Citing People v. Walker (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 502, defendant contends that because these comments were made during the sentencing hearing he is entitled to a new sentencing hearing. In Walker the court noted that the possibility of parole was a factor in at least one juror’s mind because the circuit judge had received a note from the jury asking for clarification of the possibility of parole. We find Walker distinguishable in that there is no evidence that the possibility of parole was a factor considered in the jury’s deliberations. Further, the assistant State’s Attorney accurately described the jury’s sentencing choices. As the Supreme Court said, “[s]urely the [defendant] cannot argue that the [United States] Constitution prohibits the State from accurately characterizing its sentencing choices.” (California v. Ramos (1988), 463 U.S. 992, 1005 n.19, 77 L. Ed. 2d 1171, 1183 n.19, 103 S. Ct. 3446, 3455 n.19.) The assistant State’s Attorney was attempting to “inform the jury of the nature of the sentence of imprisonment that may be imposed, including its implication with respect to possible release upon parole, if the jury verdict is against sentence of death.” (463 U.S. 992, 1009 n.23, 77 L. Ed. 2d 1171, 1186 n.23, 103 S. Ct. 3446, 3457 n.23.) We cannot say, in the circumstances shown here, defendant was denied a fair trial. People v. Williams (1983), 97 Ill. 2d 252, 805-06. Defendant contends next that psychiatrists, called by the People at the sentencing hearing, were improperly allowed to testify as to the opinions of nontestifying experts. Dr. Richard Rogers, a clinical psychologist, and Dr. James Cavanaugh, a psychiatrist called by the People in rebuttal, testified that, in their opinions, defendant was sane at the time of the offenses, was a sociopath and malingerer who at the time of the offense was not suffering from extreme mental or emotional distress. The testimony of which defendant complains consists of statements that other psychiatrists who had examined defendant reached conclusions consistent with those of Drs. Rogers and Cavanaugh. Citing People v. Ward (1975), 61 Ill. 2d 559, and Wilson v. Clark (1981), 84 Ill. 2d 186, defendant argues that in permitting these experts to testify concerning the opinions of nontestifying witnesses, the circuit court, in violation of defendant’s sixth amendment right of confrontation, erroneously permitted the jury to consider the opinions of the nontestifying psychiatrists. He argues that although under Ward and Wilson an expert may state an opinion based on the report of another witness it was error to permit him to state the opinion of the other witness. The evidence was admitted at the sentencing hearing pursuant to section 9 — 1(e) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 9— 1(e)), which provided: “During the proceeding any information relevant to any of the factors set forth in Subsection (b) may be presented by either the State or the defendant under the rules governing the admission of evidence at criminal trials. Any information relevant to any additional aggravating factors or any mitigating factors indicated in Subsection (c) may be presented by the State or defendant regardless of its admissibility under the rules governing the admission of evidence at criminal trials. The State and the defendant shall be given fair opportunity to rebut any information received at the hearing.” This court has held that this section suspends the rules of evidence so that the jury may have all relevant information before it. (People v. Free (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 378, 422, cert, denied (1983), 464 U.S. 865, 78 L. Ed. 2d 175, 104 S. Ct. 200.) Moreover, we are not persuaded that the brief reference to the fact that the opinions of other nontestifying experts were consistent with those experts who testified was prejudicial. Defendant’s next contention also concerns the testimony of Dr. James Cavanaugh. Dr. Cavanaugh testified that defendant was sane at the time of the offense, not under “extreme emotional distress,” and diagnosed defendant as possessing an antisocial personality disorder and being a malingerer. It is defendant’s contention that he is entitled to a new sentencing hearing because the circuit court denied him the opportunity to make an offer of proof that Dr. Cavanaugh relied on the report of an unqualified, unlicensed psychologist in forming his own opinion on defendant’s mental condition at the time of the offenses. The record shows that defense counsel sought to examine Dr. Cavanaugh outside the presence of the jury to determine the extent of his reliance on the report. The circuit court denied defense counsel’s request and concluded from a review of the doctor’s report and Dr. Cavanaugh’s direct testimony that the report of the psychologist did not materially affect Dr. Cavanaugh’s opinion. The People argue that the issue has been resolved because this court in People v. Free (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 378, cert, denied (1983), 464 U.S. 865, 78 L. Ed. 2d 175, 104 S. Ct. 200, found that Dr. Ronald K. Siegel, the psychologist involved, is qualified. (94 Ill. 2d 378, 411.) The circuit court concluded that Dr. Cavanaugh’s opinion was not materially affected by Dr. Siegel’s allegedly unreliable report. On this record we are unable to say that the circuit court erred in its conclusion. Defendant contends next that he must be granted a new sentencing hearing because the circuit court, in violation of the statute and defendant’s fifth amendment rights, improperly admitted the testimony of psychiatrists who had made a court-ordered examination of defendant. Defendant argues that under the provisions of section 115 — 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 115 — 6) the testimony was inadmissible unless he sought to raise the defense of insanity and points out that the defense of insanity was withdrawn during the guilt phase of the trial. In the sentencing hearing defendant called Dr. Edward Senay, who testified that in his opinion defendant was under extreme emotional distress, was unable to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law at the time of the offense, and was suffering from “toxic psychosis.” It is the position of the People that the testimony of Drs. Cavanaugh and Rogers, who had examined defendant, was admissible, and as previously noted, they testified in rebuttal that defendant was not suffering from extreme emotional disturbance, was able to conform his conduct to the requirements of the law, was possessed of an antisocial personality disorder, and was a malingerer. We find no violation of defendant’s constitutional rights and conclude that under the authority of People v. Silagy (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 147, 174-75, the testimony of Drs. Cavanaugh and Rogers was properly admitted to rebut the testimony of Dr. Senay. Citing Bruton v. United States (1968), 391 U.S. 123, 20 L. Ed. 2d 476, 88 S. Ct. 1620, defendant contends next that at the sentencing hearing he was denied the right to confront witnesses when the circuit court erroneously permitted a police officer to testify concerning the statements of defendant’s accomplices who had implicated defendant in the 1965 robbery and murder of Fred Christiansen. Bruton held that admission at a joint trial of a defendant’s extrajudicial confession implicating a codefendant violated the codefendant’s right of cross-examination guaranteed by the confrontation clause of the sixth amendment. This court has interpreted Bruton and its progeny not to require “ ‘reversal of a defendant’s conviction when the defendant himself has confessed and his confession “interlocks” with and supports the confession of his codefendant.’ ” (People v. Davis (1983), 97 Ill. 2d 1, 21.) Defendant’s confession is not only consistent with, but is more detailed than, the statements attributed to his codefendants. In these circumstances, the admission into evidence of the accomplices’ statements concerning the 1965 murder did not constitute reversible error. Defendant contends next that he must be granted a new sentencing hearing because the jury was not instructed that in order to support the finding that there existed the aggravating factor set forth in section 9— 1(b)(3) (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(b)(3)), multiple murders occurring as a result of unrelated acts must be premeditated. Alternatively, he contends that he is entitled to a new sentencing hearing because the verdict form finding the existence of that aggravating factor did not state that the murders for which defendant had been convicted were intentional. Defendant’s first argument was considered by this court in People v. Davis (1983), 95 Ill. 2d 1, which held that section 9 — 1(b)(3) does not require premeditated acts, but merely “two or more murders resulting from intentional or knowing acts.” (95 Ill. 2d 1, 36.) Notwithstanding,, the error, if any, was cured by the jury instruction which provided: “Before the defendant who has attained the age of eighteen years can be eligible for the death penalty, either or both of the following statutory aggravating factors must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt. One: ***. Two: The defendant George Del Vecchio has been convicted of intentionally murdering Anthony Canzoneri and intentionally murdering one Fred Christiansen.” Defendant’s alternative argument that the verdict form omitted the word “intentionally” was waived by his failure to object to the form when tendered or to submit an alternative form. Defendant contends next that the death penalty statute is unconstitutional because it permits the consideration of undefined nonstatutory aggravating factors and thus violates the eighth amendment ban on arbitrary and capricious imposition of the death penalty. In support of his argument defendant cites Henry v. Wainwright (5th Cir. 1981), 661 F.2d 56, vacated and remanded (1982), 457 U.S. 1114, 73 L. Ed. 2d 1326, 102 S. Ct. 2922, affd on remand (5th Cir. 1982), 686 F.2d 311, vacated and remanded (1983), 463 U.S. 1223, 77 L. Ed. 2d 1407, 103 S. Ct. 3566, affirmed in part and reversed in part on remand (5th Cir. 1983), 721 F.2d 990, cert. denied (1984), 466 U.S. _, 80 L. Ed. 2d 846, 104 S. Ct. 2374. In People v. Free (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 378, 427, cert, denied (1983), 464 U.S. 865, 78 L. Ed. 2d 175, 104 S. Ct. 200, we distinguished the Florida statute considered in Henry and need not discuss it again. Defendant next contends that he was denied a fair sentencing hearing where the assistant State’s Attorney made insinuations concerning defendant’s misconduct and engaged in prejudicial argument not supported by the evidence. In support of his argument he cites People v. Nuccio (1969), 43 Ill. 2d 375, in which the judgment was reversed and the cause remanded because the State’s Attorney repeatedly insinuated that defendant had previously threatened decedent and some of the prosecution’s witnesses, but failed to call those witnesses, some of whom were in the courtroom. We find it unnecessary to enumerate the instances where the assistant State’s Attorney in the instant case made these alleged insinuations. The court in Nuccio limited its holding to “[wjhere, as here, the guilt of the accused is not manifest, but is dependent upon the degree of credibility accorded by the trier of fact to his testimony and that of the witnesses who testify on his behalf ***.” (43 Ill. 2d 375, 396.) Given the overwhelming evidence of guilt, we find Nuccio inapposite. Defendant contends next that the assistant State’s Attorney improperly argued that the jury was to decide whether to impose the death penalty by determining whether the mitigating or aggravating evidence was greater. He argues that the admonition is contrary to the statute and misinformed the jury of its function. We find it unnecessary to set forth the specific remarks which defendant enumerates because we have determined that the effect of the improper argument, if any, was cured when the circuit court sustained defendant’s objections and admonished the jurors that they would be correctly instructed on the law. Prior to retiring for deliberations, the jurors were correctly instructed by the court regarding the law to be applied in the second phase of deliberations. We conclude that the circuit court took proper steps to insure that the jury properly applied the law to the facts of this case. We next consider defendant’s contention that the People’s being given the opportunity to both open and close the final arguments at the sentencing hearing denied him due process. In People v. Williams (1983), 97 Ill. 2d 252, 302-03, we considered and rejected this contention, and we decline to reconsider it here. Defendant next argues that the death penalty is excessive and requests this court to reduce the sentence to a term of imprisonment. Citing People v. Carlson (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 564, and People v. Gleckler (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 145, defendant argues that this court is obliged to reduce his sentence because his crimes were caused by mental or emotional disturbance. However, both cases are inapposite, decider vacated the death sentence which had been imposed on the defendant, one of three persons indicted for the murder, because “Gleckler, with no criminal history, *** was not the ringleader in this sordid affair; nor [were] his rehabilitative prospects demonstrably poorer than those who received imprisonment terms.” (82 Ill. 2d 145, 171.) Likewise, in Carlson, the court considered as a mitigating factor, inter alia, the fact that defendant had no prior criminal background. Given defendant’s prior serious criminal history (including murder and robbery) and his sole responsibility for the crime, we do not agree that imposition of the death penalty upon defendant was excessive. Defendant raises a number of constitutional issues, all of which have been determined adversely to defendant’s contentions. Defendant argues that the constitutional requirement of adequate appellate review mandates written, factual findings by the jury. This precise issue was considered in People v. Gaines (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 342, 384, cert. denied (1982), 456 U.S. 959, 72 L. Ed. 2d 482, 102 S. Ct. 2034, and relying on People v. Brownell (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 508, the court held such findings were not required. Defendant also contends that article I, section 11, of the Illinois Constitution requires that the jury be instructed to consider whether he possessed any rehabilitative potential and because his attorney failed to tender such an instruction, his death sentence should be vacated. In People v. Gaines (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 342, 380-83, cert. denied (1982), 456 U.S. 959, 72 L. Ed. 2d 482, 102 S. Ct. 2034, this issue was decided adversely to defendant. We have also considered and rejected the argument that the statutory mitigating factor of “extreme mental or emotional disturbance” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(c)(2)) is both unconstitutionally vague and impermissibly limiting. (People v. Silagy (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 147, 163-65.) Defendant has also argued that because the death penalty statute provides no data-gathering procedures for compilation of all capital felony cases, this court is unable to prevent its arbitrary imposition. We have previously considered and rejected this contention. (People v. Brownell (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 508, 541-44.) In Pulley v. Harris (1984), 465 U.S. 37, 79 L. Ed. 2d 29, 104 S. Ct. 871, the Supreme Court imposed no requirement not met by our present method of review. Defendant contends that the failure of the death penalty statute to require the People to prove beyond a reasonable doubt the absence of mitigating factors sufficient to preclude the death penalty violates due process of law and the eighth amendment. In People v. Free (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 378, cert, denied (1983), 464 U.S. 865, 78 L. Ed. 2d 175, 104 S. Ct. 200, we reaffirmed our holding in People v. Brownell (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 508, that a unanimous jury, or the court, must weigh the mitigating factors against the aggravating factors and conclude that there are no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude the imposition of the death sentence. We decline the invitation to reconsider the propriety of those holdings. Defendant, in his supplemental brief, argues that, in violation of the eighth and fourteenth amendments, the circuit court improperly instructed the jury that “[n]either sympathy nor prejudice should influence you.” The court gave instructions in the form of Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions (IPI) Criminal, No. 1.01 (2d ed. 1981) (general instructions regarding the functions of the court and the jury), omitting paragraph 4 as recommended by the Illinois Supreme Court Committee for capital cases. Defendant cites People v. Easley (1983), 34 Cal. 3d 858, 671 P.2d 813, 196 Cal. Rptr. 309, which held that, although appeals to the sympathy or passions of the jury are inappropriate at the guilt phase, it is necessary that the jury consider the sympathetic elements of defendant’s background during the death penalty phase, (34 Cal. 3d 858, 880, 671 P.2d 813, 827, 196 Cal. Rptr. 309, 323.) We are not persuaded that the instruction given was inappropriate and note further that no instruction consistent with defendant’s contentions was tendered. Defendant contends next that the death penalty was imposed in violation of the eighth and fourteenth amendments to the Constitution of the United States. He argues that “the essence of the death penalty decisions of the Supreme Court has been that a constitutionally imposed death sentence requires an individualized sentencing process in which the senteneer will decide whether ‘death is the appropriate punishment in a specific case.’ ” He argues, too, that the jurors, despite finding that mitigation did not outweigh aggravation, may have considered capital punishment inappropriate, but may have felt that they were without discretion to return a verdict other than one imposing the death penalty. He contends that for those reasons the jury, in addition to the finding that mitigation did not outweigh aggravation, should have been required to find that death was the appropriate punishment. He contends, too, that the jury may have assumed that it was defendant’s burden to disprove the suitability of the death sentence. We do not agree. Implicit in the statutory scheme is that the jury should carefully weigh the factors “in order to reach a fair and just result, one that is based on the particular circumstances of the offense and the defendant.” (People v. Brownell (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 508, 538.) The holding in Brownell resolves any question of “appropriateness.” Defendant contends next that after being found eligible for the death sentence, in violation of the eighth and fourteenth amendments he bore the burden of proving that the death penalty was inappropriate. In People v. Williams (1983), 97 Ill. 2d 252, 302, we held that at the aggravation and mitigation hearing there is no burden of proof, but, rather, the People have the burden of going forward with the evidence, and we decline to reconsider that holding here. Finally, defendant asserts that four of the members of this court have previously expressed the opinion that the statute is unconstitutional because it bestows upon the People the sole discretion to determine whether to seek the death penalty, and that this may result in arbitrary application of the statute. (See People ex rel. Carey v. Cousins (1979), 77 Ill. 2d 531, 544 (Ryan, J., Goldenhersh, C.J., and Clark, J., dissenting); People v. Lewis (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 129, 179 (Simon, J., dissenting), cert, denied (1982), 456 U.S. 1011, 73 L. Ed. 2d 1308, 102 S. Ct. 2307.) Defendant notes that three of the judges filed concurring opinions, relying on stare decisis, upholding the constitutionality of the death penalty statute (see People v. Lewis (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 129, 165 (Goldenhersh, C.J., concurring), 166 (Ryan, J., concurring), 167 (Clark, J., concurring), cert. denied (1982), 456 U.S. 1011, 73 L. Ed. 2d 1308, 102 S. Ct. 2307), and that these opinions were predicated on the assumption that the Supreme Court would review the validity of the statute. The argument continues that because the Supreme Court has denied certiorari, this court is, in effect, the “final tribunal” to determine the statute’s validity. Defendant argues that the Supreme Court’s denial of certiorari in, inter alia, People v. Lewis (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 129, cert, denied (1982), 456 U.S. 1011, 73 L. Ed. 2d 1308, 102 S. Ct. 2307, requires this court to reconsider the constitutionality of the statute. We do not agree. However, we note parenthetically that there are decisions of this court on which petitions for writs of certiorari await consideration. (See People v. Gacy (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 1; People v. Holman (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 133; People v. Albanese (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 504.) As the People note, previous denials of certiorari by the Supreme Court do not preclude it from later granting certiorari. (Chessman v. Teets (1957), 354 U.S. 156, 175-77, 1 L. Ed. 2d 1253, 1265-67, 77 S. Ct. 1127, 1137-38.) In People ex rel. Carey v. Cousins (1979), 77 Ill. 2d 531, cert, denied (1979), 445 U.S. 953, 63 L. Ed. 2d 788, 100 S. Ct. 1603, the majority traced the history of the broad discretion enjoyed by the State’s Attorney in both the initiation and the management of criminal litigation and determined that such discretion was not unconstitutional. Cousins has subsequently been reaffirmed (see, e.g., People v. Lewis (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 129, cert, denied (1982), 456 U.S. 1011, 73 L. Ed. 2d 1308, 102 S. Ct. 2307), and we decline to reconsider it here. For the reasons stated, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court of Cook County. The clerk of this court is directed to enter an order fixing Tuesday, September 17, 1985, as the date on which the sentence of death entered by the circuit court is to be executed. The defendant shall be executed by lethal injection in the manner provided by section 119 — 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 119 — 5). A certified copy of this order shall be furnished by the clerk of this court to the Director of Corrections, to the warden of Stateville Correction Center, and to the warden of the institution wherein the defendant is confined. Judgment affirmed.

=== CASE 9739579 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:51.84006+00 ===

JUSTICE SIMON, concurring in part and dissenting in part: I concur in the majority’s judgment that the defendant’s conviction for murder should be affirmed, but I dissent from the decision to impose the death penalty. For the reasons set forth in my separate opinions in People v. Lewis (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 129, 179 (Simon, J., dissenting), in People v. Silagy (1984), 101 Ill. 2d 147, 184 (Simon, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part), and in People v. Albanese (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 504, 549 (Simon, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part), I have concluded that the Illinois death penalty statute violates the United States and Illinois constitutions. Moreover, the comments made by the assistant State’s Attorney during the sentencing hearing regarding the possibility of parole for the defendant if the jury chose not to impose the death penalty require that the death sentence be reversed. In People v. Walker (1982), 91 Ill. 2d 502, 515, this court held: “Our statute requires that the court or jury, as the case may be, consider aggravating and mitigating factors, which are relevant to the imposition of the death penalty. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1977, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(c).) Whether or not the defendant may, at some future time, be paroled is not a proper aggravating factor to consider in determining whether the death penalty should be imposed.” The majority’s attempt to distinguish Walker from this case is unpersuasive. Here, as in Walker, the prosecution argued that the defendant might be paroled if he received a prison term. Here, as in Walker, the trial court overruled objections to this improper argument. Here, as in Walker, the jury may have considered the possibility of parole in determining whether the defendant should be executed, a factor that is not permitted by the Illinois death penalty statute. As this court said in Walker, “[in] a death penalty case, a high standard of procedural accuracy is required in determining whether or not that penalty will be imposed. The procedural errors in this case do not conform to the high standard which must be followed to insure that proper matters are considered in aggravation and that the penalty is applied in as uniform a manner as possible within the framework of an adversary proceeding.” 91 Ill. 2d 502, 517. California v. Ramos (1983), 463 U.S. 992, 1005 n.19, 77 L. Ed. 2d 1171, 1183 n.19, 103 S. Ct. 3446, 3454-55 n.19, is not in point. The defendant has not argued here that the United States Constitution prohibits the State from accurately characterizing its sentencing choices. Rather, he has argued that our death penalty statute prohibits the State from raising improper issues in the determination of aggravating factors. Our opinion in People v. Walker supports that contention. I would therefore vacate the sentence of death and remand to the trial court for resentencing.

=== CASE 2220362 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:41.176225+00 ===

131 Ill. App.3d 716 (1985)
475 N.E.2d 1375
KATHLEEN CASEY et al., Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.
DAVID BASEDEN et al., Defendants-Appellants.
No. 5-84-0259.
Illinois Appellate Court  Fifth District.
Opinion filed March 7, 1985.
*717 *718 Michael F. Dahlen and Richard A. Green, both of Feirich, Schoen, Mager, Green & Associates, of Carbondale, for appellants.
John Paul Womick & Associates, Chartered, of Carbondale, for appellees.
Judgment affirmed.
JUSTICE HARRISON delivered the opinion of the court:
David Baseden and R.A. Williams, Inc., defendants, appeal from a judgment of the circuit court of Union County awarding Kathleen Casey, plaintiff, the sum of $140,000. The litigation between the parties resulted from an August 27, 1982, accident in which a truck driven by Baseden, an employee of R.A. Williams, Inc., struck the rear of plaintiff's car. Following a jury trial, the jury assessed plaintiff's damages at $200,000 and plaintiff's comparative negligence at *719 30%. The trial court entered judgment on the verdict and denied defendants' post-trial motion. On appeal, defendants raise numerous issues for our consideration. For the reasons which follow, we affirm the judgment of the circuit court.
 1 Initially, defendants argue that four of the instructions given to the jury were erroneous. The first instruction challenged by defendants is plaintiff's instruction No. 29, which stated:
"If you find for the plaintiffs on the issue of liability, and find that the plaintiffs have proven that they have sustained damages, then the defendants have the burden of proving that the plaintiff, Kay Casey, was contributorily negligent."
Defendants contend that they do not have the burden of proving plaintiff's contributory negligence, and that this instruction was erroneous. We disagree.
Prior to the adoption of the comparative negligence doctrine in Illinois, a plaintiff was required to establish that he had exercised due care for his own safety, and the absence of such a showing, or sufficient affirmative evidence of contributory negligence, was a complete bar to recovery. (Mueller v. Sangamo Construction Co. (1975), 61 Ill.2d 441, 446, 338 N.E.2d 1.) In Alvis v. Ribar (1981), 85 Ill.2d 1, 421 N.E.2d 886, the case in which our supreme court adopted the comparative negligence doctrine, the court offered no opinion as to whether a plaintiff was still required to prove his freedom from contributory negligence or whether the burden of establishing a plaintiff's contributory negligence rested now with the defendant. Subsequently, however, in discussing Mueller and other cases holding that a plaintiff must prove freedom from contributory negligence, the court stated that "Alvis v. Ribar has, of course, rendered these holdings obsolete." (Long v. City of New Boston (1982), 91 Ill.2d 456, 463, 440 N.E.2d 625.) In light of the court's unequivocal rejection of these pre-Alvis holdings, we are unable to accept defendants' argument that the burden of proving freedom from negligence continues to rest with plaintiff. On the contrary, we believe that the rationale for placing this burden on plaintiff no longer exists, and that the jury in this case was properly instructed.
 2 The swift and universal acceptance of the contributory negligence doctrine during the nineteenth century has been attributed to a need to protect newly developing industries from juries overly sympathetic to injured plaintiffs. (Alvis v. Ribar (1981), 85 Ill.2d 1, 5-6, 421 N.E.2d 886.) Early in the judicial history of this State, our supreme court held that it was incumbent on the plaintiff in a negligence action to prove freedom from negligence on his part (Aurora Branch *720 R.R. Co. v. Grimes (1852), 13 Ill. 585, 587); while the rationale for this holding was not expressed in Grimes, it seems clear that, in imposing an additional requirement on the plaintiff, the court furthered the policy of offering some degree of legal protection to railroads and other industries. While this may have been sound social policy at the time, the same considerations which prompted the adoption of comparative negligence support the conclusion that a plaintiff should no longer be required to plead and prove his own freedom from negligence. This was implicitly recognized as early as 1908, when the Federal Employers' Liability Act (45 U.S.C. sec. 51 et seq.) was adopted; in cases tried under the Act, which recognizes the doctrine of comparative fault (45 U.S.C. sec. 53), the burden of establishing contributory negligence on the part of the plaintiff rests with the defendant (Fisher v. Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific Ry. Co. (1919), 290 Ill. 49, 56, 124 N.E. 831; see Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions (IPI), Civil, No. 160.10 (2d ed. 1971)). We see no reason why a similar rule should not be applied to ordinary negligence actions, as it is both logical and fair to hold that a defendant who stands to benefit from a showing that a plaintiff was contributorily negligent should have the burden of making that showing. Accordingly, we hold that the court did not err in giving plaintiff's instruction No. 29. We note parenthetically that any error in giving this instruction was harmless, in view of the jury's high apportionment of 30% negligence to plaintiff, whose car was struck in the rear by defendants' truck, during daylight hours, while plaintiff's car was stopped to make a left turn.
 3 Defendants next contend that the court erred in giving the long form of IPI Civil No. 15.01. This instruction states:
"When I use the expression `proximate cause', I mean any cause which, in natural or probable sequence, produced the injury complained of. It need not be the only cause, nor the last or nearest cause. It is sufficient if it concurs with some other cause acting at the same time, which in combination with it, causes the injury."
The court erred in giving the last two sentences of this instruction, as there was no evidence of any third party's negligence. (Bass v. Washington-Kinney Co. (1983), 119 Ill. App.3d 713, 722, 457 N.E.2d 85.) This error was harmless, however, as nothing in the verdict tends to suggest that the jury speculated as to possible additional causes of the accident, and there is nothing of record which would have operated to invite such speculation.
 4, 5 The next contention of defendants concerns the duty and agency instructions given to the jury. While defendants complain of *721 the use of the word "himself" in the duty instruction (IPI Civil No. 70.01), claiming that it placed undue emphasis on the duty owed by the male defendant, this objection was not made at trial, and the issue is waived for purposes of review (Saunders v. Schultz (1960), 20 Ill.2d 301, 314, 170 N.E.2d 163). As to agency, the court gave the following instruction (IPI Civil No. 50.01) at plaintiff's request:
"The defendants are sued as principal and agent. The defendant, R.A. Williams, Inc., is the principal and the defendant, David Baseden, is its agent. If you find the defendant, David Baseden, is liable, then you must find that the defendant R.A. Williams, Inc., is also liable. However, if you find David Baseden is not liable, then you must find that R.A. Williams, Inc., is not liable."
Over the objection of defendants, the court also gave IPI Civil No. 50.02:
"David Baseden was the agent of the defendant, R.A. Williams, Inc. at the time of this occurrence. Therefore, any act or omission of the agent at that time was in law the act or omission of the defendant, R.A. Williams, Inc."
While defendants point out that the second instruction is largely repetitive of the first, we cannot say that reversible error occurred. It was undisputed that Baseden was in fact the agent of R.A. Williams, Inc., and the second reference to this agency relationship was not of such significance as to improperly sway the juror's sympathies toward the plaintiffs and away from the corporate defendant. Under these circumstances, we cannot say that the giving of the second instruction, even if erroneous, was prejudicial to defendants.
 6, 7 The final instruction issue raised by defendants concerns two aspects of plaintiff's instruction No. 24. The disputed parts of this instruction state:
"If you decide for the plaintiff, Kay Casey, on the question of liability, you must then fix the amount of money which will reasonably and fairly compensate her for any of the following elements of damages proved by the evidence to have resulted from the negligence of the defendants:
*   *   *
C. The value of time and earnings lost and the present cash value of earnings reasonably certain to be lost in the future;
D. The reasonable expenses necessary for help in her home which were required as a result of her injury."
While defendants assert that there was not sufficient evidence to justify the giving of these two sections of the instruction, examination of *722 the record reveals otherwise. During direct examination, plaintiff testified as follows:
"Q. Let's stay, if we can, just for a second, on the Goodyear Tire Store.
A. Okay.
Q. Had you reached an agreement with Carroll [plaintiff's son] about how you were going to be paid?
A. No, it was oral.
Q. What was the oral agreement about how you were going to be paid?
*   *   *
A. He had said something about a hundred and seventy-five dollars a week, and he had asked me again, if that was enough, because I had done more work for him in my home, too."
In order to recover lost earnings, all the law requires is that the plaintiff present evidence which will establish, with a fair degree of probability, a basis for the assessment of damages. (Tracy v. Village of Lombard (1983), 116 Ill. App.3d 563, 575, 451 N.E.2d 992.) Plaintiff's testimony regarding her plans to work at the tire store, if believed by the jury, was sufficient to meet this test. Defendants' contention regarding the portion of the instruction concerning expenses related to help in the home is also without merit, as plaintiff testified that she employed a housekeeper for about 21 days and paid her "around" $25 or $30 per day.
 8-11 In addition to the alleged errors in jury instructions, defendants raise three additional issues for our consideration. First, defendants claim that the court erred in excusing, without interrogation, nine prospective jurors who were insured by Country Companies, the company which served as defendants' insurance carrier. It has been specifically held that this procedure does not constitute reversible error (Lynch v. Mid-America Fire & Marine Insurance Co. (1981), 94 Ill. App.3d 21, 30, 418 N.E.2d 421), and we believe that the reasoning of Lynch applies with equal force here. While defendants also allege that the court erred in not allowing them to recross-examine plaintiff's medical expert regarding certain diagnostic tests performed on plaintiff, it is well settled that the scope and extent of cross and re-cross-examination are within the discretion of the court (Johns-Manville Products Corp. v. Industrial Com. (1979), 78 Ill.2d 171, 181, 399 N.E.2d 606), and we cannot say that the court abused that discretion here. Finally, defendants contend that the verdict is excessive. The evidence adduced at trial, however, showed that plaintiff suffered dizziness, muscle aches, headaches and *723 periods of depression, that she was unable to work or drive a car, and that her injuries were of a permanent nature. In determining whether a verdict is excessive, we must analyze whether that verdict falls within the flexible limits of fair and reasonable compensation, or is so large as to shock the judicial conscience. (LeMaster v. Chicago Rock Island & Pacific R.R. Co. (1976), 35 Ill. App.3d 1001, 1030, 343 N.E.2d 65.) Upon application of this test to the instant case, we cannot say that the verdict is excessive.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court is affirmed.
Affirmed.
JONES, P.J., and WELCH, J., concur.

=== CASE 9739580 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:52.76714+00 ===

CHIEF JUSTICE CLARK delivered the opinion of the court: We have consolidated the following two cases for review, Van Slambrouck v. Economy Baler Company, No. 59708 (Van Slambrouck), and Gunderson v. Goodall Rubber Company, No. 59709 (Gunderson). First, we will set forth the facts of each case. Then, we will discuss the issues presented by these two cases. The procedural history of Van Slambrouck is long and involved. Because of our holding in the case it is not necessary to set forth the Van Slambrouck facts in detail. Michael Van Slambrouck worked for a janitorial service, Lein Chemical Company. Marshall Field and Company (Field’s) hired Lein Chemical to service its Old Orchard store. On November 10, 1973, Van Slambrouck’s left foot was amputated while using a paper-baling machine at work. Economy Baler Company (Economy) manufactured the baling machine, Field’s owned the machine, and Lein Chemical used the machine. Van Slambrouck sued Economy and Field’s in the circuit court of Cook County in July 1974. However, Van Slambrouck voluntarily dismissed Field’s with prejudice as a defendant in the case on October 6,1976. On August 30, 1979, Van Slambrouck moved to vacate the October 6, 1976, order which dismissed Field’s from the case. In Van Slambrouck’s motion, he contended that a recent inspection by Economy revealed that the paper-baling machine malfunctioned because Field’s employees had removed parts from the machine. The circuit court denied the motion. On November 15, 1979, Van Slambrouck again sued Field’s. This complaint was dismissed with prejudice on March 4, 1980. Van Slambrouck filed a fifth amended complaint against Economy on March 28, 1980. Count I of the amended complaint alleged strict products liability, and count II alleged negligence. Economy then filed a counterclaim against Field’s on April 7, 1980, seeking indemnity based on active/passive negligence. On November 13, 1981, Economy amended the counterclaim seeking either indemnity or contribution. Field’s motion to dismiss the amended counterclaim was granted. The circuit court held: (1) that Economy’s counterclaim was barred by the prior adjudication that Field’s was not negligent with regard to Van Slambrouck (the October 1976 voluntary dismissal with prejudice); (2) that since Economy was the manufacturer of the product it was actively negligent as a matter of law and, therefore, could not maintain an indemnity action based on active/passive negligence against a downstream owner such as Field’s; and (3) that contribution was unavailable to Economy because of this court’s decision in Skinner v. Reed-Prentice Division Package Machinery Co. (1977), 70 Ill. 2d 1. Economy appealed the circuit court’s dismissal of its amended counterclaim. The appellate court affirmed the circuit court on the indemnity and contribution issues. (120 Ill. App. 3d 843.) Because of its holding the appellate court did not reach the issue of whether Economy’s counterclaim was barred by the prior adjudication that Field’s was not negligent. Economy then petitioned this court for leave to appeal, and we allowed the petition. (We note that Van Slambrouck has not gone to trial.) Before we discuss the merits of Van Slambrouck, we will set forth the facts of Gunderson. William Gunderson was employed by Schwerman Trucking Company (Schwerman). On August 25, 1977, Gunderson was severely injured at work when a rubber hose ruptured and caused a caustic substance to burn his eyes. As a result of the injuries, Gunderson lost his sight. Gunderson filed a lawsuit based on a theory of products liability against Goodall Rubber Company of Canada, Ltd., the manufacturer of the hose; Goodall Rubber Company (Goodall), the distributor of the rubber hose, and Hi-Way Power and Equipment Corporation, a broker which had ordered the rubber hose from Goodall and then sold it to Schwerman. Goodall filed a third-party action against Schwerman seeking contribution. Schwerman moved to strike Goodall’s contribution claim, and the motion was granted. Gunderson’s case proceeded to trial. A jury in' the circuit court of Cook County awarded a verdict to Gunderson, assessing damages in the amount of $5 million against all three defendants. In a special interrogatory, the jury found that the rubber hose was in an unreasonably dangerous condition when it left the control of all three defendants and that the unreasonably dangerous condition was a proximate cause of Gunderson’s injury. While post-trial motions were pending, Goodall obtained leave to file a second amended complaint against Schwerman seeking indemnity. Goodall alleged that if it was negligent at all, it was passively negligent and that Schwerman was actively negligent since Schwerman used the hose improperly. Schwerman moved to dismiss the amended complaint and the circuit court granted the motion. Goodall then appealed to the appellate court. 120 Ill. App. 3d 748. Goodall’s notice of appeal to the appellate court sought review of the circuit court’s order dismissing Goodall’s contribution claim and indemnity claims against Schwerman. However, Goodall’s only request was that the appellate court reverse and remand the circuit court’s order with respect to the indemnity claim. The appellate court noted that the contribution action would have been barred because the cause of action arose before March 1, 1978, the date contribution became available in Illinois. With regard to its indemnity action, Goodall argued that Skinner v. Reed-Prentice Division Package Machinery Co. (1977), 70 Ill. 2d 1, and Stevens v. Silver Manufacturing Co. (1977), 70 Ill. 2d 41, allowed “ ‘downstream’ indemnity actions, brought under a theory of active/passive negligence.” (120 Ill. App. 3d 748, 750.) The appellate court held, however, that those cases and their companion case of Robinson v. International Harvester Co. (1977), 70 Ill. 2d 47, only applied to causes of action arising on or after March 1, 1978. Therefore, the court held that Goodall’s indemnity action was properly dismissed since the cause of action arose before March 1, 1978. Goodall filed a petition for leave to appeal with this court, and we granted the petition. We consolidated the appeal in Gunderson with the appeal in Van Slambrouck. Having set forth the facts of Van Slambrouck and Gunderson, we now turn to the issues presented in these cases. The issues in Van Slambrouck are: (1) whether we should modify the prospective application of our holding in Skinner v. Reed-Prentice Division Package Machinery Co. (1977), 70 Ill. 2d 1, which held that the right to contribution applies only to causes of action arising on or after March 1, 1978; (2) whether the manufacturer of a product can maintain an indemnity action against a user of the product when the cause of action arose prior to March 1, 1978; and (3) whether Van Slambrouck’s voluntary dismissal of Field’s from the case with prejudice bars Economy’s counterclaim against Field’s. In Gunderson the issue is whether the distributor of a product can maintain an indemnity action when the distributor’s liability is based on strict liability and the cause of action arose prior to March 1, 1978. We begin our analysis with a discussion of the contribution issue in Van Slambrouck. Economy argues that this court should modify the date which was set as the effective date that contribution would be available in this State (March 1, 1978) and to now allow contribution to be available to all cases tried on or after June 8, 1981, the date that comparative negligence became applicable to cases. (Alvis v. Ribar (1981), 85 Ill. 2d 1.) Economy argues that the “three year gap results in an injustice to Economy by subjecting it to comparative negligence without allowing it to have the benefit of contribution from Marshall Field for this accident.” Because of this perceived injustice, Economy has asked this court to modify our ruling in Skinner v. Reed-Prentice Division Package Machinery Co. (1977), 70 Ill. 2d 1, by allowing all cases tried on and after the date of our opinion in this case to be governed by both comparative negligence and contribution. As we stated in Skinner, Stevens v. Silver Manufacturing Co. (1977), 70 Ill. 2d 41, and Robinson v. International Harvester Co. (1977), 70 Ill. 2d 47, contribution only applies to causes of action arising out of occurrences on or after March 1, 1978. In addition to our holdings in these three cases, the legislature has provided by statute that the right of contribution applies only to causes of action arising on or after March 1, 1978. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 70, par. 301.) Since the cause of action in this case arose on November 10, 1973, contribution does not apply. Therefore, the appellate court properly affirmed the circuit court’s order dismissing Economy’s claim for contribution. We now turn to the indemnity issues presented in Van Slambrouck and Gunderson. We begin by noting that “a third-party complaint will be dismissed if it fails to state a cause of action by the defendant against the third-party defendant.” (Muhlbauer v. Kruzel (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 226, 230.) “Indemnity *** is a common law doctrine providing for the complete shifting of liability on a showing that there was a pre-tort relationship between the guilty parties and a qualitative distinction between their conduct.” (Heinrich v. Peabody International Corp. (1984), 99 Ill. 2d 344, 349.) Therefore, to state a cause of action for indemnity, the third-party complaint must allege: (1) a pretort relationship between the third-party plaintiff and the third-party defendant, and (2) a qualitative distinction between the conduct of the third-party plaintiff and the third-party defendant. In both Van Slambrouck and Gunderson, the third-party defendants, Field’s and Schwerman, have noted that the third-party plaintiffs, Economy and Goodall, have failed to allege a pretort relationship on which to base their indemnity actions; a pretort relationship gives rise to the duty to indemnify. Van Jacobs v. Parikh (1981), 97 Ill. App. 3d 610, 612. Classic pretort relationships which have given rise to a duty to indemnify include: lessor and lessee (Mierzejwski v. Stronczek (1968), 100 Ill. App. 2d 68); employer and employee (Embree v. DeKalb Forge Co. (1964), 49 Ill. App. 2d 85); owner and his lessee (Blaszak v. Union Tank Car Co. (1962), 37 Ill. App. 2d 12); master and servant (Gulf Mobile & Ohio R.R. Co. v. Arthur Dixon Transfer Co. (1951), 343 Ill. App. 148). In Reynolds v. Illinois Bell Telephone Co. (1964), 51 Ill. App. 2d 334, and Sargent v. Interstate Bakeries, Inc. (1967), 86 Ill. App. 2d 187, indemnity was permitted even though there was no pretort relationship alleged and/or proved between the third-party plaintiff and the third-party defendant. However, in Muhlbauer v. Kruzel (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 226, 231-32, this court stated, “[A] third-party complaint must disclose some relationship upon which a duty to indemnify may be predicated.” We do not find the required allegation of a pretort relationship in either Economy’s or Goodall’s indemnity claims. Therefore, we hold that Economy’s and Goodall’s indemnity claims failed to state a cause of action against Field’s and Schwerman. Because of the third-party plaintiffs’ failure to state a cause of action for indemnity, we need not decide the indemnity issues which were set forth earlier, namely, whether the manufacturer of a product can maintain an indemnity action against a user of the product when the cause of action arose prior to March 1, 1978, and whether the distributor of a product can maintain an indemnity action when the distributor’s liability is based on strict liability and the cause of action arose prior to March 1,1978. Because of our holding in Van Slambrouck, we need not discuss whether Economy’s counterclaim was barred by the prior adjudication that Field’s was not negligent. (The October 6, 1976, voluntary dismissal of Field’s was with prejudice.) Before we conclude, we will comment on an issue raised in Goodall’s brief. That issue is whether indemnity continues to be a viable cause of action after March 1, 1978, the date contribution became available in Illinois. In Heinrich v. Peabody International Corp. (1984), 99 Ill. 2d 344, we noted that this was an important issue which awaits resolution. We still believe this to be true. However, the causes of action before this court occurred prior to the date contribution became available. Therefore, it is inappropriate to address this issue here. Hence, we affirm the judgments of the appellate court in Van Slambrouck and Gunderson, for the reasons set forth above. Judgments affirmed.

=== CASE 9739581 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:52.771977+00 ===

JUSTICE SIMON, dissenting: The active-passive theory of indemnification has been defined as follows: “where one does the act which produces the injury and the other does' not join in the act but is thereby exposed to liability and suffers damage the latter may recover against the principal delinquent, and the law will inquire into the real delinquency and place the ultimate liability upon him whose fault was the primary cause of the injury. [Citations.]” (Griffiths & Son Co. v. National Fireproofing Co. (1923), 310 Ill. 331, 339.) The majority opinion dismisses this appeal because “the third-party plaintiffs, Economy and Goodall, have failed to allege a pretort relationship on which to base their indemnity actions; ***.” (105 Ill. 2d at 469.) I believe both third-party plaintiffs have alleged sufficient pretort relationships to satisfy the pleading requirements for an indemnity action. If, however, they have failed to meet some technical requirement, I would allow them leave to amend their complaints to allege pretort relationships, because they clearly exist. In Economy Baler’s action, Economy’s relationship to Marshall Field satisfies the requirement the majority finds lacking. Marshall Field purchased the machine directly from Economy, and this seller-purchaser relationship existed prior to the tort. In Campbell v. Joslyn Manufacturing & Supply Co. (1965), 65 Ill. App. 2d 344, the appellate court reversed the circuit court’s dismissal of a third-party action between a manufacturer and the purchaser based on an active-passive theory. Likewise, in SW (Delaware), Inc. v. American Consumers Industries, Inc. (Del. 1982), 450 A.2d 887, the Delaware Supreme Court, while dismissing an action for indemnification, noted that a manufacturer could bring an action for indemnity against a purchaser if the factual situation supported such a theory. (See also Annot., 28 A.L.R.3d 943, 981-87 (1969).) Moreover, the manufacturer-purchaser relationship is indistinguishable in substance from the “classic pretort relationships” of lessor-lessee, employer-employee, owner-lessee and master-servant referred to by the majority. (105 Ill. 2d at 469-70.) Therefore, Economy’s relationship to Marshall Field, alleged in its third-party complaint, satisfies the pretort relationship requirement. Goodall also had a pretort relationship with Schwerman sufficient to pursue an indemnity action. Goodall produced the rubber hose which ruptured and injured Gunderson. While Goodall’s connection is attenuated by another party (Hi-Way Power and Equipment Corporation), its contractual relationship with Hi-Way, who in turn sold the hose to Schwerman, is a sufficient basis for alleging the duty to indemnify. Just as privity no longer bars an action in contract (see, e.g., Suvada v. White Motor Co. (1965), 32 Ill. 2d 612), Goodall's relationship with Schwerman is a pretort relationship for pleading purposes. The majority, citing Muhlbauer v. Kruzel (1968), 39 Ill. 2d 226, contends that a pretort relationship is a necessary part of an indemnity action. While I do not dispute the necessity of this requirement, I do not find that Muhlbauer supports the majority’s conclusion that no pretort relationship exists in these cases. In Muhlbauer, no pretort relationship was alleged and it was impossible “to discern potential relationships that would support a duty on the part of Wilson to indemnify Kruzel.” (39 Ill. 2d 226, 232.) Unlike Muhlbauer, these cases allege facts which establish relationships existing prior to the tort. Likewise, Heinrich v. Peabody International Corp. (1984), 99 Ill. 2d 344, is distinguishable from Economy’s and Goodall’s claims. Heinrich held that a loaned-servant allegation could not be the basis for an indemnity action because the original defendant and the third-party defendant were not both liable to the plaintiff. The court’s decision in that case, which was that the loaned-servant doctrine does not set forth an indemnity theory, dealt with a requirement different from the one at issue in this case. Therefore, I would dissent from the majority’s decision to dismiss this case for lack of a pretort relationship. I would have gone on to decide the second issue presented to this court, that is whether a manufacturer or distributor can maintain an indemnity action against “downstream” parties when the cause of action arises prior to March 1, 1978, the date set by the decision in Skinner v. Reed-Prentice Division Package Machinery Co. (1977), 70 Ill. 2d 1, 17. GOLDENHERSH and RYAN, JJ., join in this dissent.

=== CASE 9739582 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:53.05168+00 ===

Abrams, J.
This products liability action raises the question of the extent of a drug manufacturer’s duty to warn consumers of dangers inherent in the use of oral contraceptives. The plaintiffs brought suit against the defendant, Ortho Pharmaceutical Corporation (Ortho), for injuries allegedly caused by Ortho’s birth control pills, and obtained a jury verdict in their favor. The defendant moved for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict. The judge concluded that the defendant did not owe a duty to warn the plaintiffs, and entered judgment for Ortho. The plaintiffs appealed. We transferred the case to this court on our own motion and reinstate the jury verdict.2
We summarize the facts. In September, 1973, the plaintiff Carole D. MacDonald (MacDonald), who was twenty-six years old at the time, obtained from her gynecologist a prescription for Ortho-Novum contraceptive pills, manufactured by Ortho. As required by the then effective regulations promulgated by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the pill dispenser she received was labeled with a warning that “oral contraceptives are powerful and effective drugs which can cause side effects in some users and should not be used at all by some women,” and that “[t]he most serious known side effect is abnormal blood clotting which can be fatal.”3 The *133warning also referred MacDonald to a booklet which she obtained from her gynecologist, and which was distributed by Ortho pursuant to FDA requirements. The booklet contained detailed information about the contraceptive pill, including the increased risk to pill users that vital organs such as the brain may be damaged by abnormal blood clotting.* **4 The word *134“stroke” did not appear on the dispenser warning or in the booklet.
MacDonald’s prescription for Ortho-Novum pills was renewed at subsequent annual visits to her gynecologist. The prescription was filled annually. On July 24, 1976, after approximately three years of using the pills, MacDonald suffered an occlusion of a cerebral artery by a blood clot, an injury commonly referred to as a stroke.5 The injury caused the death of approximately twenty per cent of MacDonald’s brain tissue, and left her permanently disabled. She and her husband initiated an action in the Superior Court against Ortho, seeking recovery for her personal injuries and his consequential damages and loss of consortium.
MacDonald testified that, during the time she used the pills, she was unaware that the risk of abnormal blood clotting encompassed the risk of stroke, and that she would not have used the pills had she been warned that stroke is an associated risk.6 The case was submitted to a jury on the plaintiffs’ theories that Ortho was negligent in failing to warn adequately of the dangers associated with the pills and that Ortho breached its warranty of merchantability. These two theories were treated, in effect, as a single claim of failure to warn. The jury returned a special verdict, finding no negligence or breach of warranty in the manufacture of the pills. The jury also found that Ortho adequately advised the gynecologist of the risks inherent in the pills;7 the jury found, however, that Ortho was negligent and *135in breach of warranty because it failed to give MacDonald sufficient warning of such dangers. The jury further found that MacDonald’s injury was caused by Ortho’s pills, that the inadequacy of the warnings to MacDonald was the proximate cause of her injury, and that Ortho was liable to MacDonald and her husband.* *****8
After the jury verdict, the judge granted Ortho’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, concluding that, because oral contraceptives are prescription drugs, a manufacturer’s duty to warn the consumer is satisfied if the manufacturer gives adequate warnings to the prescribing physician, and that the manufacturer has no duty to warn the consumer directly.
The narrow issue, on appeal, is whether, as the plaintiffs contend, a manufacturer of birth control pills owes a direct duty to the consumer to warn her of the dangers inherent, in the use of the pill. We conclude that such a duty exists under the law of this Commonwealth.
1. Extent of duty to warn. Ordinarily, “a manufacturer of a product, which the manufacturer knows or should know is dangerous by nature or is in a dangerous condition,” is under a duty to give warning of those dangers to “persons who it is foreseeable will come in contact with, and consequently be endangered by, that product.” H.P. Hood & Sons v. Ford Motor Co., 370 Mass. 69, 75 (1976). The element of privity being long discarded, a manufacturer’s warning to the immediate purchaser will not, as a general matter, discharge this duty. However, “there are limits to that principle.” Carter v. Yardley & Co., 319 Mass. 92, 98 (1946). Thus, “a manufacturer may be absolved from blame because of a justified reliance upon ... a middleman.” Id. at 99. This exception is applicable *136only in the limited instances in which the manufacturer’s reliance on an intermediary is reasonable. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 388 comment n (1965). In such narrowly defined circumstances, the manufacturer’s immunity from liability if the consumer does not receive the warning is explicable on the grounds that the intermediary’s failure to warn is a superseding cause of the consumer’s injury, or, alternatively, that, because it is unreasonable in such circumstances to expect the manufacturer to communicate with the consumer, the manufacturer has no duty directly to warn the consumer.9 See generally 1A L. Framer & M. Friedman, Products Liability §§ 8.01, 8.03 [3] (1983 & Supp. 1984); Restatement (Second) of Torts, supra at § 452 comment f.
The role in jurisdictions that have addressed the question of the extent of a manufacturer’s duty to warn in cases involving prescription drags is that the prescribing physician acts as a “learned intermediary” between the manufacturer and the patient, and “the duty of the ethical drag manufacturer is to warn the doctor, rather than the patient, [although] the manufacturer is directly liable to the patient for a breach of such duty.” McEwen v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 270 Or. 375, 386-387 (1974). Oral contraceptives, however, bear peculiar characteristics which warrant the imposition of a common law *137duty on the manufacturer to warn users directly of associated risks. Whereas a patient’s involvement in decision making concerning use of a prescription drug necessary to treat a malady is typically minimal or nonexistent, the healthy, young consumer of oral contraceptives is usually actively involved in the decision to use “the pill,” as opposed to other available birth control products, and the prescribing physician is relegated to a relatively passive role.10
Furthermore, the physician prescribing “the pill,” as a matter of course, examines the patient once before prescribing an oral contraceptive and only annually thereafter. J. Willson, E. Carrington, & W. Ledger, Obstetrics and Gynecology 184 (7th ed. 1983). D. Danforth, Obstetrics and Gynecology 267 (4th ed. 1982). T. Green, Gynecology: Essentials of Clinical Practice 593 (3d ed. 1977). At her annual checkup, the patient receives a renewal prescription for a full year’s supply of the pill.11 Thus, the patient may only seldom have the opportunity to explore her questions and concerns about the medication with the prescribing physician. Even if the physician, on those occasions, were scrupulously to remind the patient of the risks attendant on continuation of the oral contraceptive, “the patient cannot be expected to remember all of the details for a protracted period of time.” 35 Fed. Reg. 9002 (1970).
Last, the birth control pill is specifically subject to extensive Federal regulation. The FDA has promulgated regulations designed to ensure that the choice of “the pill” as a contraceptive *138method is informed by comprehensible warnings of potential side effects.12 See notes 3 and 4, supra. These regulations, and subsequent amendments, have their basis in the FDA commissioner’s finding, after hearings, that “[bjecause oral contraceptives are ordinarily taken electively by healthy women who have available to them alternative methods of treatment, and because of the relatively high incidence of serious illnesses associated with their use, . . . users of these drugs should, without exception, be furnished with written information telling them of the drug’s benefits and risks.” 43 Fed. Reg. 4215 (1978). The FDA also found that the facts necessary to informed decisions by women as to use of oral contraceptives are “too complex to expect the patient to remember everything told her by the physician,” and that, in the absence of direct written warnings, many potential users of “the pill” do not receive the needed information “in an organized, comprehensive, understandable, and handy-for-future-reference form.” 35 Fed. Reg. 9002 (1970).
The oral contraceptive thus stands apart from other prescription drugs in light of the heightened participation of patients in decisions relating to use of “the pill”; the substantial risks affiliated with the product’s use; the feasibility of direct warnings by the manufacturer to the user; the limited participation of the physician (annual prescriptions); and the possibility that oral communications between physicians and consumers may be insufficient or too scanty standing alone fully to apprise consumers of the product’s dangers at the time the initial selection of a contraceptive method is made as well as at subsequent points when alternative methods may be considered. We conclude that the manufacturer of oral contraceptives is not justified in relying on warnings to the medical profession to satisfy its common law duty to warn, and that the manufacturer’s obligation encompasses a duty to warn the ultimate user. Thus, the *139manufacturer’s duty is to provide to the consumer written warnings conveying reasonable notice of the nature, gravity, and likelihood of known or knowable side effects, and advising the consumer to seek fuller explanation from the prescribing physician or other doctor of any such information of concern to the consumer.13
2. Adequacy of the warning. Because we reject the judge’s conclusion that Ortho had no duty to warn MacDonald, we turn to Ortho’s separate argument, not reached by the judge, that the evidence was insufficient to warrant the jury’s finding that Ortho’s warnings to MacDonald were inadequate. Ortho contends initially that its warnings complied with FDA labeling requirements, and that those requirements preempt or define the bounds of the common law duty to warn. We disagree. The regulatory history of the FDA requirements belies any objective to cloak them with preemptive effect. In response to concerns raised by drug manufacturers that warnings required and drafted by the FDA might be deemed inadequate by juries, the FDA commissioner specifically noted that the boundaries of civil tort liability for failure to warn are controlled by applicable State law. 43 Fed. Reg. 4214 (1978). Although the common law duty we today recognize is to a large degree coextensive with the regulatory duties imposed by the FDA, we are persuaded that, in instances where a trier of fact could reasonably conclude that a manufacturer’s compliance with FDA labeling requirements or guidelines did not adequately apprise oral contraceptive users of inherent risks, the manufacturer should not be shielded from liability by such compliance. See Brochu v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 642 F.2d 652, 658 (1st Cir. 1981); Skill v. Martinez, 91 F.R.D. 498, 508 (D.N.J. 1981); Stevens v. Parke, Davis & Co., 9 Cal. 3d 51, 65 (1973); McEwen v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 270 Or. 375, 397-398 (1974). Cf. Hubbard-Hall Chem. Co. v. Silverman, 340 *140F.2d 402, 405 (1st Cir. 1965); Ferebee v. Chevron Chem. Co., 552 F. Supp. 1293, 1304 (D.D.C. 1982). See generally 1A L. Framer & M. Friedman, Products Liability § 8.07[1] (1983). Thus, compliance with FDA requirements, though admissible to demonstrate lack of negligence, is not conclusive on this issue, just as violation of FDA requirements is evidence, but not conclusive evidence, of negligence. See Deignan v. Lubarsky, 318 Mass. 661, 664 (1945). See also Lukaszewicz v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 510 F. Supp. 961, 965 (E.D. Wis. 1981). We therefore concur with the plaintiffs’ argument that even if the conclusion that Ortho complied with FDA requirements were inescapable, an issue we need not decide, the jury nonetheless could have found that the lack of a reference to “stroke” breached Ortho’s common law duty to warn.
The common law duty to warn, like the analogous FDA “lay language” requirement, necessitates a warning “comprehensible to the average user and . . . conveying] a fair indication of the nature and extent of the danger to the mind of a reasonably prudent person.” Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp. v. Chapman, 180 Ind. App. 33, 49 (1979), quoting Spruill v. Boyle-Midway, Inc., 308 F.2d 79, 85 (4th Cir. 1962). Whether a particular warning measures up to this standard is almost always an issue to be resolved by a jury; few questions are “more appropriately left to a common sense lay judgment than that of whether a written warning gets its message across to an average person.” Ferebee v. Chevron Chem. Co., 552 F. Supp. 1293, 1304 (D.D.C. 1982). See Hayes v. Ariens Co., 391 Mass. 407, 409-410 (1984). A court may, as a matter of law, determine “whether the defendant has conformed to that standard, in any case in which the jury may not reasonably come to a different conclusion,” Restatement (Second) of Torts § 328B (d) and comment g (1965), but judicial intrusion into jury decision making in negligence cases is exceedingly rare. See Croley v. Matson Navigation Co., 434 F.2d 73, 75 (5th Cir. 1970). Further, we must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the plaintiffs. Uloth v. City Tank Corp., 376 Mass. 874, 876 (1978). The test is whether “anywhere in the evidence, from whatever source derived, any combination of *141circumstances could be found from which a reasonable inference could be drawn in favor of the plaintiff.” Poirier v. Plymouth, 374 Mass. 206, 212 (1978), quoting Raunela v. Hertz Corp., 361 Mass. 341, 343 (1972). Accord Michnik-Zilberman v. Gordon’s Liquor, Inc., 390 Mass. 6, 7 n.1 (1983).
Ortho argues that reasonable minds could not differ as to whether MacDonald was adequately informed of the risk of the injury she sustained by Ortho’s warning that the oral contraceptives could cause “abnormal blood clotting which can be fatal” and further warning of the incremental likelihood of hospitalization or death due to blood clotting in “vital organs, such as the brain.” We disagree. “The fact finder may find a warning to be unreasonable, hence inadequate, in its factual content, its expression of the facts, or the method or form in which it is conveyed. . . . The adequacy of such warnings is measured not only by what is stated, but also by the manner in which it is stated. A reasonable warning not only conveys a fair indication of the nature of the dangers involved, but also warns with the degree of intensity demanded by the nature of the risk. A warning may be found to be unreasonable in that it was unduly delayed, reluctant in tone or lacking in a sense of urgency.” Seley v. G.D. Searle Co., 67 Ohio St. 2d 192, 198 (1981). We cannot say that this jury’s decision that the warning was inadequate is so unreasonable as to require the opposite conclusion as a matter of law.14 The jury may well have concluded, in light of their common experience and MacDonald’s testimony, that the absence of a reference to “stroke” in the warning unduly minimized the warning’s impact or failed to make the nature of the risk reasonably comprehensible to the average consumer. Similarly, the jury may have concluded that there are fates worse than death, such as the permanent disablement suffered by MacDonald, and that the mention of the risk of death did not, therefore, suffice to apprise an average consumer of the material risks of oral contraceptive use. Cf. Hubbard-Hall Chem. Co. v. Silverman, 340 F.2d 402, 405 (1st Cir. 1965).
*142Ortho’s argument that, as a matter of law, there was insufficient evidence that MacDonald’s injury was proximately caused by a deficiency in the warnings is substantially similar to its argument on the issue of the adequacy of the warnings, and is likewise unavailing. Relying on Harnish v. Children’s Hosp. Medical Center, 387 Mass. 152 (1982), for the proposition that MacDonald had the burden of proving causation by showing that “had the proper information been provided neither [s]he nor a reasonable person in similar circumstances” would have accepted Ortho’s pills as a contraceptive method, id. at 158, Ortho argues that “[tjhere was no evidence that a reasonable person, having been informed of the risk of death by abnormal blood clotting and having chosen to assume the risk, would have acted differently if informed of the risk of‘stroke. ’ ” The jury were free, however, to credit MacDonald’s testimony that she would not have used the pills had she been advised of the danger of “stroke,” and to infer that an explicit reference to the risk of stroke might tip the balance in a reasonable person’s choice of a contraceptive method. Ortho also asserts that evidence that MacDonald did not ask her gynecologist for an explanation of the meaning of “abnormal blood clotting” or inform him of two episodes of numbness in her hand subsequent to her initiation of oral contraceptive use indicates that MacDonald was not disposed to heed Ortho’s warnings, and, consequently, that the evidence did not permit an inference that a different warning by Ortho would have affected MacDonald’s decision to use Ortho’s pills. These arguments raise the issue of the plaintiff Carole MacDonald’s comparative negligence. That issue was not raised below and thus is not before us. Kagan v. Levenson, 334 Mass. 100, 106 (1956).
We reverse the judgment, which the judge ordered notwithstanding the verdict, and remand the case to the Superior Court for the entry of judgment for the plaintiffs.
So ordered.
The only issues before us are issues of the drug manufacturer’s liability.
FDA regulations in effect during the time period relevant to this litigation required that the following warning be included in or with the pill dispenser:
“Do Not Take This Drug Without Your Doctor’s Continued Supervision.
“The oral contraceptives are powerful and effective drugs which can cause side effects in some users and should not be used at all by some women. The most serious known side effect is abnormal blood clotting which can be fatal.
“Safe use of this drug requires a careful discussion with your doctor. To assist him in providing you with the necessary information, *133_has prepared a booklet (or other form) writ-
(Firm name)
ten in a style understandable to you as the drug user. This provides information on the effectiveness and known hazards of the drug including warnings, side effects and who should not use it. Your doctor will give you this booklet (or other form) if you ask for it and he can answer any questions you may have about the use of this drug.
“Notify your doctor if you notice any unusual physical disturbance or discomfort.”
21 C.F.R. § 130.45(d)(1), 35 Fed. Reg. 9002-9003 (1970), recodified at 21 C.F.R. § 310.501(a)(4), 39 Fed. Reg. 11680 (1974), 40 Fed. Reg. 5354 (1975).
Applicable FDA regulations required that the booklet contain “information in lay language, concerning effectiveness, contraindications, warnings, precautions, and adverse reactions,” including a warning “regarding the serious side effects with special attention to thromboembolic disorders and stating the estimated morbidity and mortality in users vs. nonusers.” 21 C.F.R. § 130.45(e) & (e)(3), 35 Fed. Reg. 9002, 9003 (1970), recodified at 21 C.F.R. § 310.501(a)(6) & (a)(6)(iii), 39 Fed. Reg. 11680 (1974), 40 Fed. Reg. 5353 (1975). Ortho’s booklet contained the following information:
“About blood clots
“Blood clots occasionally form in the blood vessels of the legs and the pelvis of apparently healthy people and may threaten life if the clots break loose and then lodge in the lung or if they form in other vital organs, such as the brain. It has been estimated that about one woman in 2,000 on the pill each year suffers a blood clotting disorder severe enough to require hospitalization. The estimated death rate from abnormal blood clotting in healthy women under 35 not taking the pill is 1 in 500,000; whereas for the same group taking the pill it is 1 in 66,000. For healthy women over 35 not taking the pill, the rate is 1 in 200,000 compared to 1 in 25,000 for pill users. Blood clots are about three times more likely to develop in women over the age of 34. For these reasons it is important that women who have had blood clots in the legs, lungs or brain not use oral contraceptives. Anyone using the pill who has severe leg or chest pains, coughs up blood, has difficulty breathing, sudden severe headache or vomiting, dizziness or fainting, disturbances of vision or speech, weakness or numbness of an arm or leg, should call her doctor immediately and stop taking the pill.”
MacDonald’s hospital records refer to her injury as a “cerebral vascular accident,” terminology likewise descriptive of brain damage attributable to blood clotting.
Subsequent to the events in this case, the FDA regulation was amended by 43 Fed. Reg. 4221 (1978), which replaced the regulation requirement of a specified warning on the pill dispenser, see note 3, supra, with a requirement that the dispenser contain a warning “of the serious side effects of oral contraceptives, such as thrombophlebitis, pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction, retinal artery thrombosis, stroke, benign hepatic adenomas, induction of fetal abnormalities, and gallbladder disease” (emphasis added). See 21 C.F.R. § 310.501(a) (2)(iv) (1984).
MacDonald stated at trial that her gynecologist had informed her only that oral contraceptives might cause bloating, and had not advised her of the *135increased risk of stroke associated with consumption of birth control pills. The physician was not joined as a defendant in this action, and no questions relating to any potential liability on his part are before us.
MacDonald farther testified at trial that she had read both the warning on the Dialpak tablet dispenser as well as the booklet which she received from her gynecologist. See notes 3 and 4, supra.
The only issue before us concerns the scope of Ortho’s duty to the plaintiffs. The defendant does not contest the damages but relies solely on its claim that it owes no duty to warn the plaintiffs directly.
Ortho points out that a number of courts have reached this result in oral contraceptive cases. See, e.g., Brochu v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 642 F.2d 652, 656 (1st Cir. 1981) (applying New Hampshire law); Lindsay v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 637 F.2d 87, 91 (2d Cir. 1980) (applying New York law); Skill v. Martinez, 91 F.R.D. 498, 507 (D. N.J. 1981), aff’d, 677 F.2d 368 (3d Cir. 1982); Goodson v. Searle Laboratories, 471 F. Supp. 546, 549 (D. Conn. 1978); Dunkin v. Syntex Laboratories, Inc., 443 F. Supp. 121, 123 (W.D. Tenn. 1977); Chambers v. G.D. Searle & Co., 441 F. Supp. 377, 381 (D. Md. 1975), aff’d per curiam, 567 F.2d 269 (4th Cir. 1977); Carmichael v. Reitz, 17 Cal. App. 3d 958, 989 (1971); Hamilton v. Hardy, 37 Colo. App. 375, 387 (1976); Mahr v. G.D. Searle & Co., 72 Ill. App. 3d 540, 561 (1979); Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp. v. Chapman, 180 Ind. App. 33, 43 (1979); Seley v. G.D. Searle & Co., 67 Ohio St. 2d 192, 198 (1981); McEwen v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 270 Or. 375, 385 (1974); Leibowitz v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 224 Pa. Super. 418, 431 (1973). See also Terhune v. A.H. Robins Co., 90 Wash. 2d 9, 14 (1978) (intrauterine contraceptive device).
According to the American Medical Association, “the medical profession regards the pill, in most cases, as a convenience rather than a traditional medication.” Statement of American Medical Association, published in Science News, March 14, 1970, quoted in Comment, Liability of Birth Control Pill Manufacturers, 23 Hastings L.J. 1526, 1532 (1972). These distinguishing features have been recognized by legal commentators as well as by the medical profession. See Merrill, Compensation for Prescription Drug Injuries, 59 Va. L. Rev. 1, 91, 93 (1973); Comment, Liability of Birth Control Pill Manufacturers, 23 Hastings L.J. 1526, 1538-1543 (1972).
MacDonald saw her gynecologist once in the summer of 1973, once in the summer of 1974, and once in August of 1975. At each appointment, she received a prescription for birth control pills. Thus, eleven months had elapsed between her last gynecological checkup and her stroke in July, 1976.
See 21 C.F.R. § 130.45(a), 35 Fed. Reg. 9002 (1970) (oral contraceptives “are used for long periods of time by large numbers of women who, for the most part, are healthy and take them as a matter of choice for prophylaxis against pregnancy, in full knowledge of other means of contraception”); 43 Fed. Reg. 4215 (1978).
This opinion does not diminish the prescribing physician’s duty to “disclose in a reasonable manner all significant medical information that the physician possesses or reasonably should possess that is material to an intelligent decision by the patient whether to” take “the pill.” Harnish v. Children’s Hosp. Medical Center, 387 Mass. 152, 155 (1982).
See Weinberger, Collateral Estoppel and the Mass Produced Product: A Proposal, 15 New Eng. L. Rev. 1, 36-38 (1980).

=== CASE 9739583 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:53.059557+00 ===

O ’ Connor , J.
(dissenting). The court reverses the judgment below and holds Ortho Pharmaceutical Corporation (Ortho) *143liable to Carole and Brace MacDonald even though the jury found that Ortho adequately informed Carole MacDonald’s physician of the risks associated with the use of its contraceptive pills, and regardless of whether Ortho complied with the applicable Federal Food and Drag Administration (FDA) regulations governing the provision of printed information to users of oral contraceptives. I would hold that, as a matter of law, by adequately informing physicians of the risks associated with its product and by complying with applicable FDA regulations, a contraceptive pill manufacturer fulfils the duty to warn that it owes consumers. Therefore, because the jury found that Ortho adequately warned Carole MacDonald’s physician of the risks associated with its contraceptive pills and because the MacDonalds presented no evidence that Ortho failed to comply with FDA regulations, I would affirm the judgment for Ortho.
In order to fulfil its duty to warn consumers of risks associated with its product, a manufacturer of a nonprescription (“over-the-counter”) drag must place on the drag’s package printed warnings. That duty “derives from the basic marketing predicate of the over-the-counter drag industry, namely, that nonprescription drags are purchased by consumers for the purpose of self-medication typically without any intended or actual intervention by a physician.'” Torsiello v. Whitehall Laboratories, 165 N.J. Super. 311, 322 (1979) (emphasis added). In contradistinction, a manufacturer of a prescription drag fulfils its duty to warn a consumer by adequately informing the consumer’s physician — a “learned intermediary between the purchaser and the manufacturer” — of the drag’s associated risks. Sterling Drug, Inc. v. Cornish, 370 F.2d 82, 85 (8th Cir. 1966). That role results from the fact that, by definition, before a consumer uses a prescription drag, that consumer must have some interaction with a doctor. See 21 U.S.C. § 353(b)(1) (1982).* 1 In cases involving manufacturers of con*144traceptive pills, every court but one has adhered to the “prescription drug” rule. See Hamilton v. Hardy, 37 Colo. App. 375, 387 (1976); Mahr v. G.D. Searle & Co., 12 Ill. App. 3d 540, 561 (1979); Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp. v. Chapman, 180 Ind. App. 33, 43 (1979); Cobb v. Syntex Laboratories, Inc., 444 So.2d 203, 205 (La. App. 1983); Seley v. G.D. Searle & Co., 61 Ohio St. 2d 192, 202-203 (1981); McEwen v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 270 Or. 375, 385 (1974); Leibowitz v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 224 Pa. Super. 418, 431 (1973); Brochu v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 642 F.2d 652, 656 (1st Cir. 1981); Lindsay v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 637 F.2d 87, 91 (2d Cir. 1980); Goodson v. Searle Laboratories, 471 F. Supp. 546, 548 (D. Conn. 918); Dunkin v. Syntex Laboratories, Inc., 443 F. Supp. 121, 123 (D. Tenn. 1977); Chambers v. G.D. Searle & Co., 441 F. Supp. 377, 381 (D. Md. 1975); Skill v. Martinez, 91 F.R.D. 498, 507 (D.N.J. 1981). See also Carmichael v. Reitz, 17 Cal. App. 3d 958, 989 (1971) (oral contraceptive pills used to treat woman for endometriosis and to aid her to become pregnant); Terhune v. A.H. Robins Co., 90 Wash. 2d 9, 13 (1978) (intrauterine contraceptive device). But see Lukaszewicz v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 510 F. Supp. 961, 963, amended by order, 532 F. Supp. 211 (D. Wis. 1981). The one court that went beyond the prescription drug rule, see Lukaszewicz v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., supra, imposed on Ortho the duty to adequately inform physicians of the contraceptive pill’s risks and to comply with applicable FDA regulations. 532 F. Supp. at 213. To my knowledge, no other court has embraced the rule laid down today by the court.
*145Before prescribing any drug, whether on the doctor’s initiative or at the patient’s request, the doctor must exercise professional judgment as to the medical propriety of that patient’s taking that drug and, in exercising that judgment, the doctor must conform to the standards of good medical practice laid down in Brune v. Belinkoff, 354 Mass. 102, 109 (1968). Furthermore, this court has held that a doctor must “disclose in a reasonable manner all significant medical information that the physician possesses or reasonably should possess that is material to an intelligent decision by the patient whether to undergo a proposed procedure.” Harnish v. Children’s Hosp. Medical Center, 387 Mass. 152, 155 (1982). That rule applies when a physician prescribes a drug just as it does when a physician performs any other medical procedure. “Materiality may be said to be the significance a reasonable person, in what the physician knows or should know is his patient’s position, would attach to the disclosed risk or risks in deciding whether to [use the drug].”Id. at 156, quoting from Wilkinson v. Vesey, 110 R.I. 606, 627 (1972). “Appropriate information may include the nature . . . and probability of risks involved, the benefits to be reasonably expected, the inability of the physician to predict results,. . . , and the available alternatives, including their risks and benefits.” Harnish, supra at 156.
Unless doctors have current, accurate, and complete information about a drug’s risks, they cannot properly perform their vital role. Therefore, courts have imposed on drug manufacturers the duty to provide doctors with that information. See, e.g., Brochu v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., supra at 657-659. A drug manufacturer who fails properly to fulfil that duty must respond in damages to a patient who suffers an injury as a result. See, e.g., McEwen v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., supra at 386-387.
I believe that the “prescription drug” rule, combined with the Harnish rule, most fairly and efficiently allocates among drug manufacturers, physicians, and drug users, the risks and responsibilities involved with the use of prescription drugs. Furthermore, I believe that those rules best ensure that a prescription drug user will receive in the most effective manner *146the information that she needs to make an informed decision as to whether to use the drug. The rules place on drug manufacturers the duty to gather, compile, and provide to doctors data regarding the use of their drugs, tasks for which the manufacturers are best suited, and the rules place on doctors the burden of conveying those data to their patients in a useful and understandable manner, a task for which doctors are best suited. Doctors, unlike printed warnings, can tailor to the needs and abilities of an individual patient the information that that patient needs in order to make an informed decision whether to use a particular drug. Manufacturers are not in position to give adequate advice directly to those consumers whose medical histories and physical conditions, perhaps unknown to the consumers, make them peculiarly susceptible to risk. Prescription drugs — including oral contraceptives — differ from other products because their dangers vary widely depending on characteristics of individual consumers. Exposing a prescription drug manufacturer to liability based on a jury’s determination that, despite adequately informing physicians of the drug’s risks and complying with FDA regulations, the manufacturer failed reasonably to warn a particular plaintiff-consumer of individualized risks is not essential to reasonable consumer protection and places an unfair burden on prescription drug manufacturers.
Even though the court recognizes the universal application of the “prescription drug” rule, it states that “[ojral contraceptives . . . bear peculiar characteristics which warrant the imposition of a common law duty on the manufacturer to warn users directly of associated risks.” Ante at 136-137. The court attempts to distinguish contraceptive pills from other prescription drugs by comparing the relative involvement of doctor and patient in the prescribing process. “Whereas a patient’s involvement in decision making concerning use of a prescription drug necessary to treat a malady is typically minimal or nonexistent,” the court asserts, “the healthy, young consumer of oral contraceptives is usually actively involved in the decision to use ‘the pill,’ as opposed to other available birth control products, and the prescribing physician is relegated to a relatively passive *147role.” Ante at 137. In making that statement, the court not only assumes facts not established on the record but also disregards the mandate of Harnish v. Children’s Hosp. Medical Center, supra.
While I would choose the “prescription drug” rule over the rule announced today by the court, I recognize that the FDA has promulgated regulations governing the provision of printed information to users of oral contraceptives. I would not consider the imposition of tort liability for failure to comply with those regulations, designed to further consumer protection, unfair nor unduly burdensome to contraceptive pill manufacturers. However, in my view, the evidence in this case would not support a finding that Ortho failed to comply with those regulations. The FDA required Ortho to place on every oral contraceptive pill dispenser a warning stating that the “most serious known side effect [of the oral contraceptive pill] is abnormal blood clotting which can be fatal.” 21 C.F.R. § 130.45(d)(1), 35 Fed. Reg. 9002-9003 (1970). Ortho complied in every way with that requirement. The FDA also required that Ortho make available to physicians for patients who requested it “information in lay language, concerning effectiveness, contraindications, warnings, precautions, and adverse reactions.” 21 C.F.R. § 130.45(e), 35 Fed. Reg. 9003 (1970). Ortho provided Carole MacDonald’s physician with a booklet that stated: “Blood clots occasionally form in the blood vessels of the legs and pelvis of apparently healthy people and may threaten life if the clots break loose and then lodge in the lung or if they form in other vital organs, such as the brain.” MacDonald’s physician gave Ortho’s booklet to MacDonald. The court finds it unnecessary to decide whether Ortho complied with FDA’s “lay language” requirement, ante at 140-141, but I do not believe that any rational trier of fact could have concluded that Ortho failed to comply with the regulation.
Furthermore, even if there be a common law duty necessitating a direct warning to the consumer with respect to the “nature and extent of the danger” of contraceptive pills, as the court declares, the MacDonalds presented no evidence that Ortho failed to fulfil that duty. The court states only that the jury *148“could have found that the lack of reference to ‘ stroke’ breached Ortho’s common law duty to warn.” Ante at 140. Surely, the statement in Ortho’s booklet that the contraceptive pill could cause life threatening blood clots to form in the brain, even though it did not contain the word “stroke,” satisfied the court’s requirement that Ortho provide “written warnings conveying reasonable notice of the nature, gravity, and likelihood of known or knowable side effects.” Ante at 139.1 would affirm the judgment for Ortho.
Section 353(b)(1) provides: “A drug intended for use by man which — (A) is a habit-forming drug to which section 352(d) of this title applies; or (B) because of its toxicity or other potentiality for harmful effect, or the method of its use, or the collateral measures necessary to its use, is not *144safe for use except under the supervision of a practitioner licensed by law to administer such drug; or (C) is limited by an approved application under section 355 of this title to use under the professional supervision of a practitioner licensed by law to administer such drug; shall be dispensed only (i) upon a written prescription of a practitioner licensed by law to administer such drug, or (ii) upon an oral prescription of such practitioner which is reduced promptly to writing and filed by the pharmacist, or (in) by refilling any such written or oral prescription if such refilling is authorized by the prescriber either in the original prescription or by oral order which is reduced promptly to writing and filed by the pharmacist. The act of dispensing a drug contrary to the provisions of this paragraph shall be deemed to be an act which results in the drug being misbranded while held for sale."

=== CASE 9739584 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:17:59.022513+00 ===

JUSTICE WELCH delivered the opinion of the court: Petitioners Lake Ka-Ho, Inc., and J. C. Smith, Billy R. Summers, and William L. Peipert, Jr., trustees of Lake Ka-Ho Subdivision, commenced this mandamus action in the circuit court of Madison County to compel defendant John Kramer, Director of the Department of Transportation, State of Illinois (the Director), to institute eminent domain proceedings with respect to real property located in Lake KaHo Subdivision in Macoupin County. The Director objected to venue in Madison County and also moved that the petition be dismissed for want of jurisdiction. From denial of said motions, the Director appealed to this court pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 308. (87 Ill. 2d R. 308.) This court dismissed the appeal. The Director then moved that the circuit court reconsider its prior orders in the case. From the denial of the latter motion, the Director sought leave to appeal pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 306 (87 Ill. 2d R. 306.) This court granted said petition. We reverse. The pertinent facts include this court’s opinion in Department of Transportation v. Lake Ka-Ho, Inc. (1981), 98 Ill. App. 3d 1052, 425 N.E.2d 50 (hereinafter Lake Ka-Ho I). To accomplish the construction of Interstate Route No. 55 in the area, the Department of Transportation condemned an L-shaped tract of land in Lake Ka-Ho Subdivision. Lake Ka-Ho, Inc., cross-petitioned for damages to land not taken. At trial, the circuit court refused to allow proof of damages caused to the lake by siltation, that court ruling that the siltation came from earthen dikes about 600 feet away from the condemned tract. This court affirmed, stating: “We therefore hold that the siltation was not the direct result of the taking and even if it were, neither the pleadings nor the evidence was sufficient to sustain an award. We offer no opinion as to any possible alternative remedy available to the defendants against the State of Illinois.” 98 Ill. App. 3d 1052, 1056, 425 N.E.2d 50, 53. In the instant petition, petitioners sought that the Director be compelled to institute eminent domain proceedings “for the taking of land and damages to land not taken” for lots 1, 2, 3, and 5 and Outlot B of Block 1 in Lake Ka-Ho Subdivision and that portion of the lake adjacent to and between said lots. Said petition set forth as a factual basis “that at the time of construction, and thereafter, of Interstate Route 55, through Macoupin County, in and near [the property] *** said lake has silted and a portion thereof is no longer usable as a lake area. *** That as a result of said siltation ***, Lake Ka-Ho, Inc., has been deprived of its right of access from its lots hereinabove described to the remaining lake area. *** That said siltation has destroyed *** access to the lake area and has damaged and reduced in value [the property] ***.” The Director’s motions for transfer to a proper venue and to dismiss for want of jurisdiction were denied in an order reciting that there was no good cause to delay an appeal. The Director’s appeal to this court pursuant to Rule 308 was dismissed for failure of the trial court to identify the question of law certified for appeal. (See 87 Ill. 2d R. 308.) The circuit court, on June 8, 1984, denied the Director’s motion for reconsideration. This court granted leave to appeal. 87 Ill. 2d R. 306. From the pleadings and affidavits it appears uncontradicted that the real estate in question is located entirely within Macoupin County, and that the Department of Transportation maintains its principal office in Sangamon County and two branch offices in Madison County.  We first consider petitioners’ contention that the Director’s appeal is not proper under Rule 306. Rule 306 provides for petition for leave to appeal to. the appellate court, inter alia, from an order granting or denying a motion for transfer of venue based on the assertion that the defendant is not a resident of the county in which the action was commenced, and no other legitimate basis for venue in that county has been offered by the plaintiff. (87 Ill. 2d R. 306(a)(l)(iv).) Here, petitioners concede that the location of the real estate has no bearing on the venue issue. It is not alleged that the Director is a resident of Madison County. Petitioners urge, instead, that venue is proper in Madison County due to the presence there of the two Department of Transportation branch offices. With exceptions not pertinent here, actions against a “public, municipal, governmental or quasi-municipal corporation” must be brought in the county in which its “principal” office is located. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 110, par. 2 — 103(a); see Harrell v. Board of Trustees (1977), 48 Ill. App. 3d 319, 321, 362 N.E.2d 441, 443-44.) We conclude that this is a case in which no “other” legitimate basis for venue in Madison County has been offered by plaintiff. The Director’s appeal is properly before this court pursuant to Rule 306.  While the parties have chosen to address the merits of the venue issue next, we proceed to the jurisdictional issues which are potentially dispositive of the appeal. The Director argues that the petition for mandamus should have been dismissed because the matter of eminent domain proceedings as to siltation damage to the lake is res judicata after Lake Ka-Ho I. We have carefully examined the instant record and the arguments of counsel, and have found nothing to contradict our impression that the siltation of the lake alleged in the petition for mandamus is the same siltation for which petitioners sought recovery in Lake Ka-Ho I. Petitioners do not contend otherwise. As we read Lake Ka-Ho I, this court agreed with the circuit court that if the defendants (petitioners here) had any remedies available against the State of Illinois, the remedy of eminent domain proceedings was not among them. The doctrine of res judicata is based on the requirements of justice and public policy that a matter once adjudicated should be deemed finally and conclusively settled in any subsequent litigation between the same parties where the same question arises. (City of Chicago v. Walker (1978), 61 Ill. App. 3d 1050, 1054, 377 N.E.2d 1214, 1217.) We hold that insofar as eminent domain proceedings are concerned, damage suffered by petitioners on account of the alleged siltation of the lake is res judicata. The trial court should have dismissed the petition for mandamus, as the Director’s lack of authority to compensate petitioners for the damages alleged had been conclusively determined in Lake Ka-Ho I.  Aside from our conclusion that the extent of the Director’s authority in this matter was conclusively decided in a prior adjudication, what petitioners allege is a damaging of property without a taking, a matter within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Illinois Court of Claims, not a matter for eminent domain proceedings in the circuit court. The parties agree that a “taking” is a matter for the circuit court and that a “damaging” without a “taking” is for the Illinois Court of Claims. (Granite City Moose Lodge No. 272 v. Kramer (1983), 96 Ill. 2d 265, 271, 449 N.E.2d 852, 855.) A loss or impairment of access does not involve an actual physical invasion of the property, and it therefore constitutes a “damaging,” rather than a “taking,” of the property. An abutting property owner is not entitled to have condemnation proceedings instituted to determine damages to his property occasioned by a public improvement where no part of his property is physically taken. (Granite City Moose Lodge No. 272 v. Kramer (1983), 96 Ill. 2d 265, 449 N.E.2d 852.) Petitioners argue that the subdivision lots in question are totally worthless to them now. This was not pleaded. Even if it had been pleaded, such would be a mere conclusion of the pleader, entitled to no weight on motion challenging the pleadings. (See People ex rel. Waite v. Bristow (1945), 391 Ill. 101, 103, 62 N.E.2d 545, 547.) The same must be said as to petitioners’ reliance on the petition’s allegation that a “taking” had occurred. This, again, is a mere conclusion, which the facts well pleaded do not support. In summary, we conclude that the circuit court of Madison County was without jurisdiction to issue the writ of mandamus as sought in petitioners’ petition. For the foregoing reasons, the June 8, 1984, order of the circuit court of Madison County is reversed; the petition for mandamus is dismissed. Order reversed; petition for mandamus dismissed. JONES, P.J., concurring.

=== CASE 9739586 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:00.350115+00 ===

*680HUNTER, Justice.
The defendant, Floyd Little, was convict ed by a jury of two rapes, one a Class B felony, Ind.Code § 85-42-4-~l(a) (Burns 1984 Supp.), and the second rape, a Class A felony, Ind.Code § 85-42-4-l(a) (Burns 1984 Supp.), robbery, a Class C felony, Ind.Code § 35-42-51 (Burns 1984 Supp.), and attempted robbery, a Class C felony, Ind.Code § 35-41-5-1 (Burns 1979 Repl.) and Ind.Code § 85-42-51 (Burns 1984 Supp.). He was sentenced to the Indiana Department of Correction for a term of ten years for Class B rape, five years for robbery, thirty years for Class A rape, and five years for attempted robbery. The Class A rape and attempted robbery terms are to be served concurrently and the Class B rape and robbery terms are to be served concurrently. The sentences imposed upon the rape and robbery are to be served consecutively with the sentences imposed upon the second rape and attempted robbery convictions.
Defendant's direct appeal to this Court raises the following issues:
1. Whether there was sufficient evidence to support the verdicts; and
2. Whether the trial court abused its discretion by imposing consecutive sentences in the absence of any finding of aggravating circumstances.
A brief summary of the facts most favorable to the state reveals that on October 6, 1981, the first victim was watching television alone in her home at around 11:00 pm. A black man knocked at her front door to inquire about a man named Tom. The victim testified that the porch light was on which enabled her to see the man well, and she identified defendant both pri- or to and during the trial as this man.
Defendant left and the victim continued to watch television for another one-half hour and then went to bed. The victim was awakened at approximately 12:15 a.m. by defendant who placed his hand over her mouth and nose and a pillow over her head. After a struggle with defendant, the victim was asked whether she was going to cooperate. Defendant then pushed her down onto the bed and covered her head with a blanket. Defendant asked whether she had any money and then took approximately $180 from her. Defendant then stated he had a knife and that he knew her husband kept more money at home. At this point the victim recognized his voice as that of a black man who had been at her door earlier that evening, and whom she subsequently identified as Floyd Little. Defendant raped the victim, told her not to look and then left. The entire criminal incident took approximately ten minutes from the time the victim was awakened by defendant.
On October 7, 1981, the day after the first victim was raped, she identified defendant's picture in a mug book at the police station. The police did not inform the victim as to the name of the man she chose. The following day, October 8, 1981, completely on her own initiative, she found a picture of defendant in her high school year book and identified him as the man who raped her. Beginning at the front of the yearbook, she looked at approximately thirty photographs of black men before she identified defendant. On October 27, 1981, the victim viewed and identified defendant-both by voice and in person-from a police station lineup composed of six black men. The victim testified that she was positive that the man whom she identified (Floyd Little) was the same man who was on her porch October 6, 1981, and who had raped her on October 7, 1981.
The record also shows that on October 24, 1981, the second victim was awakened shortly after midnight when she felt something over her mouth. Defendant warned her that he was armed and threatened to shoot or kill her if she screamed. When defendant requested money, this victim emptied the contents of her purse to show that she did not have any money. While defendant was holding onto the neck of the victim, she looked up and saw defendant's face and Afro hair style. After defendant raped the victim, he threw an afghan over her head. While he was attempting to *681steal her stereo, she watched defendant through the holes in the afghan.
On October 26, 1981, two days after the rape, this victim looked at approximately one hundred photographs of black men in a police mug book. She identified defendant as the man who raped her, but requested a lineup and voice identification. The next day, October 27, 1981, this victim viewed a police station lineup of six black men wherein each lineup participant asked the same innocuous question. The victim identified defendant both by voice and appearance. She testified that she was positive that the man in the courtroom, where she again identified defendant, was the man who raped her. She also testified that she had not been told the name of defendant when participating in pretrial identification procedures and only learned defendant's name later from a newspaper account.
To summarize, the first victim identified defendant on four different occasions: in the police mug book, in her high school yearbook, at the police station lineup, and in court. The second victim also identified defendant on three different occasions: in the police mug book, at the police station lineup, and in court. No suggestion or encouragement was provided by the police before, during, or after any of the pretrial identification procedures.
I.
Defendant first argues there was insufficient evidence to support the verdict. In considering the sufficiency of the evidence, it is well settled that as a court of review, we will neither reweigh the evidence nor judge the credibility of the witnesses. Rather, we will only look to that evidence most favorable to the state and all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom. If there is substantial evidence of probative value to support the conclusion of the trier of fact, the judgment will not be overturned. Borom v. State, (1984) Ind., 470 N.E.2d 712; Johnson v. State, (1983) Ind., 455 N.E.2d 897; Duffy v. State, (1981) 275 Ind. 191, 415 N.E.2d 715.
Citing Neil v. Biggers, (1972) 409 U.S. 188, 93 S.Ct. 375, 84 L.Ed.2d 401, defendant argues that the pretrial identification procedures were impermissibly suggestive, thereby tainting the in-court identifications made by both victims. He maintains that the victims did not have sufficient time to view their attacker and thus there was not an independent basis for their identification at trial. Defendant's insufficiency argument is predicated on three theories: suggestive pretrial identification procedures, the absence of counsel at the pretrial lineup and the absence of lice infestation on either rape victim. We will address each of these arguments individually and then consider the totality of the pretrial identification procedures.
Defendant's first insufficiency argument is predicated on suggestive pretrial identification procedures based upon pretrial photographic arrays and lineup identifications.
Defendant first contends that the photographic identification made by the first victim was impermissibly suggestive because she identified defendant in her high school yearbook wherein captions accompanied the student photos and thus she learned the name of defendant. In Haun v. State, (1988) Ind., 451 N.E.2d 1072, this Court held that a pretrial yearbook photographic identification was not so suggestive as to give rise to a substantial likelihood of misidentification when the victim had not heard defendant's name before selecting defendant's photograph as the man who raped her. Similarly, in this case, the victim did not learn the name of defendant until she chose his photo in the high school yearbook. The police did not tell the victim defendant's name when she previously identified defendant at the police station photographic identification.
Defendant next contends that the mug book photograph from which the see-ond victim identified defendant was "much sharper and more distinct than the other photographs on the page." The practice of exhibiting a number of photographs to crime victims for the purpose of identifying the perpetrator is not an impermissible in*682vestigative method. The procedure becomes violative of due process when the display is accompanied by verbal communications or includes graphic characteristics which distinguish and emphasize a defendant's photograph in an unduly suggestive manner. Head v. State, (1982) Ind., 443 N.E.2d 44.
While defendant's picture in the mug book may appear more distinct than the other photographs on that page, this Court notes that the entire mug book is comprised of pictures whose size and photographic quality vary. We therefore conclude that the high school yearbook and the mug book photographic identifications were not the product of unduly suggestive procedures likely to result in misidentifica-tions where the victims viewed between thirty to one hundred photographs of black men who were relatively similar in age, complexion and hairstyles and where neither victim was encouraged to select any individual nor informed that the photographic array included defendant.
Next, defendant maintains that the composition of the police station lineup was calculated to draw attention to him because he was the only person in the lineup with disheveled hair, a characteristic noted by the second victim regarding the man who raped her. Distinctiveness of hairstyle has been held to be not necessarily unconstitutionally suggestive. Fields v. State, (1975) 263 Ind. 550, 333 N.E.2d 742. In such cases, distinctiveness of hairstyle is only one of a number of factors to be considered regarding the identification. Aker v. State, (1980) Ind.App., 403 N.E.2d 847. In state's exhibit #2, which is an accurate photographic representation of the police station lineup, as testified to by both vie-tims, there are six black men of relatively similar age, weight, height, complexion and appearance. -All of the lineup participants except one, who is not defendant, have Afro hairstyles. Therefore, the lineup participants were not so dissimilar in appearance or hairstyle as to eliminate all participants except defendant.
Defendant argues that the entire pretrial identification process, particularly with respect to the first victim, "caused the name and face of defendant to be presented in a manner calculated to tie him to the offenses and to cause equivocal early identifications to be reinforced unfairly so as to create a sense of certainty." The totality of the cireumstances surrounding pretrial identification are evaluated to determine whether the process was unduly suggestive. A lineup identification is not rendered impermissibly suggestive by reason of precedent identification of defendant from a photographic array where there is no suggestion to the identifying witness that the individual selected by the photograph would be in the lineup. Woodson v. State, (1984) Ind., 460 N.E.2d 970. The first victim was only informed that the police had arranged a lineup of suspects. for her to view to see if she could identify anyone as the man who raped her. There were no suggestions made by the police that she should be identifying anyone in particular. Under these circumstances the identification procedures were not unnecessarily suggestive of guilt and did not give rise to a substantial likelihood of misidenti-fication.
Defendant further argues that the in-court identifications made by both victims did not have an independent basis separate from the pretrial identification procedures. Assuming arguendo that the pretrial identification procedures were im-permissibly suggestive, the in-court identifications made by the victims had an independent basis to support their in-court identifications.
It is the likelihood of misidentification resulting from impermissibly suggestive identification procedures which violates a defendant's right to due process. Johnson v. State, (1983) Ind., 455 N.E.2d 897. The central question is whether under the totality of cireumstances the in-court identification was reliable even though photographic and lineup identification procedures may have been unduly suggestive.
*683The factors considered in determining the existence of an independent basis are the witness's opportunity to observe the offender at the time of the crime and the reliability of the witness's recollection of his or her original observation of the offender. Dooley v. State, (1981) Ind., 428 N.E.2d 1; Horris v. State, (1980) 278 Ind. 60, 403 N.E.2d 327; Parker v. State, (1976) 265 Ind. 595, 858 N.E.2d 110; Dillard v. State, (1971) 257 Ind. 282, 274 N.E.2d 387; Hiner v. State, (1984) Ind.App., 470 N.E.2d 363, 369.
In this case, the record shows that both witnesses had an adequate opportunity to observe defendant at the time of the crime. Both victims had an opportunity to see defendant's face under adequate lighting conditions at some point during the crime. Each victim was alone with defendant for at least ten minutes and each victim was in close proximity to defendant.
There is also evidence which indicates the reliability of the witnesses' recollection of defendant as the man who raped them. The description of the rapist made by the first victim to the police before any pretrial identification procedures was substantially an accurate description of defendant. There was a minimal lapse of time between the crime and the victim's pretrial identification of defendant. The photographic identification was held within one or two days of the crime. The lineup identification was held a few weeks after the first rape and two days after the second rape. Both victims never made any inaccurate identification of defendant nor did either victim ever fail to identify defendant as the attacker.
We therefore conclude that there was not a substantial likelihood of misidentification and that both witnesses had an independent basis to support their in-court identifications.
Defendant's second insufficiency argument maintains that the pretrial identification lineup conducted violated his Sixth Amendment right to assistance of counsel. The inquiry is whether the Sixth Amendment right to counsel had attached at the time the lineup was conducted. It is well settled that the Sixth Amendment right to counsel attaches only at or after the time that adversary judicial proceedings have been initiated against defendant. Kirby v. Illinois, (1972) 406 U.S. 682, 92 S.Ct. 1877, 82 LEd.2d 411; Tabor v. State, (1984) Ind., 461 N.E.2d 118; Bray v. State, (1982) Ind., 448 N.E.2d 810.
In this state, the commence ment of prosecution is governed by Ind. Code § 35-34-1-1 (Burns 1984 Supp.) in which the filing of an information or indictment begins the formal criminal process. Bray, 443 N.E.2d at 313; Winston v. State, (1975) 263 Ind. 8, 323 N.E.2d 228. Onee charges are filed against defendant the Sixth Amendment right to counsel attaches to any critical stage in the proceedings, including pretrial identification lineups, in order to preserve defendant's right to a fair trial. Kirby v. Illinois, (1972) 406 U.S. 682, 92 S.Ct. 1877, 32 L.Ed.2d 411.
This Court has held that a lineup conducted prior to the filing of an information or indictment is not a critical stage which necessitates the presence of counsel in order to preserve defendant's right to a fair trial, Bray, 443 N.E.2d at 313; Corman v. State, (1979) 272 Ind. 76, 396 N.E.2d 344. Therefore, defendant is not entitled to counsel at a lineup that is held before he is formally charged by the filing of an information or indictment. Tabor v. State, 461 N.E.2d at 122; Bray, 448 N.E.2d at 313; Hollonguest v. State, (1982) Ind., 482 N.E.2d 87. Insofar as defendant was not formally charged with rape until two days after the lineup, defendant was not entitled to the assistance of counsel at the lineup.
Defendant argues that while he was not formally charged with rape at the time the lineup was conducted, "he was clearly a 'prime suspect' based on the earlier identifications" made by the rape victims. Defendant further maintains that at the time of lineup "the investigation had reached a stage at which the filing of the information was no more than a formality and that *684adversary proceedings had been initiated against him factually, if not formaly." The process becomes adversarial in nature, according to defendant, when the lineup is no longer an "investigatory tool but has become a device to further prosecution of a person who had already been isolated as the prospective defendant."
A similar argument was espoused in Bruce v. State, (1978) 268 Ind. 180, 875 N.E.2d 1042, wherein the defendant maintained that the police purposefully deferred formal charges in order to evade the assistance of counsel requirement at the lineup. In essence defendant here is arguing that since the lineup was no longer an investigatory tool but a device to further prosecution that formal charges should have been filed before the lineup so as not to evade the assistance of counsel requirement. However, there is nothing in the record to indicate that the lineup was anything but a tool of routine police investigation. The record shows that the probable cause affidavit and information were filed on October 29, 1981, two days after the lineup. The second victim was raped on. October 24, 1981, and identified defendant in a photographic identification held on October 26, 1981. At the photographic identification the second victim told the police she would like to see the man in person and hear him speak. The police arranged a lineup for both victims which included voice identification, at the police station on the following day, October 27, 1981. Therefore, the police arranged the lineup identification to provide the probable cause requisite to formal charging, as indicated by the reliance of the probable cause affidavit on the lineup evidence.
Defendant further maintains that a pretrial lineup identification held in the absence of counsel violates his Sixth Amendment right to counsel even where formal charges have not been filed. Defendant cites U.S. v. Wade, (1967) 388 U.S. 218, 87 S.Ct. 1926, 18 L.Ed.2d 1149, wherein the U.S. Supreme Court noted that the accused is entitled to counsel at any stage of the prosecution, formal or informal, which could affect the accused's right to a fair trial. Defendant's reliance on Wade is misguided, however, because Wade explicitly qualified the informal right to counsel to stages of prosecution. Moreover, any pretrial confrontation of the accused would-according to the Wade decision-require a determination as to whether substantial prejudice inhered in the pretrial confrontation and the ability of counsel to avoid such prejudice.
The Wade court noted the difficulty in depicting what transpired at the lineup which could result in defense counsel's inability to reconstruct the manner and mode of lineup identification for the jury at trial. In this case, however, there was no hindrance to lineup reconstruction. The lineup procedures used by the police were all the standard procedures which the United States Supreme Court cited with approval, Wade, 388 U.S. at 235 n. 26, 87 S.Ct. at 1937 n. 26, 18 LEd.2d at 1162 n. 26, and included the following safeguards which were contained in the record:
1. The lineup participants' names were recorded;
2. A transcript of a taped interview which was conducted with both rape victims regarding the lineup procedures conducted; and
3. Though not mentioned in the Wade footnote, a photograph of the actual lineup.
Since the role of counsel at the lineup is essentially that of a witness to enable reconstruction of the lineup procedures and to deter prejudices or abuses, Bruce v. State, 375 N.E.2d at 1086, the existence and availability of the above procedures enabled defense counsel to reconstruct the lineup procedure. Moreover, since the names of the officers involved, lineup participants, and identifying witnesses were available to defense counsel, he was provided the means to question those persons to ensure that no prejudices inhered in the lineup procedure. When reconstruction of the lineup procedure is thus available and no prejudicial or suggestive factors inhere in the lineup, there is no *685right to counsel at a pretrial identification lineup conducted before defendant is formally charged.
Finally, defendant argues the insufficiency of evidence based upon the absence of either victim contracting body lice even though defendant showed he suffered from lice infestation during the time of the attacks. Thus, defendant argues he could not have been the man who committed the rapes. However, there is no medical evidence in the record to show that contact with an infected person will absolutely result in an infected victim. Shaffer v. State, (1983) Ind.App., 453 N.E.2d 1182. Since defendant neglected his opportunity to present such evidence at trial, we will not consider this issue further.
IL
Defendant argues the trial court abused its discretion by imposing consecutive sentences in the absence of any finding of aggravating circumstances. However, we find the record shows that at the sentencing hearing the trial judge did state that the reason for the imposition of consecutive sentences was that there were two unrelated crimes.
Statutory authority to impose consecutive sentences is provided by Ind.Code § 85-50-1-2(a) (Burns 1979 Repl.) which vests the trial court with discretion in determining whether sentences upon multiple convictions are to run concurrently or consecutively. Guidance for imposing consecutive sentences is given in Ind.Code § 85-88-1-7 (Burns 1984 Supp.).
It is well established that when the trial court uses its discretionary power to increase or decrease the basic sentence or impose consecutive terms of imprisonment, the record must disclose what factors were considered by the judge to be mitigating or aggravating cireumstances. The record must further show that the determination of the sentence was based upon a consideration of the facts of the specific crime and the relation of the sentence imposed to the objectives to be served by that sentence. Warren v. State, (1984) Ind., 470 N.E.2d 342; Allen v. State, (19838) Ind., 458 N.E.2d 1011.
Aggravating circumstances are listed in Ind.Code § 85-88-1-7(b) (Burns 1984 Supp.) and are preceded by an introductory qualifying clause: "[the court may consider the following factors as aggravating circumstances or as favoring imposing consecutive terms of imprisonment." (Emphasis added.) Subsection (d) states "[t]he criteria listed in subsections (b) and (c) do not limit the matters that the court may consider in determining the sentence."s
The legislature has indicated fac tors which may be considered as aggravating circumstances, but the statute expressly does not limit the matters the court may consider in determining the sentence. Alen v. State, 453 N.E.2d at 1012. As we stated in Bish v. State, (1981) Ind., 421 N.E.2d 608, 617: "[when deciding whether to impose consecutive sentences, the trial court does not deviate from the statutory procedure or abuse its discretion in considering relevant factors in addition to those listed in § 85-4.1-4-7(c)." [Since repealed and now codified as Ind.Code § 85 38-1-7.]
The trial judge's discretion to impose consecutive sentences is limited by the requirement that the judge should articulate facts in the case that support a finding "of the presence of at least one of the aggravating circumstances" listed by statute before consecutive terms of imprisonment may be imposed. Taylor v. State, (1982) Ind., 442 N.E.2d 1087, 1092 (emphasis added).
Generally consecutive sentences have been imposed on separate offenses which arose from the same criminal incident and which transpired during the course of continuous criminal conduct. Warren, 470 N.E.2d at 344; Zachary v. State, (1984) Ind., 469 N.E.2d 744, 746; Taylor, 442 N.E.2d at 1088.
However, in this case, two criminal acts which were separate offenses (rape and robbery; rape and attempted robbery) were *686committed on two separate occasions, October 7, 1981, and October 24, 1981, and upon two separate victims.
In Brown v. State, (1982) Ind., 442 N.E.2d 1109, a defendant was convicted of three counts of rape, three counts of confinement, two counts of robbery, and one count of attempted robbery. The sentences within each of the three cases were to be served concurrently but the sentences on each different case were to be served consecutively. There was a time interval of one and one-half hours between the first and second rapes and an interval of one month between the second and third rapes. In Brown, 442 N.E.2d at 1117, we found that neither the sentencing order nor the sentencing hearing stated any aggravating circumstances for the imposition of consecutive sentences. We remanded the cause with instructions to vacate the order of consecutive sentences and enter an order of concurrent sentences. However, the present case is distinguishable from Brown because the trial court in Rrown explicitly stated in the record that the court found neither aggravating nor mitigating cireum-stances.
In the present case, at the sentencing hearing the trial court stated that "[iJlnasmuch as they were two separate crimes, the Court is going to order Count I and Count IV to be served consecutively with Count II and Count III." (Emphasis added:) Thus, the trial court segregated the crimes committed against each rape victim and considered the fact that this defendant had committed two separate crimes against two different victims to be a sufficient aggravating circumstances to support the imposition of consecutive sentences. We find no error in the imposition of consecutive sentences here as the court did state a proper aggravating circumstances to support the sentence.
Finally, the consecutive sentences are not manifestly unreasonable in view of the nature of the offenses and the character of the offender.
For all the foregoing reasons, there was no trial court error and the judgment of the trial court should be affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
GIVAN, C.J., and PIVARNIK, J., concur.
DeBRULER, J., concurs and dissents with opinion in which PRENTICE, J., concurs.
PRENTICE, J., concurs and dissents and joins in DeBRULER, J.'s concurring and dissenting opinion.

=== CASE 2220665 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:54.869809+00 ===

504 N.W.2d 559 (1993)
In the Matter of the Application for Disciplinary Action Against Cheryl L. ELLIS, a Member of the Bar of the State of North Dakota.
DISCIPLINARY BOARD OF the SUPREME COURT of the State of North Dakota, Petitioner,
v.
Cheryl L. ELLIS, Respondent.
Civ. No. 920375.
Supreme Court of North Dakota.
August 10, 1993.
*560 Vivian Elaine Berg, Disciplinary Counsel, Bismarck, for petitioner.
Cheryl Leslie Ellis, pro se.
PER CURIAM.
This is a disciplinary proceeding against Cheryl L. Ellis, a Fargo attorney, arising out of her representation of Linnea Andreasen, James C. Bakeman and Esther Hartman. We order that Ellis be suspended from the practice of law for a period of six months, that she write and achieve a score of at least 80 on the Multistate Professional Responsibility Examination (MPRE), and that she pay costs of $2,782.15 and attorney fees of $1,482.50.
We review disciplinary proceedings against attorneys de novo on the record, according due weight to the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the hearing panel. Disciplinary Board v. Ellis, 439 N.W.2d 808 (N.D.1989). We do not rubber stamp the findings and recommendations of the Disciplinary Board. Id. The standard of proof is clear and convincing evidence. Id.; Rule 3.5, NDPRLDD. "In determining what discipline is warranted, each case must be decided on its own particular facts." Ellis, supra, 439 N.W.2d at 809.
The hearing panel found that Ellis represented Andreasen in a Clay County, Minnesota, divorce action which was tried in September 1989, with a judgment being entered on November 9, 1989. Ellis met with Andreasen and Bakeman on December 3, 1989, informed Andreasen for the first time that judgment had been entered in the divorce action, and discussed issues for appeal and a motion hearing scheduled for January 29, 1990. At the December 3 meeting, Ellis presented Andreasen with a statement of charges reflecting a balance due of $6,591. Ellis had Andreasen sign an assignment and agreement indicating that Andreasen owed $6,389.80 in legal fees and costs to Ellis, authorizing the First State Bank of Audubon to disburse funds to Ellis in payment of legal fees, and providing that the bank would be repaid out of the *561 proceeds of Andreasen's divorce judgment. When the bank would not provide Ellis all of the funds she sought, Ellis had Andreasen sign a second agreement, which falsely indicated that Andreasen owed Ellis legal fees and costs of $11,489 as of December 6, 1989. The agreement recited that Ellis wished to borrow $4,000 from the bank, with the loan to be secured by an assignment of the proceeds of Andreasen's divorce judgment, and provided that Ellis agreed to discount Andreasen's bill to $9,403. Ellis borrowed the $4,000, the bank was repaid with interest, and Ellis never billed Andreasen for the additional amounts reflected in the second agreement. The panel also found that Ellis misled Andreasen and, apparently, the court about certain hearing dates on motions, and that she failed to respond to messages left on her answering machine and failed to apprise Andreasen of amendments to her divorce decree.
The hearing panel also found:
"VII
"Ellis undertook to represent James C. Bakeman (husband of Linnea Bakeman, formerly Linnea Andreasen) in connection with at least three (3) matters, including a Reciprocal Child Support Enforcement action in Stearns County, Minnesota, and was to file certain motions to vacate or amend an order which had been entered in the Stearns County, Minnesota action. Ms. Ellis undertook the representation knowing that she was not licensed to practice in Minnesota and she did indicate to Mr. Bakeman that payment of a back bill in the amount of approximately four hundred dollars, plus filing fee of $75, was required as a prerequisite to filing the appeal. Mr. Bakeman forwarded the necessary funds in the amount of $475 by Federal Express; however, the appeal or proceeding was not undertaken.
"VIII
"At a meeting of Ellis and Mr. and Mrs. Bakeman on December 3, 1989, at Alexandria, Minnesota, at which time Ellis was representing Mr. Bakeman, he turned over to her a personal file containing records, with the idea in mind that Ellis would make copies and return the files to Bakeman.... Subsequently, through personal telephone contact and messages left on her answering machine, Mr. Bakeman did request on more than one occasion that she return his files. Ellis indicated to him that they had been returned and on another occasion indicated that they had been sent to him from Detroit Lakes. Ellis indicated that she was going to put a tracer through the postal service to check on the package referred to; however, it appears that no tracer had ever been put through.
"IX
"Ellis undertook to represent Esther Hartman (mother of Linnea Bakeman, formerly Linnea Andreasen) in connection with an investment or investments which had proven to be unsound. Ellis obtained Esther Hartman's file containing quarterly reports, copies of promissory notes and matters pertaining to the investment(s). Ellis was requested to return the file by telephone and letter and the files were returned to Mrs. Hartman after about ten or eleven months....
"X
"Ellis has violated one or more of the following provisions of the Rules of Professional Conduct:
"RULE 1.1 COMPETENCE. A lawyer shall provide competent representation to a client. Competent representation requires the legal knowledge, skill, thoroughness and preparation reasonably necessary for the representation.
"RULE 1.15 SAFEKEEPING PROPERTY, which requires that a lawyer shall safeguard a client's property and at subparagraph (a) provides that `other property shall be identified as such and appropriately safeguarded ...'
*562 "RULE 1.3. DILIGENCE. A lawyer shall act with reasonable diligence and promptness in representing a client.
"RULE 1.4. COMMUNICATION.
"(a) A lawyer shall make reasonable efforts to keep a client reasonably informed about the status of a matter. A lawyer shall promptly comply with a client's resonable [sic] requests for information.
"(b) A lawyer shall explain matters related to the representation to the extent reasonably necessary to permit the client to make informed decisions.
"RULE 3.3. CANDOR TOWARD THE TRIBUNAL.
"(a) A lawyer shall not:
"(1) Make a statement to a tribunal of fact or law that the lawyer knows to be false.
"RULE 5.5. UNAUTHORIZED PRACTICE OF LAW.
"A lawyer shall not:
"(a) Practice law in a jurisdiction where doing so violates the regulation of the legal profession in that jurisdiction.
"Additionally, it appears that Ellis has violated Rule 1.2(A)(3), NDPRLDD, in that it is stated to be misconduct and grounds for disciplinary sanctions for a lawyer to `engage in conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation'."
The hearing panel recommended that Ellis be reprimanded[1] and that she be ordered to pay costs of $2,782.15 and attorney fees of $1,482.50. The Disciplinary Board adopted the hearing panel's findings and recommendations, with the exception of the hearing panel's finding of unauthorized practice of law.
Ellis argues that the hearing panel's report was untimely. Rule 3.1(D)(4), NDPRLDD, provides, in part: "The hearing body shall in every case submit to the board within 60 days after the conclusion of its hearing a report containing its finding and recommendations, together with a record of its proceedings." However, Rule 3.5(I), NDPRLDD, provides:
"Except as is otherwise provided in these rules, time is directory and not jurisdictional. Failure to observe prescribed time intervals may result in sanctions against the violator but does not abate any proceeding."
Ellis's argument is without merit.
Ellis points out that the hearing panel's report is signed by only two of the three members of the panel. Our Procedural Rules for Lawyer Disability and Discipline fail to address this point. They do, however, provide that the Disciplinary Board itself may act with the concurrence of a majority, Rule 2.1(E), NDPRLDD, and they do not set forth any greater requirement for the Board's hearing bodies, nor do they require that all members of a hearing panel sign a report. We therefore determine that a report signed by two of the three panel members is sufficient.[2]
Ellis was not served with a subpoena or notice before an Inquiry Committee East hearing was held. That hearing was followed by formal proceedings and a hearing by the three-member panel involved here. Ellis asserts that she was denied her due process right to appear. An attorney subjected to disbarment proceedings is "entitled to procedural due process, which includes fair notice of the charge." In re Ruffalo, 390 U.S. 544, 550, 88 S. Ct. 1222, 1226, 20 L. Ed. 2d 117, 122 (1968). In State v. Rome, 235 Kan. 642, 685 P.2d 290 (1984), a disciplined attorney alleged a due process *563 violation when he was not questioned and allowed to provide an explanation in a preliminary investigation before proceedings were filed. Citing Hannah v. Larche, 363 U.S. 420, 446, 80 S. Ct. 1502, 1516, 4 L. Ed. 2d 1307 (1960), the court held: "Individuals who are investigated by agencies and who will be `accorded all the traditional judicial safeguards at a subsequent adjudicative proceeding,' cannot successfully complain that they were not given procedural due process." 685 P.2d at 291, Syllabus ¶ 3. Ellis alleges that if she had been at the Inquiry Committee East hearing, "it would have been apparent" that Mrs. Hartman had forgotten about a telephone conversation they had had, and Hartman's "telephone records for the time in question could have then been subpoenaed." Ellis has not suggested how such a subpoena would have improved her position. Ellis's due process argument is without merit.
Ellis alleges that before the hearing began, disciplinary counsel refused to allow an attorney, who had previously represented Andreasen and was a witness at the hearing, to assist Ellis at the hearing. Ellis asserts that this was a denial of counsel. Ellis did not raise this as an issue at the hearing. We will not address an issue raised for the first time on review.
Ellis contends that she was denied the right of examining into the character of the complainant Andreasen through examination of Andreasen's former attorney. Where, as here, the attorney-client privilege had not been waived, a restriction on examination of the attorney was appropriate. In re Tepper, 126 Ill. 2d 109, 127 Ill. Dec. 756, 533 N.E.2d 838 (1988).
From our review of the record, we conclude that there is clear and convincing evidence to support the panel's findings that Ellis violated provisions of the North Dakota Rules of Professional Conduct. There is clear and convincing evidence that Ellis involved a client, Andreasen, in the submission of false documentation of legal fees and costs to a bank in connection with a loan; that Ellis failed to proceed with an appeal on behalf of Bakeman after he had provided her with the filing fee; failed to act diligently in representing a client; failed to safeguard and return client property; failed to keep a client informed or to comply with requests for information; and made a false statement to a court. Each of those violations caused Ellis's clients to suffer actual or potential harm.
From our review of the record, we conclude that there is not clear and convincing evidence to support the panel's finding that Ellis violated Rule 1.1, NDRPC, which requires a lawyer to "provide competent representation to a client." The rule requires "the legal knowledge, skill, thoroughness and preparation reasonably necessary for the representation." What is addressed by Rule 1.1, NDRPC, is clarified by reference to Standards 4.51 through 4.54, NDSILS, relating to lack of competence. Standard 4.51 addresses a lawyer's failure to "understand the most fundamental legal doctrines or procedures." Standard 4.52 addresses a lawyer who "engages in an area of practice in which the lawyer knows he or she is not competent." Standard 4.53 addresses a lawyer's "failure to understand relevant legal doctrines" or a lawyer's negligence "in determining whether he or she is competent to handle a legal matter." Standard 4.54 addresses a lawyer's "isolated instance of negligence in determining whether he or she is competent to handle a legal matter." We are not persuaded that Ellis lacked the "legal knowledge, skill, thoroughness and preparation reasonably necessary for the representation" she provided the complainants. The record does not contain clear and convincing evidence that Ellis failed to understand the most fundamental legal doctrines or procedures, that Ellis engaged in an area of practice in which she knew she was not competent, that Ellis failed to understand relevant legal doctrines, or that she was negligent in determining whether she was competent to handle a legal matter. In our view, Ellis was not shown to have violated Rule 1.1, NDRPC, by clear and convincing evidence.
Regarding the panel's conclusion that Ellis committed unauthorized practice of law, Ellis is licensed to practice law in *564 North Dakota; she is not licensed to practice law in Minnesota. An applicable Minnesota court rule provides that a nonresident attorney may participate in a Minnesota trial upon motion of a member of the Minnesota bar associated in the case. However, there is also evidence in the record that some courts in Minnesota border counties allow North Dakota attorneys to participate in Minnesota trials without a motion by a member of the Minnesota bar associated in the case if there is no objection. Thus, Ellis was able to represent Andreasen in her divorce action in Clay County without associating a Minnesota attorney on the case.
When Ellis attempted to represent Bakeman in seeking to vacate a judgment in a URESA action in Stearns County without associating a Minnesota attorney on the case, opposing counsel objected. Ellis did not associate with a Minnesota attorney on the case, could not further represent Bakeman in the case without doing so, did not further represent Bakeman in that action, and told Bakeman that he would have to retain a Minnesota attorney to represent him in that action. Ellis did not file an appeal that she had prepared. Once having undertaken to represent Bakeman in the matter, when Ellis learned she could not proceed without associating with Minnesota counsel, she should have done so in order to continue representing Bakeman or she should have assisted Bakeman in retaining local counsel. Ellis left Bakeman to fend for himself. Under the circumstances, Ellis should not have placed on Bakeman the responsibility of securing another attorney to represent him. We agree with the Disciplinary Board that Ellis was not shown by clear and convincing evidence to have engaged in unauthorized practice of law. We believe that Ellis's action in this regard was a failure to act with reasonable diligence in representing a client.
Rule 1.3, N.D. Rules of Professional Conduct, requires a lawyer to act with reasonable diligence and promptness. Standards 4.42 and 4.43, N.D. Standards for Imposing Lawyer Sanctions, provide:
"4.42 Suspension is generally appropriate when:
"(a) a lawyer knowingly fails to perform services for a client and causes injury or potential injury to a client, or
"(b) a lawyer engages in a pattern of neglect and causes injury or potential injury to a client.
"4.43 Reprimand is generally appropriate when a lawyer is negligent and does not act with reasonable diligence in representing a client, and causes injury or potential injury to a client."
Rule 1.4, NDRPC, requires a lawyer to make reasonable efforts to keep a client reasonably informed, to promptly comply with requests for information, and to explain matters to the extent reasonably necessary. Standard 4.63, NDSILS, provides: "Reprimand is generally appropriate when a lawyer negligently fails to provide a client with accurate or complete information, and causes injury or potential injury to the client."
Rule 1.15(a), NDRPC, requires that client funds be deposited in trust accounts and that other property be appropriately safeguarded. Rule 1.15(b), NDRPC, provides that "a lawyer shall promptly deliver to the client or third person any funds or other property that the client or third person is entitled to receive." Standards 4.12 and 4.13, NDSILS, provide:
"4.12 Suspension is generally appropriate when a lawyer knows or should know that he is dealing improperly with client property and causes injury or potential injury to a client.
"4.13 Reprimand is generally appropriate when a lawyer is negligent in dealing with client property and causes injury or potential injury to a client."
Rule 3.3, NDRPC, provides: "A lawyer shall not: (1) Make a statement to a tribunal of fact or law that the lawyer knows to be false." Standard 6.12, NDSILS, provides: "Suspension is generally appropriate when a lawyer knows that false statements or documents are being submitted to the court." Standard 6.13, NDSILS, provides: "Reprimand is generally appropriate when *565 a lawyer is negligent ... in determining whether statements or documents are false."
Rule 1.2(A)(3), NDPRLDD, provides: "It is misconduct and grounds for disciplinary sanctions for a lawyer to: ... (3) Engage in conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation." Standard 4.62, NDSILS, provides that suspension is generally appropriate when a lawyer knowingly directs fraud, deceit or misrepresentation to a client. Standard 5.12, NDSILS, provides that suspension is generally appropriate when a lawyer knowingly engages in dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation adversely reflecting on the lawyer's fitness to practice.
Standard 9.2, NDSILS, provides that the existence of prior disciplinary offenses is an aggravating factor that may justify an increase in the degree of discipline to be imposed. Ellis was previously disciplined by this court. See Disciplinary Board v. Ellis, supra. Ellis was disciplined in that case for failing to communicate with clients about the status of their cases, misrepresentation, neglect, and lack of diligence. This court suspended Ellis from the practice of law for a two-year period, with all but the first 90 days stayed for a one-year probationary period.
Some of the violations involved in this proceeding are of the same nature as those for which Ellis was previously suspended. In our view, the Disciplinary Board's recommendation that Ellis only be reprimanded unduly depreciates the seriousness of Ellis's commission of new violations similar to those for which she previously had been disciplined.
We believe suspension from the practice of law is appropriate in this case. We hereby impose upon Ellis a six month suspension from the practice of law commencing September 1, 1993, order that she write and achieve a score of at least 80[3] on the Multistate Professional Responsibility Examination (MPRE) and order her to pay costs of $2,782.15 and attorney fees of $1,482.50.[4]
VANDE WALLE, C.J., and LEVINE, MESCHKE, NEUMANN and SANDSTROM, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  "Reprimand, also known as censure or public censure, is a form of public discipline which declares the conduct of the lawyer improper, but does not limit the lawyer's right to practice." Standard 2.4, NDSILS.
[2]  Nothing in the record before us indicates why the third panel member in this case may have failed or refused to sign the hearing body's report. When, as here, there is no other explanation, we will interpret the absence of the member's signature as a dissent from the report. We note, however, that it would be better practice, and more useful to the Disciplinary Board and this court, for a dissenting member to set forth his position and his reasoning explicitly.
[3]  The North Dakota State Bar Board has established 80 as the minimum passing MPRE score for purposes of admission to practice law in this state.
[4]  Compare Disciplinary Board v. Nassif, 504 N.W.2d 311 (N.D.1993). The greater severity of the sanction imposed in the present case results from the greater severity of Ellis's prior disciplinary offenses, the seriousness of Ellis's having submitted a false document to obtain a loan, and the seriousness of Ellis's having involved a client in the submission of that false document.

=== CASE 9739671 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:19:20.714669+00 ===

AMUNDSON, Justice.
American Family Insurance Company (American Family) appeals from a final judgment awarding Darla Bowen (Bowen) a proportionate amount of attorney fees incurred in settling her personal injury claim which included American Family’s subrogation interest. Bowen files notice of review. We affirm.
FACTS
Bowen was injured when she was involved in a motor vehicle accident with David Lee Tuenge (Tuenge) on May 20, 1990. Tuenge struck the rear of Bowen’s vehicle when she slowed for traffic. Bowen was insured with American Family; Tuenge was insured with IMT Insurance Company (IMT).
Five days after the accident, on May 25, 1990, Carol Foster (Foster) of American Family wrote Tuenge to ascertain whether Tuenge was insured and, if so, with whom. Foster learned that Tuenge had a policy with IMT and that the IMT agent was State Bank of Rock Rapids, Iowa.
On June 1, 1990, IMT agreed to pay for all property damage to Bowen’s vehicle. On July 10, 1990, Bowen retained Dean Nasser (Nasser) as counsel to represent her with respect to her personal injury claims. Nasser informed IMT of his representation two days later.
American Family notified IMT of its sub-rogation interest for medical expenses on August 6,1990. IMT responded on August 28, informing American Family that its subrogation interest would be protected upon settlement with Bowen. American *605Family accordingly kept IMT apprised of the increasing amount of subrogation until it reached its maximum amount of $2,000.00. On December 12, 1990, subsequent to receipt of IMT’s letter, American Family sent Bowen a release and subrogation agreement requiring Bowen to do whatever was necessary to secure American Family’s subrogation rights.
On April 18, 1991, Nasser reached a tentative settlement with IMT regarding compensation for Bowen’s personal injuries. The agreement provided a total of $16,-500.00 in payments, $2,000.00 of which would cover American Family’s subrogation interest. Nasser contacted representatives of American Family to verify the amount of American Family’s subrogation interest and informed them that such interest would be protected in the settlement subject to the apportionment of the costs of litigation (a one-third contingent of attorney fees plus sales tax and costs). Claiming its subrogation interest was protected through its own efforts and not those of Nasser, American Family denied any responsibility for attorney fees and demanded the entirety of its $2,000.00 subrogation interest. Bowen was allowed to recover the $14,500.00 balance of the settlement while the parties disputed whether the $2,000.00 subrogation interest was subject to attorney fees.
Both parties filed motions for summary judgment which the court denied. The parties then submitted the issue of attorney fees to the court on stipulation. The trial court held that American Family was obligated for a proportionate share of attorney fees expended in reaching settlement. American Family appeals and Bowen files notice of review claiming that she was entitled to summary judgment as initially requested.
ISSUE
Whether an insurer’s subrogation interest is subject to a proportionate share of attorney’s fees incurred by the insured in securing settlement?
ANALYSIS
We will not disturb the findings of the trial court unless they are clearly erroneous. Wiggins v. Shewmake, 374 N.W.2d 111, 114 (S.D.1985). “In applying this standard, we will overturn the findings of the trial court only when, after review of all the evidence, we are left with a definite and firm conviction that a mistake has been made.” Id.
American Family asserts that Nasser played no role in securing its subro-gation payment. It thus claims it should not be responsible for attorney fees on its subrogation proceeds. While this court has not previously addressed the issue of attorney fees in the recovery of a subrogated interest, we have long recognized that a subrogated interest may not be split from an insured’s cause of action against a tort-feasor.
It is a well settled rule of law that an insurer is entitled to subrogation, either by contract or in equity for the amount of the indemnity paid. When the indemnity paid by the insurer covers only part of the loss, as in this case, leaving a residue to be made good to the insured by the wrongdoer, the right of action remains in the insured for the entire loss. In these cases the insured becomes a trustee and holds the amount of recovery, equal to the indemnity for the use and benefit of the insurer. The rule is founded on the principle that the wrongful act was single and indivisible, and gives rise to but one liability. Upon this theory the splitting of causes of action is avoided and the wrongdoer is not subjected to a multiplicity of suits.
Parker v. Hardy, 73 S.D. 247, 248, 41 N.W.2d 555, 556 (1950) (citations omitted). See also Sodak Distrib. Co. v. Wayne, 77 S.D. 496, 499, 93 N.W.2d 791, 793 (1958). Bowen’s cause of action against IMT thus included seeking the subrogation rights of American Family.
In addressing an insurer’s responsibility for attorney fees on a subrogated claim, the Nebraska Supreme Court relied on the indivisibility of a claim as enunciated in Parker. Krause v. State Farm Mutual *606Auto. Ins. Co., 184 Neb. 588, 169 N.W.2d 601, 604, modified, 184 Neb. 638, 170 N.W.2d 882 (1969). The court found that the insured’s cause of action imposes on him a trust for the funds coming into his hands and obligates him, under a fiduciary duty, to account for a proportionate amount of the proceeds for the subrogation interest. Id. at 604. “The right to an attorney’s fee follows as a matter of course, since the services rendered by the attorney are beneficial to the administration of the trust and the rights of the beneficiary and as such he is entitled to a proportionate award of an attorney’s fee.” Id. American Family was a beneficiary of Bowen’s settlement. It naturally follows that American Family should bear a proportionate share of the attorney fees that were incurred in obtaining the settlement.
In addition, the Krause court reiterated the rule of law established in the seminal case of United Servs. Auto. Ass’n v. Hills, 172 Neb. 128, 109 N.W.2d 174 (1961).
“The applicable rule is that where the holder of the subrogation right does not come into the action, whether he refuses to do so or acquiesces in the plaintiff’s action, but accepts the avails of the litigation, he should be subjected to his proportionate share of the expenses thereof, including attorney’s fees.”
Krause, 169 N.W.2d at 603 (quoting Hills, 109 N.W.2d at 177). This rule has subsequently been nearly unanimously adopted in all jurisdictions faced with the issue of attorney fees on a subrogated interest recovered either by judgment or settlement. Krause, 169 N.W.2d at 604; State Farm Mutual Auto. Ins. Co. v. Geline, 48 Wis.2d 290, 179 N.W.2d 815, 820 (1970); Annotation, Right of Attorney for Holder of Property Insurance to Fee Out of Insurer’s Share of Recovery from Tortfeasor, 2 A.L.R.3d 1441 (1965).
American Family argues that it in no way joined Bowen’s action, but settled its subrogation interest directly with IMT. While American Family was not actively involved in the settlement negotiation between IMT and Bowen, American Family did notify Bowen during the settlement negotiations time frame that Bowen was obligated to protect its subrogation interest. There is no question that American Family’s policy with Bowen so provided.1
When so notifying Bowen, American Family sent its form release and subrogation agreement.2 This notice was given to Bowen approximately three months after American Family claims to have reached agreement with IMT. Notwithstanding this settlement of its subrogation interest, American Family’s communications to Bowen made no mention of same. Likewise, neither the contract of insurance nor the subrogation agreement advise the insured that in fulfilling his duty of protecting the insurer’s subrogation interest he will be responsible for all attorney fees incurred in obtaining settlement with the third party’s insurer. There is no dispute of the fact that any claim for damages is the sole right of the insured. Therefore, until the insured has reached a settlement or obtained a verdict, there are no funds available to pay any subrogation interest of a claimant’s insurer.
American Family relies on Moyer & Moyer v. State Farm Mutual Ins. Co., 190 *607Neb. 174, 206 N.W.2d 644 (1973), wherein the insurer was not required to pay a proportionate share of attorney fees in recovering its subrogation interest. However, the insurer in Moyer was paid its subrogation interest by the third party before the insured was able to obtain a settlement. The court denied a recovery because the insurer had received no benefit from the insured’s attorney. In this case, the communication from IMT to American Family clearly stated that American Family’s sub-rogation interest would be protected “upon settlement with Miss Bowen.” While American Family argues that its own communication with IMT insured the protection of its subrogation interest, it was Bowen’s settlement with IMT that made the payment of American Family’s interest possible. American Family benefitted from Bowen’s efforts in securing payment from a third party — efforts American Family itself required of Bowen. American Family must accordingly bear a proportionate share of the cost of obtaining that benefit.
Under the facts of this case, we are not left with a definite and firm conviction that the trial court made a mistake in requiring the insurer to pay a proportionate share of attorney fees for the recovery of its subro-gated interest. American Family argues that an award of attorney fees in this case will have a cataclysmic effect on the insurance industry. We do not perceive such an impact, since this decision is based solely on the facts presented in this litigation. Further, it is fairly obvious that a company can avoid attorney fees by simply providing for same in their contract of insurance or subrogation agreement. At a bare minimum, a company should at least make their insured aware that the company has settled its subrogation claim with the other party’s insurer and will not be responsible for any attorney fees incurred by its insured in obtaining a settlement or judgment for their damages. If the insured is aware that his insurer will not pay any attorney fees, the injured insured can then avoid being obligated for attorney fees to his attorney on the total amount of a settlement or judgment. The order of the trial court is accordingly affirmed.
MILLER, C.J., and HENDERSON and SABERS, JJ., concur.
WUEST, J., concurs in result.
. This policy issued to Bowen provides in part as follows:
Our Recovery Rights. If we pay under this policy, we are entitled to all the rights of recovery of the person to whom payment was made against another. That person must sign and deliver to us any legal papers relating to that recovery, do whatever else is necessary to help us exercise those rights and do nothing after loss to harm our rights.
When we pay damages under this policy to a person who also collects from another, the amount collected from the other shall be repaid to us to the extent of our payment.
PART VI — GENERAL PROVISIONS ¶ 5.
. This subrogation agreement provides in the last paragraph as follows:
I also agree that said company shall be subro-gated to all of my rights of recovery to the extent of the above-stated payment against any person or organization responsible for my loss, and I will execute and deliver instruments and papers and do whatever else is necessary to secure such rights and do nothing to prejudice such rights.

=== CASE 2222280 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:40:34.545423+00 ===

27 Mass. App. Ct. 167 (1989)
535 N.E.2d 1284
LYMAN G. JUDD
vs.
EDWARD H. McCORMACK & another.[1]
No. 87-453.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Middlesex.
May 11, 1988.
March 28, 1989.
Present: PERRETTA, DREBEN, & KASS, JJ.
William H. Carroll, Special Assistant Attorney General (Antonette S. Fernandez with him) for the defendants.
Dennis Paul Phillips for the plaintiff.
PERRETTA, J.
When Judd was dismissed from his position as a provisional fire fighter for the town of Arlington because of his alleged poor performance at the Massachusetts Firefighting Academy (Academy), he brought this action against the defendant McCormack, the chief of training at the Academy, *168 and seven of his instructors.[2] He claimed that their statements concerning his lack of qualifications as a fire fighter were false and malicious, and he sought damages for the intentional interference with his advantageous relationship with Arlington. The jury found in Judd's favor only as to two of the defendants, McCormack and one of the instructors, Byrne. On their appeal we conclude that Judd failed to sustain his burden of showing that McCormack and Byrne had abused the conditional privilege by which their remarks were protected. We reverse and order the entry of judgments dismissing the complaint against them.
I. The Evidence.
We relate the evidence in a light most favorable to Judd. See Tosti v. Ayik, 394 Mass. 482, 494 (1985). When Judd received his provisional appointment to the Arlington fire department in January, 1977, it was with the understanding that the appointment was to be made permanent upon his satisfactory completion of a six-month probationary period and a seven-week training course at the Academy. The Academy receives fire fighting recruits from local fire departments throughout the Commonwealth for training purposes. See G.L.c. 6, §§ 164 and 165 (now see also § 165A, added by St. 1986, c. 670, § 1). When Judd attended the Academy, McCormack, as chief of training, was assisted by two deputy chiefs (one of whom was Mararian, see note 2, supra), twelve to eighteen staff members, and about 150 certified part-time instructors. These instructors were fire fighters, from various fire departments, who gave the recruits the benefit of their experience and knowledge concerning fire fighting techniques.
Training at the Academy consisted of two components, classroom instruction and field drills and exercises. In addition to receiving numerical grades on written examinations, each recruit's performance, in the classroom and on the field, was *169 evaluated by the instructors. Poor evaluations could result in demerits which, in turn, could lead to an individual counseling session. The degree of counseling would intensify as a recruit's tally of demerits increased from twenty-five to fifty to seventy-five. An accumulation of 100 demerits could result in a recruit's dismissal from the Academy.
At the end of the training program and just before graduation, the Academy would prepare a letter for each recruit's city or town appointing authority in which the recruit's performance and qualifications as a fire fighter would be described and assessed. As was known by the Academy, the letters had a major impact on the recruits' prospects for permanent employment. Although signed by McCormack as chief of training, the letters were actually prepared and written by Mararian on the basis of the instructors' written evaluations which were turned in to him. After drafting the individual letters, Mararian would leave them with McCormack for his signature. McCormack did not engage in any actual instruction and did not know any of the recruits personally. He would sign the letters without conferring with Mararian, the instructors, or the recruit.
In his letter concerning Judd, McCormack does point out his very high numerical grades on the written examinations. He notes, however, that Judd received twenty-eight demerits, which was eight more than the class average. The most critical and detrimental portions of the letter pertain to Judd's "performance of the required physical phases of training." Here Judd was described as showing "reluctance to cooperate with the Instructors, report on time ... [and] a general lack of discipline," displaying a "tendency when under pressure to show stress and become confused ... [and] not being able to function effectively in a fire involved area or smoke filled environment," and as "constantly attempt[ing] to let someone else do the necessary work whenever possible." The final sentence of the letter reads: "It is the opinion of the training staff at the Massachusetts Firefighting Academy that Firefighter Judd has not shown the necessary psychological and physiological skills necessary to perform effectively as a firefighter."
*170 Any praise of Judd by his instructors in their written evaluations of him was limited to his intelligence and mastering of the classroom materials. There was consensus among them concerning Judd's performance in the classroom and on the field. As samples, they wrote: "always questions the instructor why it is done that way and gives with an alternative method, which usually doesn't work anyway," "when instructed in the proper way of doing things he always had another method which he was convinced was better," "will not volunteer and when assigned on a company operation he always seems to get the easiest job," "willing to let others `go first,'" "not capable of much physical dexterity," "not cut out to be a firefighter ... would not want this man on the fire ground under pressure," and "when faced with an emergency situation he has a tendency to back down ... is content to stay in the background running the pump or pulling hose, but unwilling to take part in the actual fighting of a fire." Two of the instructors also found him lacking in punctuality. Byrne's evaluation was expressed in language which could be characterized as harsh: "Always has a question which does not pertain to what is being taught, tries to impress people with 50 cent words, in plain english a ... [expletive deleted]. Under fire conditions has no ... [expletive deleted], if you put a chain around him and drag him around, he might make a good man in 100 years. Not someone I would like to have on my crew. Will be the F. Lee Bailey of the fire house."[3]
Those instructors called to testify at trial all related that Judd asked many questions in class, sometimes in a challenging manner. They claimed that, on the field exercises, he would leave his assigned position, that he would not volunteer or participate in drills unless required to do so, and that his performance was seriously lacking in critical areas.
Judd explained, rather than disputed, the occurrence of the incidents cited by his instructors. He explained that when he *171 entered the Academy in 1977, he brought with him some training and experience in fighting fires. While in the United States Air Force from 1964 through 1968, he had been a member and then chief of his Air Force base fire fighting unit. His many questions were motivated by his desire to reconcile the differences between Air Force and Academy fire fighting methods.[4] Judd acknowledged that he frequently was one of the last recruits to enter a classroom and that one instructor asked him to try to be more prompt. However, he was actually late only three or four times, and each for a reason: trouble with his contact lenses, a fall on the ice, and the flu.
Judd answered to the criticisms of his field performance as follows. Opportunities to volunteer for drills were rare and participation was mostly on an assigned basis. He performed a pit fire drill as required. When not involved in the pit fire drill, he took photographs of that exercise as souvenirs for himself and his classmates, and he was allowed to do so.
There was no dispute that it was important for the members of a hose-line team to maintain their assigned positions along the line. In this way, each team member knows exactly where the others are and what they are doing. There was also no dispute that Judd broke from his position several times. Judd explained each incident. As his team was bringing a hose-line into a burning building, the recruit working the water pump called out for instructions. Judd left his position, ran back to the recruit, and explained the valves and pressure problems. By the time he returned to his assigned position, his team had brought the hose up the stairs.
On the second occasion, Judd was in the fourth position as his team was bringing a hose up a stair well. They were to enter a room at the top of the stairs and extinguish a fire. They had gone several flights when the hose failed to give. Judd called down the stair well for someone to untangle the hose, *172 but no one responded. He left his position, ran down the stairs, and untangled the hose. By the time he was able to return to his place on the line, his team had entered the room, opened the windows, and started to extinguish the fire.
In another, but similar, exercise Judd's team was attempting to enter a smoke-filled room. He was in the second or third position on the hose-line. He heard people yelling "ventilate, ventilate" and felt a hard slap across his back. He construed the calls and slap as a command. He left the hose-line, entered the room, and opened the windows to release the smoke. He returned to the hose-line, taking the last, rather than his original, position. He thought it inappropriate to assume his assigned place because his team members had moved up on the line to take his empty place.
Turning to the criticism of his ability to deal with fire and flammable liquids, Judd related that in this drill, he was the "nozzleman." His team was without breathing equipment when they entered a room thick with black smoke. Judd followed procedure and sprayed fine mist about the ceiling to cool or extinguish the fire. There were noxious fumes and Judd called out to an instructor that flammable liquids were present. The instructor ordered the team to back out from the room and leave the fire for a team with appropriate breathing apparatus.
As for a complaint from a classmate that Judd had failed to maintain his position and hold a ladder secure as the recruit descended the exterior wall of a building, Judd stated that he was holding the ladder. He agreed that it was a bit shaky but only because his feet were slipping on the snow and ice.
Judd related one incident, early in the training course, where he deservedly received harsh criticism. Judd was not a participant in a drill in which a recruit was to drive a fire truck to a hydrant. From his observation point, Judd thought that the truck was not close enough to the hydrant for the hose to be attached. He called out for the driver to pull up some more. At the time he called out, he was unaware of the fact that another recruit was stepping from the back of the truck with the hose. Judd stated that although he was only trying to help his classmates, he later realized that he had put a member of *173 the participating team in danger by his involvement. He learned much from the incident and viewed that criticism as helpful.
II. Existence of a Privilege.
Judd has alleged from the outset that the statements in McCormack's letter and Byrne's evaluation were false and malicious. McCormack and Byrne have insisted that their statements were true and absolutely privileged. There can be no dispute that a privilege existed, and the question here is its scope.
We agree with the trial judge's conclusion that the protection afforded the defendants was conditional, rather than absolute. See Vigoda v. Barton, 348 Mass. 478, 484 (1965); Ezekiel v. Jones Motors Co., 374 Mass. 382, 385-386 (1978); Bratt v. International Business Machs. Corp., 392 Mass. 508, 509 (1984). Next we note that "[w]ith a qualified or conditional privilege, a defendant is protected unless he abuses the privilege. See Retailers Commercial Agency, Inc., petitioner, 342 Mass. 515, 520-522 (1961); Galvin v. New York, N.H. & H.R.R., 341 Mass. 293, 297 (1960)." Ezekiel, supra at 385. See also Restatement (Second) of Torts § 599 (1977). Once the defendants met their burden of showing the existence of a conditional privilege, see United Truck Leasing Corp. v. Geltman, 26 Mass. App. Ct. 847, 852 (1989), it became incumbent upon Judd to show that they had abused and thereby lost their protection against liability. See Doane v. Grew, 220 Mass. 171, 182 (1915); Bander v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 313 Mass. 337, 343-344 (1943); McCone v. New England Tel. & Tel. Co., 393 Mass. 231, 236 (1984). See also Prosser & Keeton, Torts § 115, at 835 (5th ed. 1984) ("Once the existence of the privilege is established, the burden is upon the plaintiff to prove that it has been abused ...").
III. Abuse of the Privilege.
We apply the law to the evidence taken in the light most favorable to Judd to determine whether it was sufficient to show that McCormack and Byrne had abused their conditional privilege. The statements, as well as the circumstances under which they were made, must be considered. "Our cases have recognized that a conditional privilege may be abused, and *174 lost, in a number of ways. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 599 comment a, at 286 (1977). In Tosti v. Ayik, 386 Mass. 721, 726 (1982), we stated: `One manner of such abuse is publication with knowledge of falsity or with reckless disregard of the truth.' In Sheehan v. Tobin, 326 Mass. 185, 192 (1950), we stated: `The rule long established by this court is "that an occasion which would justify such a communication may be abused in such a manner as to deprive the party making it of the excuse of privilege.... The jury may ... [find for the plaintiff] from proof that the defendant knew the charges to be false, or had no reason to believe them to be true [and] also from the terms in which the communication is made."' Id., quoting Atwill v. Mackintosh, 120 Mass. 177, 183 (1876). Cf. Ezekiel v. Jones Motor Co., 374 Mass. 382, 390-391 (1978) (defendant employer could lose privilege of communicating reasons for plaintiff's discharge to union grievance board if statements made out of actual malice or reckless disregard for plaintiff's rights). The policy reasons behind the recognition of a conditional privilege impel us to conclude that whatever the manner of abuse, recklessness, at least, should be required." (Footnotes omitted.) Bratt v. International Business Mach. Corp., 392 Mass. at 514-515.
Turning first to the statements themselves, we note that even though Judd's claim is one for the intentional interference with an advantageous relationship, it is based upon what Judd alleges to be defamatory, or false and malicious, statements. The evidence shows as matter of law, however, that McCormack's letter and Byrne's evaluation are "nonactionable statements of opinion." Aldoupolis v. Globe Newspaper Co., 398 Mass. 731, 733 (1986). See also Myers v. Boston Magazine Co., 380 Mass. 336, 341 (1980); King v. Globe Newspaper Co., 400 Mass. 705, 709 (1987). McCormack's letter expressly sets out the basis for the opinion and "does not imply the existence of undisclosed facts." Id. at 713. See also Restatement (Second) of Torts § 566 & comment b (1977). That Byrne's evaluation was more conclusory than factual does not make it other than an expression of opinion. Byrne wrote his evaluation for submission to Mararian in accordance with Academy procedure. *175 "The pure type of expression of opinion may also occur when the maker of the comment does not himself express the alleged facts on which he bases the expression of opinion. This happens when both parties to the communication know the facts or assume their existence and the comment is clearly based on those assumed facts and does not imply the existence of other facts in order to justify the comment." Id.
Although Byrne's evaluation was expressed in some tasteless and harsh language, his choice of words bespeaks an impolite bluntness rather than malice. "Malice has been stated to require evidence of `an improper motive,' Hartmann v. Boston Herald-Traveler Corp., 323 Mass. 56, 65 (1948), or an intent to abuse the occasion by resorting to it `as a pretence,' Remington v. Congdon, [2 Pick. 310, 315 (1824)], or `reckless disregard' of the rights of another, Retailers Commercial Agency, Inc., petitioner, 342 Mass. at 521. Cf. Stone v. Essex County Newspapers, Inc., 367 Mass. 849 (1975). See also Boston Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Varone, 303 F.2d 155, 159 (1st Cir.1962)." Ezekiel v. Jones Motor Co., 374 Mass. at 390, also citing, at n. 4, to Restatement (Second) of Torts § 603 (1977), and Prosser, Torts § 115, at 795 (4th ed. 1971). The record does not support a finding that the defendants had a motive ulterior to their duty to evaluate Judd's performance in the training program.
Nor do we see malice or recklessness in McCormack's use of the words "psychological and physiological." No reasonable reader of those words in the context made would construe them as conveying diagnostic facts. When all is said and done, McCormack stated "in an oblique or hyperbolic manner," Hoesl v. United States, 451 F. Supp. 1170, 1172 (N.D. Cal. 1978), what a reasonable reader knew to mean that Judd simply did not have what it takes to be a fire fighter.
It was also Judd's position at trial that McCormack abused his privilege by writing the letter with a reckless disregard as to its truth or falsity. There is no conflict in the evidence concerning McCormack's actual knowledge of Judd's lack of ability. McCormack had no knowledge whatsoever of Judd, and he made no inquiry of Mararian, any of the instructors, *176 or of Judd before sending the letter. But even were the letter other than an expression of opinion, the evidence of McCormack's lack of knowledge is not sufficient to show, as Judd was required to do, that McCormack had no reason to believe the statements to be true, i.e., that he acted in reckless disregard of the truth. McCormack signed the letter on the basis of materials compiled by the faculty in a manner which entitled him to rely on its truthfulness as constituting a summary of what instructors had observed about a trainee. See Sheehan v. Tobin, 326 Mass. at 192, quoting from Atwill v. Mackintosh, 120 Mass. 177, 183 (1876); Vigoda v. Barton, 348 Mass. at 485. See also Restatement (Second) of Torts § 600 comment b (1977) ("Reckless disregard as to truth or falsity exists when there is a high degree of awareness of probable falsity or serious doubt as to the truth of the statement").
If the evidence can be construed so favorably to Judd as to show that his instructors took a strong dislike of him, Judd still did not sustain his burden of proof. The procedures by which information for the letter was compiled and the circumstances, in their totality, under which it was written and sent show neither recklessness nor animus toward Judd. See Caverno v. Fellows, 300 Mass. 331, 336-338 (1938); Pacella v. Milford Radio Corp., 18 Mass. App. Ct. 6, 15-16 (1984). See also Restatement (Second) of Torts § 603 & comment b, at 292 (1977) ("[I]f the publication is made for the purpose of protecting the interest in question, the fact that the publication is inspired in part by resentment or indignation at the supposed misconduct of the person defamed does not constitute an abuse of the privilege").
Judd's proof shows, at best, that he did not endear himself to his instructors. That is too weak an evidentiary basis upon which to allow a conclusion that the defendants had abused the privilege given them as protection for their honesty and candor in furthering an important public interest.
IV. Conclusion.
Because the plaintiff failed to prove that the defendants abused their conditional privilege, the defendants' motion for a directed verdict or their motions for judgment notwithstanding *177 the verdict should have been allowed. The judgments are reversed, and the matter is remanded to the Superior Court for the entry of judgments for the defendants.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  Jerome F. Byrne.
[2]  The deputy chief of training at the Academy, Harold E. Mararian, was also named as a defendant. However, he died prior to trial, which did not commence until 1986, about nine years after the complaint was brought. The action against him was dismissed upon stipulation of the parties.
[3]  As explained by Byrne upon cross-examination, that term is a slang expression for a fire fighter who is always asking questions. In the same vein, another instructor wrote that Judd would "make one hell of a firehouse lawyer."
[4]  One of Judd's classmates testified that, although Judd had asked many questions in class, he did not view Judd's questions as disruptive to the lectures. None of the instructors who testified thought Judd's questions foolish as much as they thought them too frequent, mostly irrelevant to the methods being taught, and very time consuming.

=== CASE 9740120 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:28:35.823089+00 ===

JUSTICE CUNNINGHAM delivered the opinion of the court: On April 10, 1985, a bill of indictment was filed charging defendant, Manuel Salazar, with the murder of a police officer, Martin Murrin, while Officer Murrin was in the course of performing his official duties on September 12, 1984. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, pars. 9— 1(a)(1), (b)(1).) Subsequent to a change of venue from Will County to McLean County, a jury found defendant guilty of murder. Pursuant to section 9 — 1 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1) (hereafter referred to as the death penalty statute), a death penalty hearing was held before the same jury (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 9 — 1(d)(1)). The jury unanimously found that defendant had attained the age of 18 or more, that statutory aggravating factors existed and that no mitigating factors existed to preclude the imposition of the death sentence. Defendant was sentenced to death. The sentence was stayed pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 609(a) pending appeal to this court (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, §4(b); 107 Ill. 2d Rules 609(a), 603). This court -will address in full all the evidence in this case as it applies to each issue. I Defendant argues that he was denied equal protection of the law when the circuit court transferred the cause from Will County to McLean County, resulting in the alleged exclusion of blacks and persons of Spanish origin from the jury venire. Citing Taylor v. Louisiana (1975), 419 U.S. 522, 42 L. Ed. 2d 690, 95 S. Ct. 692, defendant specifically argues that he is entitled to an impartial jury drawn from a cross-section of the community. In Taylor, the United States Supreme Court held that the systematic exclusion of women from sitting on juries violates a defendant’s sixth amendment right to have a jury chosen from a fair cross-section of the community. In this case, however, defendant’s argument does not involve whether a systematic exclusion of a particular race or ethnic group has occurred, but in actuality whether a lack of a jury chosen from a fair cross-section of a community equal to the community where the crime was committed and from whence this cause was transferred has denied defendant equal protection. This court effectively addressed the issue in People v. Johnson (1986), 114 Ill. 2d 170. This court held: “This is not a case involving the systematic exclusion of ‘a “distinctive” group in the community’ [citation], which would trigger a fair-cross-section inquiry under the standard recently announced by the Supreme Court in Batson v. Kentucky (1986), 476 U.S. 79, 90 L. Ed. 2d 69, 106 S. Ct. 1712. Nor are we familiar with any constitutional right allowing a defendant to select his own place of trial. [Citation.] To require that the venire of the transferee county proportionately mirror any distinctive groups found in the originating county would either saddle our judiciary with an onerous, if not impossible, task or effectively grant defendants a heretofore unrecognized right to choose their place of trial.” 114 Ill. 2d at 180-81. The facts in this case are similar to those in Johnson. Defendant in this case was indicted in the circuit court of the Twelfth Judicial Circuit, Will County. On July 29, 1985, the People raised the issue of change of venue because in previous conversations with defendant’s out-of-State counsel, the People were under the impression that defense counsel thought that the case had been transferred from Will County to Kankakee County as a matter of law. However, the People had not received any motion regarding the matter. The local defense counsel confirmed the People’s statements. The trial court at this point stated that it did not know if the case would be transferred to Kankakee County because it did not believe that the “climate” would be beneficial to defendant based on previous experiences in that county. The court later expressed concern about transferring the case to Kankakee or Iroquois County and suggested the possibility of Rockford or “someplace like that.” Local counsel agreed. On August 2, 1985, the local defense counsel officially gave notice to the court and the People that it would be filing a motion to change venue in three weeks. Defendant filed his motion for change of venue on August 29, 1985, and on the same date the court held a hearing on the motion. The court granted defendant’s motion but reserved its ruling regarding the naming of the situs of the trial. The court also expressed some reservations regarding other areas within the circuit and stated that it would confer with the chief judge regarding the arrangements. Defense counsel expressed no objections to Cook County, but the court stated that it would not be Cook County and possibly would be Peoria or Bloomington or “something like that.” On September 17, 1985, the court filed its written orders transferring the case from Will County to McLean County for trial commencing on November 4, 1985. At the October 18 hearing, the out-of-State defense counsel expressed concern regarding the place of venue because of his need to be near an airport in light of the fact that he was coming from California. The court assured him that Bloomington in McLean County had a substantial airport. Defense counsel stated that if he had any more objections to venue he would submit a written motion. Defense counsel then expressed concern over the selection of jurors in McLean County. The court noted that it had filed its order for change of venue on September 12, 1985, and that defense counsel had waited until October 18, 1985, to express concern. The court told defense counsel that the motion had to be filed very soon because five weeks had passed. On November 4, 1985, the date of the start of the trial, defense counsel filed a motion to discharge the jury and transfer this case to another county because .82% of the McLean County population is of Hispanic origin and 5% is of black and Hispanic origin, whereas the county of the incident is 4% of Hispanic origin and 14% of black and Hispanic origin. Defendant alleged that Spanish and black persons were being systematically excluded from the available jury pool. Prior to jury selection the court held a hearing on the motion. The trial court denied defense counsel’s motion. This court finds that defense counsel was attempting to force the circuit court to pick a venue favorable to defendant or to defendant’s liking. This court does not recognize a right on behalf of a defendant to choose venue. As illustrated in this case, a defendant could continue to object to venue until a favorable situs has been found. The circuit court has discretion to choose the proper venue, and this court finds that the court did not abuse its discretion. The circuit court considered the amount of pretrial publicity, the other counties in the circuit, and the out-of-State defense counsel’s concern for an airport and appropriately chose McLean County. Thus, this court finds that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion. II Defendant argues that the People failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt defendant’s guilt. Defendant specifically argues that the People failed to prove that defendant had the requisite mental state, i.e., that he intentionally killed Officer Murrin. The evidence reveals otherwise. Officer Thomas Ponce stated that on September 12, 1984, at approximately 5 p.m., he and the deceased were patrolling in full uniform in the northeast section of Joliet. They were traveling in a marked police squad car. As they were traveling eastbound on Woodruff Avenue and were approaching the intersection of Draper Avenue, they observed a green, full-size, four-door car with a group of male Spanish subjects and a male black traveling on Draper Avenue toward Woodruff. Officer Ponce pointed out the car to Officer Murrin. Officer Murrin then told Officer Ponce to continue driving eastbound on Woodruff as Officer Murrin maintained observation of the vehicle. As they passed the vehicle, Officer Murrin instructed Officer Ponce to turn the squad car around as they both continued to keep the green car in their sight. After Officer Ponce made the U-turn, the car under observation was coming toward the squad car. At that time, the car stopped and a black male subject and a Spanish male subject exited the car and began running away from the car. The Spanish subject held a red bag in his hand. Officer Ponce drove the car into a vacant lot which defendant ran across. Officer Murrin then instructed Officer Ponce to “cut him [defendant] off,” pointing toward Antram Avenue. Officer Murrin exited the squad car and began pursuit of defendant on foot. About two minutes later during Officer Ponce’s attempt to locate his partner or defendant, Ponce heard five gunshots. Eventually, he saw defendant in the rear of a residence. Officer Ponce exited the squad car and yelled, “Halt, police.” Defendant looked over his right shoulder at Officer Ponce and then ran off. Although Officer Ponce observed defendant holding a gun at a 45-degree angle, he did not fire at defendant because the distance was too far. He only observed that defendant was carrying a handgun and that defendant did not have any debris or blood on him. Officer Ponce at that time did not observe anything unusual about the right side of defendant’s face. Soon afterwards, Officer Ponce found Officer Murrin, who was bleeding from the chest area, and immediately radioed for help. Officer Ponce also stated that a week prior to this offense he and the deceased had had a discussion regarding a “wanted” flyer on defendant. The deceased had directed Officer Ponce’s attention to the flyer and told him that he was going to find defendant later during patrol. The wanted flyer contained the nature of the charge and a picture of the suspect. Willie Pitts, who lives at 1029 Antram Avenue, overheard part of the scuffle between defendant and the deceased. Pitts was working on his car in his backyard when he heard the sound of “fast running feet.” At that time, he came out from under the hood of his car and looked to his right but saw nothing. When he looked to his left, he saw a young man (defendant) running down the alley with a police officer following in pursuit. Pitts observed that the officer had a gun in his right hand and that defendant was carrying a plastic bag in his left hand. Pitts stated'that the young man (defendant) was Hispanic or Mexican. A few seconds later he heard someone say, “Stop fighting, damn it. I got you. You are under arrest,” and then he heard three quick gunshots followed by a pause and two more gunshots. Later he saw defendant come back down the alley and up on the hill behind his house. Pitts saw defendant vault one of the neighbors’ fences while holding a gun in his right hand. He then saw defendant come back over the fence without the gun. Pitts stated that the left side of defendant’s face did not have any unusual markings, blood or bruises. Pitts did not identify defendant as the young man he saw on the day of the offense. During cross-examination, defense counsel unsuccessfully attempted to sway Pitts regarding his prior statements. To impeach Pitts, defendant presented Robert Brenczewski, a police officer for 14 years and an investigator for six of those years with the City of Joliet police department. Officer Brenczewski had taken statements from various witnesses, including Pitts, on September 12, 1984. Between 5:30 and 6 p.m. that day, he had spoken with Willie Pitts in Pitts’ backyard. Officer Brenczewski stated that Pitts told him that he first heard someone yell and then saw a male Mexican subject run by him. At that time, Pitts was working on his car in his backyard at 1029 Antram. Pitts was 6 to 12 feet from the alleyway. Pitts stated that he first heard a subject yell something to the effect, “Halt. I got you, God damn it. Freeze,” and then saw a male Mexican wearing a red or maroon T-shirt with no collar and with black hair run past him. About 30 to 40 feet behind the male Mexican subject was a police officer with his gun drawn. Pitts heard the officer order the subject to halt and heard the officer yell, “Freeze. I got you.” About 30 to 40 seconds later, Pitts heard a type of talking which he could not make out. Pitts did not tell Officer Brenczewski that he heard “Quit fighting” or “You are under arrest.” When Pitts first saw the male Mexican subject running down the alleyway, he saw the subject carrying a plastic bag in his hand. Pitts told Officer Brenczewski that he was unsure of the exact color of the bag. Pedro Palacios, a friend of defendant, was at his parents’ house on September 12, 1985, working outside on his father’s car when his brother David Palacios came up to him and told him that defendant was in the garage. Pedro stated that he then stopped what he was doing, went in the garage, and saw defendant putting on his brother David’s clothes. Pedro saw that one of defendant’s legs had a barbed wire cut on it and that defendant’s face was “puffed up” on the right side. Pedro did not observe any blood by the eye and only a little blood on the leg which had been cut. Pedro did not see any other injuries on defendant but he did have a problem recognizing defendant at first. Defendant eventually told Pedro that he had just shot a cop. Pedro, David and defendant went downstairs into the basement to decide what to do next. Defendant told the Palacios brothers that he had been chased by a cop. During the chase, defendant was carrying a bag with a 9 millimeter gun in it which he tossed. When the officer yelled “Freeze,” defendant stopped and began to give himself up but the officer started to hit him repeatedly. When defendant could not take it anymore, defendant reached for the officer’s gun. Defendant fired once and saw the officer turn around, say, “Oh, my God,” and then defendant fired the rest of the shots. At this point in the trial, the People introduced into evidence Pedro’s taped statements pursuant to section 115 — 10.1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 115 — 10.1) as a prior inconsistent statement. The People argued that Pedro’s prior taped statements to the police were inconsistent with his testimony at trial. Detective Terrence Mazur, an officer with the City of Joliet police department for IIV2 years, took Pedro’s statements on September 15 and 17, 1984. Defense counsel objected and the court allowed an offer of proof outside the presence and hearing of the jury. During the offer of proof, both of Pedro’s tape-recorded statements were played. Pedro stated that the tapes were accurate and that nothing had been added or deleted on the tapes. Pedro stated that the second statement was taken to clarify when defendant threw his gym bag away. Regarding the first statement, Pedro stated that Officer Mazur interviewed him for two hours and suggested things for him to say on the tape. Regarding the second statement, Pedro stated that during the recording Officer Mazur had turned off the tape recorder several times and questioned him regarding defendant’s taking the gun out of Officer Murrin’s holster. However, Pedro admitted at trial that Officer Mazur did not threaten him in any way, but that Officer Mazur told him that if he were lying, he would arrest him and “throw the book at him.” At the close of the offer of proof, the court allowed the People to question Pedro regarding his taped statements in the presence of the jury. Upon continuing direct examination regarding his second taped statement, Pedro admitted that he told Officer Mazur that defendant informed Pedro that he threw the gym bag away after he shot the officer. Under cross-examination Pedro stated that defendant told him that he threw the bag away before he came to the fenced-in area at the end of the alleyway and before his encounter with the deceased. Defendant also told Pedro that when he could not take the officer’s hitting him anymore, he reached for the officer’s gun. Pedro stated that Officer Mazur told him defendant reached for the gun, not vice versa. Pedro also stated that Officer Mazur suggested to him that defendant kept shooting the gun into the deceased’s body. During redirect, Pedro stated that the police department told him to contact the State’s Attorney’s office. Pedro did contact and meet with the Will County State's Attorney. During the meeting, the Will County State’s Attorney played both of Pedro’s tape-recorded statements and asked if there were any additions, corrections or deletions to be made. Pedro replied at that time, “No.” Pedro did not tell them about any problems with the taped statement until at trial. The People then presented Officer Terrence Mazur. Officer Mazur stated that he took the tape-recorded statements of Pedro Palacios. As Officer Mazur read Pedro his constitutional rights, Pedro signed and initialed each right on the constitutional rights form. During cross-examination, Officer Mazur stated that he asked Pedro to come back a second time on September 17, 1984, to get Pedro’s responses on a tape regarding the gun and the gym bag. Officer Mazur stated that Pedro did tell him at the prior meeting that defendant had thrown the gym bag away while Officer Murrin chased him. Officer Mazur did put Pedro’s version in his report but on the second session he wanted Pedro to put his version on a tape. Officer Mazur stated that he did not discuss Pedro’s response prior to turning on the tape recorder. Donald Havekost, a special agent with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, performed a neutron activation analysis (NAA) on the swabbing samples from Officer Murrin’s hands sent by Officer Randall Fleck, who gathered the evidence from the site. In light of the NAA findings, Agent Havekost concluded that the deceased’s left hand was on or near the muzzle of a firearm when it discharged. The chemical amounts in the swabbings removed from the back of the deceased’s hands were consistent with both hands’ having been on or near the firearm when it discharged. Agent Havekost also concluded that the deceased’s right hand could have been on or near the gun as it was discharged. Agent Havekost could not give an opinion regarding which hand was on the gun. Officer Randall Fleck, a police officer with the City of Joliet for IOV2 years, photographed the area and gathered various items of evidence. After he carefully collected the gym bag, he observed that it contained a bandanna, a Smith and Wesson 9 millimeter semiautomatic gun with a clip in it, a spare clip, a pair of brass knuckles, a bottle of cologne, a pack of Life Savers candy, a comb, and a watch. The bag also contained a partially empty bottle of Listerine and a gray cap from a spray paint can. In the photographs taken at the scene, the body was found 16 feet north of the bag. The fence was directly south of the body. Officer Michael Sheridan, a police officer for the City of Joliet for 7V2 years, was working the 3 to 11 shift on the night of the incident. He was patrolling in the area of the incident when, at 5 p.m., he heard a call on the squad car radio announcing that an officer was in foot pursuit and a later report that shots were heard. He found the deceased’s gun 50 feet northwest of his body behind 1029 Antram on Draper. He also found a silver chain about two to three feet from the gun. However, under cross-examination he identified a similar chain as the one he observed that day at the scene, but the chain presented at trial was gold. The People also presented Louis Silich, a police officer with the Joliet police department for 10 years. Officer Silich was working the 7 a.m. to 3 p.m. shift on September 12, 1984, as an evidence technician, but was called to report to work again at 5:15 p.m. and was instructed to go to the scene of the incident. At 1014 Draper, he found two medals and a gold chain on top of a sloped area between the garage at 1014 Draper and the garden plot. At the bottom of the sloped area and 55 feet north of the deceased, he found a .38 special revolver. Officer Murrin’s body was on the east side of the fence and the gun was found on the west side of the fence. Officer Silich later went to the hospital and collected evidence from and the personal belongings of the deceased. Among the evidence collected, Officer Silich recovered a knife from a sheath on the deceased’s left leg. Dr. Larry Blum, a forensic pathologist for the county coroners in 11 Illinois counties, performed the autopsy on Officer Murrin. He observed that Officer Murrin had been shot five times and also had injuries consistent with blunt trauma injuries, mainly abrasions or scrapes as well as bruising on the skin. Officer Murrin had bruises and abrasions to his right upper lip below the nostril, another vertical mark on the right ear as well as a prominent scratch behind the right ear. There was no evidence of healing and the abrasions were fresh. Dr. Blum also found superficial scrapes or scratches on the left upper arm, on the back of the left arm and on the left forearm and a scrape behind the thumb on the palm surface on the left hand. The deceased also had abrasions on the right upper arm and on the back of the right elbow. On the back of the neck and the front right side of the neck, there were four parallel abrasions. Dr. Blum observed fresh abrasions on the deceased’s front right knee and two abrasions on the back of the left knee. Dr. Blum also observed several gunshot wounds. The deceased had a gunshot wound two inches below the top of his head in the center of his forehead which traveled from right to left. Dr. Blum stated that the gunshot wound to the forehead was fatal and was inflicted at a distance of 6 to 24 inches, possibly farther. Another gunshot wound was in the right ear passing through the front of the ear and out the back, traveling from the left side to the right side with a downward trajectory. The gunshot wound to the right ear was not a fatal type and the range of fire for the ear wound was 6 to 24 inches. The gunshot wound to the right chest traveled from front to back toward the victim’s left side at a 20-degree angle. It was not a fatal type of wound. The other chest wound to the right side was three inches below the uppermost wound traveling at a 60-degree angle downward. This wound was a fatal type inflicted within a six-inch firing range. The fifth wound was located on the left side of the chest traveling from left to right in a slightly downward angle. The firing range for this wound was greater than two feet. The doctor gave an estimation “based upon common sense and medical knowledge” regarding the exact sequence of the gunshot wounds. He stated that the chest wounds were first because they produced a great deal of internal bleeding. If the head wound, which was fatal instantaneously, was first, it would have prohibited the victim from producing any significant amount of internal bleeding. The doctor stated that the alcohol level found in Officer Murrin’s blood was .043% and in Officer Murrin’s urine was .02%. The doctor also stated that while .043% does not necessarily indicate intoxication, that level of alcohol may have different effects on individuals depending on whether or not that person is used to the effects of alcohol. A blood-alcohol level of .02 to .04 can have from no significant effect to a feeling of mild euphoria or a mild sense of well-being. If a person is accustomed to that level of alcohol, then the effects may be negligible. The People presented Dr. Robert Hunton, a forensic scientist with the Bureau of Forensic Sciences Crime Lab in Joliet, who specializes in the field of firearms identification. In performing tests to determine the distance at which defendant shot Officer Murrin, Dr. Hun-ton observed that the two entrance bullet holes on the right side of the shirt above the pocket were from a gun which was shot at a distance of less than an inch. The bullet hole on the left side of the shirt near the pocket was caused by a bullet from a gun which was fired within four to six feet. Larry Knott, a police officer who had been with the Joliet police department for 17 years, is a court liaison for the police department and the Will County State’s Attorney’s office. On August 21, 1984, his duty was to obtain a warrant charging defendant with aggravated battery, a felony, in the shooting of Frederick Ferguson. Michael Broadwell, a friend of defendant, stated that on September 12, 1984, he saw defendant first at defendant’s house around 11 a.m. After 20 minutes, Broadwell and defendant left on defendant’s bicycle to go to a creek on Abe Street. Broadwell was carrying a 9 millimeter pistol which he obtained from defendant’s basement. Defendant and Broadwell stayed at the creek for V-k hours to two hours. They made plans to leave the State once Broadwell was on parole from the work release center. While at the creek, they “got high” by sniffing spray paint and did some target practice. They then left for Johnny Garcia’s house. When defendant and Broadwell arrived at the Garcias’ house, only Johnny Garcia’s brother Pauly was present. Johnny Garcia arrived later driving a green Buick. They stayed at the Garcias’ house until it was time for Broadwell to return to the work release center. When Johnny Garcia gave Broadwell a ride, he was accompanied by Johnny’s brother Pauly, defendant and Pepi Salazar, defendant’s brother. Thomas Stein, an officer with the Joliet police department for over four years, related a conversation he had with Officer Murrin on August 27, 1984. At that time they discussed the felony arrest warrant which charged defendant with aggravated battery in the shooting of Frederick Ferguson. Officer Stein told Officer Murrin that defendant might possibly be located on the east side of the City of Joliet and that he might possibly be with Johnny Garcia in Garcia’s 1970 four-door green Buick Electra. On May 21, 1985, Ruben Coronado, a police investigator with the City of Joliet, had picked up defendant in Laredo, Texas. Defendant had been found and arrested on the felony warrant for the instant offense in Mexico. On September 12, 1984, Officer Coronado radioed soon after the shooting of Officer Murrin that defendant might be in the car described at the scene and that the car was possibly owned by Johnny Garcia. Officer David Gerdes, who had been with the City of Joliet police department for 13 years, was Officer Murrin’s immediate supervisor on September 12, 1984. He was aware that Officer Murrin carried a knife on his leg which Officer Murrin had not directly requested permission to wear. According to Officer Gerdes, as well as other supervisors and division commanders, department policy guidelines did not prohibit the carrying of the type of knife worn by Officer Murrin. Pamela Ann Murrin, wife of the victim, stated that on September 12, 1984, her husband was 32 years old and in excellent health. He was particularly happy on September 12 because he had just scored very high on a sergeant’s test and was looking forward to becoming a sergeant. The only injury the victim had was an old scab on his knee. His uniform clothes on that date were in good condition. She knew of no drinking problem her husband had but knew that he did drink socially, and on occasions he would have a beer at lunch. Stipulations were entered for other witnesses. Donna Metzer, a forensic serologist for the Illinois Department of State Police, analyzed various blood samples from the deceased and defendant as well as clothes items from both. In examining the deceased’s pants, she found a tear on the right front knee area and a second tear on the right rear area of the pants. When she examined defendant’s yellow sweatshirt found near the scene, she found several small areas of blood staining. On the left shoulder of the sweatshirt she found a small smear of human blood and on the lower right back, she found small droplets of human blood. Both areas of stains were applied from the outside and did not soak through the garment. The amount of blood was insufficient to determine the source. She also found two smears of human blood on the inside of the shirt on the left side. The quantity of this blood smear was also insufficient to determine the source. The second stipulation was that of Jacqueline Fracaro, a fingerprint examiner for the State of Illinois, Bureau of Scientific Services at the Joliet Crime Lab. When examining the gun magazine recovered from the gym bag, she found four latent fingerprints which she determined to be those of defendant. She also recovered a latent fingerprint from a gray paint can cap and determined the print to be defendant’s. The third stipulation was that of Blair Shutts, a forensic scientist for the State of Illinois, Bureau of Scientific Services at the Joliet Crime Lab. When Shutts examined the yellow sweatshirt, the plastic wrap and the tennis shoes, he found that all had a silver gray paint on them which was similar in color and chemical reactivity. It was stipulated that Officer Rex Provenzale recovered the plastic wrap from Johnny Garcia’s green Buick. The remaining stipulations regarded who found each of the projectiles and other evidence recovered at the scene. Eventually, defendant took the stand. He first stated that his birthday is February 20, 1966. After three years of high school he dropped out and went to work. He stated that in early August 1984, he was staying with his grandparents in Houston, Texas. During the three to four weeks he was in Houston, he did not contact his parents, only his brother Tony. Prior to living in Texas, and after returning to Illinois, defendant stayed with his brother Tony Silvas in New Lenox. He returned to Illinois either the 10th or 11th of September. He identified the gold chains and religious medals found at or near the scene as his. Defendant also stated that on September 12, 1984, he left his brother’s house by bike and traveled to his parents’ house, where he later met with Broadwell. Defendant had his 9 millimeter gun with him but Broadwell ended up carrying it. Defendant’s and Broadwell’s versions of the events prior to and up until the time Broadwell was left at the work release center are similar. Defendant stated that after he, Pauly and Johnny Garcia, and Pepi Salazar, defendant’s brother, dropped Broadwell off at the work release center, they went to Theresa Jones’ house to pick up Norman Gates. They then drove to Norman’s house. While Norman was at his house, Norman picked up his gun. They then left to go to defendant’s grandfather’s house to do some target practice. Defendant was sitting in the front passenger side, Norman was sitting in the rear driver’s side, Johnny Garcia was driving, Pauly Garcia was sitting in the center of the rear seat and Pepi Salazar was sitting on the passenger side in the rear. As they drove around, defendant began to sniff paint from a bag. He did not, therefore, see the squad car driven by Officer Ponce pass in front of the car in which he was riding at the intersection of Draper and Wood-ruff. One of his friends in the car stated, “Put the bags down. There is a cop in front of us.” When defendant saw the squad car turn around, he told Norman to “jump out of the car” because they both had a gun. Defendant ran into a grass alleyway. He then heard someone yell “Freeze” or “Freeze, police.” He looked back and saw the officer (Murrin) with his gun but kept running because he wanted to get rid of his gun. He finally came upon a fenced-in area which was a dead end. Defendant then threw the gym bag with the gun in it into some bushes. When defendant again turned around, he saw the officer who yelled “Freeze.” Defendant, who was facing the fence, put his hands up. Through the corner of his eyes he saw the officer put his gun away. After the officer put his gun away, he turned defendant around and hit him in the right eye and continued to hit him. The officer and defendant then ended up on the ground with the officer on top of defendant in a kneeling position. The officer hit defendant approximately seven or eight times. Defendant kept saying, “I give. I give.” At that point, when defendant either pushed or punched the officer, the officer reached for his gun. Defendant also reached for the officer’s gun. The struggle continued until defendant fell back and the gun went off and kept going off. Defendant did not recall where the officer was shot. The next thing defendant remembered was walking away and then hearing a police officer yell something to the effect of “Freeze, freeze police.” Defendant threw the officer’s gun away, jumped over the fence and kept running. On that day defendant was wearing a yellow T-shirt, jeans and tennis shoes. After defendant shot the officer and vaulted a fence, he ran on a path along a creek until he came to the Palacios' house. During the run, he took off his pants and shirt. While at the Palacios’ house, defendant put on some of David Palacios’ clothes. Later, Pedro and David Palacios investigated the scene and told defendant that they heard that he would be shot on sight. The Palacios brothers left the house again and went to the house of defendant’s parents to contact defendant’s brother George. When the Palacios brothers came back, they told defendant that someone would be coming for him. A man named “Bill” came to the Palacios residence and put defendant into the trunk. Later Bill let defendant out of the trunk and they continued traveling until they reached California. When they arrived in Tijuana, Mexico, defendant left for Monterrey, Mexico. During cross-examination, defendant stated that his gym bag contained brass knuckles, a comb, a watch, a bottle of cologne and a bottle of Listerine. Defendant also stated that for about half a year, from 1983 to 1984, he had received boxing training about every other day for about two to three hours. He also had taken TaeKwan Do self-defense lessons which involved the use of the body and mostly the hands. It is a fundamental principle of due process that the prosecution must prove every element of an offense beyond a reasonable doubt. (In re Winship (1970), 397 U.S. 358, 364, 25 L. Ed. 2d 368, 375, 90 S. Ct. 1068, 1073.) The fact finder may infer intent to take a life from defendant’s acts and the circumstances surrounding the commission of the offense. (People v. Garcia (1983), 97 Ill. 2d 58, 85.) Intent to take a life may specifically be shown not only from the character of the assault and the surrounding circumstances but also from the use of a deadly weapon. (People v. Koshiol (1970), 45 Ill. 2d 573, 578.) Whether or not this court views the evideuce in a light most favorable to defendant (see People v. Garcia (1983), 97 Ill. 2d 58, 85), it is well established that every sane man is presumed to intend all the natural and probable consequences flowing from his own deliberate act. (People v, Koshiol (1970), 45 Ill. 2d 573, 578.) Where a man wilfully does an act, the natural and direct tendency of which is to destroy another’s life, the trier of fact may reach a “natural and irresistible conclusion,” in the absence of qualifying facts, that the act to destroy another’s life was intended. (45 Ill. 2d at 578.) In this case, even looking at the evidence most favorably to defendant, this court finds that the uncontroverted evidence presented at trial concerning defendant’s conduct and the physical evidence reveals that defendant had the requisite mental state. Defendant argues that he ran from the officer because defendant had a gun in his possession and not because there was an outstanding felony warrant issued against him. However, his explanation is without support from the evidence. Defendant explains that he was running from a misdemeanor, not a felony warrant. It is, however, unlikely that defendant would run from a misdemeanor charge. Rather, defendant’s actions prior to this offense reveal his knowledge of the felony warrant. Soon after the shooting incident of Frederick Ferguson, which resulted in the felony warrant, defendant left the State, and upon returning, made plans to leave the country the next day with his friend, Broadwell. Defendant also stated that he threw away the gym bag with the gun in it as he saw the officer approach but before he became “fenced in” at the end of the alleyway. At this point defendant stated that he stopped while facing the fence and put his hands up. His explanation that he gave up at this time because he was “fenced in” does not coincide with his ability to vault fences immediately after the offense. Defendant’s version also does not agree with his later account that he surrendered only after the infliction of numerous blows to his face by the deceased. Defendant’s testimony to the contrary reveals that he did not surrender at that time because he eventually struggled for and obtained the deceased’s gun. This court finds that even in the light most favorable to defendant, the evidence shows that defendant, in his attempt to escape by vaulting the fence, was approached and stopped by Officer Murrin. At this point a struggle ensued and not any semblance of a surrender. This court concludes that with defendant’s training and experience as a boxer, and with his training in TaeKwan Do and the evidence adduced at trial, Officer Murrin received the beating and not defendant. Officer Murrin no doubt was able to strike defendant in the face but defendant, in his attempt to escape, administered most of the punches in the struggle. The autopsy revealed that the officer had fresh abrasions and bruises on his body. While the evidence reveals that defendant left basically unscathed, Officer Murrin sustained bruises and abrasions to his right upper lip and a vertical mark on his right ear as well as a scratch behind his right ear. He also had scratches on the back of his left upper arm and on his left forearm, a scrape behind the thumb on the palm surface of the left hand, and abrasions on his right upper arm and on the back of his right elbow. On the back of his neck and on the front right side of his neck four parallel abrasions were found. Officer Murrin also sustained abrasions on his front right knee and two abrasions on the back left knee. Compared to defendant’s puffiness in his right eye, it is apparent that defendant was the aggressor. To corroborate defendant’s version of the struggle, he refers to Pedro Palacios’ statements, Officer Murrin’s blood-alcohol level and use of a sheath knife and defendant’s broken neck chains. However, these facts do not support the proposition that Officer Murrin was the aggressor. Pedro’s statement reveals that defendant only attempted to give up during the struggle. Pedro’s description of defendant’s face immediately following the incident is not comparable to the injuries sustained by Officer Murrin. Moreover, Willie Pitts and Officer Ponce did not notice any injuries to defendant’s face as he fled the scene. Defendant’s version of the struggle is not supported by the testimony at trial. Further, evidence of the broken neck chains reveals that Murrin may have been restraining defendant from escaping or may have been defending himself in the short-lived struggle. Of significance is the fact that Pitts and Officer Ponce stated that the incident happened in a matter of a few minutes and as such rules out any possibility of a drawn-out struggle as indicated by defendant. Defendant points out that the officer’s blood-alcohol level and his sheath knife attached to his leg show that Officer Murrin was the aggressor. However, the testimony at trial did not conclusively show that the officer was intoxicated. The deceased was known to drink socially and was accustomed to the effects of alcohol and, as such, the effects of alcohol would have been negligible. The evidence reveals that the officer was in an exceptionally good mood because he just received his scores back from the sergeant’s exam and found out that he would be promoted. Although the deceased carried a sheath knife without department permission, it was not against the department rules to carry one, and the deceased’s immediate supervisor knew about the knife. This court finds that these facts do not reveal an aggressive, law-breaking individual. Defendant also alleges that the officer kept hitting him even after he yelled, “I give.” At that point defendant alleges that he punched or pushed the officer and a struggle ensued. When he saw the officer reach for his gun, the next thing he remembers was the gun going off. However, defendant’s version does not support the view that he was surrendering but, rather, that defendant was exercising a ploy to catch the officer off guard in order to renew his escape with added vigor. Defendant argues in the alternative that if the People did prove beyond a reasonable doubt his intention to kill the officer, he did so in self-defense. However, as previously stated, the evidence does not support defendant’s argument. First, the struggle was one-sided. Second, defendant had a motive to escape from a felony warrant and not from a potential misdemeanor charge, and he had already made travel plans to leave the country after just arriving in town. Third, there is no persuasive evidence that the officer was the aggressor. Although Officer Murrin had a .04 blood-alcohol content, a person such as the officer, who was a social drinker, would not experience the mild euphoria associated with that level of alcohol. It is unlikely that Officer Murrin experienced any elevated state of well-being resulting in a more aggressive stance in his pursuit of defendant. Furthermore, the evidence reveals that the officer had no difficulty pursuing defendant. Thus, defendant’s argument is without support. Defendant argues also that, in the alternative, the evidence reveals that he committed voluntary manslaughter, in that he intentionally or knowingly killed an individual because he believed the circumstances to be such that, if they existed, would justify or exonerate the killing even if his belief is unreasonable. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 9 — 2.) In this case, defendant did not act with any unreasonable belief that would justify his taking of the deceased’s weapon and shooting the victim five times at very close range. The facts reveal that defendant had motive to flee and was the initial aggressor in the struggle as well as the dominant figure in the short-lived altercation which followed. He also fired the gun at the deceased not once but five times at very close range. When Officer Ponce arrived near the scene, he saw defendant standing with the gun pointed downward at a 45-degree angle. Except for defendant’s testimony, nothing in the record reveals that he acted in any other way but deliberately and intentionally to kill Officer Murrin. Defendant also argues in the alternative that he should be found guilty of involuntary manslaughter in that he unintentionally killed the officer without lawful justification because his acts, whether lawful or unlawful, caused the death to the deceased and he performed those acts recklessly. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 9 — 3.) As stated previously, the evidence reveals that defendant acted intentionally. His knowledge of how to fire a gun, his statement that he did reach for the gun, his motive to escape and his dominant and aggressive role in the struggle show that the act was intentional. Thus, this court concludes that the People proved beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant acted with intent to kill Officer Murrin, a peace officer acting within the scope of his duties. “A voluntary and wilful act which has the natural tendency to cause death or great bodily harm is sufficient evidence of the intent required for the offense of murder.” People v. Foster (1987), 119 Ill. 2d 69, 88. Ill Defendant next raises the issue that the circuit court erred in admitting evidence of the felony arrest warrant charging defendant with aggravated battery against Frederick Ferguson and the complaint. It is well recognized that “relevant evidence” has been defined as “evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence.” (People v. Stewart (1984), 105 Ill. 2d 22, 54.) It is also established that “[ejvidence of other crimes, while not admissible to show the propensity to commit crime, is admissible to show motive.” (105 Ill. 2d at 56.) Furthermore, “while any evidence which tends to show that an accused had a motive for killing the deceased is relevant, such evidence, to be competent, must at least to a slight degree tend to establish the existence of the motive relied on.” (105 Ill. 2d at 56.) Only where the relevance of evidence depends on unproved assumptions is it inadmissible. (People v. Newbury (1972), 53 Ill. 2d 228, 240; People v. Jones (1982), 108 Ill. App. 3d 880, 884.) Specifically, an arrest warrant and complaint are inadmissible where the existence does not establish anything about the defendant’s state of mind. See People v. Wilson (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 29, 52. In this case, the evidence of the warrant and complaint is admissible in light of the facts established at the trial. Defendant’s motive to kill the officer is reflected in defendant’s leaving the State of Illinois after the shooting incident of Frederick Ferguson, which resulted in the arrest warrant and complaint of August 21, 1984. Defendant stated that on the date of the shooting of Officer Murrin, he had just returned from Texas and was planning to leave the area with a friend who was being released from a work release program the next day. When defendant saw the police car beginning to follow the car he was in, he immediately fled. The evidence surrounding his flight and the subsequent struggle reveals defendant’s strong desire to escape. The testimony at trial also reveals that defendant actually threw the gym bag over the fence prior to his attempt to vault it, defendant was the initial aggressor and dominant figure in the struggle, and defendant eventually shot the officer not only once but five times at close range and immediately fled not only the area but also the country. The extent to which defendant fought to escape does not show someone who was fleeing a misdemeanor offense. Rather, the evidence supports the admissibility and relevancy of the arrest warrant and complaint to show his motive to escape, and to make it less probable that Officer Murrin was the aggressor. Thus, this court finds that the court did not err in allowing the evidence of the arrest warrant charging defendant with aggravated battery, and the complaint, into evidence at the trial. IV Defendant argues that the circuit court erred when it permitted the People to introduce two entire prior taped statements of Pedro Palacios where allegedly only two inconsistencies existed. Defendant specifically argues that Pedro’s statements did not contain enough inconsistencies to be admitted into evidence as substantive evidence. Defendant does not argue that Pedro’s statements do not meet the other requirements of the statute. The People argue that not only were Pedro’s prior taped statements inconsistent with his testimony at trial but the tapes also contradicted another witness’ testimony regarding the circumstances surrounding the making of those tapes. Accordingly, the People argue that the circuit court properly admitted both taped statements in their entirety. On appeal, this court will not substitute its opinion for the circuit court’s and will only reverse a circuit court’s decision where it has abused its discretion. Section 115 — 10.1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 provides, in part: “In all criminal cases, evidence of a statement made by a witness is not made inadmissible by the hearsay rule if (a) the statement is inconsistent with his testimony at the hearing or trial, and (b) the witness is subject to cross-examination concerning the statement, and (c) the statement *** *** (2) narrates, describes, or explains an event or condition of which the witness had personal knowledge, and * * * (B) the witness acknowledged under oath the making of the statement either in his testimony at the hearing or trial in which the admission into evidence of the prior statement is being sought, or at a trial, or other proceeding, or (C) the statement is proved to have been accurately recorded by a tape recorder ***.” 111. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 115-10.1. Since defendant did not raise the issue whether the taped statements met the statutory requirements, this court will not discuss it. In our reading of the statute, we find that it does not require a certain minimal amount of inconsistencies. We do, however, find several inconsistencies in Pedro’s taped statements with trial testimony. In the first statement, Pedro stated that (1) his brother David told him that defendant was in the back; (2) that the officer hit defendant once in his eye and defendant hit him back; and (3) that when the officer started to fall back, defendant grabbed the officer’s gun and shot the officer once and then fired the rest of the bullets. In the second statement, Pedro stated that after defendant shot the officer, he threw the gym bag away. In Pedro’s trial testimony, he stated that defendant told him that defendant threw the gym bag away before his encounter with Officer Murrin; and that defendant reached for Officer Murrin’s gun because defendant could not take the beating by the officer. Pedro also stated that his brother actually told him that defendant was in the backyard “all beat up.” In defendant’s argument, he specifically attempts to have this court proclaim a quantitative or mathematical analysis as a prerequisite to the application of section 115 — 10.1. If the General Assembly had intended such a prerequisite, it could have provided for it in the statute. The General Assembly, however, provided for the circuit court to have discretion in determining whether or not the testimony is inconsistent with a prior statement. A circuit court’s discretion is not based on a quantitative analysis but a qualitative one. In some circumstances, this court recognizes that a mere tendency to be inconsistent will be enough to admit the statements into evidence and in other circumstances more than a mere tendency would be needed to admit the statements. It is for the circuit court to determine the issue. Although this court finds that the above-listed inconsistencies are few, these inconsistencies are significant and specifically relate to the credibility of Pedro himself. These inconsistencies also affect the credibility of Officer Mazur and defendant. Pedro’s testimony at trial reveals a different set of circumstances surrounding the making of both tapes as well as a different version of the incident. Since the taped statements go to the issue of Pedro’s credibility, the circuit court did not err when it admitted the taped statements into evidence. V Defendant argues that the circuit court erred when it permitted the People’s witness, a pathologist, to testify regarding the sequence of the gunshot wounds. Defendant alleges that the pathologist’s testimony was based upon mere conjecture and speculation and not upon any well-recognized scientific principle or technique. Defendant does not argue that the pathologist was not qualified to answer the question; defendant argues that the pathologist’s testimony was not based upon a reasonable degree of medical certainty but rather that the testimony was based on merely “some estimations” and was therefore impermissibly speculative. It is well established that the burden of establishing the qualifications of an expert witness is on the proponent of the expert testimony. Once the proponent has established the expert’s qualifications, it is then within the discretion of the circuit court to determine whether the proponent has met its burden of qualifying an expert witness. This court will only reverse that decision if it constituted an abuse of discretion. (People v. Park (1978), 72 Ill. 2d 203, 209; see People v. Jordan (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 192, 208.) The People met their burden of establishing Dr. Larry Blum’s qualifications. On direct, the People examined Dr. Larry Blum, the pathologist, regarding each of the five gunshot wounds. The doctor, based upon his medical knowledge and experience, related the distance and angle at which each wound was inflicted, the direction the bullet traveled in the body and the damage to the body each bullet caused. Dr. Blum also stated that he had done 850 autopsies and appeared in court 35 times. When the People asked his knowledge of the possible sequence of the gunshot wounds, Dr. Blum stated: “I just don’t know of any foolproof way of determining various gunshots. There are some estimations, based upon common sense and medical knowledge, that can be made, but as to the exact sequence of gunshot wounds, unless you were there and actually saw it, I know of no absolute way of absolutely reconstructing them.” When the People then asked Dr. Blum if he had an opinion regarding the sequence of the gunshot wounds, defendant objected, arguing that the opinion was speculative. At that time, the circuit court ordered the jury out of the courtroom and heard arguments. The circuit court then personally asked Dr. Blum: “THE COURT: All right. You indicated you have an opinion as to the chest wounds that caused a large amount of bleeding as opposed to the wound of the forehead; is that correct? THE WITNESS: Yes, your Honor. THE COURT: Is that opinion, what we are talking about, is that based upon a reasonable degree of scientific certainty? THE WITNESS: Yes, your Honor. THE COURT: All right. Bring back the jury. If the question is asked, I am going to allow him to answer it.” The court then allowed the People to present an offer of proof. At the end of the offer of proof, defendant still objected but the court allowed Dr. Blum to testify regarding the question. Dr. Blum stated that in his opinion, within a reasonable degree of medical certainty, the head wound followed the chest wounds because of the large amount of internal bleeding present in each chest cavity. If the head wound came first, it would have resulted in the victim’s death immediately and any subsequent wounds to the chest or elsewhere would not have resulted in this much bleeding. In this case, the record reveals that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion. First, the expert was not testifying to matters within common knowledge of the lay person and his testimony aided the trier of fact in reaching a conclusion. (People v. Jordan (1984), 103 Ill. 2d 192, 208.) Further, his opinion was not speculative but based on matters requiring scientific knowledge. His particular skill and judgment was essential to explain the cause and effect of each injury. (People v. Ciucci (1956), 8 Ill. 2d 619, 626, aff’d (1958), 356 U.S. 571, 2 L. Ed. 2d 983, 78 S. Ct. 839.) In this case, Dr. Blum testified regarding the amount of blood loss which had occurred from the various gunshot wounds. His testimony also explained why a certain amount of blood loss would occur if the officer were still alive and how much blood loss would have occurred if the officer had died from the head wound prior to the chest wound. Thus, the testimony given by Dr. Blum required special skill and knowledge and as such, his resulting opinion on the order of gunshot wounds was not based on mere estimations and was not impermissibly speculative. Thus, this court finds that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion. VI Defendant argues that he was denied a fair trial because the deceased officer’s widow was allowed to testify about the length of the couple’s marriage, the lack of marital problems and the couple’s school-age children. This court notes that although defendant objected to this testimony at trial, he failed to reassert the issue in his post-trial motion and as such the issue is properly deemed waived. (People v. Wright (1985), 111 Ill. 2d 128, 153.) Moreover, had there been no waiver, this court finds that defendant was not prejudiced. It is established that the testimony of a life-and-death witness which is given for the purpose of establishing the identification of the decedent is admissible for those purposes. “Furthermore, it is not always error to admit evidence showing that a murder victim has left a spouse or children when such evidence is elicited in an incidental manner not causing the jury to believe such evidence is material.” People v. Thompkins (1988), 121 Ill. 2d 401, 446. In this case, Mrs. Murrin testified to the length of their marriage, the absence of marital problems, the deceased’s physical condition, the deceased’s state of mind, the presence of only one old wound on his knee, the condition of his clothes as he left for work, the deceased’s drinking and eating habits, and the deceased’s mental state prior to leaving for work. Her testimony only related facts regarding the physical and mental state of the deceased on the day of the incident. Furthermore, her testimony was relevant to defendant’s claim of self-defense. Her one and only reference to the existence of children was: “STATE’S ATTORNEY EDWARD PETKA: And were you regularly with him or were you in and out of the home? MRS. MURRIN: Oh, I was in and out of the house all day, because I was trying to get the yard work done before the kids came home from school.” Although the reference to the couple’s children was unnecessary, it was inadvertent, incidental and innocuous, especially in light of the entire testimony. Thus, this court finds that defendant was not denied a fair trial because of the admission of Pamela Murrin’s testimony. VII Defendant argues that the circuit court committed reversible error when it instructed the jury on People’s instructions Nos. 18A, 19B and 20A because the evidence failed to warrant their use. Defendant specifically argues regarding instruction No. 18A that it was not only a non-Illinois Pattern Jury Instruction (IPI), but that it was also an incorrect statement of the law. People’s instruction No. 18A provides: “A person is not justified in the use of force if he is escaping after he has been charged with the commission of a forcible felony.” See Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 7 — 4(a); Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 24 — 25.10 (2d ed. 1981) (hereinafter IPI Criminal 2d). People’s instruction No. 19B provides: “A peace officer need not retreat or desist from efforts to make a lawful arrest because of resistance or threatened resistance to the arrest. He is justified in the use of any force which he reasonably believes to be necessary to effect the arrest or to defend himself from bodily harm while making the arrest. However, he is justified in using force likely to cause death or great bodily harm only when he reasonably believes both that such force is necessary to prevent the arrest from being defeated by resistance or escape and the person to be arrested has committed or attempted a forcible felony; or is necessary to prevent the arrest from being defeated by resistance or escape and the person to be arrested is attempting to escape by use of deadly weapon or otherwise indicates that he will endanger human life or inflict great bodily harm unless arrested without delay.” See IPI Criminal 2d No. 24 — 25.12; Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 7 — 5(a). People’s instruction No. 20A provides: “A peace officer who has an arrested person in his custody is justified in the use of any force which he reasonably believes to be necessary to prevent the escape of the arrested person or to defend himself from bodily harm while preventing the escape. However, he is justified in using force likely to cause death or great bodily harm only when he reasonably believes both that such force is necessary to prevent the escape and the person attempting to escape has committed or attempted a forcible felony; or is necessary to prevent the escape and the person is attempting to escape by use of deadly weapon or otherwise indicates that he will endanger human life or inflict bodily harm unless prevented from escaping without delay.” See IPI Criminal 2d No. 24 — 25.13; Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 7 — 5(a). Although defendant includes instruction Nos. 19B and 20A in his argument, he failed to offer any support for his argument and, accordingly, has waived any argument. However, this court will address those instructions in connection with instruction No. 18A. Regarding People’s instruction No. 18A, defendant argues that the court should have instructed the jury on IPI Criminal 2d No. 24 — 25.10 and not the submitted version. It is well established that the circuit court need not use an IPI instruction when it determines that it does not accurately state the law. (107 Ill. 2d R. 451(a).) Further, it has been established that a jury instruction is “to convey to the minds of the jury the correct principles of law applicable to the evidence submitted to it in order that, having determined the final state of facts from the evidence, the jury may, by the application of proper legal principles, arrive at a correct conclusion according to the law and the evidence.” People v. Gambony (1948), 402 Ill. 74, 81-82; People v. Mitchell (1975), 27 Ill. App. 3d 117, 121. In order to determine whether the amended IPI instruction was proper, the court must look at the IPI instruction in light of the facts and any relevant applicable law. In this case, defendant immediately left the area after the commission of aggravated battery against Frederick Ferguson, a forcible felony for which there was an eventual arrest warrant. Defendant did not come back into the area until just prior to the instant offense. Furthermore, his only reason to return to the area was to have a friend accompany him in leaving not only the State, but the country. There appears to have been no longing by defendant to be home with his family because, as defendant stated at trial, he had had no contact with his family during the weeks he was in Texas. His only contact with his family was when he called his brother, Tony, prior to leaving Texas. In light of these facts, it appears that defendant was not only still escaping but was also “on the run” from the commission of a forcible felony. Our conclusion that defendant was still escaping must also be read in light of the'escape statute, the amended IPI instruction and the facts of this case. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 31 — 6.) One element of escape is that defendant has been charged and escape is an especially serious offense if committed by a felon. (People v. Simmons (1981), 88 Ill. 2d 270, 275.) In this case defendant, a felon, used force in an attempt to escape from a forcible felony with which he had been charged. Since IPI number 24 — 25.10 and section 7 — 4 describe those persons who cannot use force, the modified IPI instruction submitted to the jury not only accurately described the facts presented to the jury but also submitted a description of the applicable law. However, defendant argues that section 7 — 4(a) refers to escape immediately following the commission of a forcible felony. He specifically argues that “the legislative intent was not to remove a person’s right to self-defense for an indefinite time period after the commission of a forcible felony.” This court finds defendant’s interpretation too restrictive. The court further finds that defendant’s argument relies on an assumption that even without the word “immediately” in the statute or the IPI instruction, the General Assembly intended the statute to mean “immediately” after the commission of a forcible felony. Defendant does not cite any authority for this assumption. In reading the statute and the accompanying committee notes, it is apparent that the assumption that a person must be in the process of committing a forcible felony or that a person must have just completed the commission of the forcible felony is a misunderstanding of the intent of the statute. This court finds that the General Assembly did not intend to limit section 7 — 4 as suggested by defendant. The General Assembly intended the statute to cover situations prior to the commission of a forcible felony, at the time of the commission of a forcible felony, and after the commission of a forcible felony, without reference to a specific time period. In reading the statute it is clear that the General Assembly did not fix a definitive time period so as to allow the statute to be applicable to all the circumstances which may surround the commission of a forcible felony. We have no doubt that the General Assembly intended to cover situations such as the one before this court. The record reveals that defendant had knowledge of the charge of a forcible felony against him and that he absconded himself from the area only to return in time to meet with a friend who was just being released from a work release center in order to plan leaving the country the following day. Thus, this court finds that the evidence warranted the use of the amended instruction. Accordingly, the circuit court did not commit reversible error. Defendant also argues that the evidence did not warrant the use of instructions 19B and 20A. These instructions, however, must be read in light of instruction number 18A and the facts of this case. A police officer is justified in using force likely to cause death or great bodily harm when he reasonably believes both that such force is necessary to prevent the escape of a person and that the person is using escape to defeat the arrest. We agree with the People’s reasoning that without these instructions the jury would not have been able to find that the alleged use of force by the deceased officer was justified under section 7 — 5 absent the officer’s reasonable belief that defendant had voluntarily placed himself in the position of an immediate aggressor. We also find that without these instructions the jury would find section 7— 4(a) inapplicable without defendant’s voluntary placement of himself in the position of an immediate aggressor. Furthermore, since an officer is entitled to utilize even deadly force when he reasonably believes it necessary to effectuate an arrest for a forcible felony, our analysis of the legislative intent regarding instruction 18A was proper. Section 7 — 4 only contemplates a situation in which the person who has provoked the use of force but not deadly force against himself and who then becomes unexpectedly threatened with deadly force. (Ill. Ann. Stat., ch. 38, par. 7 — 4, Committee Comments, at 408-09 (Smith-Hurd 1972).) However, as in this case, a person who is escaping after the commission of a forcible felony cannot argue that the use of force by a police officer to prevent escape from a forcible felony was unexpected. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 7 — 5.) Thus, defendant in this case who was also a forcible felon at the time of the instant offense cannot claim a qualified right to meet excessive force with deadly force and it is defendant who must suffer the legal consequences of his choice to kill. (Ill. Ann. Stat., ch. 38, par. 7 — 4, Committee Comments, at 408-10 (Smith-Hurd 1972).) In light of these findings, this court finds that all three of the instructions were proper; accordingly, the circuit court did not commit reversible error. VIII Defendant argues next that the circuit court abused its discretion when it admitted into evidence irrelevant and unreliable hearsay at the death penalty hearing. This court finds that defendant misunderstands the function of the death penalty hearing. At the death penalty hearing the nature of the crime and the character of the accused are considered. (People v. Stewart (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 463, 492.) In order to allow all relevant evidence in at the aggravation and mitigation hearing, the restrictive rules of evidence do not govern. (People v. Perez (1985), 108 Ill. 2d 70, 86.) Rather, at the hearing the evidence is admissible on the grounds of relevancy and reliability. These prerequisites must be met to the satisfaction of the trial judge’s sound discretion. (108 Ill. 2d at 88.) Evidence is relevant if it has “any tendency to make the existence of any [material] fact *** more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence.” People v. Free (1983), 94 Ill. 2d 378, 413. Defendant argues that the testimony regarding his gang affiliation was “completely and totally irrelevant to the shooting in the instant case.” We find otherwise. It is established that proof of prior misconduct is deemed relevant to a defendant’s character although it may not have resulted in prosecution (People v. Brisbon (1985), 106 Ill. 2d 342, 365) and proof of defendant’s “propensity” to conduct himself in a particular manner is sufficiently relevant to be admissible at the death qualification hearing (People v. Free, 94 Ill. 2d at 424). Furthermore, any evidence regarding defendant’s character is relevant. People v. Stewart, 104 Ill. 2d at 492. Some of defendant’s objections are to hearsay evidence regarding his gang affiliation. However, this court finds that without evidence regarding his character, the jury would not have had all of the necessary information to decide the death qualification issue. Moreover, the People’s evidence concerning defendant’s gang affiliation was corroborated, thereby making the evidence not only relevant but also reliable. In defendant’s argument, he specifically refers to the testimony of Officer Coronado, to the testimony of Police Officer Robert Simandel, and to the testimony of FBI Special Agent Wayne Zydron. Officer Coronado stated that on August 14, 1984, he spoke with defendant’s parents and specifically told defendant’s mother that defendant was a member of the Latin Kings gang. He was looking for defendant regarding a shooting incident for which defendant was later charged. Officer Simandel, who has been an officer with the Chicago police department’s gang crimes section for 13 years, was shown the photographs taken of defendant as he arrived at the jailhouse after his arrest for the instant offense. He stated that the photographs showed defendant “putting down the Disciples” street gang with a hand gesture. Agent Zydron stated that he interviewed Lewis Zamudio, who told him that he (Zamudio) was a former general in the Latin Kings gang and defendant was a lieutenant in the Latin Kings. Each of the witnesses gave testimony which revealed information about not only defendant’s character but also defendant’s social environment. Moreover, each of the statements are intertwined and add to the reliability of the statements. Officer Coronado’s testimony was corroborated by Zamudio’s October 27, 1984, statement that defendant was a lieutenant in the Latin Kings street gang and by Simandel’s testimony that a photograph taken of defendant after his arrest depicted him as seriously degrading the Disciples, a rival gang, through a hand gesture. Furthermore, Officer Coronado gathered his information during an official investigation of the aggravated battery incident against Ferguson prior to the instant offense and defendant never directly challenged Officer Coronado’s testimony. See, e.g., People v. Morgan (1986), 112 Ill. 2d 111, 143-44. Defendant presented two witnesses, Maurice Sherrod and Gabriel Ben Moreno, to challenge the testimony regarding gang affiliation. Sherrod testified that he had known defendant since junior high school and did not know defendant to be a gang member or carry a gun. However, Sherrod had only seen defendant once between the summer of 1983 and the time of the offense at issue. Moreno, a boxing coach for the Joliet park district, stated that he did not know defendant to associate with any gang. Moreno, however, had not worked with defendant since approximately 1983 and had heard others state that defendant was a gang member. Defendant also argues that Frederick Ferguson’s statements to Officer Saxon regarding the person who shot him in the legs were not relevant or reliable. However, as the People point out, defendant opened the door on the matter by suggesting during cross-examination of Officer Saxon that no probable cause existed for the arrest at the time the police sought to question defendant on the shooting. Furthermore, Ferguson’s statements were sufficiently corroborated to render them reliable. Ferguson did not initially cooperate with the police because he wanted to handle the matter himself. Later, when he did decide to cooperate, he stated that a driver of an orange vehicle, which had pulled up alongside him as he stood in front of 322 South Ottawa Street, had shot him in the leg with a sawed-off shotgun. The driver was accompanied by three black males. He described his assailant as a 16- to 17-year-old Mexican male who attended Joliet High School and whose nickname was Junior. Ferguson also stated that the assailant yelled “L.K.” as he fired the gun. Ferguson also positively identified defendant as the assailant. James Booker and Beatrice Mays, witnesses to the shooting incident, corroborated the fact and location of the shooting. Identification of defendant as the assailant was corroborated by his nickname of Junior, his attendance at Joliet High School, his physical appearance and his eventual flight after the shooting, which in this case reflects consciousness of guilt. Defendant argues that the above-mentioned facts were not reliable because of other conflicting testimony. For instance, Ferguson made inconsistent statements regarding the incident and failed to sign the warrant. This court finds that the testimony was not so conflicting as to render it unreliable. Ferguson’s father stated that another person was responsible for the shooting but he did not state that the other person committed the shooting. Two of the men who Ferguson believed had threatened him in a phone call at the hospital were black, which relates to the description that three black men accompanied defendant in the car on the day of the shooting. Although Booker and Mays did state that Ferguson was shot by a Mexican riding on a motorcycle, Ferguson maintained he was shot by a Mexican male accompanied by three black males. Even in light of these inconsistencies, the evidence was sufficiently consistent to render it reliable and, accordingly, the jury was able to weigh the aggravation value of the August 11 shooting. Last of all, defendant argues that the testimony of police officer James Stewart regarding a taped statement given by arrestee Elliott Pennick was not relevant. Pennick was booked by Officers Ponce and Murrin just prior to the instant offense. However, this court finds that the fact that within an hour before Officer Murrin’s death, he and Officer Ponce spoke, at length with arrestee Pennick; that Officer Murrin had treated Pennick “excellent in all respects”; and that Officer Murrin looked healthy and happy when he and Officer Ponce left the police station are all relevant. The arrest of Pennick has a tendency to make it less probable that Officer Murrin acted aggressively toward defendant. Thus, this court finds that the circuit court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the hearsay testimony of various witnesses. IX Defendant argues that his conviction must be reversed and his death sentence vacated because it was excessive and disproportionate in light of defendant’s character and of the circumstances of the particular offense. The People argue that when each of defendant’s arguments are scrutinized, the jury could have rationally found these factors to be insufficient to preclude imposition of the death sentence. Defendant argues that because of his age, he should not be executed unless there exist overwhelming reasons to do so. He specifically refers to his lack of any significant history of prior criminal activity. While we agree that defendant is young, his prior encounters with law enforcement and his lifestyle belie his assertion of being a person of tender age. On other occasions, defendant has used age as a method of avoiding the consequences of his criminal activity. When arrested in 1983, defendant told the police that he was 16 years old and subject only to limited criminal prosecution. Defendant was 17 at the time. Also, defendant’s prior contact with law enforcement reveals a far more experienced individual than his age would indicate. For example, in 1983 defendant was arrested for the possession of a concealed .357 Magnum revolver and a buck knife. In 1984, a vehicle in which defendant and others were riding contained three .22-caliber handguns. Defendant had on his person at that time a buck knife and 20 rounds of .22-caliber long rifle ammunition. The People also introduced evidence that defendant was a member of the Latin Kings, a street gang, and that in August 1984 defendant shot a rival gang member. On the date of the instant offense, defendant had been with his best friend who was on a prison work release program. Prior to encountering Officer Murrin, defendant shot one of his guns in the air and picked up another gun at his friend Gates’ house. Also on the date of this offense, defendant had, in addition to a gun, a pair of brass knuckles in his possession. Defendant presented evidence at the hearing and also states on appeal that he was a respectful, friendly young man while in custody. Defendant argues that this evidence reveals a person who could be rehabilitated. However, the evidence of defendant’s respect for the educational system, law enforcement and society in general do not support this argument. After defendant dropped out of high school, he was caught for a second time in possession of firearms less than two months after the first incident of illegal possession of firearms. After the gang shooting of Ferguson, defendant left the State despite his mother’s requests that he turn himself in to the police. Defendant was even planning to leave again on the date of the instant offense. Defendant relies on People v. Carlson (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 564. This court finds that defendant has misapplied Carlson. In Carlson, this court found that the imposition of the death penalty for the murder of a police officer was inappropriate because the circuit court should have considered as a mitigating factor that defendant’s killing of the police officers was “part of one unfortunate and tragic event precipitated by the events leading up to killing” of the defendant’s wife; the circuit court should not have allowed the arson and murder of the defendant’s wife to preclude it from considering the mitigating effect of a prior life free of crime. This court also held that the circuit court erred in discounting the testimony of the psychiatrist, and in determining that defendant was not under extreme mental or emotional disturbances. This court, in Carlson, also noted that the defendant suffered a gradually debilitating physical ailment for two years prior to the offense. Thus, this court concluded that “these mitigating circumstances do not bespeak a man with a malignant heart who must be permanently eliminated from society.” In this case, defendant did not present evidence of any physical infirmity or mental disturbance which would mitigate the circumstance of the offense. Rather, the evidence revealed that defendant’s prior history and his character were far from exhibiting a person with strong rehabilitative potential. Defendant did not act under extreme mental or emotional stress but under the sole motivation to escape capture and eventual arrest for a previous forcible felony. Although his previous contact with police does not reveal any resistance, he had every reason to resist in this case because of the outstanding felony warrant. Moreover, the offense in the case was not part of an unfortunate and tragic series of events precipitated by years of debilitating circumstances; rather, the years reveal an individual whose character and lifestyle had been deteriorating. The evidence also reveals that in his attempt to escape, defendant repeatedly shot Officer Murrin, who had been acting in the line of duty, and was the aggressor during the entire incident. These facts do “bespeak a man with a malignant heart.” Thus, this court finds that the sentence of death was not excessive or disproportionate. X Defendant argues that this court should reconsider its position on the issue whether, when prospective jurors are excluded which might result in selection of a conviction-prone jury, defendant’s right to a fair cross-section of the community is violated. This court has recently reconsidered its position concerning this issue in People v. Thompkins (1988), 121 Ill. 2d 401, and stated, citing Lockhart v. McCree (1986), 476 U.S. 162, 90 L. Ed. 2d 137, 106 S. Ct. 1758: “ ‘In sum, ‘‘ Wíí&erspotm-excludables,’ ’ or for that matter any other group defined solely in terms of shared attitudes that render members of the group unable to serve as jurors in a particular case, may be excluded from jury service without contravening any of the basic objectives of the fair cross-section requirement.’ Lockhart v. McCree (1986), 476 U.S. 162, 176-77, 90 L. Ed. 2d 137, 150, 106 S. Ct. 1758, 1766.” (!Thompkins, 121 Ill. 2d at 450.) Accordingly, this court finds that defendant’s argument is without merit. XI Defendant argues that the death penalty statute contains inadequate safeguards to prevent arbitrary imposition of the death penalty. This court finds that defendant’s argument has been addressed and, as such, declines to alter its previous holdings. People v. Stewart (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 463, 499-502; People ex rel. Carey v. Cousins (1979), 77 Ill. 2d 531. XII Defendant also argues that the death penalty statute violates the eighth and fourteenth amendments of the United States Constitution (U.S. Const., amends. VIII, XIV) because the statute limits the imposition of the death penalty to defendants who do not require special provisions or assistance, such as sign language translation, to be fit for trial. Since this court has addressed and rejected the argument, we find no merit in defendant’s argument. People v. Stewart (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 463, 499-502. XIII Defendant also argues that the death penalty statute violates the eighth and fourteenth amendments in that it bars the jury at the death penalty hearing from considering sympathy for the defendant. Again, this court notes that this issue has been addressed in People v. Stewart (1984), 104 Ill. 2d 463, 493-94, and as such, finds no merit in this argument. For the foregoing reasons, defendant’s conviction and sentence of death are affirmed. The clerk of this court is directed to enter an order fixing Tuesday, March 14, 1989, as the date on which the sentence of death entered in the circuit court of McLean County is to be implemented. The defendant shall be executed by lethal injection in the manner provided by section 119 — 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1987, ch. 38, par. 119 — 5). The clerk of this court shall send a certified copy of the mandate of this court to the Director of Corrections, to the warden of Stateville Correctional Center, and to the warden of the institution wherein defendant is confined. Affirmed.

=== CASE 9740121 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:28:35.831392+00 ===

JUSTICE CLARK, dissenting: While I agree that the evidence below adequately supported the jury’s verdict, I cannot agree with the majority’s affirmance of the defendant’s sentence and conviction. The trial of a close case, pivoting on the credibility of the accused, was marred by several serious evidentiary errors and an erroneous instruction to the jury. These errors, taken in combination, contributed to the defendant’s conviction and cannot be considered harmless. I therefore respectfully dissent. As a careful reading of the majority opinion makes clear, the evidence of the defendant’s guilt was not overwhelming. The defendant’s testimonial version of events — that he surrendered to the officer, that the officer beat him, and that he shot the officer during the course of an attempt to defend himself — was not entirely inconsistent with the evidence adduced at trial. It was corroborated by the fact that he had thrown away the gym bag with the gun in it before he was arrested and by some of the testimony given by Pedro Palacios (e.g., by the testimony that the defendant appeared at Palacios’ house with his face bloody and swollen). A serious weakness in the State’s case was the lack of evidence that the defendant had in fact committed the crime for which the officer was allegedly attempting to arrest him, and which is supposed to have motivated the defendant’s flight and resistance to arrest. This evidence would have borne upon motive and upon the defense of justification. As can be seen from the sentencing hearing, the lack of evidence on this point was no accident — it stemmed from the prior victim’s initial refusal to cooperate with the police and several inconsistencies in his story. It is unfortunate that the State attempted to remedy this weakness by reading the arrest warrant to the jury and introducing an instruction which told the jury, incorrectly, that the defense of justification is not available to a defendant who escapes after being “charged with” a crime. Since the jury might have inferred a violent character from the contents of the arrest warrant or thought that the fact of the arrest warrant meant that the defendant could not raise the defense of justification, these errors were not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. ADMISSION OF EVIDENCE OF THE FELONY ARREST WARRANT The general rule in Illinois is that the fact that warrants have been issued for the defendant for previous crimes is admissible where relevant to show the defendant’s motive for committing the crime charged but only if “the defendant knew about the warrant or knew that the officers were attempting to arrest him.” (People v. Wilson (1987), 116 Ill. 2d 29, 52.) Even if the fact that the warrants were issued is admitted for this purpose, “proof of the details of such crimes is improper.” People v. Durkin (1928), 330 Ill. 394, 404. There is no showing in the record that the defendant knew about this warrant or knew that the officers were attempting to arrest him for the prior crime charged. The defendant himself testified that he fled from the police car because he had possession of an illegal gun. Without a showing that the defendant was aware of the warrant, the warrant itself does not prove anything about the defendant’s state of mind. Moreover, the warrant itself was only an accusation; it was not relevant to prove that the defendant had committed the prior crime. The State did not attempt to prove, other than by the admission of the warrant, that the defendant actually had committed the prior crime, and that the prior crime, rather than the warrant, was his motive for fleeing the officers and killing one of them. Thus cases which the majority cites, such as People v. Stewart (1984), 105 Ill. 2d 22, are not pertinent — these cases all deal with proof of prior crimes, not proof that the defendant was aware that he was being sought in connection with these crimes. Even assuming the warrant was admissible, it was also error to read the entire warrant to the jury, including the statement in the warrant that the defendant committed aggravated battery, a felony, “by shooting *** Frederick Ferguson in the leg while using a deadly weapon, to-wit, a shotgun.” These were details of the crime that were highly prejudicial to the defendant since they tended to suggest a propensity to engage in violence. The majority opinion argues that these details were relevant because they showed the depth of the defendant’s motive to escape and rebutted his contention that he was not the initial aggressor. Again, however, the majority opinion confuses the relevance of an accusation of a prior crime with relevance of a prior crime. Had the State introduced competent evidence to prove that the defendant had shot Frederick Ferguson, such evidence would have tended to prove that the defendant, having committed the crime, had a strong motive to resist arrest. However, in the absence of such evidence, the details included in the warrant itself could not provide evidence of motive without a showing that the defendant was aware of what the warrant contained. USE OF A NON-IPI INSTRUCTION While the defendant cites as error the use of three instructions, all relating to the defense of justification, I believe that the only instruction which is truly important is People’s instruction No. 18A, which stated: “A person is not justified in the use of force if he is escaping after he has been charged with the commission of a forcible felony.” (Emphasis added.) This instruction varied from the Illinois Pattern Jury Instruction (IPI) which states that “[a] person is not justified in the use of force if he is ((attempting to commit) (committing) (escaping after the commission of)) a forcible felony.” (Illinois Pattern Jury Instructions, Criminal, No. 24 — 25.10 (2d ed. 1981).) The IPI instruction tracks the language of the statute which provides that the defense of justification is not available to a person who “[i]s attempting to commit, committing, or escaping after the commission of, a forcible felony.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 7 — 4.) Under Supreme Court Rule 451, non-IPI instructions are not to be used unless they accurately state the law. (See People v. Haywood (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 540 (reversing where correct IPI instruction and incorrect non-IPI instruction were both given).) The difference between the two instructions is significant in this case, precisely because the State did not introduce any evidence that the defendant had committed a prior forcible felony, only that he had been charged with the commission of a prior forcible felony. Thus it is arguable that IPI Criminal 2d No. 24 — 25.10 should not have been given at all, let alone in the incorrect variant actually introduced. The error reinforced the erroneous admission of the arrest warrant. I am unable to understand the majority’s reasoning on this point. At one point the majority appears to be arguing that there was evidence of a prior forcible felony. (“In this case, defendant immediately left the area after the commission of aggravated battery against Frederick Ferguson, a forcible felony for which there was an eventual arrest warrant.” (126 Ill. 2d at 464.)) But, aside from the arrest warrant, a mere accusation, no evidence of a prior forcible felony was actually introduced at trial. At another point, the majority appears to argue that section 7 — 4 only requires proof that the defendant has been charged with a felony because being charged with commission of a crime is an element of escape. (126 Ill. 2d at 465.) This is wrong on two counts. First, section 7 — 4 requires both escape and actual commission of a crime, these requirements being stated in the conjunctive. Second, commission of a crime or a charge that the defendant committed a crime is only an element of felony escape, which is escape “from any penal institution or from the custody of an employee of that institution” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 31 — 6(a)). If the defendant committed escape at all, it was misdemeanor escape, which is defined as an intentional escape from the “lawful custody of a peace officer” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 38, par. 81 — 6(c)). Because I disagree that this instruction should have been given at all, let alone in an incorrect form, I would not reach the defendant’s argument that IPI Criminal 2d No. 24 — 25.10 should not have been given anyway because it applies only where escape occurs immediately after the commission of a forcible felony. ADMISSION OF EVIDENCE OF TWO ENTIRE PRIOR TAPED STATEMENTS OF PEDRO PALACIOS On this issue I believe the majority opinion misses the point. Under section 115 — 10.1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1985, ch. 38, par. 115 — 10.1), evidence of a prior inconsistent tape-recorded statement may be admitted as substantive evidence under certain conditions. The defendant concedes that certain parts of the prior tape-recorded statements of Pedro Palacios were inconsistent with his trial testimony (e.g., whether the defendant had told him that he threw the gym bag away after his encounter with the officer (prior statement) or before (trial testimony)) but argues that only those inconsistent portions, and not the entire tapes, should be played to the jury. At the trial below, the State argued, and the trial court agreed, that all of the tapes could be played because, in their entirety, they tended to rebut Palacios’ explanation that the inconsistencies were due to nervousness, confusion, and suggestive questioning by the interrogating officer. The trial court placed particular emphasis on the value to the jury of hearing Palacios’ tone of voice. The majority opinion does not accurately state the issue, saying that the defendant “specifically argues that Pedro’s statements did not contain enough inconsistencies to be admitted into evidence as substantive evidence.” (126 Ill. 2d at 456.) The opinion goes on to reject the view that the statute requires some minimal number of inconsistencies in a taped statement before it can be admitted. But this is not what the defendant is arguing; it is his argument that only the inconsistent statements should be played and the consistent portions redacted. The State argues, by analogy with the rule that a witness may be given the opportunity to show the circumstances under which an inconsistent statement was made, that it should be able to use the tape to rebut the witness’ explanation of the circumstances surrounding the inconsistencies. This is a novel question, and one which, so far as I can discover, is one of first impression. The State appears to be arguing for the admission of the inconsistent portions as substantive evidence per the statute, and the consistent portions as reflecting on the witness’ credibility. One problem with this argument is that the jury was not instructed to divide the statements in this fashion; it could have considered the consistent portions also as substantive evidence. Another problem is that the statute itself does not provide for the admission of taped statements to impeach credibility, rebut an attack on credibility, or, as in this case, refute an attempt by the witness to rehabilitate his credibility. I believe that in the absence of precedent, these portions should not have been admitted. Since they may have affected the jury’s consideration of Palacios’ explanation of the inconsistencies, and since Palacios’ testimony was in general not favorable to the defendant, this error was prejudicial. EVIDENCE OF VICTIM IMPACT The general rule is that testimony that the deceased left behind a spouse or children is not admissible at trial because it has no bearing on the guilt or innocence of the accused. (People v. Bernette (1964), 30 Ill. 2d 359.) On the other hand, incidental references to the victim’s family are permissible where relevant for some other purpose. I would agree with the majority that most of the testimony by the victim’s wife was relevant as bearing on the victim’s state of mind on the day in question; particularly in light of the defendant’s claim that the victim was the aggressor and had been drinking. Evidence that the couple was not suffering from marital problems and that the officer was in good health was relevant to rebut the inference that he was drunk and aggressive. On the other hand, testimony that they had been married 12 years and had an unspecified number of children was probably not relevant for this purpose. I would agree these references, standing alone, would not mandate reversal. The reference to the length of the marriage was not objected to. And while the reference to children was objected to, it was certainly “inadvertant, incidental, and innocuous” — volunteered by the witness, and unprompted by any specific question. However, in combination with the other errors enumerated above, the admission of the length of the couple’s marriage deprived the defendant of a fair trial. I therefore believe that the defendant’s conviction and sentence should be reversed, and the cause remanded for a new trial. While I would therefore not reach the issue of whether the defendant’s death sentence was excessive, I agree with the majority that this case is distinguishable from People v. Carlson (1980), 79 Ill. 2d 564, because this defendant, unlike the defendant in Carlson, did not act under the influence of extreme emotional or mental disturbance and had some, although not an extensive, prior criminal history. On the other hand, the majority’s assertions that the defendant’s youth should be discounted because of his “lifestyle” and his prior use of his age as a “method of avoiding the consequences of his criminal activity” are unnecessary. The majority’s opinion illustrates the adage that hard cases make bad law. While any killing is terrible, the death of a police officer in the line of duty naturally evokes strong feelings among all members of the law enforcement community — judges included. Under these circumstances, any tendency to bend the rules of evidence in favor of a conviction, however natural, can and must be resisted. I therefore respectfully dissent. JUSTICE STAMOS joins in this dissent.

=== CASE 2220397 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:42.222311+00 ===

741 N.W.2d 397 (2007)
In re Petition for DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST Russell A. INGEBRITSON, a Minnesota Attorney, Registration No. 48860.
No. A07-2031.
Supreme Court of Minnesota.
November 13, 2007.
ORDER
The Director of the Office of Lawyers Professional Responsibility has filed a petition for disciplinary action alleging that respondent Russell A. Ingebritson committed professional misconduct warranting public discipline, namely, that respondent was convicted of a misdemeanor in United States District Court for conspiring to commit an offense against the United States in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 371 (2006), for conspiring with a co-defendant not to inform the Railroad Retirement Board of that co-defendant's weekly purchase of feed for his wife's quarter horse operation, and conspiring with another co-defendant not to inform the Railroad Retirement Board that he worked for respondent's law practice, in violation of 45 U.S.C. § 231l and of Minn. R. Prof. Conduct 8.4(b).
Respondent admits his conduct violated the Rules of Professional Conduct, waives his rights under Rule 14, Rules on Lawyers Professional Responsibility (RLPR), and has entered into a stipulation with the Director in which they jointly recommend that the appropriate discipline is a public reprimand and unsupervised probation co-extensive with respondent's three-year criminal probation.
The court has independently reviewed the file and approves of the recommended disposition.
Based upon all the files, records, and proceedings herein,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that respondent Russell A. Ingebritson is publicly reprimanded and is placed on unsupervised probation for a term co-extensive with respondent's three-year criminal probation, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Respondent shall cooperate fully with the Director's Office in its efforts to monitor compliance with this probation and shall promptly respond to the Director's correspondence by the due date. Respondent shall cooperate with the Director's investigation of any allegations of unprofessional conduct that may come to the Director's attention. Upon the Director's request, respondent shall provide authorization for release of information and documentation to verify compliance with the terms of this probation.
(b) Respondent shall abide by the Minnesota Rules of Professional Conduct.
(c) Respondent shall fully comply with all of the terms of his criminal probation.
Respondent shall pay $900 in costs pursuant to Rule 24, RLPR.
BY THE COURT:
/s/ Helen M. Meyer
Associate Justice

=== CASE 2220406 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:42.355403+00 ===

131 Ill. App. 3d 513 (1985)
475 N.E.2d 1029
GLENN MULLIGAN, Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
VILLAGE OF BRADLEY et al., Defendants-Appellees.
No. 3-84-0201.
Illinois Appellate Court  Third District.
Opinion filed March 6, 1985.
John Bernard Cashion, of Chicago, for appellant.
Alan F. Smietanski, of Berz & Smietanski, of Kankakee, and William W. Kurnik, of Kurnik & Cipolla, of Arlington Heights, for appellees.
Judgment affirmed.
*514 JUSTICE SCOTT delivered the opinion of the court:
The plaintiff, Glenn Mulligan, appeals a decision of the circuit court of Kankakee County which dismissed his complaint against the village of Bradley and Kenneth Hayes, president of the board of trustees, following plaintiff's termination as village administrator.
Plaintiff's complaint was in four counts and sought damages for breach of contract, malicious prosecution, and a civil rights violation for being deprived of a "property right" in his employment position and that his firing was politically motivated.
The claims of malicious prosecution and the alleged civil rights violations were dismissed by the circuit court for failure to state a cause of action.
The circuit court then granted the village's motion for judgment on the pleadings with respect to plaintiff's claim for breach of contract.
The factual background for the complaint is derived, in part, from the minutes of the meetings of the village board.
On October 8, 1979, Mulligan, as president of the board of trustees of the village of Bradley, appointed trustee Novak as chairman of a committee of the whole, to study the question of whether there was a need for a full-time employee to look into the village business and to look out for the general growth and well-being of the village.
In the interim between the October 8 meeting and the next regular meeting of the board of trustees on October 29, 1979, Mulligan discussed the necessity of creating a new position of village administrator with committee chairman Novak and other members of the board of trustees. Mulligan not only urged the board members to vote in favor of creating the position of village administrator, but to vote in favor of offering the position to him.
The October 29 meeting commenced with Mulligan presiding as village president. Novak reported that although they had interviewed other candidates for the position as village administrator, they had decided to offer the position to village president Mulligan.
A resolution was read and approved which created the new position of village administrator. Four trustees voted in favor of the resolution and two trustees voted against it. Mulligan did not vote. A motion was then made to offer the contract to Mulligan. The motion passed five to one, with Mulligan abstaining. Mulligan offered his resignation as village president, which was accepted by a unanimous vote of the trustees. Mulligan accepted the position of village administrator for a period of three years commencing November 1, 1979, up to and including October 31, 1982. No appropriation ordinance was ever *515 made to pay the $27,000 per year salary and annual 7% pay raises.
The position of village administrator involved soliciting and assisting the relocation of business entities into the village of Bradley. Hayes, who had been Mulligan's former political adversary in the village, became president of the village board. The contract provided that either party to the agreement could terminate it by 30 days' written notice during the first year, 60 days' written notice the second year, and 90 days' written notice the third year. There was no provision in the contract that it could only be terminated "for cause."
On May 4, 1981, Hayes fired Mulligan after a hearing. Thereafter, Mulligan was subpoenaed to testify before the grand jury of Kankakee County. Mulligan alleged that Hayes instigated the criminal proceedings without probable cause and with malice. The grand jury returned a "No Bill," and Mulligan filed suit against the village of Bradley and Hayes on the grounds enumerated above.
In granting a judgment on the pleadings to the defendant village with respect to plaintiff's allegation of a breach of contract, the circuit court held that the plaintiff's agreement with the village was void and unenforceable for two reasons. First, the court believed that section 8-1-7 of the Illinois Municipal Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 24, par. 8-1-7) prohibits the making of a contract unless an appropriation has been made concerning the contract. Second, the court indicated that in its opinion, the contract was void and unenforceable because it violated both section 3 of "An Act to prevent fraudulent and corrupt practices * * *" and section 3-14-4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 102, par. 3; ch. 24, par. 3-14-4), which both prohibit an elected or appointed official from having an interest in a contract upon which he may be called upon to vote or when the consideration of the contract is paid from the public treasury.
 1 We believe that there exists ample evidence in the record which supports the decision of the circuit court in declaring the contract in question to be void and unenforceable on the basis of plaintiff's conflict of interest. Nor are we deterred from such a conclusion by the grand jury's refusal to return an indictment, since there existed alternative authority to declare the agreement null and void without the necessity of finding a criminal violation had occurred (i.e., Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 24, par. 8-1-7; Hogan v. City of Centralia (1979), 71 Ill. App. 3d 1004, 390 N.E.2d 595 (purported two-year contract for chief of police held to be void ab initio without a proper budget being passed)).
 2 We also believe the circuit court properly dismissed plaintiff's complaint with respect to his allegations of malicious prosecution.
*516 The plaintiff has contended that he was entitled to recover damages for the tort of malicious prosecution where a grand jury merely investigates a complaint. In Joiner v. Benton Community Bank (1980), 82 Ill. 2d 40, 411 N.E.2d 229, our supreme court held that one of the essential elements of a cause of action for malicious prosecution concerns whether the facts show "the commencement * * * of [a] * * * criminal or civil judicial proceeding by the defendant * * *." 82 Ill. 2d 40, 45, 411 N.E.2d 229, 232.
We do not believe that the mere presentation of evidence to a grand jury constitutes "the commencement of a criminal or judicial proceeding" within the meaning of Joiner. Section 111-1 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 38, par. 111-1) provides that a prosecution is commenced by a complaint, an information, or an indictment.
Dean Prosser has noted in his Law of Torts 836 (4th ed. 1972):
"The proceeding must, however, have been commenced. It is not enough that a mere complaint has been made to the proper authorities for the purpose of setting prosecution in motion, where no official action ever has been taken * * * a grand jury which refuses to indict * * *."
Finally, section 2-16 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1979, ch. 38, par. 2-16) provides:
"`Prosecution' means all legal proceedings by which a person's liability for an offense is determined, commencing with the return of the indictment or the issuance of the information * * *." (Emphasis added.)
 3 Plaintiff's final allegation that he was denied his civil rights to due process of law when he was deprived of a hearing before an impartial hearing officer and that he had a "property right" in his employment must also be rejected.
As previously noted, since the employment contract was void, plaintiff was precluded from having a "property interest" in a void contract. Furthermore, the plaintiff's employment contract was not limited to termination for cause. The only protection afforded by the agreement was a mere notice requirement and as such did not create a "property interest" protected by either 42 U.S.C. sec. 1983 (1976) or the fourteenth amendment. Daleanes v. Board of Education (1983), 120 Ill. App. 3d 505, 457 N.E.2d 1382; Hayward v. Henderson (9th Cir.1980), 623 F.2d 596.
 4 Plaintiff's allegation that the termination of his employment was "politically motivated" raises the question of whether the position of village administrator is one that can be terminated for political *517 considerations alone.
Our courts have uniformly held that persons in policy-making positions can be dismissed for political considerations, since to hold otherwise would saddle existing administrations with political adversaries occupying positions from which they could thwart or hinder the implementation of new or different idealogies presumably called for by the electorate. Elrod v. Burns (1976), 427 U.S. 347, 49 L. Ed. 2d 547, 96 S. Ct. 2673; Branti v. Finkel (1980), 445 U.S. 507, 63 L. Ed. 2d 574, 100 S. Ct. 1287.
The employment agreement here enumerates plaintiff's general supervisory powers as village administrator. Our review of the agreement leaves little doubt that the village administrator of the village of Bradley has been given broad discretion and latitude to be utilized in the implementation of wide-ranging policies and goals and that more than mere ministerial competence is required for the position. Stegmaier v. Trammell (5th Cir.1979), 597 F.2d 1027.
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the circuit court of Kankakee County is affirmed.
Affirmed.
HEIPLE, P.J., and BARRY, J., concur.

=== CASE 9739590 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:05.709015+00 ===

BUCHANAN, Chief Judge.
CASE SUMMARY
Defendants-appellants Mutual Hospital Insurance, Inc. and Mutual Medical Insurance, Inc., doing business as Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Indiana [hereinafter referred to as Insurance Companies], appeal from a judgment entered in favor of plaintiffs-appellees George and Carol Hagner (Hagners) that ordered the Insurance Companies to pay Hagners $744.25 under a contract of health insurance and an additional $5,000 as punitive damages, claiming the trial court erred in concluding that the treatment rendered to Hagners' son was not an excluded dental service under the contract of medical insurance and in awarding punitive damages when the record did not disclose clear and convincing evidence of conduct justifying such an award.
We affirm in part and reverse in part.
FACTS
This litigation arose from an action on a contract of medical insurance between Insurance Companies and General Motors. The action was brought by George Hagner, an employee of General Motors and a beneficiary under the medical insurance program, and his wife Carol for payment of treatment rendered to their son Christopher Hagner (Christopher). The case was tried to the bench, and the evidence included discovery materials, stipulated items, and testimony.
Christopher, a child of two and one-half years of age, fell and broke several front teeth at the gum line. Christopher suffered from the pain of this injury, quit eating, lost weight, and ran the risk of severe infection. On October 7 and 8, 1979, Christopher was treated at St. Mary's Health Center in Jefferson City, Missouri. A dentist placed Christopher under a general anesthetic, removed the dead pulp from each tooth, filled the open wounds, and then covered the broken teeth with steel crowns. The total cost incurred by Hagners for Christopher's treatment was $1,178.28.
The Hagners then became involved in correspondence with the Insurance Companies which lasted almost two years. The initial claim for hospital expenses, received by the Insurance Companies on October 9, 1979, was immediately paid. But when Hagners submitted a claim to the Insurance Companies for the remaining $744.25 in medical expenses, the Insurance Companies requested, during January of 1980, that Hagners refund the amount previously paid toward hospital services and refused payment of the $744.25. The Insurance Companies' terse denial of the claim was based on the opinion that no "concurrent medical hazard" existed.
About May of 1980, Hagners requested a review of their insurance claim and submitted to the Insurance Companies a letter by Dr. Busby, the hospital staff physician at the time of Christopher's treatment, that attested to the related health problems suffered by Christopher as a result of his injuries. In response to this letter, the Insurance Companies withdrew their refund request and stated the hospital insurance claim was payable because it was accident related. The Hagners, convinced that if hospital services for Christopher were provided then medical services should also be covered, resubmitted their claim for the doctor's services. In August of 1980, Hagners' request was again denied, and again the Insurance Companies made a re*34fund request, this time through General Motors' insurance office.
Further correspondence of this type was earried on for several months by Hagners, the General Motors insurance office, and the Insurance Companies. In frustration, Hagners wrote, in January of 1981, to the president of the Insurance Companies, explaining their problem and asking for help. The Insurance Companies indicated that they would again review the claim. Final ly, in June of 1981, the Insurance Compa nies responded with a letter detailing at some length the basis of their refusal of the Hagners' claim for medical treatment and dropping their request for a refund of the payment for hospital services. The Insurance Companies also offered to pay an additional $32.00 for first aid for Christopher.
This lawsuit ensued, and the trial court found the treatment rendered to Christopher was medically necessary and covered by the medical insurance policy under which Christopher was a beneficiary. The trial court also found the exceptions to coverage asserted by the Insurance Companies were inapplicable. In addition to an award of $744.25, the trial court awarded Hagners $5,000.00 in punitive damages. The trial court based the punitive damages award on the finding that the Insurance Companies had deliberately avoided payment of a covered claim, such conduct amounting to bad faith, oppressive conduct, fraud or malice.
ISSUES
The Insurance Companies raise two issues for our review:
1. Whether the trial court erred when it concluded, as a matter of law, that the Hagners' claim was not excepted from coverage under the insurance contract?
2. Whether the trial court erred when it found the evidence to be clear and convincing that the Insurance Companies' conduct amounted to bad faith, oppressive conduct, fraud or malice?
DECISION
ISSUE ONE-Whether the trial court erred when it concluded, as a matter of law, that the Hagners' claim was not excepted from coverage under the insurance contract?
PARTIES' CONTENTIONS-The Inosurance Companies argue that the treatment rendered to Christopher was clearly excepted from coverage under the contract of medical insurance.
Hagners contend that Christopher's treatment was not subject to exceptions under the insurance contract.
CONCLUSION-The trial court did not err when it concluded that the treatment provided to Christopher was covered under the contract of medical insurance because the Insurance Companies failed to prove that such treatment was excepted from the general provisions of the medical insurance policy.
Because this case involves a mixed question of fact and law, the trial court was required to determine, as a matter of law, the effect of the insurance contract. The court also needed to determine the facts of the case and examine them according to its decision regarding the insurance contract. Christopher's injury and need for treatment were undisputed.
Hagners presented the expert testimony of Dr. William Leyda, Doctor of Dental Medicine specializing in oral and maxilofa-cial surgery, who characterized Christopher's condition as a traumatic bodily injury. Record at 434. The treatment of such injury, by excision of the dead pulp under a general anesthetic, fits the plain meaning of the Insurance Companies' contract provision for surgery, the latter defined as "operative and cutting procedures for the nee-essary . . . treatment of . . . injury." Record at 373.
The burden of proving an exception to this general provision was on the Insurance Companies. "An exclusionary clause is for the purpose of delimiting and restricting policy coverage. The object of *35an 'exception' is to exelude that which otherwise would be included within it, so as to prevent misrepresentation." 18 J.A. Appur-MAN & J.A. APPLEMAN, INSURANCE Law AND PRACTICE, § 7887 (1976) (citations omitted). "[A] common rule of contract and insurance law states that when performance is promised in general terms, followed by specific exceptions and limitations, the obligor has the burden of proving that the case falls [within] the exception." Zebrowski & Assoc. v. City of Indianapolis (1983), Ind.App., 457 N.E.2d 259, 262 (citations omitted). Because the Insurance Companies are appealing from a negative judgment on the issue of whether Christopher's treatment was excepted from the contract of insurance, an affirmative defense on which the Insurance Companies carried the burden of proof, we will reverse only if the evidence reasonably leads to only one conclusion which is contrary to that of the trial court. Ross v. Ross (1979), Ind.App., 397 N.E.2d 1066.
The burden was on the Insurance Companies to prove that Christopher's treatment was subject to the dental service-es exceptions contained in the policy.1 The evidence was conflicting on this basic issue. Hagners introduced testimony that Christopher's treatment was a surgical procedure for the treatment of infection and loss of weight resulting from a traumatic bodily injury. Record at 425-27, 434-35. Because the treatment was to repair a bodily injury and prevent more generalized health problems, the trial court could reasonably find that the treatment was not just a dental service, and therefore was not excluded by the contract language cited by the Insurance Companies. The Insurance Companies simply failed to prove how such treatment comes within the meaning of dental services as that term is employed in the contract of insurance. Several courts have held that the placement of crowns on the teeth as an adjunct to the treatment of temporomandibular joint syndrome, the latter requiring the repositioning of the jaw, is not excluded by a dental services exception. See, e.g., Goss v. Medical Serv. (1983), D.C., 462 A.2d 442; Simpson v. State Mut. Life Assurance Co. of Am. (1977), 135 Vt. 554, 382 A.2d 198. Similarly, the evidence in this case showed medical problems facing Christopher and his need for treatment thereof. Because the evidence was conflicting regarding the medical purposes of Christopher's treatment, *36we cannot say that the trial court erred, as a matter of law, when it concluded that such treatment was not subject to the dental services exception.
ISSUE TWO-Whether the trial court erred when it found the evidence to be clear and convincing that the Insurance Companies' conduct amounted to bad faith, oppressive conduct, fraud or malice?
PARTIES' CONTENTIONS-The Insurance Companies contend that the award of punitive damages was erroneous because the trial court found no evidence of bad faith, oppressive conduct, fraud or malice on the part of the Insurance Companies.
Hagners answer that clear and convincing evidence was presented at trial of the Insurance Companies' bad faith, oppressive conduct, fraud or malice.
CONCLUSION-The trial court did err when it found that the Insurance Companies' conduct amounted to bad faith, oppressive conduct, fraud or malice. The record discloses no more than a good faith dispute between the parties.
In reviewing the propriety of a judgment of punitive damages, we apply our normal standard of review in civil cases, keeping in mind, however, that the trial court may award punitive damages only upon a finding of clear and convincing evidence. Orkin Exterminating Co. v. Traina (1984), Ind.App., 461 N.E.2d 693.
Upon reviewing the record, we are convinced that the evidence presented at trial does not justify an award by the court of punitive damages. At most, the record shows a good faith dispute over the validity of the Hagners' claim. It is error to award punitive damages on such a factual foundation because of the "prohibitive social costs" of making such a claim indisputable. See Vernon Fire & Cas. Ins. Co. v. Sharp (1976), 264 Ind. 599, 349 N.E.2d 173. In addition, when establishing clear and convincing evidence to support an award of punitive damages in contract actions, "some evidence shall be required that is inconsistent with the hypothesis that the tortious conduct was the result of a mistake of law or fact, honest error of judgment, over-zealousness, mere negligence or other such noniniquitous human failing." Travelers Indem. Co. v. Armstrong (1982), Ind., 442 N.E.2d 349, 362. The Insurance Companies' vacillation on the question of a refund, while perhaps supportive of a finding of malice, is not inconsistent with a hypothesis of honest error or over-zealousness. Because the evidence fails to satisfy the standard established by Armstrong, we must reverse the award of punitive damages.
Affirmed in part, reversed and remanded in part. Costs are apportioned one-half to Insurance Companies and one-half to Hag-ners.
SHIELDS, J., concurs.
SULLIVAN, J., concurs in result with separate opinion.
. The Insurance Companies point to the following as the controlling contract language in this case. The cited language is from the Blue Shield or medical treatment portion of the contract. Similar language also appeared in the Blue Cross or hospital services portion of the contract. Record at 372. The distinctions between the two parts of the contract were not emphasized at trial and are not significant for purposes of this appeal.
"Dental Services
For the services indicated below, benefits shall also be payable when such services are performed by a D.D.S. or D.M.D.
a. Benefits are provided to cover oral surgery which most commonly includes, but is not restricted to, the following procedures:
(1) Excision of tumors and cysts of the jaws, cheeks, lips, tongue, roof and floor of the mouth
(2) Surgical procedures required to correct accidental injuries of the jaws, cheeks, lips, tongue, roof and floor of the mouth
(3) Excision of exostoses of the jaws and hard palate
(4) Treatment of fractured facial bones (maxillae or mandible)
(5) Incision and drainage of cellulitis
(6) Incision of accessory sinuses, salivary glands or ducts
(7) Reduction of, dislocations of, and excision of, the temporomandibular joints
b. The following services when performed on a hospital bedpatient: Multiple extractions or removal of unerupted teeth, and gingivec-tomies and alveolectomies, under general anesthesia, where the admission for the service is because a concurrent hazardous medical condition exists such as a serious blood dys-crasia, unstable diabetes, or a severe cardiovascular condition. Apprehension of the patient, regardless of age, does not entitle the patient to benefit coverage.
Benefit Exclusions
In addition to those elsewhere excluded or limited, the following services are not covered:
3. Dental services with the exception of the services provided in Part 3, Sec. II, A7, pages 3.11 and 3.12."
Record at 373.

=== CASE 2220415 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:42.68769+00 ===

394 Mass. 233 (1985)
475 N.E.2d 1201
PENTUCKET MANOR CHRONIC HOSPITAL, INC., & others[1]
vs.
RATE SETTING COMMISSION & another[2].
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
November 5, 1984.
March 12, 1985.
Present: HENNESSEY, C.J., WILKINS, LIACOS, ABRAMS, & LYNCH, JJ.
*234 Ellen L. Poster (Stanley M. Poster with her) for the plaintiffs.
Ellen L. Janos, Assistant Attorney General, for the defendants.
LIACOS, J.
We granted further appellate review to the plaintiffs, three proprietary chronic-care hospitals (hospitals). They claim error in the issuance of an Appeals Court order which summarily dismissed their appeal on the ground that the filing of the appeal was untimely. In addition, the hospitals allege error by the judge of the Superior Court in his determination of the merits of their claim.
The defendant Rate Setting Commission (commission) had reduced previously set rates of Medicaid reimbursement for the plaintiff hospitals. The hospitals appealed the commission's action to the Division of Hearings Officers (division). See G.L.c. 6A, § 36. After the division affirmed the rate reductions, the hospitals sought review in the Superior Court. See G.L.c. 6A, § 36; G.L.c. 30A, § 14. On January 4, 1983, a Superior Court judge entered a judgment for the commission, based upon a recommendation by a special master that the decision of the division be affirmed.[3]
The hospitals moved to vacate the judgment on January 12, 1983. The judge denied the motion on April 4, 1983. On April 29, 1983, the hospitals filed a notice of appeal. The Appeals Court declined to reach the merits of the hospitals' claims because the hospitals had failed to file their notice of appeal within sixty days of the entry of judgment on January 4, 1983.
The Appeals Court treated the hospitals' motion to vacate as a motion under Mass. R. Civ. P. 60 (b), 365 Mass. 828 (1974),[4]*235 the filing of which does not toll the running of the sixty-day appeal period under Mass. R.A.P. 4 (a), as amended, 393 Mass. 1239 (1985). The hospitals contend that their appeal was timely filed within ten days after entry of judgment, and that their motion falls under Mass. R. Civ. P. 59 (e), 365 Mass. 827 (1974),[5] which tolls the running of the sixty-day appeal period.
There are no Massachusetts decisions which address the issue whether a motion to vacate, if served within ten days of judgment, should be treated as a rule 59 (e) motion to alter or amend judgment, or as a rule 60 (b) motion for relief from judgment. The only decision of this court which has touched upon this issue assumed a motion to reconsider was a rule 60 motion. Wolfberg v. Hunter, 385 Mass. 390, 392 n. 4 (1982). In the instant case, both the trial judge and the Appeals Court treated the hospitals' motion to vacate as one for reconsideration, and cited Wolfberg, supra, to place it under rule 60.
The Reporters' Notes to rule 59 (e) state that the rule encompasses a motion for rehearing, reconsideration, or vacation. Reporters' Notes to Mass. R. Civ. P. 59 (e), Mass. Ann. Laws, Rules of Civil Procedure at 560 (1982).[6] We believe *236 the better approach, and that taken by some Federal courts, is that substance, not labels, should control in determining whether a postjudgment motion is a rule 59 (e) motion or a rule 60 motion. See, e.g., Sunstream Jet Express, Inc. v. International Air Serv. Co., 734 F.2d 1258, 1273 (7th Cir.1984); Smith v. United States Parole Comm'n, 721 F.2d 346, 348 (11th Cir.1983).[7] The hospitals alleged that (1) the master's report adopted by the Superior Court judge was deficient in some findings, (2) the master misunderstood the purpose of the audit procedure, and (3) the master's conclusions were not supported by the record. The hospitals had raised these same errors in a prejudgment motion. The only provision of rule 60 (b), into which the motion to vacate arguably could fit, is rule 60 (b) (6), which provides for motions for "any other reason justifying relief from the operation of the judgment." See note 4, supra.
"As a general principle, we apply to our rules of civil procedure the construction given to the cognate Federal rules." Chavoor v. Lewis, 383 Mass. 801, 806 n. 5 (1981). Rule 60 does not provide for general reconsideration of an order or a judgment. Blair v. Delta Air Lines, Inc., 344 F. Supp. 367, 368 (S.D. Fla. 1972). Nor does it provide an avenue for challenging supposed legal errors, nor for obtaining relief from errors which are readily correctible on appeal. Id., citing 3 W.W. Barron & A. Holtzoff, Federal Practice and Procedure (Rules ed.) § 1322 (Wright rev. ed. 1958). Roque v. Redlands, 79 F.R.D. 433, 435 (C.D. Cal. 1978). Relief under rule 60 (b) (6) will be granted only in extraordinary circumstances. Artco, Inc. v. DiFruscia, 5 Mass. App. Ct. 513, 517 (1977). Larsen v. International Business Machs. Corp., 87 F.R.D. 602, 604 (E.D. Pa. 1980). Roque, supra. *237 7 Moore's Federal Practice par. 60.27[2], at 60-274 (2d ed. 1982). 11 C.A. Wright & A.R. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure § 2864, at 219 (1973), and cases cited therein. The circumstances of the instant case cannot be considered so extraordinary as to bring them within the purview of rule 60 (b) (6).
Where doubt exists as to the proper characterization of a postjudgment motion, some courts simply treat all timely-filed motions which call into question the correctness of a judgment as rule 59 (e) motions. See Western Indus., Inc. v. Newcor Canada Ltd., 709 F.2d 16, 17 (7th Cir.1983); Dove v. Codesco, 569 F.2d 807, 809 (4th Cir.1978); Foman v. Davis, 292 F.2d 85, 87 (1st Cir.1961). Cf. Seshachalam v. Creighton Univ. School of Medicine, 545 F.2d 1147 (8th Cir.1976). We find this approach consistent with our view described in Page v. New England Tel. & Tel. Co., 383 Mass. 250, 252 (1981), that rule 59 (e) is designed to correct judgments which are erroneous because they lack legal or factual justification.[8] We conclude that, because the hospitals' motion to vacate was served within ten days of judgment and because the relief sought was correction of errors of law, it properly can be considered a rule 59 (e) motion. Thus, the appeal was timely. We proceed to consider the merits of the plaintiffs' appeal.
We give a brief summary of the facts and of the Medicaid program, necessary to an understanding of the substantive issues. Although the Federal government and each participating State jointly fund the Medicaid program, each State designs its own program within certain Federal guidelines. See 42 U.S.C. § 1396 et seq. (1976 & Supp. III 1979). Massachusetts *238 participates in the Medicaid program, and the Department of Public Welfare is charged with the responsibility to ensure that the program is administered in accordance with Federal law. See G.L.c. 118E, §§ 4, 6. During the years relevant to this appeal, participating States submitted plans for approval by the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services, which were required to conform to the requirements of 42 U.S.C. § 1396a and regulations promulgated thereunder. Federal regulations established the following criteria for States electing not to adopt Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (Medicare) systems of repayment:[9] incentives for efficiency and economy; reimbursement on a reasonable cost basis; and reimbursement not exceeding that allowable under Title XVIII standards and principles of cost reimbursement. See 45 C.F.R. 250.30(a)(2) (1969).[10]
In 1974, the commission adopted a new system of reimbursement for hospitals through the promulgation of Regulation 74-1, under the authority of G.L.c. 6A, § 32. Under the regulation, the commission separately calculates a rate for each hospital prior to the beginning of the rate year. The rate is based on operating costs reported by each hospital for its "base" year (two years prior to the rate year), and increased by an inflation factor. Added to this figure are a hospital's base year "non-operating" expenses and any additional allowance resulting from administrative adjustments.[11] If a hospital's actual rate year expenses are less than projected, it need not return *239 the overage. On the other hand, if its actual expenses are more than projected, it is not reimbursed for the difference.
The commission originally adopted the rates here at issue by using cost information contained in forms known as HCF-100 and HCF-400 submitted by each hospital to the commission. After the rates were set, the commission conducted audits on every HCF-100 and HCF-400 submitted by the hospitals during the four-year period of 1974-1977. The commission had received information from the Department of Public Health that the hospitals' administrative salaries included in the administrative expense category on the forms exceeded maximums set by Federal guidelines.[12] See 20 C.F.R. 405 et seq. (1968); Provider Reimbursement Manual.[13] The commission determined that the owner-administrators' salaries as reported by the hospitals on HCF-100 were excessive, reduced each allowance for "administration" cost, and reissued the rates at lower amounts.[14]
The hospitals do not contest the finding of excessiveness of their administrative cost claims, nor do they contest the power of the commission to establish reasonable levels of compensation for owner-administrators. Rather, they argue that, for a *240 variety of reasons, redetermination of their Medicaid payment rates was improper.[15] They first contend that redetermination violates the prospective system of rate setting established in G.L.c. 6A, § 32. Section 32, by its plain words, establishes a "prospective" system for rate setting. The statute is silent, however, as is the legislative history, as to whether or when rate redeterminations such as the one here at issue may be made.[16]
When the meaning of a statute is brought into question, a court properly should read other sections and should construe them together, Holbrook v. Holbrook, 1 Pick. 248, 250 (1822), so as to constitute an harmonious whole consistent with the legislative purpose. Board of Educ. v. Assessor of Worcester, 368 Mass. 511, 513-514 (1975). We note first that the sixth paragraph of § 32, after commanding the establishment of prospective rates whenever possible, then provides for the setting of "interim" rates. See note 16, supra. In the eighth paragraph of § 32 the Legislature establishes the ability of the commission to set a "preliminary final rate" and provides for auditing procedures.[17]*241 Finally, also in the eighth paragraph, the Legislature provides that ninety per cent of the difference between an interim and a preliminary final rate is payable by, or to, a governmental unit when certified to the State Secretary. See note 17, supra. The ability of the commission to set interim and preliminary final rates, and the provision for payment of differences between them, demonstrate that the Legislature anticipated the setting of tentative or provisional rates with allowances for later adjustment. Section 32 does not prohibit the adjustment of rates.
The hospitals also argue that the redeterminations of their rates violate the commission's own regulations governing hospital reimbursement. Specifically, the hospitals contend that the rate redeterminations, resulting from audits which revealed excessive administrative costs, are not authorized by the regulations. At issue are four regulations, each covering a separate rate year, promulgated pursuant to G.L.c. 6A, §§ 31-36.[18]
The regulations covering the first two years, Regulation 74-1 and Regulation 74-26, do not require explicitly that the commission conduct audits. The regulations do make reference, however, to audits in several instances, including the section pertaining to the method for determining rates and in the section *242 concerning rate adjustments. See Regulation 74-1, §§ 4.3 and 9.5; Regulation 74-26, §§ 4.3 and 9.5. Accordingly, the regulations presume that audits will occur. Because the regulations should not be construed so as to make an audit provision inoperative or superfluous, see 2A C. Sands, Sutherland Statutory Construction § 46.06 (4th ed. 1984), it follows that audits may require rate redeterminations. More importantly, § 9.5 of Regulation 74-1 and of Regulation 74-26 states: "The Commission may, on its own motion, require an adjustment in the rate of a provider ... where such rate had been established on the basis of unaudited base year cost information and subsequent audit reveals substantial error in the costs as reported by the provider."
In light of the regulation's purpose to "produce fair and reasonable rates of payment," we believe that the commission could conclude that "substantial error[s]" should include unreasonable administrative costs. Only reasonable costs properly may be used to determine rates. The discovery that the rates were fixed, in part, on the basis of excessive rates of compensation for owner-administrators clearly revealed a "substantial error," and the commission was entitled to readjust the rates on that basis.
The later regulations, 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3 and 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, as amended, unambiguously authorize audits and anticipate the setting of rates before audits are complete: "Rates determined under this part shall be calculated from audited and adjusted HCF 400 statements when possible." 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, § 3.54.[19] Section 3.55(b) of 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3 and 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, as amended, provided that allowable hospital costs be determined in accord with 20 C.F.R. 405 et seq., and the Provider Reimbursement Manual. Furthermore, under these regulations, the commission may review a rate upon its own motion at any time, and is explicitly authorized to *243 increase, decrease, or maintain a rate following review.[20] We conclude that redeterminations such as the ones here at issue are permitted under 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3 and 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, as amended, and that the division did not err in concluding that the commission needs the power to review rates after audit to comply with Federal requirements.[21]
We next address the hospitals' contention that the rate redeterminations conflict with Federal mandates. A Federal regulation required that, if the medicare standards and principles were not adopted, the alternative methods and standards must provide "[i]ncentives for efficiency and economy." 45 C.F.R. 250.30(b)(1)(iii)(a) (1971). The hospitals argue that such incentives depend on their ability to rely on the finality of the rate set.
Prior to 1972, Federal law required participating States to reimburse hospitals for inpatient services provided to Medicaid patients on the basis of cost methodology used by the Federal Medicare program. In response to concerns about spiraling costs, Congress amended Title XIX of the Social Security Act in 1972 to allow each State to develop its own alternative reimbursement scheme. Mississippi Hosp. Ass'n v. Heckler, 701 F.2d 511, 515 (5th Cir.1983). "`[E]xperience under the ... medicaid ... program[] ha[d] clearly demonstrated there [was] little incentive to contain costs or to produce the services *244 in the most efficient and effective manner.' H.R.Rep. 231, 92d Cong., 1st Sess. 80 (1971), reprinted in 1972 U.S. Code Cong. & Admin. News, p. 5066 (emphasis added)." California Hosp. Ass'n v. Obledo, 602 F.2d 1357, 1360 (9th Cir.1979). Regulation 45 C.F.R. 250.30(b)(1)(iii)(a) (1971) was promulgated presumably in accordance with this legislative concern.
The nature of a prospective methodology, such as the one here at issue, is to indicate to a hospital what its reimbursement will be for the coming year; the prospective system itself induces efficiencies and economies. Hospital Ass'n of N.Y. State, Inc. v. Toia, 473 F. Supp. 917, 938 (S.D.N.Y. 1979). While increased efficiency was a goal of the 1972 changes, Federal law also gave State authorities great flexibility in the areas of cost-finding and rate-setting. Mississippi Hosp. Ass'n v. Heckler, supra.
Regulation 74-1, which was approved by the Department of Health, Education and Welfare (HEW), provides several avenues for rate redetermination. Health care providers may request adjustments after the rate is set in a variety of circumstances. See Regulations 74-1 and 74-26, §§ 9.1-9.3; 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, §§ 3.73-3.75; 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, as amended, §§ 3.74-3.76. In addition, the commission may order a rate reduction where costs have been transferred or eliminated during the rate year. See Regulations 74-1 and 74-26, § 9.4; 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, § 3.77; 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, as amended, § 3.78.
Given these other avenues for rate redeterminations and their approval by HEW, we cannot say that the redetermination of a rate following revelation of a nonallowable expense defeats Federal mandates for incentives for economy and efficiency.[22] Accordingly, the division did not err in concluding that rate redeterminations are consistent with the prospective system *245 because they are permitted by the regulations in other circumstances.
Finally, the hospitals contend that the division based its decision on findings of fact which were not in the record, i.e., they were not stipulated to by the parties. Our reading of the record indicates that some of these findings may be inferred reasonably from the stipulations, and that, in any event, these facts are not necessary to support the division's conclusions. Accordingly, the judgment of the Superior Court is affirmed.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  Newburyport Manor Chronic Hospital, Inc., and Beaconcrest Chronic Hospital, Inc.
[2]  The chief hearing officer of the Division of Hearing Officers.
[3]  Review of an administrative decision is generally confined to the record. G.L.c. 30A, § 14 (5). Martin v. Director of the Div. of Employment Sec., 347 Mass. 264, 268 (1964). The record in the instant case indicates that the special master did not hold evidentiary hearings, but rather reviewed the record as would a Superior Court judge.
[4]  Massachusetts R. Civ. P. 60 (b), reads in part: "Mistake; Inadvertence; Excusable Neglect; Newly Discovered Evidence; Fraud, etc. On motion and upon such terms as are just, the court may relieve a party or his legal representative from a final judgment, order, or proceeding for the following reasons: (1) mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect; (2) newly discovered evidence which by due diligence could not have been discovered in time to move for a new trial under Rule 59(b); (3) fraud (whether heretofore denominated intrinsic or extrinsic), misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an adverse party; (4) the judgment is void; (5) the judgment has been satisfied, released, or discharged, or a prior judgment upon which it is based has been reversed or otherwise vacated, or it is no longer equitable that the judgment should have prospective application; or (6) any other reason justifying relief from the operation of the judgment. The motion shall be made within a reasonable time, and for reasons (1), (2), and (3) not more than one year after the judgment, order or proceeding was entered or taken."
[5]  Massachusetts Rule of Civil Procedure 59 (e), states: "Motion to Alter or Amend a Judgment. A motion to alter or amend the judgment shall be served not later than 10 days after entry of the judgment."
[6]  Cf. 6A Moore's Federal Practice par. 59.12[1], at 59-289 (2d ed. 1984): "Although the motion under [rule 59] (e) is to `alter or amend' the judgment, it would perhaps be more accurate to say that subdivision (e) deals with motions to alter, amend, or vacate. It would be an unreasonably narrow position to hold that a judgment may be modified and amended only up to the thin line where it amounts to a vacation of the judgment altogether." (Emphasis in original.)
[7]  Indeed, some courts have gone so far as to treat motions labeled rule 60 (b) as rule 59 (e) motions. See Dove v. Codesco, 569 F.2d 807, 809 (4th Cir.1978); Sea Ranch Ass'n v. California Coastal Zone Conservation Comm'ns, 537 F.2d 1058, 1061 (9th Cir.1976).
[8]  We reject the narrow approach which the commission urges us to adopt. See Durkin v. Taylor, 444 F. Supp. 879, 889 (E.D. Va. 1977); Erickson Tool Co. v. Balas Collet Co., 277 F. Supp. 226, 234 (N.D. Ohio 1967); American Fed'n of Teachers Local 2012 v. Rhode Island Bd. of Regents for Educ., 477 A.2d 104, 106 (R.I. 1984). "One of the purposes of the rules of [civil and] appellate procedure was undoubtedly to simplify that procedure by eliminating many of the previous rigid statutory time limitations which often served as fatal or near-fatal booby traps for inexperienced or unwary practitioners taking a case from the trial court to the appellate court." Giacobbe v. First Coolidge Corp., 367 Mass. 309, 315 (1975).
[9]  States had been required to reimburse health care providers according to principles of reimbursement developed under the Medicare system. In 1972, legislative changes permitted States to implement reimbursement methods which departed from those of Medicare. See infra at 243-244.
[10]  The Federal regulation, 45 C.F.R. 250, was redesignated 42 C.F.R. 450 in 1977. The regulation 45 C.F.R. 250.30(a)(2) (1974) may be found at 39 Fed. Reg. 28, 288 (1974).
[11]  A hospital may apply for administrative adjustments in certain circumstances to receive reimbursement for a limited number of rate year costs. See Regulations 74-1 and 74-26, §§ 9.1-9.3; 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, § 3.73; 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, as amended, § 3.74. The plaintiff hospitals have applied for and received these administrative adjustments.
[12]  Audits for the base years 1972 and 1973 were commenced and then discontinued. The commission resumed auditing 1972-1973 base year information after notification by the Department of Public Health.
[13]  The Federal Regulation, 20 C.F.R. 405, was redesignated 42 C.F.R. 405 in 1977.
[14]  The administrator salaries involved were paid to Marjorie O'Toole, her husband, Joseph O'Toole, and to Mary O'Meara. All three had an ownership interest in the hospitals involved. The specific amounts paid to these owner-administrators were not shown separately in the original filings. The audits revealed that the three owner-administrators of the three hospitals were claiming salaries as follows:
1972       1973       1974       1975
Marjorie O'Toole     $61,320    $61,963    $66,082    $64,920
Joseph O'Toole        93,052     94,627     98,199     98,350
Mary O'Meara          40,847     45,950     46,048     33,840
The Provider Reimbursement Manual guidelines for facilities of the size of each hospital ranged from $19,200 to $39,600.
[15]  All eight of the hospitals' arguments arise under G.L.c. 30A, § 14, and allege either error on the part of the Superior Court judge in failing to reverse the division's decision due to errors of law or that the division's decision itself was based on errors of law or was unsupported by substantial evidence.
[16]  Paragraph 6 of § 32, prior to a 1981 amendment, provided in part: "The commission shall establish rates on a prospective basis, subject to rules and regulations promulgated by the commission whenever possible, provided however that, whenever the commission by regulation provides that a final rate for a reporting period shall be computed on the actual cost of a provider of services, or a state institution, for such period, it shall establish an interim rate for said provider or institution within twenty-one days of the beginning of said reporting period, from which interim rate said provider may appeal as provided under section thirty-six of this chapter" (emphasis supplied). Unless otherwise indicated, references to c. 6A, § 32, will be to provisions as they existed between 1974 and 1977.
Section 32 was enacted by St. 1973, c. 1229, § 2, replacing and enlarging former G.L.c. 7, § 30L. General Laws c. 7, § 30L, had no explicit provision for the setting of tentative or provisional rates, yet in Murphy Nursing Home, Inc. v. Rate Setting Comm'n, 364 Mass. 454, 458-459 (1973), this court found proper a regulation establishing a tentative rate.
[17]  "Whenever a final rate for a filing period is to be determined after the end of said period, the commission shall calculate a preliminary final rate within sixty-days after receipt of a satisfactory financial and operating cost report from a provider of services or state institution for such filing period. If said reports provide all the information required by the commission and are attested to by an independent licensed accountant or an independent certified public accountant ... the commission may, prior to a field audit establish said preliminary final rate on the basis of said information submitted.... Ninety per cent of the difference between the interim rate and said preliminary final rate shall become payable by or to governmental units when certified to the state secretary. Said preliminary final rate may be promulgated as the final rate of a provider of services or state institution if the commission is satisfied with a provider's report...." G.L.c. 6A, § 32, inserted by St. 1973, c. 1229, § 2.
[18]  Regulation 74-1 governs rates beginning April 1, 1974; Regulation 74-26 governs the rate year beginning October 1, 1974; 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3 governs the rate year beginning October 1, 1975; 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, as amended, governs the rate year beginning October 1, 1976.
[19]  As amended, 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3 changed HCF 400 statements to RSC 100 or RSC 401 statements. 14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, § 3.54, as amended.
[20]  14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, § 3.76, provides: "To assure that an approved inpatient, outpatient, or well newborn rate is adequate and appropriate, the Commission may, at any time and upon its own motion, review an approved rate upon notice to the hospital."
14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, § 3.78, provides: "Upon notice of administrative review, a hospital shall submit such books, records, documentation, and information as the Commission may require. After review, the Commission will render a written decision and statement of reasons for its decision. The decision may include an increase, decrease, or maintenance of rate."
14 Code Human Services Regs. 3, as amended, did not significantly change these sections.
[21]  Because we have decided that the redeterminations were appropriate under the regulations, we need not decide whether the division improperly deferred to the commission's construction of them.
[22]  We note that the record indicates that at least some of the recommended administrators' salaries were a matter of public record. Furthermore, Congress enacted Title XIX "to provide health care for the poor and aged, not to subsidize or otherwise to benefit health care providers." Pennsylvania Pharmaceutical Ass'n v. Department of Pub. Welfare, 542 F. Supp. 1349, 1355-1356 (W.D. Pa. 1982).

=== CASE 2220420 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:42.779834+00 ===

19 Mass. App. Ct. 484 (1985)
475 N.E.2d 1223
DAVID ZIEMBA & another[1]
vs.
FO'CS'LE, INC. & another.[2]
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Barnstable.
November 9, 1984.
March 19, 1985.
Present: PERRETTA, KAPLAN, & WARNER, JJ.
Evan T. Lawson (Lena M. Wong with him) for the plaintiffs.
Charles M. Sabatt for the defendant.
PERRETTA, J.
The defendant Fo'cs'le, Inc. (Fo'cs'le), is a bar in Provincetown which, during the summer season, serves juices, soda, liquor, and snacks to the public. In the winter, sandwiches are added to the menu. The atmosphere at the Fo'cs'le, which has a jukebox and pinball machine, can be described as informal. Fo'cs'le also had a "house" rule or policy *485 that children were not allowed on the premises after 6:00 P.M. When Dorothy Griffin (Dorothy), the barmaid at the Fo'cs'le on the evening in question, enforced this rule against the plaintiffs David and Sarah Ziemba (David and Sarah) and their three year old son an argument ensued between Dorothy and David. David was of the view that Dorothy, with whom he had kept company while separated from Sarah, was selectively enforcing the rule against him out of hostility over his reunion with Sarah.
Dorothy gave David an ultimatum to the effect that, if he did not leave, she would call the police and have him arrested. David and Sarah refused to remove themselves, and the police were called. Upon their arrival, they spoke with Dorothy and then advised David and Sarah that, if they did not leave, they would be arrested. When David and Sarah stood fast, they were arrested and escorted to the police station. After being found not guilty on complaints charging them with criminal trespass, G.L.c. 266, § 120, David and Sarah brought this action against Dorothy and Fo'cs'le, alleging false imprisonment, malicious prosecution, and the intentional infliction of emotional distress. At the close of their evidence, the trial judge entered judgment against them on a directed verdict under Mass.R.Civ.P. 50(a), 365 Mass. 814 (1974).[3] We affirm.
1. Malicious Prosecution.
On their claim against Fo'cs'le for malicious prosecution, the plaintiffs were required to show that they suffered damages because Dorothy, as agent of Fo'cs'le, instituted criminal proceedings against them with malice and without probable cause and that the proceedings terminated in their favor. See Beecy v. Pucciarelli, 387 Mass. 589, 593 (1982). See also Nolan, Tort Law § 52 (1979). The trial judge concluded that the plaintiffs had failed to meet their burden because the undisputed evidence established that the police arrested them in the exercise of their independent discretion and, therefore, that Dorothy had *486 not initiated the criminal proceedings. See, e.g., Shea v. Sullivan, 261 Mass. 255, 258-259 (1927). Compare Mason v. Jacot, 235 Mass. 521 (1920). See also Restatement (Second) of Torts § 653 comment d, at 408 (1977) ("The giving of the information or the making of the accusation, however, does not constitute a procurement of the proceedings that the third person initiates if it is left to the uncontrolled choice of the third person to bring the proceedings or not as he may see fit").
The plaintiffs argue that whether they were arrested at Dorothy's direction or at the discretion of the police was a question of fact for the jury. We review the evidence in a light most favorable to the plaintiffs (see Carroll v. Gillespie, 14 Mass. App. Ct. 12, 18 [1982], and cases therein cited) to determine if there is any support for their claim that Dorothy initiated the criminal proceedings against them.
From September of 1975 until March of 1976 and while separated from Sarah, David was romantically involved with Dorothy. Sarah knew about their relationship and although, according to her testimony, she "understood," she was not happy about it. During that period, David would frequently go to the Fo'cs'le, bringing along his then two year old son, to meet Dorothy, who would be ready to leave work, usually between 6:00 P.M. and 6:30 P.M. Shortly after David and Dorothy returned from a trip to Puerto Rico, paid for by Dorothy, the relationship tapered off and came to a gradual end.
On April 3, 1976, David and Sarah appeared in court for their divorce, had dinner together, and reconciled. At about 4:00 P.M. on August 25 of that year, they decided to drop in at the Fo'cs'le. Their son, now about three and one-half years old, was with them. Dorothy was tending the bar, and they sat at one of the seven or eight tables. David went to the bar and bought a beer, which he shared with Sarah. Under another "policy" of the Fo'cs'le, their child was given fruit juice free of charge. Time passed, David played pinball, and Sarah went up to the bar and bought another beer.
Trouble began at about 5:55 P.M., when David went to the bar and asked Dorothy for another beer. Dorothy refused to *487 serve David, telling him, "It's five minutes to six. I'm not serving you. Children aren't allowed in here after six." David would not leave with his son because, as he informed Dorothy, although he knew of the "house rule," he also knew that it was selectively enforced, mostly against tourists, that she was discriminating against him contrary to the rules of the Alcoholic Beverages Control Commission, that she had no right to ask him to leave, and that he intended to stay. He returned to the pinball machine. Dorothy became angry and loud in her insistence that, if he did not leave, she would call the police and have him arrested.
David stood fast, the police arrived, and David greeted them at the door.[4] They asked him to be seated and went over to Dorothy, who was behind the bar. Neither David nor Sarah heard the conversation between the police and Dorothy.[5] After speaking with Dorothy, the police came over to David and Sarah and said to David, according to his testimony, that "Dorothy wanted us out of there and if we didn't leave that we would be arrested for trespassing." David replied that he "felt that they had no right arresting us for trespassing," that "[w]e didn't do anything wrong," and that they were not going to leave. The police put the same statement to Sarah, who responded in a similar manner to David, adding that she would not leave without him.
*488 Criminal proceedings are deemed instituted, in an action for malicious prosecution, upon the happening of any one of a number of events that can take place in the criminal process. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 654 (1977). For sound reasons of public policy, however, the mere act of calling the police for aid does not rise to the level of instituting criminal proceedings. See Wingersky v. E.E. Gray Co., 254 Mass. 198, 201 (1926) ("It is the duty of every member of society to see to it that crime is punished so far as lies in his power"). See also Seelig v. Harvard Coop. Soc., 1 Mass. App. Ct. 341, 344 (1973), and authorities therein cited. On the evidence presented, criminal proceedings were instituted against David and Sarah no earlier than when they were arrested. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 654(2)(c) and comment e, at 413 (1977). See also Nolan, Tort Law § 52, at 64 (1979).
The evidence most favorable to Sarah and David shows, at best, that Dorothy told David that if he did not leave, she would call the police and have him arrested, that she did call the police, and that she engaged in conversation with them upon their arrival. The police then advised David and Sarah that Dorothy wanted them to leave the Fo'cs'le and that, if they did not do so, they would be arrested for trespassing. Neither those facts nor the inferences which could reasonably be drawn therefrom can support a finding that Dorothy demanded or directed the police to arrest David and Sarah, that she furnished the police with false information to influence their actions, or that the police did not exercise their independent discretion in arresting David and Sarah.[6] See Burnham v. Collateral Loan Co., 179 Mass. 268 (1901); Shea v. Sullivan, 261 Mass. at 258 Compare Mason v. Jacot, 235 Mass. at 524-526; Carroll v. Gillespie, 14 Mass. App. Ct. at 25. See generally Prosser, Torts § 119, at 837 (4th ed. 1971).
*489 2. Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress.
On David and Sarah's claim for the intentional infliction of emotional distress, the trial judge ruled as matter of law that Dorothy's conduct was neither extreme and outrageous, beyond all possible bounds of decency, nor utterly intolerable in a civilized society. Moreover, she concluded that the emotional distress sustained by David and Sarah was not severe or of a nature that no reasonable person could be expected to endure it. See Agis v. Howard Johnson Co., 371 Mass. 140, 144-145 (1976).
We pick up with our recitation of the evidence in a light most favorable to David and Sarah at the point where they advised the police that they would not leave the Fo'cs'le voluntarily. David testified that he knew the police would not arrest him if he left the Fo'cs'le with his son, but he told the police, "If you have to arrest me, then arrest me." The police then left the Fo'cs'le with David and Sarah, who took turns carrying their son, and walked two blocks to the police station. The police did not handcuff or otherwise touch David or Sarah; rather, they all simply walked "abreast" of each other. Sarah testified that as they passed some people she knew, they asked what was "going on."
David and Sarah were at the police station no longer than an hour. They were not placed in a cell, and they were not required to post bail money. After leaving the police station, they went home, had supper, and went to bed. They appeared in court twice on the criminal complaints, and the proceedings were concluded on September 2, 1976.
David and Sarah described their child as being in a state of "awe" throughout the events of the evening of August 25th. At the police station he asked Sarah, a number of times, questions to the effect of "What are they doing to Daddy?" David and Sarah testified that they suffered humiliation and anxiety at the time of their arrest and during the pendency of the criminal charges against them.[7]
*490 We see nothing in the evidence that satisfies those elements set out and discussed in Agis v. Howard Johnson Co., 371 Mass. at 142-145. See also, Boyle v. Wenk, 378 Mass. 592 (1979)
3. Conclusion.
It follows from our conclusions concerning Dorothy's lack of liability that we need not consider whether her acts were committed in the scope of her employment at the Fo'cs'le. See Fanciullo v. B.G. & S. Theatre Corp., 297 Mass. 44, 47 (1937)
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  Sarah Ziemba.
[2]  Dorothy Griffin, against whom a default issued under Mass.R.Civ.P. 55(a), 365 Mass. 822 (1974), presumably for her failure to answer to the plaintiffs' complaint. She is not a party to this appeal.
[3]  As the plaintiffs make no argument concerning their claim for false imprisonment, we affirm the judgment as to that claim without discussion. See Mass.R.A.P. 16(a)(4), as amended, 367 Mass. 921 (1975).
[4]  Dorothy testified that she did not call the police. David said that she did, but he agreed (on cross-examination) that he might have done so. He remembered that during his "heated" argument with Dorothy, he had offered to place the call. We proceed on the basis that Dorothy called the police.
[5]  Dorothy's version of the conversation is revealed through her testimony. (The police were not called to testify.) She stated that she informed the police that because of the "house" rule, she wanted David and Sarah to leave and that they could return but without their child. The police advised her that she would have to ask David and Sarah to leave in their (the police) presence. She went over to David and Sarah's table, again asked them to leave, they refused, and she returned to her place behind the bar. David and Sarah had no memory of Dorothy's repeating her demand to them in the presence of the police. As David and Sarah do not have either knowledge or memory of these alleged facts which are not favorable to them, we disregard Dorothy's testimony on these points.
[6]  Evidence that the "house" rule was not enforced uniformly and that Dorothy invoked the rule out of hostility does not render those facts related by her to the police (and set out in note 5, supra) false, and hence does not make the conversation evidence favorable to David and Sarah.
[7]  A motion to strike Sarah's testimony that she also suffered severe headaches that required medical attention was allowed for her failure to show that the headaches were not related to her preexisting sinus condition which also required medical attention. No argument is made to us concerning that ruling. See Mass.R.A.P. 16(a)(4), as amended, 367 Mass. 921 (1975).

=== CASE 2220429 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:43.061417+00 ===

19 Mass. App. Ct. 477 (1985)
475 N.E.2d 753
CARLOS MADARIAGA'S (dependent's) CASE.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Suffolk.
January 7, 1985.
March 15, 1985.
Present: ARMSTRONG, CUTTER, & FINE, JJ.
John E. Coyne for the insurer.
Robert M. Schwartz for the claimant.
CUTTER, J.
The decedent Madariaga's widow (the claimant) sought before the Industrial Accident Board (the board) benefits under G.L.c. 152, § 36A, based on injuries incurred by the decedent at work on June 27, 1981, when (during an early morning holdup at the restaurant where he worked) the decedent was shot between the eyes. His brain was severely damaged and he died about twelve hours later at a hospital. The decedent, when admitted to the hospital, "was alive and breathing."
The business of the restaurant, known as Casa Romero, was incorporated as DuFour's, Inc. The insurer promptly accepted the decedent's injury as an industrial accident and has paid *478 death benefits to the claimant under G.L.c. 152, §§ 31 and 33.[1]
On the application for benefits under § 36A, a single member of the board made extensive findings. On the basis of substantial medical testimony he concluded that, if the decedent had survived, he would have suffered disfigurement and losses of function entitling him to compensation of $76,100 in the aggregate under § 36, payable to the claimant under § 36A, amended by St. 1981, c. 572, § 4.[2] The single member, after reviewing the evidence presented to him, also found that, in the circumstances stated below, the decedent was an employee of DuFour's, Inc., and was not an independent contractor.
The insurer was directed to pay $76,100 to the claimant and also to meet various fees and expenses. The reviewing board adopted the findings and decision of the single member. On complaint to the Superior Court by the claimant that the insurer refused to make payment pursuant to the board's order, a Superior Court judge ordered judgment affirming the reviewing board's decision. From this judgment the insurer has appealed. We affirm.
1. The insurer contends that the evidence does not support the single member's conclusion that the decedent at his death *479 was an employee of DuFour's, Inc. We summarize the evidence on that issue.
The claimant (Laura Madariaga, formerly Laura Walker) came to the United States from Chile in 1973. In 1974, she was employed at the Casa Romero Restaurant. She was not then (and, by the time of the hearing before the single member, had not become) a citizen of the United States but was a resident alien. She married the decedent on September 5, 1979. He began to work at the restaurant in October, 1980. By then she was manager of the kitchen and he became manager of the dining room with some other duties.
Leo Romero was president and the sole director of DuFour's. Inc., which ran the restaurant as its only business. He owned ninety-four percent of the corporation's stock and, until late 1980, he had been active in the day-to-day management of the restaurant. In late 1980, he began to spend time in Vermont developing property there. To finance his Vermont project, he had sold, earlier in 1980, premises on Gloucester Street, Boston, including the parcel on which the restaurant stood, "retaining ... a long term lease" of the restaurant.
The single member found that Romero, in the autumn of 1980, asked the claimant to manage Casa Romero for him. The decedent, her husband, "was also hired as a manager ... with her.... The parties ... agreed to ... arrangements concerning duties, accounts payable, accounts receivable ... and bookkeeping procedures" under which "the claimant and the deceased were ... to deposit $9,000 ... per month in the DuFour's checking account and DuFour's would continue to pay the [restaurant's] major overhead expenses ... including ... rent, general liability and [w]orker's [c]ompensation [i]nsurance, utilities, equipment, repairs, liquor license renewal fees, personal property taxes, replacement of major equipment and maintenance of other equipment. The ... [decedent] and the claimant were to pay most of the every day operating expenses such as meals and payroll taxes, candles, flowers, rubbish removal, and cleaning ... office supplies, telephone, advertising, dining room supplies, kitchen and bar supplies *480... and the employee payroll, including weekly salaries to [the] claimant and the" decedent.[3]
On his subsidiary findings, the single member concluded that the decedent was an employee of DuFour's, Inc., and was not an independent contractor. As the single member pointed out, the decedent "was selling his services under a business arrangement with the owner of the restaurant" and "did not even have the authority to change the menu without ... Romero's permission."
The subsidiary findings had support in not wholly consistent testimony of the claimant and Romero about the arrangements between (a) Romero and (b) the claimant and the decedent.[4]
Although some of the arrangements may have been written, no writing appears to have been relied on as stating with precision what the parties intended. Romero, the claimant, and the *481 decedent all appear to have accepted (a) the operating methods actually employed and (b) that Romero retained the ultimate power to control the operations. The arrangement may have been somewhat unusual and, as Romero testified, it was "a very trusting relationship ... basically done on a handshake." Despite its informality and some possible ambiguity in detail, reading the evidence about the arrangement affords persuasive support to the findings and conclusions of the single member.
The board's determination whether a person is an employee within G.L.c. 152, § 1(4), as appearing in St. 1945, c. 369, "under any contract of hire, express or implied, oral or written," is essentially a question of fact for the board, not to be set aside if it is justified by the evidence, unless, of course, it is tainted by some error of law. No such error appears here. See McDermott's Case, 283 Mass. 74, 75-77 (1933); O'Hara's Case, 310 Mass. 223, 225-227 (1941, worker's compensation insurance against injuries some evidence of employment); Brigham's Case, 348 Mass. 140, 141-142 (1964); Locke, Workmen's Compensation, §§ 141-149 (2d ed. 1981). See also Bell v. Sawyer, 313 Mass. 250, 251-252 (1943); Enga v. Sparks, 315 Mass. 120, 122-123 (1943, where there is consideration of significance of the circumstance that the worker is furnished equipment by his alleged employer); Cowan v. Eastern Racing Assn., 330 Mass. 135, 143 (1953, importance of right of discharge discussed); Lane's (dependent's) Case, 354 Mass. 776 (1968). Compare O'Malley's Case, 361 Mass. 504, 506-507 (1972). The testimony of Romero that he could terminate the arrangement at any time simply by "coming back to Boston and taking over the active operation" of the restaurant was strong evidence that DuFour's, Inc., had ultimate control over the claimant and the decedent.[5] The conclusion of the *482 single member that the decedent indeed was an employee[6] was well warranted.
2. The insurer contends that the claimant is precluded from recovery to the extent allowed by the Superior Court judgment by the combined effect of G.L.c. 152, § 36A (as amended by St. 1981, c. 572, §§ 4 and 5) and § 51A, inserted by St. 1969, c. 833, § 1. See note 2, supra. The 1981 amendment of § 36A was not effective until after June 27, 1981, when the decedent was shot. Thus the $20,000 limitation on recovery for specific losses from brain injury would not be applicable to the claimant's effort to recover specific compensation under § 36A, unless that effort is subject also to § 51A.
In McLeod's Case, 389 Mass. 431 (1983), the Supreme Judicial Court dealt with a case where workers' compensation benefits had increased between the date of McLeod's injury and the date of final decision on his claim, and where (at 433 n. 2) it was not disputed that "no compensation ... [had been] paid prior to the Superior Court decision" in that case. The court (at 433-435) held, on those facts, that the board and the courts were required by § 51A to compute compensation at the rates in effect on the date of final decision. In the present case, the claimant, as the decedent's widow, had been receiving from the insurer weekly payments. We regard that fact as sufficient to make § 51A inapplicable by its terms to the claimant's effort to recover specific benefits under § 36A.[7]
*483 The Supreme Judicial Court did not have before it, in McLeod's Case, a case where compensation rates or benefits had been reduced or limited between the date of injury and the date of final decision. The court (at 435) specifically pointed out that "§ 51A reflects a legislative intent to avoid obsolescence of compensation rates by requiring benefits to be computed in accordance with the statutory rate in effect at the time of the final decision, when no payments have been made during the period the claim has been contested." We regard this statement as indication that the court (because of the facts with which it then was dealing) interpreted § 51A in the light of the general upward trend of compensation benefits and rates over the years.[8] The Supreme Judicial Court has not yet decided whether it would reach the same result in a case involving less benefits at final decision than on the date of injury. There would be substantial basis for deciding that the Legislature did not intend that § 51A should have any application where benefits were reduced between injury and final decision. See the last two sentences of note 6, supra, and the discussion in Locke, Workmen's Compensation § 30, at 39-40. Because, however, weekly compensation has been paid by the insurer before final decision, we need not reach that issue.
Judgment affirmed.
NOTES
[1]  An agreement was made on October 19, 1981, between the claimant and the insurer under which (pursuant to G.L.c. 152, § 31) the claimant was to receive compensation of $110 each week and was stated to have been paid $1,760 as a first payment. The single member found that the insurer has continued to make these weekly payments.
[2]  The 1981 amendment of § 36A added a paragraph which reads: "Where any specified loss ... under section thirty-six is a result of an injury involving brain damage, then, to that extent, payment in total under this section for such specific loss or losses resulting from said brain damage only shall be in the amount of twenty thousand dollars. In no event shall payments be made under this section for an injury resulting in instantaneous death." Section S of c. 572, provided that the chapter should take effect on its passage (approved November 24, 1981, followed by an emergency letter on December 1, 1981) "and shall apply only to injuries occurring on and after its effective date." This provision should be considered with c. 152, § 51A, inserted by St. 1969, c. 833, § 1, which reads: "In any claim in which no compensation has been paid prior to the final decision on such claim, said final decision shall take into consideration the compensation provided by statute on the date of the decision, rather than the date of the injury" (emphasis supplied).
[3]  The single member also found that the funds to pay expenses were to come from the DuFour's overhead bank account and the restaurant's other accounts. "Any monies left over after payment of the expenses and the payroll were to be ... incentive pay or bonuses to the claimant and the [decedent].... Romero could terminate at will the business arrangement ... and not be subject to liability. Although both the [decedent] and the claimant had been given [by Romero] wide discretion in the day-to-day performance of ... duties [Romero] had authority to make major decisions concerning major equipment replacement, redecorating ... changing of menus and prices.... Romero would visit the restaurant at least once a month to check on its management by the claimant and the" decedent.
[4]  Some testimony was not the subject of specific findings by the single member. That testimony, however, could reasonably have been viewed by the single member as generally consistent with his conclusions. Among matters of testimony, not the subject of findings, were (a) that, at the beginning of the arrangement with Romero, the claimant and her husband purchased (for $5,594) DuFour's, Inc.'s, inventory of food and liquor, which DuFour's, Inc., repurchased (for $5,768) at the end of the arrangement; (b) that, because the claimant and the decedent were not citizens of the United States, the liquor license of this Boston restaurant had to be in the name of a citizen, one Allison, who accompanied Romero on his visits to the restaurant; and (c) that the operating expenses were a responsibility of the claimant and the decedent (so that any loss in day-to-day operations would have been borne by them). The testimony of Romero strongly suggests, however, that it was contemplated there would be some operating surplus which would provide an incentive bonus to the claimant and the decedent, and so it apparently turned out to be.
[5]  The testimony, that the arrangement was originally expected to be a brief one, because of plans of the claimant and the decedent to return to Chile after a short period, also may have given support to the single member's conclusion, as did evidence that DuFour's, Inc. furnished them with W-2 forms for income tax purposes.
[6]  Since we decide that the evidence provided support for the board's conclusion (that the decedent was an employee of DuFour's, Inc.), there is no occasion for us to consider the claimant's contention that the insurer's agreement to pay weekly compensation to the claimant is binding upon it and estops it now to contend that the decedent was an independent contractor. See Kareske's Case, 250 Mass. 220, 224-226 (1924); Hansen's Case, 350 Mass. 178 (1966). See also Corbosiero's Case, 11 Mass. App. Ct. 590, 592-593 (1981); Locke, Workmen's Compensation §§ 417-418 (1981 & Supp. 1984).
[7]  We recognize that the present insurer had disputed its liability to pay the claimant specific benefits under §§ 36 and 36A, from the time such benefits were sought by the claimant although it had paid (and continued to pay) weekly compensation probably important to the claimant. The inclusion in c. 152, § 51 A, of the words, "In any claim in which no compensation has been paid prior to the final decision on such claim," may have been in part a legislative effort to encourage insurers to make a prompt determination and payment of undisputed compensation to claimants likely to be facing fiscal problems. We perceive no legislative intention in the words from § 51A just quoted to make any separation of "compensation" based upon the section of c. 152 under which particular compensation was paid.
[8]  The general upward trend of compensation benefits is discussed in Locke, Workmen's Compensation §§ 302, 461 (1981 & Supp. 1984). See also discussions of the McLeod case in that textbook's 1984 supplement at §§ 302, n. 18; 441, n. 4; 591, n. 1; 601, n. 16.5.

=== CASE 2220434 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:43.206249+00 ===

105 Ill.2d 342 (1985)
475 N.E.2d 832
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Appellee,
v.
WILLIAM T. JONES, Appellant.
No. 57216.
Supreme Court of Illinois.
Opinion filed February 6, 1985.
*343 *344 *345 *346 Charles M. Schiedel, Deputy Defender, and Carroll J. King, Assistant Defender, of the Office of the State Appellate Defender, of Springfield, for appellant.
Neil F. Hartigan, Attorney General, of Springfield (Mark L. Rotert and Marcia L. Friedl, Assistant Attorneys General, of Chicago, of counsel), for the People.
Reversed and remanded.
JUSTICE GOLDENHERSH delivered the opinion of the court:
In an indictment returned in the circuit court of Jefferson County, defendant, William T. Jones, was charged with the murder and felony murder (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, pars. 9-1(a)(2), (3)) of Margaret Dare, attempted murder (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, pars. 8-4(a), 9-1(a)(1)) of James Dare, armed robbery (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 18-2), home invasion (Ill. Rev. Stat. *347 1981, ch. 38, par. 12-11), residential burglary (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 19-3(a)), and aggravated battery (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 12-4(b)(1)). Following a jury trial, defendant was convicted of felony murder, murder, attempted murder, armed robbery, residential burglary, and aggravated battery. In a death penalty hearing requested by the People, the jury found that one or more of the factors set forth in section 9-1(d) of the Criminal Code of 1961 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1981, ch. 38, par. 9-1(d)) existed and found that there were no mitigating factors sufficient to preclude a sentence of death. Defendant was sentenced to death, and the sentence was stayed (87 Ill.2d R. 609(a)) pending appeal to this court (Ill. Const. 1970, art. VI, sec. 4(b); 87 Ill.2d R. 603). Defendant was also sentenced to natural life for murder, 60 years for attempted murder, 60 years for armed robbery, 30 years for residential burglary, and 10 years for aggravated battery.
James Dare, 62 years of age, testified that on January 25, 1982, he and his wife, Margaret, resided in a rural area in Jefferson County. That night, the couple went to bed at about 10 p.m. Some time after falling asleep he heard Margaret shouting, "Come quick." He went to the living room where he saw a man with his arms around Margaret. The intruder threatened, "If you interfere, I'll kill her." Mr. Dare could recall nothing further.
Louise Breeze, Margaret Dare's aunt, lived in a trailer next to the Dare residence. She testified that Margaret visited her almost every morning, and that, when Margaret failed to answer her telephone calls on the morning of January 26, Mrs. Breeze called Margaret's sister, Lucy Baker. At approximately 9 a.m. Mrs. Breeze went to the Dare residence. She saw Margaret on the living room sofa, and James struggling toward the front door. There was blood "all over the room and *348 her [Mrs. Dare]." Mrs. Breeze ran to her trailer to telephone for an ambulance and the sheriff.
When the ambulance attendants arrived, they examined Margaret Dare and determined that she was dead. Deputy Sheriff Jerry Almaroad and Chief Deputy Roy Bradford arrived at the scene at 9:13 and 9:15 a.m., respectively. Bradford testified that Dare stated that a black man had broken into his house in the middle of the night. When a paramedic arrived at approximately 9:20 a.m., Dare was in a deep state of shock and could not further respond to either verbal or physical stimuli.
Deputy Almaroad testified that the living room showed signs of a struggle. He determined that a stereo had been removed because a turntable dust cover was upside down on the floor and speaker wires had been disconnected. He also concluded that a portable television had been taken because its silhouette had been traced in the dust on a stand, and the wires had been cut. A large, wooden-handled knife, later identified by Dorothy Lacey as being hers, was found in a wash pan in the kitchen. The knife, together with a television set, jewelry, a clock, and a quilt, had been stolen from Mrs. Lacey's home in Mt. Vernon during a burglary on January 23.
James Jennings, defendant's brother-in-law, testified that between 10 and 10:30 p.m., January 23, defendant came to the residence where Jennings and Larry Faint lived. Defendant brought a television, a television stand, a white quilt, a clock, and some jewelry into the house. These items remained there until defendant picked them up the next day. Defendant left Jennings' home but returned sometime in the early morning hours of January 26. Defendant, Jennings and Faint decided to go to Decatur. Both Faint and Jennings testified that, on the way to Decatur, all three sat in the front seat because a television and stereo covered with a white quilt were in *349 the back seat of the car. Upon arriving in Decatur, they went to defendant's sister's apartment.
Faint testified that the stereo and television were taken into defendant's sister's apartment and that it was necessary to wipe off the stereo because it appeared that there was blood on it. After unsuccessful attempts to sell the stereo and television, defendant found an auction where he sold the television for $50. Defendant and his companions then left Decatur for Mt. Vernon. On their way, they stopped in Centralia to attempt to sell the stereo. The stereo was not sold, and they returned to Mt. Vernon. Defendant testified that he then took Faint to his apartment and took Jennings to a restaurant where they saw Jennings' sister. She informed them that the police were looking for Jennings and defendant. Defendant returned home, spoke with his wife, and went to the police department. He drove to police headquarters in his 1971 Ford Torino. A confidential source had informed Deputy Sheriff Lamar that a friend of defendant had told him that stolen property could be found in defendant's car. A search warrant was issued, and defendant's car was searched. The officers discovered a white quilt and jewelry, all later identified by Mrs. Lacey as items taken during the burglary of her home in Mt. Vernon two nights before the crimes at the Dare residence. Her identification of these items was the basis for connecting defendant to the crimes committed at the Dare residence because, as noted earlier, the wooden-handled knife found at the Dare residence had been identified by Mrs. Lacey as being hers.
Defendant contends first that the conviction must be reversed for the reason that the People failed to prove his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. We do not agree. The testimony shows that an individual with the same type of blood as defendant had been in the Dare home on the night of the murder. The evidence also shows that *350 a knife taken in the burglary at the Lacey home was found in the Dare home and that other items taken in the Lacey burglary were found in defendant's automobile. Defendant's testimony, and the testimony of the other individuals whom he saw that night and with whom he went to Decatur and Centralia, do not exclude the possibility that sometime during that night defendant could have perpetrated the crimes.
Defendant contends correctly that when a conviction for murder rests upon circumstantial evidence the guilt of the defendant must be so thoroughly established as to exclude every other reasonable hypothesis. (People v. Garrett (1975), 62 Ill.2d 151, 163.) It is not necessary, however, that the jury be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt as to each link in the chain of circumstances. It is sufficient if all the evidence taken together satisfies the jury beyond a reasonable doubt of the accused's guilt. (People v. Foster (1979), 76 Ill.2d 365, 374.) We have considered defendant's argument that he presented credible, corroborated testimony which accounted for his whereabouts at the time the murder was committed. The credibility of defendant and the witnesses who testified in his defense was for the jury to determine. Defendant, in electing to testify in his own behalf, submitted his credibility to the usual tests applicable to the testimony of other witnesses, and the jury could take into consideration the probability or improbability of the truth of his statements. From our examination of the record we conclude that the evidence was sufficient to support a finding of guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
We consider next defendant's contention that the circuit court erred in failing to declare a mistrial when a mimeographed copy of a racist "joke" was found in the jury room. We refuse to disseminate this scurrilous material, and it suffices to note that it contains denigrating, racist comments which are insulting to black people. At *351 the conclusion of defendant's case and before rebuttal, after the court had adjourned for the day, a courthouse janitor discovered a mimeographed copy of the "joke" in the jury room. He notified the bailiff, who, in turn, notified the trial judge. The following day the parties met in chambers to discuss the matter. It was agreed that the jurors should be examined individually to determine who, if anyone, had seen it, and whether it would affect his deliberations. Of the 12 jurors, 8 had not seen the material. The juror who had brought the material into the jury room was questioned, dismissed, and replaced by an alternate juror who had not seen it. Three jurors on the panel as finally composed stated that they had seen the material. Two of those jurors had read at least part of the material. All three testified that it would have no prejudicial effect on their deliberations.
The juror who brought the material into the jury room testified that he had brought two copies, one of which was taken by "a lady," but that she was not one of the jurors. He testified that he made no remarks concerning the material to the other jurors but simply set it on the table in the jury room. Arguing that the entire panel had been tainted by exposure to the material, defendant moved for a mistrial. The circuit court denied the motion, concluding that no evidence of prejudice had been presented.
Defendant argues that the entire panel had been tainted by exposure to the material because its content "evinces an attitude which precludes the fair and impartial consideration of evidence which is constitutionally guaranteed to every person charged with a crime." He also argues that the circuit court could not have made an informed decision whether the jury was influenced by the material because the court failed to ascertain whether the second copy of the material had been taken out of the jury room by another juror. Citing People v. *352 Cole (1973), 54 Ill.2d 401, the People argue that defendant must be able to point to specific evidence in the record establishing prejudice and that mere suspicion of prejudice is not evidence. They argue that the trial judge is in a superior position to observe the jurors' demeanor and that the determination is within the sound discretion of the circuit court. They contend that defendant is unable to point to any evidence which would support a finding that any juror, other than the juror who brought the material into the jurors' room, was prejudiced against defendant by reason of his race or as the result of having seen the objectionable material.
Although the People are correct in their contention that in most cases involving claims of deprivation of due process evidence of prejudice to the accused is required, there are circumstances which create "such a probability that prejudice will result that [the trial] is deemed inherently lacking in due process." (Estes v. Texas (1965), 381 U.S. 532, 542-43, 14 L.Ed.2d 543, 550, 85 S.Ct. 1628, 1633.) Such circumstances are present here. Where black racist material is found in the jury room during the trial of an accused black man, and the material has admittedly been read by three members of an all-white jury, such circumstances are intolerable, and prejudice to defendant will be presumed. We are concerned, too, that the jurors did not bring the material to the attention of the court. This may be indicative of either lack of appreciation for their responsibility as jurors, or that they did not consider it offensive.
A situation which was already inherently prejudicial was further exacerbated by the fact that the juror who brought the material into the jury room testified that "a lady" took one of the copies of the material from the jury room. Although he testified that she was not one of the jurors, a nonjuror lady's presence in the jury room at that time is inexplicable. The presence in the jury *353 room of a nonjuror, or of a juror who kept the offensive material, presented a danger of prejudice which the circuit court should have further pursued. A fair trial requires the participation of impartial jurors (Irvin v. Dowd (1961), 366 U.S. 717, 6 L.Ed.2d 751, 81 S.Ct. 1639), and in the circumstances shown here, we cannot conclude that defendant received a fair trial. We hold, therefore, that the circuit court erred in failing to declare a mistrial.
The parties have briefed and argued a number of questions, but in view of our conclusion that the judgment must be reversed and the cause remanded for a new trial, we need not consider those which are unlikely to arise on retrial. Other questions have been decided in other opinions adversely to defendant's contentions and need not be reconsidered. We shall, therefore, consider only those contentions relevant to alleged errors likely to recur on retrial.
Defendant contends that the circuit court erred in permitting Deputies Bradford and Almaroad to testify to James Dare's out-of-court statements. Mr. Dare testified that he was unable to recall any details of the attack on him and his wife. D.W. Meyers, an ambulance attendant, was the first person to whom Dare spoke, approximately eight hours after the crimes were committed. Meyers testified that "I asked him did somebody do this to you and he said, `Yes, a man in the middle of the night.' And that is all he said to me." Defendant makes no issue concerning the admission of this statement. Deputy Almaroad testified over objection that when he arrived on the scene he questioned Dare. He testified that "his response was that someone had broke into his house. He stated that he thought they were black, and just one of them." Deputy Bradford also testified that Dare stated that he had been attacked by a black man in the middle of the night. The addition of the statement *354 that the intruder was black is significant because the evidence showed that the blood type of the presumed offender was twice as likely to occur in the black as in the white populations.
Defendant argues that Dare's statements to the deputies revealed this information because it was elicited by the deputies' leading questions. He argues, too, that the circuit court ignored a substantial time lapse between the crimes and the statements, and disregarded the fact that Dare's statements to the deputies were not the first statements he had made.
In People v. Robinson (1978), 73 Ill.2d 192, this court restated the test to be applied to such hearsay testimony:
"This court has repeatedly held that, for testimony to qualify as a spontaneous declaration and be admissible regardless of declarant's presence at trial, three elements must be present: `(1) an occurrence sufficiently startling to produce a spontaneous and unreflecting statement; (2) absence of time to fabricate; and (3) the statement must relate to the circumstances of the occurrence.' (People v. Poland (1961), 22 Ill.2d 175, 181.) As this court noted in Poland, `The pertinent point is whether there was a lack of sufficient time to allow an opportunity for reflection and invention.' (22 Ill.2d 175, 181.)" (73 Ill.2d 192, 199.)
In Robinson, a statement made by the victim more than 3 1/2 hours after the crime had been committed was held to be inadmissible as a spontaneous declaration. Here approximately eight hours had elapsed since the crime had been committed before Dare had the opportunity to make any statement concerning the occurrence. Furthermore, his statements to Deputies Almaroad and Bradford came after he had spoken to Meyers, and these later statements included more detail than the first statement given to Meyers. Here, as in Robinson, "[t]o conclude that [Dare's] statements were spontaneous in *355 this case would do utter violence to the rule." 73 Ill.2d 192, 199.
Defendant contends next that the circuit court erred in refusing his request that the jury be instructed with the second paragraph of Illinois Pattern Jury Instruction (IPI), Criminal, No. 3.02 (2d ed. 1981) (definition of circumstantial evidence), because there was no direct evidence of defendant's guilt. IPI, Criminal, No. 3.02, provides:
"Circumstantial evidence is the proof of facts or circumstances which give rise to a reasonable inference of other facts which tend to show the guilt or innocence of [(the) (a)] defendant. Circumstantial evidence should be considered by you together with all the other evidence in the case in arriving at your verdict.
You should not find the defendant guilty unless the facts or circumstances proved exclude every reasonable theory of innocence."
The People argue that the corpus delicti of each of the crimes charged was proved directly by Dare's eyewitness testimony and by medical evidence. Citing People v. Evans (1981), 87 Ill.2d 77, defendant argues that the second paragraph of this instruction must be given where proof of guilt as to each element of the offense is circumstantial.
"Circumstantial evidence is the proof of facts or circumstances which gives rise to a reasonable inference of other facts which tend to establish the guilt or innocence of a defendant." (People v. Evans (1981), 87 Ill.2d 77, 83.) This court has held that the second paragraph of the instruction "should be given when the proof of guilt, as to each element of the offense, is circumstantial." (87 Ill.2d 77, 83.) In view of our holding that Dare's statements to the deputies were erroneously admitted, defendant's conviction was based solely on circumstantial evidence and the circuit court's failure to include the second paragraph *356 of the instruction was error.
We next consider defendant's contention that the circuit court erred in failing to suppress items seized from defendant's automobile pursuant to a search warrant supported only by the hearsay statements of an unknown informant whose reliability had not been established. The record shows that at approximately 11 or 11:30 p.m. on January 26, Deputy Lamar received a phone call from a confidential source in Mt. Vernon. The confidential source related to Lamar a conversation he had had with a third person. This third person told the confidential informant that defendant had come to the third person's house in the early morning hours that day with a stereo, speakers, and a television, all of which were covered with blood. Lamar testified that, according to the informant, defendant and the third person had the following conversation: "`I will bet you either killed someone or fucked someone up getting this.' And this other person that was with [defendant] said, `You took the words right out of my mouth.'" The aforementioned items were then placed in defendant's trunk.
Defendant contends that this information presented to the judge who issued the warrant was neither detailed nor corroborated in any way which shows that the informant was reliable. He argues that the third person, who allegedly knew something first hand about stolen property in the trunk of defendant's automobile, was not shown to be reliable. The People contend that defendant's argument, that the failure of the complaint upon which the warrant was issued to establish the reliability of facts provided by the informant, improperly attempts to isolate the "veracity" prong of the Aguilar-Spinelli test. Aguilar v. Texas (1964), 378 U.S. 108, 12 L.Ed.2d 723, 84 S.Ct. 1509; Spinelli v. United States (1969), 393 U.S. 410, 21 L.Ed.2d 637, 89 S.Ct. 584.
We agree with the People that the sufficiency of the *357 complaint does not rest on whether each segment of the two-prong Aguilar-Spinelli test is complete. (Massachusetts v. Upton (1984), 466 U.S. ___, 80 L.Ed.2d 721, 104 S.Ct. 2085.) In Upton the Supreme Court clarified its position regarding probable-cause determinations based on an informant's tip:
"We did not [in Illinois v. Gates (1983), 462 U.S. 213, 76 L.Ed.2d 527, 103 S.Ct. 2317,] merely refine or qualify the `two-pronged test.' We rejected it as hypertechnical and divorced from `the factual and practical considerations of everyday life on which reasonable and prudent men, not legal technicians, act.' Brinegar v. United States [(1949), 338 U.S. 160, 93 L.Ed. 1879, 69 S.Ct. 1302]. Our statement on that score was explicit. `[W]e conclude that it is wiser to abandon the "two-pronged test" established by our decisions in Aguilar and Spinelli. In its place we reaffirm the totality of the circumstances analysis that traditionally has informed probable cause determinations.'" (466 U.S. ___, ___, 80 L.Ed.2d 721, 726-27, 104 S.Ct. 2085, 2087-88.)
The sufficiency of the complaint rests on whether the complaint, "considered as a whole, adequately establishes that there was `a fair probability that * * * evidence of a crime [would] be found in a particular place.' (Illinois v. Gates (1983), 462 U.S. 213, 238, 76 L.Ed.2d 527, 548, 103 S.Ct. 2317, 2332; * * *.)" (People v. Gacy (1984), 103 Ill.2d 1, 22.) The complaint alleged that the third person told the informant that he saw defendant in possession of items which were covered with blood. This was consistent with the fact that a great deal of blood was present at the crime scene. The informant also stated that the third person saw defendant in possession of a stereo, speakers, and a television. This was consistent with the fact that a stereo, speakers, and television were missing from the Dare residence. We conclude that there were sufficient facts to establish probable cause to support issuance of the warrant.
*358 Defendant contends next that the court erred in permitting the People to introduce evidence of a prior crime, the Lacey burglary, which occurred in Mt. Vernon two nights before the crimes committed at the Dare residence. He argues that the probative value of this evidence is outweighed by its prejudicial effect. The People argue that the knife found at the Dare residence and later identified by Mrs. Lacey as belonging to her was highly relevant in linking defendant to the crimes committed at the Dare residence, because other items stolen from Mrs. Lacey were later found in defendant's possession.
Evidence of the commission of other crimes is admissible when such evidence is relevant for any purpose other than to show the propensity to commit crime. (People v. McKibbins (1983), 96 Ill.2d 176, 182.) The People argue that the purpose of the introduction of this evidence was to show defendant's identity and his presence at the scene. Although exclusive and unexplained possession of recently stolen property is insufficient, standing alone, to prove burglary beyond a reasonable doubt, it may be used with other corroborating evidence of guilt to support a conviction. (People v. Housby (1981), 84 Ill.2d 415.) Defendant testified that he purchased the jewelry from Brady Brown and that Faint placed the blanket in defendant's car before they left for Decatur. However, Brown testified that he had never possessed the jewelry, nor did he sell it to defendant; Jennings corroborated Faint's testimony that he did not place any items in defendant's car before going to Decatur. Thus, corroboration which supported the inference that defendant participated in the Lacey burglary is presented where defendant himself offers an explanation of possession of the property that the jury reasonably finds to be false. (People v. Housby (1981), 84 Ill.2d 415, 430-31.) Therefore, there was "rational connection" between the *359 fact of possession of property recently taken in the Lacey burglary and the inferred fact of participation in that burglary. (County Court v. Allen (1979), 442 U.S. 140, 165, 60 L.Ed.2d 777, 797, 99 S.Ct. 2213, 2228.) The presence at the Dare home of the knife taken in the Lacey burglary and the presence of Lacey's quilt and jewelry in defendant's automobile do indeed serve to show defendant's identity and his presence at the scene. The circuit court did not err in admitting evidence of the commission of the Lacey burglary.
Although only one person was killed, defendant was convicted of two counts of murder. Defendant was charged with (1) stabbing Dare with a knife, knowing such an act created a strong probability of death or great bodily harm, thereby causing her death; and (2) murder, while committing a forcible felony, armed robbery. When multiple convictions are had for offenses arising out of a single act, the rule is that the sentence is imposed on the most serious offense. (People v. Donaldson (1982), 91 Ill.2d 164, 170.) Although the evidence supports a conviction on both charges, there was only one person murdered; and there can be but one conviction. (People v. Szabo (1983), 94 Ill.2d 327, 350.) In People v. Mack (1984), 105 Ill.2d 103, involving one homicide, the defendant was convicted of three counts of murder. This court vacated two convictions and affirmed the conviction based on the most serious of the three charges. On remand, if defendant is found guilty of the crimes charged, the sentencing should comport with the principles enunciated in Mack.
For the reasons stated, the judgment is reversed and the cause remanded to the circuit court of Jefferson County for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.

=== CASE 2220441 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:43.40705+00 ===

19 Mass. App. Ct. 465 (1985)
475 N.E.2d 427
COMMONWEALTH
vs.
CRAIG YELLE.
Appeals Court of Massachusetts, Hampden.
December 19, 1984.
March 12, 1985.
Present: SMITH, KAPLAN, & WARNER, JJ.
*466 William C. Newman for the defendant.
Dianne M. Dillon, Assistant District Attorney, for the Commonwealth.
KAPLAN, J.
We are obliged to reverse judgments of conviction of rape (G.L.c. 265, § 22[b]) and of related assault and battery (G.L.c. 265, § 13A)[1] because of overreaching by the Commonwealth, objected to by the defense, but allowed, unchecked, by the judge. As will appear, the overreaching consisted of the introduction by the Commonwealth of evidence of an incident that occurred before the episode in suit which added no or at best only minimal probative value to the Commonwealth's case, but at the same time was calculated to create unfair prejudice against the defendant.
1. Prejudicial error. (a) The complainant and the defendant told different stories from the witness stand, but there was no question that Yelle was the man involved and that intercourse had occurred; the issue was whether the woman was or was not consenting.
On April 13, 1982, around 8:00 A.M. on a cloudy, cold day, the defendant, driving a white truck on Berkshire Avenue in Springfield, offered a ride to the complainant, who was waiting for a bus near Myrtle Street and St. Matthew's School. According to the complainant, she recognized the defendant although she could not exactly place him, and thus she accepted the lift; the defendant said she was a stranger to him. Her destination that morning was the Federal Building downtown, where she intended to do her taxes before going on to her job. The two conversed about a number of things as they went along. At some point, explaining the scars under his chin, the defendant *467 spoke of a fire at school in 1975, which brought in the name of a woman also known to the complainant. He says he mentioned his full name; the complainant heard only "Craig." The complainant had it that the defendant said they would cut through Blunt Park; they did so and  to her surprise  went down a side road and stopped. The defendant said he had asked the complainant to roll a joint, but she "didn't roll too good," and so, entering the park, he stopped the truck on the side road in order to do the joint and enjoy a smoke with the complainant. She said he asked if she wanted to smoke a joint and she said no; there was no business of rolling a joint. At any rate, just after parking the truck the defendant said he had to urinate, and he did so off to the side.
At this moment the complainant became apprehensive, and she said her fears were realized when the defendant, returning to the truck, tried to kiss her and finally used force, over her protests and such physical remonstrance as she could make, to pull down her slacks and have intercourse with her. The defendant related that, after entering the truck and rolling the joint, he found the complainant unwilling to smoke because it might interfere with her work later that morning. She showed her acquiescence in what followed by lying back and saying that despite the scars he was a good looking man. After some dalliance they had intercourse. She testified that, trying to discourage the defendant from his purpose, she pointed to a pimple on her right thigh, covered by a bandaid, as a mark of a venereal infection. He said she removed the bandaid and simply asked him to avoid bruising the pimple. It is agreed that before quitting Blunt Park the defendant offered the complainant an ointment that he happened to have, which she in fact applied to the sore. On the prescription label was the defendant's full name; upon which, the complainant says, she fixed her memory. They smoked her cigarettes for five minutes and then drove without incident to the Federal Building, where she was left off. She testified that she made no outcry or attempt to break away during this ten or fifteen minute journey and made it appear that the experience was "no big deal" because she feared what he might do. The testimony agrees *468 that he had earlier asked for her telephone number but she refused, saying she had a boyfriend. He said that at parting she indicated he could get in touch with her at her place of work; he then told her again his full name. The complainant's testimony does not agree.
Entering the Federal Building, the complainant was weeping and talking uncontrollably (evidence of lack of consent, the Commonwealth suggested; a self-protective put-on, according to the defendant, in case her boyfriend or family should get wind of the episode). She was led to a security officer and said she had been raped. She wrote down the defendant's name and called her mother. Shortly, she and her mother were driven to a hospital, and thence to Blunt Park and to the police station.
Before noontime, the defendant had been apprehended. A pillbox belonging to the complainant was found in the defendant's pocket. He said she gave it to him; she said it must have dropped from her purse and fallen to the floor of the truck.
(b) The foregoing sketch of testimony at trial confirms what was the issue: consent. We have now to deal with the evidence received over objection.
Just before the opening statements, the defense moved in limine to bar testimony for the Commonwealth about an event on Berkshire Avenue perhaps twenty minutes before, and one mile distant from, the defendant's encounter with the complainant: the defendant in the white truck had offered a ride to a young girl, which she refused.[2] In answer to the argument that *469 evidence on this line would be only inflammatory, the Commonwealth said it would help to identify the defendant. The defense answered that identification was conceded and was not an issue. The Commonwealth contended, further, that the evidence would bear on the complainant's consent (this was not explained) and would show how the police had been assisted in their work, as the incident had been reported to them by the girl's mother (how this connection, if true,[3] was a ground for admitting the testimony, was not explained). The judge denied the motion to exclude. She remarked that the evidence was relevant and not "unduly" prejudicial.
Defense counsel in his opening statement to the jury, immediately following the Commonwealth's, expressly conceded identification.
In midtrial, as part of its case in chief, the Commonwealth called the mother of the young girl in the earlier incident. She testified that she had five daughters ranging in age from twenty-two to thirteen. About 7:45 A.M. on April 13, while driving home on Berkshire Avenue, she saw a white truck stopped alongside her youngest daughter, who was on her way to school. She saw the driver speak to the girl. As the mother drove up to the truck, the truck pulled away to the nearest stop signal. On learning that the driver had offered the girl a ride, which she had declined, the mother reprimanded the girl for "speaking to a stranger." Arriving home, the mother wrote down the plate number of the truck, which she had observed as the truck paused at the stop. She informed the police (see n. 3) and an officer appeared that evening to interview mother and daughter.
After the mother's testimony, the defense, we may surmise, could not simply pass over the incident as irrelevant, and the defendant in his direct testimony confirmed his offer of a ride to the girl. This drew cross-examination. How old was the little girl he offered a ride to? No idea, he said, perhaps seventeen *470 or eighteen. Could she have been twelve? Any age, he said, between twenty and fourteen or whatever. Could she have been nine? No. He imagined she was going to the JFK junior/senior high school. Then perhaps twelve to fourteen. She was alone?  suggesting that that made her a target.
The direct and cross-examination riveted attention on an incident anterior to the matter truly at bar. It added very little, if anything, to the proof on that matter. In its brief on this appeal, the Commonwealth does not argue that the material was admissible as probative on consent, the issue in the case. Surely it did not furnish proof of whether the complainant was in fact consenting. It had no, or at most only very remote bearing on whether the defendant would or would not be deterred from intercourse by a woman's refusal to consent. The Commonwealth contends that the evidence could be received simply as testing the defendant's credibility, but, as noted, the incident was injected into the trial as part of the Commonwealth's case; furthermore, to accept a test-of-credibility justification would be to give the Commonwealth an unbounded roving commission. (We assume the Commonwealth does not mean that the incident could be put in, like proof of a defendant's prior criminal record, to impeach "credibility." See Commonwealth v. Edgerly, 13 Mass. App. Ct. 562, 570 [1982]). At oral argument the Commonwealth made a final effort to justify the reception of the evidence as serving a material probative purpose: the defendant indeed conceded identification in limine, but, said the Commonwealth, had it, relying on that assurance, forgone proving the incident, then there might have been a lack of evidence of identification when the Commonwealth rested, and that would have invited the defendant to turn around and move for a required finding. The argument is extreme. Not only had the defendant's opening statement to the jury again conceded the point; in fact the Commonwealth in the natural presentation of its case in chief established that the defendant was the man involved without benefit of the incident, e.g., by the complainant's selection of the defendant's picture. Upon the rather wild assumption that the defense would have been permitted to abandon its concession, leaving a deluded *471 Commonwealth with inadequate proof when it rested, we suppose the judge would surely have allowed the Commonwealth to reopen its case and prove the necessary. See Commonwealth v. Ierardi, 17 Mass. App. Ct. 297, 303 (1983). Cf. Commonwealth v. Cote, 15 Mass. App. Ct. 229, 241-242 (1983).
If the probative increment achieved by introducing the incident was nugatory or nearly so, its prejudicial potential and probable impact were considerable. There was an effort to picture the defendant either as a molester of children or a rapist on the prowl for victims, or both. The Commonwealth observes with a naivete approaching disingenuousness that since "[i]t does not necessarily follow that any one who offers a girl a ride at 7:45 A.M. intends to molest her," the evidence was of a "neutral act," not a "prior bad act." This is to ignore the calculated manner of the presentation of the evidence on direct and cross-examination and the context in which the evidence was placed. We should add that the Commonwealth does not argue, nor could the argument hold, that the defense was duty bound to seek an instruction from the judge that might mitigate the prejudice; quite apart from the fact that the judge had ruled the incident admissible and persisted in the ruling, the defense could well reason that any instruction was likely to aggravate the damage. See Commonwealth v. Whitehead, 379 Mass. 640, 661 (1980).
(c) There is no suggestion that the evidence in question could be admitted to prove a modus operandi (which, incidentally, usually goes to identification). Nor was it admissible on a theory that it showed "the whole transaction of which the crime was a part" and so might "aid the jury in reaching a verdict by giving them the complete picture." Commonwealth v. Durkin, 257 Mass. 426, 428 (1926). That theory cannot apply where the circumstances of the alleged crime are not rendered "unintelligible if the references to [the earlier incident are] omitted." Commonwealth v. Brown, 389 Mass. 382, 385 (1983). Cf. Commonwealth v. Bradshaw, 385 Mass. 244, 269-270 (1982).
To conclude on this entire point. Evidence of prior misconduct  "prior bad acts"  not offered solely for the prohibited *472 purpose of proving bad character (and thus, inferentially, a "propensity" toward crime) is admissible if "substantially relevant to the offense charged; inadmissible when its relevance is insignificant; and, in borderline cases, admissible when its relevance outweighs the undue prejudice that may flow from it...." Harper v. United States, 239 F.2d 945, 946 (D.C. Cir.1956), quoted in Commonwealth v. Deschamps, 1 Mass. App. Ct. 1, 2-3 (1972). The present case belongs in the second category; but if the judge had any discretion about admitting such evidence, she abused it: the prejudice was "undue." The circumstances of the present case make a stronger case for the rejection of the evidence than appears in the well-known decisions involving sex offenses where prior bad acts have been properly excluded. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Ellis, 321 Mass. 669, 670 (1947); Commonwealth v. Welcome, 348 Mass. 68, 70-71 (1964) (limiting Commonwealth v. Machado, 339 Mass. 713, 715 [1959]); Commonwealth v. Coviello, 7 Mass. App. Ct. 21, 26 (1979). See generally Liacos, Massachusetts Evidence 420 ff. (5th ed. 1981 & 1983 Supp.); Lempert & Saltzburg, A Modern Approach to Evidence 215-231 (2d ed. 1982). Nor is there anything in the circumstances of this case that raises any of the special questions of admission of evidence of more-or-less unrelated misconduct on which there has lately been some division of opinion. See Commonwealth v. Gallison, 383 Mass. 659, 672-674 (1981); Commonwealth v. King, 387 Mass. 464, 469-472 (1982); Commonwealth v. Sylvester, 388 Mass. 749, 753-758 (1983). Here the error was palpable.
2. Other matters. (a) Delay in furnishing transcript. Counsel preparing the defendant's appeal received the last installment of the transcript fourteen months after his request for all of it. It happened that three stenographers had been used at the trial. Two turned in their work by February, 1984, and it was noticed about that time that there was a third; an order went to her in March, but for personal reasons she did not deliver her installment until July. The clerk's office is not chargeable with deliberate delay. In deciding to deny a motion to dismiss the indictments for breach of the defendant's right to a speedy trial, *473 the judge said there had been no prejudice to the defendant's appeal. A claim of prejudice with respect to parole remains obscure.
The question of prejudice to a defendant's appeal may not be the only consideration where a conviction is reversed and the case stands for retrial with a chance that the conviction may be finally overthrown. Williams, petitioner, 378 Mass. 623, 626 (1979). Cf. Commonwealth v. Duhamel, 391 Mass. 841, 847 (1984). But on the whole, considering the length of the delay, its cause, its effect on the defendant, and the degree of responsibility or fault that can be charged to the Commonwealth, we think the judge's order was right. See Commonwealth v. Swenson, 368 Mass. 268, 279-280 (1975); Williams at 627; Duhamel at 846; Commonwealth v. Lee, 394 Mass. 209, 220-221 (1985).
(b) Treatment of "confession." The defendant on direct examination testified to physical and verbal abuse by the police from the time of his arrest through his trip to the police station, his stay in an interrogation room, and possibly beyond. The defendant said he was "pretty well dizzy.... My head was spinning from all the punches I received. "This charge of abuse  denied root and branch by the police  was given a superficial if perhaps unfair plausibility by the fact that the complainant was the daughter of a detective known to the officers accused of the misconduct.
Under cross-examination, the defendant said he did not recall talking to one of the officers. This officer was called as the sole witness for the Commonwealth on rebuttal and testified that the defendant had spoken to him and had tearfully protested: "You people don't understand that a girl can make a guy do this.... All that violence on TV, it's the violence on TV that can make a guy do this."[4]
There was no defense objection to the officer's statement, either as improper rebuttal (consider Drake v. Goodman, 386 *474 Mass. 88, 92 [1982]), or for any other reason, but the defense now argues that the judge should have viewed this as tantamount to evidence of an admission or confession by the defendant and proceeded to hold a voir dire on the spot to test whether he was overcome at the time by police abuse which might have made the confession "involuntary." What the judge did (actually at the Commonwealth's request) was instruct the jury to consider whether the defendant made the statement, and if he did, whether it was voluntary.[5] Whether, in the circumstances, no advance warning having been given her, the judge was bound on her own motion to halt the trial and conduct a voir dire according to the "humane practice" of Commonwealth v. Tavares, 385 Mass. 140, 152, cert. denied, 457 U.S. 1137 (1982), we need not decide; surely it would have been better for her to have done so. Upon retrial, the problem will be known to all and arrangements may be made ahead of time to take care of any eventuality.[6]
(c) Defendant's temporary absence from trial. The defendant was absent from the courtroom when, shortly after the jury retired, they returned with a question. It appeared upon the postconviction motion that an effort was made to find the defendant. The defendant was "entitled to be present at all critical stages" of the trial. Mass.R.Crim.P. 18(a), 378 Mass. 887 (1979). However, his absence "without cause or without leave of court," Mass.R.Crim.P. 18(a)(1), was a waiver, see Commonwealth v. Kane, ante 129, 134-135 (1984), as the judge may be assumed to have found, see Commonwealth v. Lanoue, *475 392 Mass. 583, 586 n. 2 (1984). Thus the proceeding could go on in the defendant's temporary absence.
(d) Instruction on dismissal of an indictment. The jury's return to the courtroom was to ask the judge what had happened to an indictment for kidnapping that had been mentioned at the start of trial but did not figure in the instructions. "I should have told you," said the judge, "that charge is no longer before you. The court has made a finding that the evidence did not warrant submitting the charge ... before the jury." Defense counsel did not object, but there is argument now that the judge should have added, in effect, that no adverse inferences should be drawn as to the remaining charges against the defendant. Such an instruction would have been proper and advisable, see Commonwealth v. Pasciuti, 12 Mass. App. Ct. 833, 840 n. 7 (1981), but, especially in light of the decision of this appeal, no prejudice appears.
(e) Conduct of prosecutor. Opposing the defendant's motion in limine, the prosecutor said that the mother of the girl to whom the defendant had offered the ride "called the police as soon as she got home and relayed the license plate number to them." At trial, the mother testified, "I drove home and I wrote [the plate number] down as soon as I got into the house and called and reported it." The defendant charges the prosecutor with misleading the court in suggesting that the witness called in immediately, thus assisting the police in some material way, when in fact a police report showed that her call came at 2:45 P.M. (see n. 3). There is no reason to think the prosecutor knew of the police report when she addressed the court. The misstatement (if we accept that the police report was accurate) seems to have resulted from ambiguity in the witness's story, not from a purpose to deceive. Compare S.J.C. Rule 3:08, PF 1, as appearing in 382 Mass. 798 (1981).
There is a further claim of prosecutorial misbehavior in the tendentious cross-examination of the defendant about the age of the young girl to whom he had offered a ride. We are holding that the entire incident was erroneously admitted, but the prosecutor must be given the benefit of the judge's contrary *476 ruling. Nevertheless, even accepting any theory on which the prosecutor sought (erroneously) to defend admissibility, her harping on the age of the girl, with all that that implied, was unfair. Cf. Commonwealth v. Smith, 387 Mass. 900, 904-905 (1983); Commonwealth v. Clary, 388 Mass. 583, 592 (1983). The point will not arise again on retrial.
In her closing statement the prosecutor said that she was bound by her oath to be interested in justice, not convictions. This corresponds to the law, see Commonwealth v. Smith, 387 Mass. at 905; the objection must be that the statement implied she would not have undertaken the prosecution unless she believed that justice called for a conviction, and this she believed because she believed the defendant was guilty. But she was forbidden to express any belief on her part that the defendant was guilty. Id. at 906. We doubt the jury would read all this into the statement, especially as the prosecutor seemed merely to be responding to defense counsel's overheated observation that the police "work hand in hand with the District Attorney's office, they have an interest in getting a conviction." See Commonwealth v. Burke, 373 Mass. 569, 576 (1977).
The order denying the motion to dismiss the indictments is affirmed. The judgments are reversed and the verdicts set aside.
So ordered.
NOTES
[1]  The defendant was convicted also of possession of marihuana and of possession of marihuana in hashish form with intent to distribute, but the convictions were placed on file with the defendant's consent. See Commonwealth v. Gallison, 384 Mass. 184, 185 & n. 3 (1981). An indictment for kidnapping was dismissed at the close of the Commonwealth's case, thus reducing an indictment for aggravated rape to rape.
Besides the appeal from the two convictions mentioned in the text, there is an appeal from the denial of a postconviction motion to dismiss the indictments for alleged breach of the defendant's right to speedy appeal.
[2]  The encounter with the young girl was at or near the intersection of Berkshire Avenue and Superior Avenue. The defendant said he then drove home (eastward), a short distance away, on Worcester Street; ate a half sandwich there; then went back (westward) on Berkshire Avenue, very shortly picking up the complainant about the Myrtle Street intersection. Continuing (westward) on Berkshire one would again pass the spot at Superior.
According to the defendant, he told the complainant he was going to Beaulieu Chevrolet in downtown Springfield (where he worked sporadically); she said he could drop her off at the Springfield Technical Community College. The complainant testified that the defendant said he was going to STCC, he was a student there. On cross-examination the defendant said he had last gone to STCC in 1978 when he got his GED diploma. The defendant did not get to Beaulieu that morning.
[3]  It may be noted that it appeared at argument on the postconviction motion that a police report indicated the call from the mother came at 2:45 P.M., a few hours after the defendant had been arrested (see point 2[e] below).
[4]  A claim of ineffective assistance of defense counsel is based on counsel's failure to move to suppress this statement, and on other asserted faults. On the appeal record itself, we think the claim cannot be sustained.
[5]  The instruction (to which the defendant did not object) omitted to say that the burden was on the Commonwealth to show beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant had spoken voluntarily. There was a later instruction on the Commonwealth's general burden of proof, but a specific instruction was preferable and perhaps necessary.
[6]  We add that the Commonwealth is wrong to suggest that, because the judge submitted the question to the jury, she must implicitly have found on her own part that the defendant's "confession" was voluntary. Such an inference might be made if the voluntary character of the confession "appear[ed] from the record with unmistakable clarity," Commonwealth v. Tavares, 385 Mass. at 152, quoting from Sims v. Georgia, 385 U.S. 538, 544 (1967), but that is not the present case.

=== CASE 9739592 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:18:15.710316+00 ===

JUSTICE BARRY delivered the opinion of the court: Plaintiff, Wendy Bouhl, sued Officer Steven Smith of the Peoria County sheriff’s office and the county of Peoria for personal injuries suffered by her as a result of an accident in which the truck she was driving was rear-ended by the defendant’s squad car. A Peoria County jury returned a verdict for the defendants on the question of negligence. Plaintiff filed a post-trial motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, which was denied. She appeals. On February 14, 1975, around 4:30 p.m., defendant Smith, while on patrol duty, received a dispatch to go to an accident scene located at Route 88 and Woodside Drive in Peoria County. At the time, Smith was on Mossville Road, a two-lane road, near Route 29. Smith testified that he activated the lights and siren on his squad car and drove about 40 miles per hour in the 45-mile-per-hour zone. He was still in the westbound lane of Mossville Road as he approached the point where Mossville Road meets Route 88, a stop for Mossville traffic. There he observed several vehicles lined up in his lane of traffic, and he slowed to around 35 miles per hour to attempt to go around that backed-up, stopped traffic by passing in the eastbound lane. The record is unclear as to the exact number of cars that were in the westbound lane between the plaintiff’s truck, which was the rear-most vehicle at the end of the line, and the stop sign at the intersection—the plaintiff being of the opinion that at least two cars were ahead of her and the officer opining that maybe eight or a dozen vehicles were in the line as he attempted to pass. At that point Smith saw a vehicle turn from Route 88 into the Mossville Road eastbound lane, heading towards him. Smith swerved his squad car back towards the westbound lane, braked, and skidded into the rear end of plaintiff’s truck. Smith estimated that his speed just prior to impact was 30 miles per hour. The point of collision was 220 feet from the stop sign at the “T” intersection. The weather conditions were described as starting to sleet or snow. The pavement was wet and slippery. The shoulders on both sides of Mossville Road were too narrow to permit vehicles to travel on them. The posted speed limit on Mossville Road was 45 miles per hour. It further appears that Smith was familiar with the vicinity of the accident and knew the intersection of Route 88 and Mossville Road to be busy at that time of day. The plaintiff testified that she had been stopped at the end of the line of traffic for 20 to 30 seconds and had neither seen nor heard the defendant’s squad car approaching from the rear prior to the impact. The damage to the truck was minor; and the damage to the front of the squad car, substantial. The plaintiff suffered head and back injuries which were the subject of much dispute at trial but need not be described in detail for purposes of this appeal. The only issue which need be addressed in this appeal is whether the trial court should have granted plaintiff's motion for a directed verdict on the issue of liability at the close of all evidence and whether the court erred in denying plaintiff’s post-trial motion for judgment notwithstanding the jury’s verdict for the defendant. Our task is to determine whether all of the evidence viewed in its aspect most favorable to the defendants so overwhelmingly favors the plaintiff that no contrary verdict based on the evidence could ever stand. (Pedrick v. Peoria & Eastern R.R. Co. (1967), 37 Ill. 2d 494, 229 N.E.2d 504.) For the reasons that follow, we reverse. The defendant’s theory of nonliability as presented at trial and again on appeal is premised on an application of sections 11—205 and 11—907 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 951/2, pars. 11—205 and 11—907). These provisions grant exemptions from certain traffic laws to operators of “authorized emergency vehicles when responding to an emergency call” and when “making use of either an audible signal *** or visual signals” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 951/2, par. 11—205), and require that other drivers yield to such an approaching emergency vehicle and “immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right hand edge *** of the highway” so as to permit passage of the emergency vehicle (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 951/2, par. 11—907). By operation of these statutes under the circumstances of this case, defendants contend, Officer Smith was not negligent in attempting to pass in the left-hand lane and, in any event, the appearance of an on-coming vehicle which failed to make way for Smith was the proximate cause of the accident. Plaintiff does not dispute that defendant Smith qualified for the statutory exemption for emergency vehicles (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 951/2, par. 11—205) under the circumstances as they existed on the date of the accident, but disagrees with the defendant’s application of the statutory provisions. According to the plaintiff, the statutes at issue authorize drivers of emergency vehicles to violate rules of the road only to the extent that such violations do not endanger other persons. Under plaintiff’s view, the statutory exemptions do not lower the standard of care chargeable to operators of emergency vehicles when an accident results. The question of negligence is measured by what a reasonable, prudent emergency vehicle driver would do under all of the circumstances, including that of the emergency. (Torres v. City of Los Angeles (1962), 58 Cal. 2d 35, 372 P.2d 906, 22 Cal. Rptr. 866; Rutherford v. State (Alaska 1979), 605 P.2d 16.) The plaintiff argues that defendant Smith was negligent in that his speed was too fast for existing conditions and that he failed to keep a proper lookout for vehicles that might enter the eastbound lane on the busy narrow road before proceeding into it and attempting to pass a continuous line of cars stretching 200-odd feet back from State Highway 88, h “T” intersection. The specific subsections of the statutes relied upon by the plaintiff are as follows: “The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor do such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for safety of others.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 951/2, par. 11— 205(e). “This Section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway.” (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1983, ch. 95%, par. 11-907(b).) We find the plaintiffs position compelling. It is obvious that the plaintiff could not have done anything to avoid the accident.  On the basis of the foregoing statutory provisions, plaintiff correctly observes that the ordinary-negligence standard applies to operators of emergency vehicles. Under ordinary-negligence standards, adverse weather and road conditions known to the negligent party are not sufficient to absolve a defendant from liability for an accident where the defendant’s car skids into the plaintiff’s and the plaintiff’s car is entirely within its own lane of traffic. (Calvetti v. Seipp (1967), 37 Ill. 2d 596, 227 N.E.2d 758; Kyrouac v. Brockman (1983), 120 Ill. App. 3d 249, 457 N.E.2d 1074.) In Sughero v. Jewel Tea Co. (1967), 37 Ill. 2d 240, 226 N.E.2d 28, on similar facts, our supreme court approved the principle that “after plaintiff [has] shown defendant’s vehicle was on the wrong side of the highway and out of control, [defendant] had the duty of showing it was there for some reason other than his own negligence.” 37 Ill. 2d 240, 242, 220 N.E.2d 28, 29. In the instant case, the defendants point to the appearance of the unknown vehicle that turned onto Mossville Road after Smith entered the left-hand lane of traffic to explain that Smith’s decision to re-enter the right-hand lane was reasonable. Defendants posit that the potential danger of a head-on collision would inspire a reasonably prudent person under the circumstances to risk rear-ending the plaintiff’s stopped vehicle. The problem with defendants’ theory is that it fails to acknowledge that it was entirely foreseeable that a vehicle would enter the left hand of Mossville Road from Route 88 at the “T” intersection during Smith’s proposed travel of an excess of 200 feet on the wrong side of the road, regardless of his speed. Smith, as aforesaid, was familiar with the area and its heavy traffic at that time of day. The tes-, timony at trial did not indicate that Mossville Road was other than straight or that there was any obstruction that would have concealed the unknown vehicle from Smith’s view before he left the right-hand lane. It was not established that the unknown vehicle was traveling at an excessive rate of speed before it reached the “T” intersection. It was not established how far that vehicle had traveled along Mossville Road before Smith braked and went into the skid. Finally, it was not established that the unknown vehicle did not slow down when Smith’s emergency vehicle appeared to be heading directly in its path. The testimony at trial simply established that the oncoming vehicle was not involved in the accident. When asked whether that vehicle ever stopped, Smith stated, “I don’t believe so.” Since Smith had not yet, passed the plaintiff’s truck which was last in line, it seems that the unknown vehicle appeared at the intersection almost immediately after Smith left the right-hand lane and that Smith’s switch back into that lane was attempted immediately upon his viewing the oncoming vehicle. The split-second timing of the events would explain Smith’s inability at trial to state positively what action was taken by the unknown vehicle. In any event, it is undisputed that Smith’s car went out of control when he attempted to correct his lane of travel, braked and collided with the rear of the truck occupied by Bouhl.  We hold that under the circumstances here presented, the defendant has failed to carry his burden of proving that his vehicle was under sufficient control to proceed in the left-hand lane with due regard for the safety of others. Neither the presence of the unknown motorist, nor the existing weather and road conditions, nor the emergency to which Smith was responding provides an adequate explanation or excuse for the defendant’s failure to maintain control of his squad car so as to avoid colliding with the plaintiff’s truck. Where, as here, it is clearly established that the plaintiff performed no act or omission which could in any way be considered negligent, and the perilous situation which led to the accident was a creation of the defendant emergency vehicle operator’s own negligence, then the defendant must be found negligent. The act or omission of the driver of the unknown vehicle could not have been a superseding cause of plaintiff’s injuries, since it was not established that his appearance at the “T” intersection was in any respect an unforeseeable circumstance. From the facts and evidence here presented, and viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the defendants, we conclude that reasonable minds could not differ in their judgment and could only determine that Officer Smith was negligent and that his negligence was a proximate cause of injuries to the plaintiff. The court should have granted plaintiff’s motion for a directed verdict on the question of Smith’s negligence and instructed the jury that Smith was negligent as a matter of law. Having failed to do so, the court should have granted plaintiff’s motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. Accordingly, we reverse and remand this cause to the circuit court of Peoria County with directions to enter judgment for plaintiff on the issue of liability and to grant a new trial on the issue of damages only. Reversed and remanded. SCOTT, J., concurs.