=== CASE 9739329 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:25.550391+00 ===

MINGE, Judge
(concurring specially).
Although I do not join in the opinion, I join in the decision of the majority affirming the conviction of appellants.
Freedom of expression is a fundamental right secured by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 3 of the Minnesota Constitution. We strictly scrutinize limits on expression and insist that such limits be justified by a compelling and overriding public purpose, and that they be narrowly crafted to serve that compelling purpose, without infringing on protected expression. See Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, 535 U.S. 234, 242-46, 122 S.Ct. 1389, 1398-99, 152 L.Ed.2d 403 (2002); cf. United States v. Carotene Prods. Co., 304 U.S. 144, 152 n. 4, 58 S.Ct. 778, 783 n. 4, 82 L.Ed. 1234 (1938); State ex rel. Morrow v. LaFleur, 590 N.W.2d 787, 796 (Minn.1999); In re Blodgett, 510 N.W.2d 910, 914 (Minn.1994). Obscenity and child pornography are not protected and can be prohibited. Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 238-40, 122 S.Ct. at 1396.
Appellants have admitted to possession of child pornography of identifiable children. Since the power of the state to criminalize child pornography was recognized by the Supreme Court in the case of New York v. Ferber, 458 U.S. 747, 102 S.Ct. 3348, 73 L.Ed.2d 1113 (1982), this appeal has an easy, almost simplistic, dimension. However, this case presents two more difficult problems. The first is the potential overbreadth of the statute in criminalizing the. possession of pornographic drawings of minors. Drawings are different from pictures. The term “drawing” lacks precision and is vague. The majority interprets the statute as only *427covering drawings of actual identifiable minors and appears to conclude that the accused would have to know or have strong reason to know that the drawings were of actual, identifiable minors. Only such a narrow reading of the statute and such a scienter requirement avoid the problem of overbreadth. Furthermore, such a narrow reading reduces the likelihood that the overbreadth is sufficiently substantial to justify striking the entire statute as unconstitutional.
The second problem is that the Supreme Court has not yet determined whether possession of images of an actual child that have been altered to appear as if that child is engaged in sexual activity can be subject to criminal penalties. See Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 241-42, 122 S.Ct. at 1397. The statute before us takes that step. Minn. Stat. § 617.246, subd. l(f)(2)(ii) (2000). The majority opinion upholds that provision. The opinion and the statute should be read as including a strong requirement of scienter as to both content and character. The statute should be understood to require actual knowledge or a clear reason to know both that the person depicted is an identifiable minor and that the activity shown meets the definition of pornographic work. Minn.Stat. § 617.247, subd. 4 (2000). Absent such a narrowing construction, the statute would not comply with Ashcroft and would be unconstitutional. However, since appellants do not claim that the pictures they possessed were altered and since they do not claim that the children pictured had not actually been part of proscribed sexual conduct, their conviction can stand without reference to this issue or Minn.Stat. § 617.246, subd. l(f)(2)(ii). The Supreme Court did not reach this issue and I would not reach it either.

=== CASE 9739330 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:29.140812+00 ===

JON E WILCOX, J.
¶ 1. On February 7, 2002, the Honorable Jeffrey A. Wagner (Fetitioner), a circuit court judge in Milwaukee County, sought leave to commence an original action for declaratory judgment regarding the interpretation of Article VII, Section 10(1) of the Wisconsin Constitution. Although this court initially determined that it was unable to grant the petitioner's request for expedited review, we eventually granted the petitioner leave to commence this original action on March 4, 2002. In this action, we are presented with two related issues. First, we consider whether Article VII, Section 10(1) of the Wisconsin Constitution prohibits a judge or justice of a court of record in this state from holding a nonjudicial position of public trust during the entire period of time for which he was elected and entitled to serve as a judge or justice, even if the person resigns from the judicial position before the term would otherwise expire. Second, if such a prohibition exists, the petitioner asserts that it deprives a resigned judge or justice of liberty and equal protection of the law.
¶ 2. We conclude that Article VII, Section 10(1) is more than a dual office holding provision and does, in fact, prohibit a judge or justice from holding a nonjudicial position of public trust during the entire term for which he or she was originally elected, not simply during the judge or justice's actual time of service in the position. We further find that such a restriction does not violate petitioner's constitutional rights to liberty and equal protection of the law.
*715HH
¶ 3. The facts in this action are not disputed. On March 26, 2002, this court ordered the parties to this matter to submit a Joint Stipulation of Facts, which they did on April 11, 2002. Other important facts emerge from the procedural history of the case. The petitioner is presently serving his third term as a circuit judge for Milwaukee County. His term commenced in August 2000 and expires in August 2006. The petitioner may desire to resign his position as circuit judge and run for the office of County Executive of Milwaukee County and, if elected, hold the office of County Executive of Milwaukee County. Respondent Milwaukee County Election Commission is the agency with whom declarations of candidacy for the position of Milwaukee County Executive must he filed. If it were clear that Article VII, Section 10(1) of the Wisconsin Constitution precluded the petitioner from holding the position of County Executive prior to August 2006, the Milwaukee County Election Commission would refuse to place the petitioner's name on the ballot pursuant to Wis. Stat. § 8.30(l)(c) (1999-2000).1
*716¶ 4. As noted, the petitioner first sought leave to commence an original action in this court on February 7, 2002. At the time, he expressed specific interest in becoming a candidate in an upcoming election for Milwaukee County Executive. On February 26, 2002, the respondent Milwaukee County Election Commission filed a response indicating that it neither supported nor opposed the petition by Judge Wagner. The deadline for filing nomination papers for the position of Milwaukee County Executive was March 5, 2002. In an order dated February 27, 2002, this court stated that because there was no respondent taking a position adverse to the petitioner, the court would be unable to expeditiously resolve the action before the March 5 deadline. However, the court further ordered that if the petitioner wished to proceed, it would grant the petitioner's request to commence an original action and invite the Office of the Attorney General to serve as the respondent.
¶ 5. On March 1, 2002, the petitioner informed the court that he wished to proceed. By order dated March 4, 2002, this court granted the petitioner leave to commence an original action seeking declaratory relief. It further ordered that the Office of the Attorney General advise the court if it would accept the court's invitation to serve as respondent. The Office of the Attorney General agreed to serve as a respondent in this original action on March 14, 2002. On March 29, 2002, this court granted Professor Janine E Geske's motion for leave to file a nonparty brief.
hH hH
¶ 6. Before reaching the merits of this dispute, we address the issue of justiciability raised by the amicus *717in this case. The amicus argües that no justiciable controversy exists in this action and that even if such a controversy does exist, this is an inappropriate case for the court to exercise its jurisdiction. We cannot agree.
¶ 7. Wisconsin Stat. § 806.04, the Uniform Declaratory Judgments Act, provides, in part, that "[cjourts of record within their respective jurisdictions shall have the power to declare rights, status, and other legal relations whether or not further relief is or could be claimed." The statute goes on to enumerate some specific powers conferred to courts, but in Wis. Stat. § 806.04(5), explicitly notes that these enumerations do not limit the general power conferred "in any proceeding where declaratory relief is sought, in which a judgment or decree will terminate the controversy or remove an uncertainty." In the present case, a determination by this court will end uncertainty and terminate the controversy that exists regarding the interpretation of this constitutional provision.
¶ 8. This court has stated the requisites for declaratory judgment on previous occasions. In Loy v. Bunderson, 107 Wis. 2d 400, 409-10, 320 N.W.2d 175 (1982), this court held that a justiciable controversy must exist in an action for declaratory judgment. The court then went on to state that a justiciable controversy is defined by four factors: *718Id. at 410 (internal quotations omitted); see also Slawek v. Stroh, 62 Wis. 2d 295, 306, 215 N.W.2d 9 (1974).
*717(1) A controversy in which a claim of right is asserted against one who has an interest in contesting it. (2) The controversy must be between persons whose interests are adverse. (3) The party seeking declaratory relief must have a legal interest in the controversy — that is to say, a legally protectible interest. (4) The issue involved in the controversy must be ripe for judicial determination.
*718¶ 9. The amicus suggests that this action is moot and the factors above not satisfied because the election in which the petitioner specifically expressed interest has already taken place. We do not find this argument convincing. First, the petitioner and respondents have stipulated that the petitioner maintains an interest in being a candidate for the position of Milwaukee County Executive sometime before his term is due to expire. The State, of course, contends that the Wisconsin Constitution prohibits the petitioner from holding such a position before August 2006. In Clements v. Fashing, 457 U.S. 957, 962 (1982), a case similar to the one at hand, the United States Supreme Court held that a Texas Justice of the Peace's claim that a constitutional provision made him ineligible even to become a candidate was sufficient to create a case or controversy and was not merely hypothetical.
¶ 10. Second, we agree with the parties' stipulation that the petitioner has responsibilities to adhere "to his oath as an attorney and a circuit judge to uphold and abide by the laws of the state of Wisconsin." (Joint Stipulation of Facts at 2.) Before running for Milwaukee County Executive, or any other nonjudicial position of public trust, he is right to ascertain what those laws require. It would be bad policy for this court to force a public servant, particularly a judge such as the petitioner here, to risk violating ethical rules and the constitution he has sworn to uphold in order to determine his eligibility to hold a nonjudicial position of public trust. Because the petitioner still has an interest in holding the position of Milwaukee County Executive or another nonjudicial office of public trust before his term expires in 2006, and because he has a present *719interest in fulfilling his obligations as an attorney and a circuit judge, we do not find that the case is moot. A decision by the court in this case will affect the decisions regarding candidacy to be made by the petitioner, and the responses by the State and Milwaukee County Election Commission.
¶ 11. Additionally, this court has recognized circumstances where it is appropriate to make a determination in an otherwise moot case. State ex rel. Angela M.W. v. Kruzicki, 209 Wis. 2d 112, 120 n.6, 561 N.W.2d 729 (1997). In Kruzicki, this court held that exceptions to the mootness rule exist "when the issues presented are of great public importance, or the question is capable and likely of repetition and yet evades appellate review because the appellate process usually cannot be completed in time to have a practical effect on the parties." Id. (internal citations omitted). In In re Guardianship of L.W. v. L.E. Phillips Career Development Center, 167 Wis. 2d 53, 63, 66-68, 482 N.W.2d 60 (1992),2 this court used similar standards to get to the merits of a case where the rights of a patient in a persistent vegetative state were at issue, but the patient died of natural causes while the case was pending.
¶ 12. This court granted the petitioner in this case leave to commence an original action, despite its awareness of the fact that the specific election in which *720the petitioner originally expressed interest was over. In our orders regarding acceptance of this case, we have already acknowledged the importance of the issues in this action and the necessity of deciding the issues because of the danger and tendency that this type of case could evade review. See, e.g., Joyner v. Mofford, 706 F.2d 1523, 1527 (9th Cir. 1983)(holding, in a challenge to a so-called resign-to-run clause,3 that such election cases were of the type to evade review).4
¶ 13. In our initial denial of the petitioner's request, this court acknowledged that the issue raised is important and "an appropriate subject for the exercise of this court's original jurisdiction." This court also noted: "This petition presents the kind of issue that is capable of repetition, yet evades review." The court went on to state: "For that reason, we are prepared to grant the petition for leave to file an original action."
*721The facts of this case support such reasoning. Here, the court was unable to decide this case in time to allow the petitioner to meet the filing deadline for nomination papers with respect to the election in which the petitioner expressed particular interest. Such a situation is likely to recur. While the timing of some elections could allow a candidate to bring an action to court for resolution, many will not. Additionally, some situations potentially affected by this provision could arise overnight and require immediate responses. The interpretation of this constitutional provision forces review of the structure and independence of the judiciary — issues that strike at the very heart of our democratic institutions. As shown by the facts of this action, this provision affects the rights and obligations of those who occupy positions in this state's judiciary. The facts of this case are sufficient for this court to make a determination on the merits, and because the issues raised are so important, it is appropriate that this court make such a determination.
¶ 14. The same reasoning applies to the argument by amicus that this action is not ripe for resolution. We find that the facts here are sufficient to require a determination by this court. As recently noted by the First Circuit Court of Appeals, in dealing with the issue of ripeness in the situation of a pre-enforcement challenge to a law, "Once the gun has been cocked and aimed and the finger is on the trigger, it is not necessary to wait until the bullet strikes to invoke the Declaratory Judgment Act." Stern v. United States Dist. Ct. for the District of Massachusetts, 214 F.3d 4, 10-11 (1st Cir. 2000) (quoting ANR Pipeline Co. v. Corp. Comm'n, 860 F.2d 1571, 1578 (10th Cir. 1988)). Here, the petitioner was prepared to become a candidate in an election, but *722the wheels of justice could not turn fast enough to make a determination before candidates had to declare themselves for the election.
¶ 15. It is not this court's purpose to disrupt the flow of the elective process, nor is it desirable for this court to force potential candidates into an untenable position in which they must risk violating the very constitution they are entrusted to uphold in order to seek another position from which to serve the public. As such, it is appropriate that we resolve the question as it arises under the facts presented in this case. There is a core institutional interest in protecting the integrity of the judiciary by making a determination in this case. This issue must be resolved so that all those serving as judges and justices of courts of record in this state may know and understand what is required of them under the Wisconsin Constitution.
¶ 16. Finally, the amicus asserts that there is a lack of adversity in this case. We do not find that this action is merely an advisory opinion on an academic question upon which the parties have a convenient difference of opinion. As the State noted at oral argument, the Office of the Attorney General represents the interests of the people of the State of Wisconsin. As will be shown, the people have made clear their interpretation and intentions regarding this particular provision of the Wisconsin Constitution. As such, it is the duty of the State's representative in this action to protect the interests of the citizenry. That position is adverse to the position taken by the petitioner, and the State has an interest in preventing the petitioner's claims of a right to resign and hold the position of county executive from becoming the accepted interpretation. It is true that the Milwaukee County Election Commission declined to *723take an adverse position in this case, claiming that it did not have the power to do so as a mere ministerial entity. The State, however, through the Office of the Attorney General, is an appropriate respondent in this action.
¶ 17. This court noted in Loy, 107 Wis. 2d at 407: "The power of a court to declare rights is broad in scope." Based on the factors discussed above, we find that a justiciable controversy exists in this case and that it is an appropriate case for this court to exercise its original jurisdiction. We therefore move to a determination of the merits of this action.
I — I I — I h — I
¶ 18. We have been called upon in this action to interpret the meaning of the phrase "during the term for which elected" as used in Article VII, Section 10(1) of the Wisconsin Constitution. The interpretation of a constitutional provision is subject to de novo review. State v. City of Oak Creek, 2000 WI 9, ¶ 18, 232 Wis. 2d 612, 605 N.W.2d 526 (citing State v. Hansford, 219 Wis. 2d 226, 234, 580 N.W.2d 171 (1998); Thompson v. Craney, 199 Wis. 2d 674, 680, 546 N.W.2d 123 (1996)(internal citation omitted)). When determining a constitutional provision's meaning, this court typically examines three sources: "the plain meaning of the words in the context used; the constitutional debates and the practices in existence at the time of the writing of the constitution; and the earliest interpretation of the provision by the legislature as manifested in the first law passed following adoption." Oak Creek, 232 Wis. 2d 612, ¶ 18.
*724¶ 19. The petitioner claims that Article VII, Section 10(1) of the Wisconsin Constitution does not prohibit a circuit judge or other judge or justice of a court of record in this state from holding a nonjudicial position of public trust, so long as he or she resigns from the judicial position. The petitioner asserts that this provision merely prohibits dual office holding. However, based on our examination of the relevant sources, we conclude that this provision restricts more than the simultaneous holding of judicial and nonjudicial offices of public trust. This provision prohibits a circuit judge such as the petitioner from holding a nonjudicial office of public trust during the full period of time for which he or she is elected to serve in a judicial position, even if the judge chooses to resign before that term would otherwise expire. Were we to interpret this provision as only a dual office holding restriction, the phrase "during the term for which elected" would be rendered meaningless. The period of time constituting the "term for which elected" as used in Article VII, Section 10 is set when a judge or justice is elected, and is thereafter unalterable by means of resignation.
A. Plain Meaning
¶ 20. We begin with the plain meaning of the words of the Wisconsin Constitution, Article VII, Section 10(1). During the century and a half this provision has existed, numerous sources, including this court, have had the opportunity to interpret the language at issue generally, and the provision at issue specifically. This extensive history guides us to the result we reach today.
¶ 21. The language of the constitutional provision itself lends support to our conclusion that Article VII, *725Section 10(1) restricts judges and justices from holding nonjudicial offices of public trust "during the term for which elected" regardless of whether or not they resign from judicial office. In its present form, Article VII, Section 10 of the Wisconsin Constitution states:
Judges: eligibility to office. (1) No justice of the supreme court or judge of any court of record shall hold any other office of public trust, except a judicial office, during the term for which elected....
There is a corresponding provision in the Wisconsin Statutes. Wisconsin Stat. § 757.02(2) states: "The judge of any court of record in this state shall he ineligible to hold any office of public trust, except a judicial office, during the term for which he or she was elected or appointed." The development of this statutory provision will be discussed in a later section.
¶ 22. Article VII, Section 10 was instituted as part of the original constitution adopted by Wisconsin citizens in 1848. At the time of its adoption, Section 10 stated:
Each of the judges of the supreme and circuit courts shall receive a salary, payable quarterly, of not less than one thousand five hundred dollars annually; they shall receive no fees of office or other compensation than their salaries; they shall hold no office of public trust, except a judicial office, during the term for which they are respectively elected, and all votes for either of them for any office except a judicial office, given by the legislature or the people, shall be void. .. .
Wis. Const. art. VII, § 10 (1848)(emphasis added); see also, Tenney, H.A., Smith, J.Y., Lambert, David & Tenney, H.W., Journal of the Convention to Form a Constitution for the State of Wisconsin, With a Sketch of the Debates, (1848) at 611-12; Milo M. Quaife, The *726Attainment of Statehood 11 (1928) (proclaiming the voters' acceptance of the constitution).
¶ 23. The committee at the first state constitutional convention in 1846 initially reported Article VII, Section 10, in relevant part, as follows:
[T]hey shall hold no other office or public trust, and all votes for either of them for any office except that of judge of the supreme or circuit court given by the legislature or the people shall be void. If any judge shall resign his office he shall not be eligible or appointed to any office within one year after such resignation... .
Milo M. Quaife, The Convention of 1846 293 (1919).
¶ 24. The convention adopted a modified version of that provision in the 1846 constitution. That version of Article VII, Section 10 stated:
Sec. 10. Each of the judges of the supreme and circuit courts shall... hold no other office of public trust, and all votes for either of them for any office except that of judge of the supreme or circuit court, given by the legislature or the people, shall be void. If any judge shall resign his office, he shall not be eligible or appointed to any office within two years after such resignation....
Tenney, Journal of the Convention to Form a Constitution (1848) at 637. One significant change between these two drafts is the increase from one to two years of the restriction on judges and justices following resignation from office. Both versions of Section 10 illustrate a desire by the drafters to restrict judges even after resignation. This first attempt at a constitution for Wisconsin was rejected by the people. Milo M. Quaife, The Struggle Over Ratification, 1846-1847 697 (1920) (reprinting the governor's 1847 proclamation that the 1846 constitution was not adopted).
*727¶ 25. The dissent intimates that because the first attempt at ratification failed, the discussion from those debates on the subject of an elected judiciary is largely unpersuasive. Dissent, ¶¶ 89-90, 97. We vehemently disagree. As noted by one scholar:
Although the constitution framed by this [the 1846] convention was rejected by the people, extended discussion of its proceedings is appropriate. In essential details the 1848 constitution followed closely the rejected predecessor. Also the framing of the 1846 constitution brought more sharply into focus the vital political, economic and social issues of the period than did its successor. After the 1846 convention, that of 1848, in matter of public interest, was largely an anticlimax.
Ray A. Brown, The Making of the Wisconsin Constitution, 1949 Wis. L. Rev. 648, 655 n.* (hereinafter Part I). We believe the debate surrounding elected judges and the best method of achieving an independent judiciary was one that began in 1846 and continued its evolution through the second constitutional convention.5
¶ 26. Whether judges should be appointed or elected was one of the issues extensively debated during the 1846 constitutional convention. Quaife, The Convention of 1846 at 287-88. Mr. Charles M. Baker, the reporter of the committee on the organization and functions of the judiciary, spoke upon the matter when the article on the judiciary was reported to the convention:
*728But there is one feature in the judicial system proposed for adoption by a majority of the committee so prominent and important and upon which so decided a difference of opinion exists that it demands a more minute and extended examination. It is the election of the judges by the people. This principle lies at the foundation of the whole superstructure, and it is of the first importance to ascertain whether it is sound and correct. It is conceded by all that government naturally resolves itself into the three branches, executive, legislative, and judicial, and that their appropriate spheres of action are so diverse that there is both a propriety and a necessity for keeping each not only distinct from but so far as possible entirely independent of the other. It is also an axiom of government in this country that the people are the source of all political power, and to them should their officers and rulers be responsible for the faithful discharge of their respective duties.. .. The judicial power, a distinct and coequal department, which should be wholly independent of the others, instead of emanating from the people, the true source of all political power, has been dependent for existence upon the executive or legislative will, or perhaps both. The necessary result, in a measure, must be the dependence of the judiciary upon one or both of the other branches of government and its independence of the people....
Id. From this it is clear that the committee was intensely concerned about creating and supporting a truly independent judiciary and proposed that an elective judiciary would be better fit for such purpose. Mr. Baker went on to discuss objections to the elected judges:
Another objection to the elective mode is that the judges may be induced to render unjust decisions in order to secure a reelection. This supposes the preexistence of a weak and corrupt judge, that the parties *729interested are of opposite politics, or that one has very considerable and the other very little political influence, and that a decision is to be made not long before an election.... Nothing in this country would sooner seal the political doom of any judge, by all parties and every honest man, than the attempt to bend his decisions from the line of justice to make political capital. ... He alone can be a popular judge who is honest, impartial, decided, and fearless; who holds with a steady hand the scales of justice, and will suffer no improper influences to approach them; whose judgment, though it may somewhat waiver and tremble in doubt, ultimately points steadily to the pole of eternal truth and justice.. . .
See id. at 290. See also Quaife, The Convention of 1846 at 587-603 (reprinting additional portions of the debate on the judiciary).
¶ 27. Mr. Edward G. Ryan6 brought a different perspective to the convention when he spoke of the proposed elective judiciary. Mr. Ryan was initially a member, of the judiciary committee,7 but asked to be excused from the committee after a heated debate over an increase of the number of people on the committee. See id. at 62. Nevertheless, Mr. Ryan was a prominent *730figure in the convention as a whole, and a vocal participant in the debates over the structure of the judiciary. See Brown, Part I, at 666-69 (noting Ryan as one of the members of the convention that "deserve[s] particular mention" and discussing Ryan's views in the discussion of the judiciary article).8 Mr. Ryan thought there were problems with both systems, elective or appointed.9 See *731Quaife, The Convention of 1846 at 587. He recommended several changes to the reported proposal. Id. at 587-88. Among other recommendations, Mr. Ryan specifically moved for the proposed articles to be returned to the committee for consideration of several matters, including his recommendation that "[n]o judge [would] be eligible to any office, except judicial, for the term for which he is appointed judge." Id. at 589. Although the motion to recommit the article was subsequently rejected, there is uncanny similarity between the language proposed by Mr. Ryan and the language that eventually found its way into the constitution ratified by the people. Even in the 1846 draft put before the people, a provision specifically restricted judges from holding other office after resignation.
¶ 28. On November 30, 1846, Mr. Ryan spoke again about the method for selecting the judiciary. He again emphasized several principles, including that a judge should not be eligible to other nonjudicial offices for "the full term of his appointment." Id. at 591. He emphasized the importance of an independent judiciary, which he thought impossible if the judges were too often subject to election by the people. He stated:
Sir, in this system it is not the people I distrust, but the judges to he chosen by the people; it is not the choice of the people so much, as the effect of the choice upon the judges. This objection combines with it the *732short terms of election. And this, sir, is my grand distrust of the elective system.
. . . Elected by the suffrages of the people, for a short term, with the hope of reelection or promotion, the political officer looks back forever upon his constituents, is inquisitive of the popular sentiment, full of anxious regard for the popular will, feels the public pulse and counts his own healthy when it beats responsively to that. In political office, this is right, this is admirable. It is the vitality of the representative system that the representative should thus forever look back from his own judgment to the will of his people, and thus anxiously ascertaining should faithfully execute the delegated will of those who chose him for his power and inclination to obey them. But that which is the vitality of political representation will be the corruption of the judiciary. ... Man on the bench and man in political office are the same in nature, subject, if exposed, to the same influences .... Elect the judges by the people, for short terms, with the hope of reelection or promotion — sir, the judge will cease to be the representative of truth and right and justice alone; he will be the representative of the people and will represent the popular judgment, when there is one, not his own. He, too, will remember who elected him and who must reelect him;... and, sitting on the seat of justice, her representative, he will look forth to mark the blowing of the popular breeze and will steer the course of public justice by the popular current....
I do not say that there will be no exceptions to this influence; I do not say that the choice of the people will never fall upon a man of a high strength of character and stern integrity of mind, above and beyond all such influence. ... But I say that this is the tendency of the system, the inevitable tendency ....
*733Id. at 597-99. These statements show a distrust of the elective system, particularly with short terms for such judges.10 Although Mr. Ryan failed in his attempts to recommit the proposal, he did have supporters, and the product, Article VII, Section 10, that emerged from the 1846 convention appears, in all respects, to be a compromise of the two more extreme views expressed above. The 1846 constitution provided that judges were to be elected, but it also placed limitations upon those serving to isolate them from the sway of popular politics.
¶ 29. As noted, the constitution that emerged from the first convention was rejected. However, a second constitutional convention met and the constitution adopted at this convention was ratified by the people in 1848. During the second convention, on December 24, 1847, the Committee on the Judiciary reported to the convention a new version of Article VII, Section 10, stating, in relevant part:
They shall hold no other office of public trust, and all votes for either of them for any office, except that of judge of the supreme or circuit court, given by the legislature or the people shall be void.
Tenney, Journal of the Convention to Form a Constitution (1848) at 67. Only one amendment had explanation:
*734Mr. KILBOURN moved so to amend that the disqualification of a judge from being elected to any other office, should not apply to a judicial office. His object was to leave the restriction so that a judge of the district court might be elected a judge of the supreme court.
The amendment was adopted.
Id. at 422. However, the final draft of the constitution that was adopted by the convention and eventually ratified by the citizenry included yet another variation in the text of Article VII, Section 10, adding the phrase now at the center of our discussion:
[T]hey shall hold no office of public trust, except a judicial office, during the term for which they are respectively elected, and all votes for either of them for any office except a judicial office, given by the legislature or the people, shall be void.. ..
Id. at 611-12. During this second convention, the debates fell once again upon the subject of term length for judges. See Quaife, The Attainment of Statehood at 634-37, 692-97 (reprinting convention debates on the subject of the length of judicial terms of office). On January 19, 1848, Mr. Chase, a delegate to the second convention, offered an amendment to reduce the term of office of the judges from ten to five years. See id. at 634. Many other delegates then offered statements on pros and .cons of this amendment. Mr. Chase asserted: "Ten years seemed to place the judiciary practically beyond the power of the people; and some gentlemen even advocated so long a term for that very purpose." Id. at 635. Mr. Dunn, on the other hand, suggested long terms might be better:
The doctrine of short terms and low salaries was a favorite one with many, and in general he believed in it. *735Yet in the case of judges there was not the same necessity for a frequent recurrence to the people as in the case of political officers.... To secure good judges it was necessary to offer sufficient inducements for men of the highest order of talent to devote their lives to that study. . . . Another reason for long terms was that too frequent elections would place before judges temptations to swerve from duty and to seek popularity as a means of reelection, in ways which were unbecoming to the dignity of their station. A judge, after giving up his other pursuits in life, and in a measure unfitting himself for them, would very naturally desire a reelection as a means of subsistence.
Id. Again, quite a split in opinion emerged. While no explanation of the particular amendment adding the "during the term for which elected" phrase appears in the written accounts of the convention,11 we believe the concerns raised at the conventions and the various drafts of the constitution can lead to only one logical conclusion. All of the drafts from the 1846 convention contained a provision prohibiting judges from holding a nonjudicial office of public trust for a period of time even after resignation. The second draft lengthened the period of prohibition. The first draft from the second convention contained no such provision, but the language was significantly revised into the version that went before the people. The latter, the draft that became part of our original constitution, again contained a description of the period of prohibition. The drafters of the constitution voiced concerns over the evils of an elected judiciary and long debated over the appropriate term lengths for various judges. Given the nature of the debates and the text itself of early *736versions of the constitution, it is clear to us that the drafters considered various periods of restriction and eventually settled on "during the term for which they are respectively elected." The very fact that such restrictions were written into the constitutional drafts indicates a compromise between those favoring an elected judiciary and those leery of the elective system. The judiciary was to be elected, but strict restrictions were put into place to preserve its independence. While today such a provision might not seem the best option to some, at the time and for the 150-plus years since its creation, this provision has effectively served to preserve the independence and integrity of this state's judiciary.
¶ 30. Article VII, Section 10 has been amended only twice. The first amendment, adopted in 1912, dealt with the salary of judges and had no relation to the eligibility prohibition at issue here.12 See 1909 Joint Resolution 34; ch. 665, Laws of 1911; 1911 Joint Resolution 24.
¶ 31. In 1977, as part of a broader court reform that included the creation of the court of appeals, the text of Article VII, Section 10 was again modified. This amendment split Section 10 into two subsections and *737Section 10(1), the provision now at issue, emerged in the form it retains today, stating, in relevant part:
Section 10. (1) No justice of the supreme court or judge of any court of record shall hold any other office of public trust, except a judicial office, during the term for which elected....
Wis. Const, art. VII, § 10(1) (1977). See also 1975 Enrolled Joint Resolution 13; 1977 Enrolled Joint Resolution 7.
¶ 32. In 1995, Wisconsin voters were presented with another opportunity to amend Article VII, Section 10; however, this time they declined to do so. In April 1995, Wisconsin voters rejected a referendum under which the phrase "during the term for which elected" would have been eliminated from Section 10(1). See 1995 Assembly Joint Resolution 15. Because the referendum failed, though, the phrase "during the term for which elected" remains part of the constitution.
¶ 33. This phrase has survived all the various changes to this section of the constitution. As the 1995 proposed amendment makes clear, had the drafters intended only a prohibition of simultaneous office holding, this phrase would be unnecessary and, in fact, stand in the way of such interpretation. Our constitution was adopted directly by the people and for that reason its words should be construed in the manner most consistent with common understanding. State ex rel. Martin v. Heil, 242 Wis. 41, 55, 7 N.W.2d 375 (1942); Payne v. Racine, 217 Wis. 550, 555, 259 N.W. 437 (1935). Keeping this in mind, it is logical that were this phrase not in Article VII, Section 10, the restriction would seem to apply to those who held the stated offices and only while they held those offices. If one resigns from *738the bench, the entitlement to the office is surrendered. Why is the phrase included, if not to define the period of prohibition? The drafters clearly could have created only a dual office holding prohibition, had they so intended. They did so elsewhere in the constitution. For example, they plainly created such a provision in Article W, Section 13:
No person being a member of congress, or holding any military or civil office under the United States shall be eligible to a seat in the legislature; and if any person shall, after his election as a member of the legislature, be elected to congress, or be appointed to any office, civil, or military, under the government of the United States, his acceptance thereof shall vacate his seat.
Wis. Const. art. IV, § 13 (1848). Another example is found in Article XIII, Section 3:
No member of congress, nor any person holding any office of profit or trust under the United States, (postmasters excepted), or under any foreign power ... shall be eligible to any office of trust, profit, or honor in this state.
Wis. Const. art. XIII, § 3 (1848). As this court has noted before, terms in statutes or, in this case, constitutional provisions, should be construed to give effect "to each and every word, clause and sentence" and "a construction that would result in any portion of a statute being superfluous should be avoided wherever possible." County of Columbia v. Bylewski, 94 Wis. 2d 153, 164, 288 N.W.2d 129 (1980). The petitioner's interpretation of Article VII, Section 10(1), suggesting that "the term" ends when a judge or justice resigns, would render the phrase "during the term for which elected" meaningless. *739As suggested by the State, this interpretation "ignores the language it is supposed to he interpreting." (Resp't Br. at 12.)
¶ 34. Additionally, such an interpretation conflicts with a literal interpretation of the words used in the provision. The constitution provides specific terms of service for those on the bench. Article VII, Section 7 proclaims, in pertinent part: "Circuit judges shall be elected for 6-year terms." Since 1977, when the court of appeals was created, a parallel provision has existed for court of appeals' judges in Article VII, Section 5(2). Finally, Article VII, Section 4(1) states that justices of the state supreme court "shall be elected for 10-year terms of office."13 Such clear language cannot be ignored. The constitution sets the length of the prohibition to be "during the term for which elected" and the "term for which elected" has been defined in the text of the constitution. Thus, we must agree with the State's argument that although one's "term" may refer to the time a particular person serves, the "term for which elected" as used here appears to be fixed by the constitutional language.
¶ 35. The legislative history surrounding the 1977 amendment and the proposed 1995 amendment to Article VII, Section 10 further support our interpretation. The history of the 1977 amendment to Section 10 is somewhat murky, most likely because the changes to Section 10 were only a small part of an extensive *740overhaul of the Wisconsin court system. One need only glance at the related legislation to realize the scope of the changes suggested. See 1977 Enrolled Joint Resolution 7. The language of the pertinent question placed on the 1977 ballot illustrates the point. It stated, in relevant part: "[S]hall section 21 of article I, sections 17 and 26 of article iy and sections 2 to 4, 6 to 10 and 14 of article VII of the constitution be amended ... ?" 1977 Enrolled Joint Resolution 7. Since the goal was overall reform of the state court system, it is not too surprising that the language of Section 10 did not receive much individual attention, at least in the written commentary on the reforms. That noted, however, the legislative history regarding the 1977 amendment does, indirectly, reveal some clues. The 1977 Senate Joint Resolution 9 included a short analysis by the Legislative Reference Bureau regarding the changes to Article VII, Section 10, which stated, in relevant part:
Deleted are existing provisions which now guarantee judges an annual salary of not less than $1,500, which now require justices and judges to be at least 25 years old, and which declare void any votes cast for the holder of a judicial office who, during his term of office, seeks election to a nonjudicidl office.
1977 Senate Joint Resolution 9 (emphasis added). There is nothing in the analysis to suggest the deletion would affect the interpretation of "during the term for which elected."
¶ 36. As required under Wisconsin law, the Attorney General authored an Explanatory Statement regarding the proposed amendment.14 See Wisconsin *741Briefs, Constitutional Amendments to be Considered by the Wisconsin Electorate April 5, 1977, LRB-77-WB-1 (March 1977). Regarding the referendum question that included the changes to Article VII, Section 10, the Attorney General wrote:
If you answer Yes' to the above-stated question, you will be voting (a) to create certain new features in the Wisconsin Constitution; (b) to repeal certain other features of it; and (c) in a few instances, to recreate one of the repealed features by inserting it elsewhere in such Constitution.
Id. at 7. The Attorney General then detailed the changes. Id. Among the "new features" would be an "amendment of [the] prohibition against supreme court justices or circuit judges holding any other office of public trust, except judicial office, during the term for which elected, to make it applicable to such justices and judges of any court of record instead of to such justices and circuit judges." Id. The Attorney General then went on to explain that a "yes" vote would be a vote "to repeal, that is, to eliminate," certain features of the constitution, including: "[the] provision that votes for supreme court justice or circuit court judge, for office he is ineligible to hold, given by the Legislature or the people, shall be void." Id. at 8. These are the only statements *742related to the Section 10 eligibility clause. These analy-ses show that the reform not only left the prohibition intact, but in fact, expanded the number of jurists covered by the prohibition. The analyses also suggest that the other changes to the section were intended to eliminate obsolete language from the text of the constitution.
¶ 37. The legislative history surrounding the 1995 proposed amendment is more clear. The petitioner argues that the purpose of the 1995 proposed amendment was to clear up an ambiguity. However, the legislative history of this amendment belies such an interpretation. The amendment survived first consideration by the 1993 legislature and arose for second consideration and presentation to the voters in 1995. See 1993 Assembly Joint Resolution 81, Analysis by the Legislative Reference Bureau. In the 1993 legislation, the Legislative Reference Bureau included the following explanation of the proposal:
Unlike any other elective office, the state constitution prohibits any justice of the supreme court or judge of any court of record, "during the term for which elected," from holding any other office of public trust.
This constitutional amendment, proposed to the 1993 legislature on "first consideration", eliminated that restriction. With the restriction gone, a judge, like any other elected or appointed officer, could be elected or appointed to a different office of public trust if the judge resigns the judgeship before assuming the different office.
Id. Similarly, when taken up on second consideration in 1995, the Legislative Reference Bureau noted:
The state constitution prohibits any justice of the supreme court or judge of any court of record from *743holding any other office of public trust, except a judicial office, during the term for which elected.
This constitutional amendment permits a justice or judge to be elected or appointed to a different office of public trust if the justice or judge vacates the judicial office before assuming the different office.
1995 Assembly Joint Resolution 15, Analysis by the Legislative Reference Bureau. There can be no doubt as to the position of the Legislative Reference Bureau. In discussing this and other proposed changes to the constitution in Wisconsin Briefs, the Bureau titled its section on the proposed amendment to Section 10, "Removing Restriction on Judges Holding Nonjudicial Public Office after Resignation During the Judicial Term." Wisconsin Briefs, Constitutional Amendments to be Considered by the Wisconsin Voters April 4, 1995, LRB-95-WB-6 (March 1995).
¶ 38. In 1992, in response to questions raised by Representative Scott Jensen, the Wisconsin Legislative Council staff issued the following analysis of Section 10:
Based on the language of the holding-other-office prohibition and the interpretation of that language, it appears that a judge may not hold any other state office of public trust during his or her term, even if the judge resigns his or her judicial office.
It is significant that the Wisconsin Constitution, Wisconsin Statutes and Supreme Court Rules refer to the period "during the term for which elected," "during the term for which he or she was elected or appointed" and "during the term for which he or she is elected or appointed," respectively. Had the intent of the prohibition been merely to prevent the simultaneous holding of another office of public trust by a judge, there would have been no need to refer to the period during the judge's term.
*744Wisconsin Legislative Council Staff Memorandum, Eligibility of Judge to Hold Other Office of Public Trust During Term, June 30, 1992, at 2 (hereinafter 1992 Eligibility Memorandum).
¶ 39. According to the 1992 Eligibility Memorandum, the Director of State Courts at the time apparently read the prohibition to allow the holding of another office of public trust if the judge or justice resigned from judicial office because successors elected to fill vacancies are elected for an entire term. Id. at 3. The petitioner now asserts the same argument based on the vacancy-filling provisions of Article VII, Section 9 and Wis. Stat. § 8.50(4)(f)4.15 However, as the 1992 Eligibility Memorandum noted:
It is difficult: (1) to understand the significance of the election to a full term by a successor filling a judicial vacancy, particularly in light of constitutional and statutory references to specific judicial terms (10 years for Supreme Court Justices, six years for Court of Appeals and Circuit Court Judges); and (2) to reconcile the Director's position with the language of the holding-other-office prohibition.
Id.
¶ 40. In his explanatory statement regarding the 1995 proposed amendment, the Attorney General appears to have concurred with the analysis of the Bureau:
*745Article VII, section 10(1) of the Wisconsin Constitution presently prohibits any justice of the supreme court or any judge of a court of record from holding any other office of public trust, except a judicial office, during the term for which the justice or judge was elected. A "yes" vote on this constitutional amendment would allow a justice or judge to be elected or appointed to a different office of public trust if the justice or judge vacated the judicial office before assuming the different office. A "no" vote would retain the present language of section 10(1) of article VII of the Wisconsin Constitution and would continue the prohibition against a justice or judge holding any other office of public trust, except a judicial office, during the term for which the justice or judge was elected.
Wisconsin Briefs, LRB-95-WB-6 (March 1995). It cannot be explained much more clearly. Moreover, the referendum question posed to the people of Wisconsin was stated as follows:
Eligibility of judges for nonjudicial office. Shall section 10(1) of article VII of the constitution be amended to permit a judge to assume a nonjudicial office of public trust after vacating the judicial office during that term of office?
1995 Assembly Joint Resolution 15; Elections Board, Record of Rejected Referenda (May 3, 1995). That terminology suggests that the amendment would allow activity that was previously prohibited. If the purpose was only to clarify an ambiguity, the referendum question could have easily stated that purpose. With the explanation by the Attorney General and the referendum question itself at their disposal, the people of Wisconsin rejected the amendment to Section 10. Thus, as recently as 1995, the people of the state have made clear that they intend for the prohibition of Section 10 *746to extend even beyond resignation. While we are aware that voter intent is not always clearly discerned, this court has recognized its value to interpretation of the law. As we noted in Ekern v. Zimmerman, 187 Wis. 180, 193-94, 204 N.W. 803 (1925): "The people voted intelligently upon this proposition, which clearly evidences their intention, and, where such intention appears, the construction and interpretation of the acts must follow accordingly."
¶ 41. The textual evidence and legislative history thus appear to us to support the State's position. We next turn to this court's precedents. Fortunately, we do not begin in a vacuum, because this court has previously interpreted this very provision. In 1909, this court was asked to interpret the language of Article IV Section 26 of the Wisconsin Constitution. See State ex rel. Bashford v. Frear, 138 Wis. 536, 538, 120 N.W 216 (1909). In so doing, this court compared the use of the word "term" in Article iy Section 26 to its use in Article VII of the Wisconsin Constitution and concluded they were intended to have different meanings, stating:
So the conclusion is that the judicial term mentioned in art. VII of the constitution has regard, primarily, to the office, disassociated from the occupant of it; in other words, it contemplates unity, so that several incumbents during the term take mere parts of its entirety; that "his term of office," as used in sec. 26, art. IV, of the constitution, has regard, primarily, to the personal element, the incumbent of the office; contemplates the period of incumbency, whether of a whole term, or a part of the entirety, under art. VII....
Bashford, 138 Wis. at 556 (emphasis added). The court took particular notice of Article VII, Section 10. After repeating the text of the section prohibiting holding of a nonjudicial office of public trust "during the term for *747which he is elected," the court found: "Here we have the office, the term of office, the incident of office, to wit, the salary and the exclusion from every field of official life outside of the judicial field during such term, to wit, the elective term." Id. at 541-42.
¶ 42. Also important is this court's analysis in Bashford of Article VII, Section 9. The court found that Section 9 further supported the interpretation that use of the word "term" in Article VII meant the full elected term, because Section 9 operated to recognize "the unity of the term." Id. at 543. At the time of the case, under Section 9, if a vacancy existed on the supreme court, the governor appointed someone to fill the vacancy until a successor was elected and qualified. See id. As previously noted, the newly elected successor would then hold the office for "the residue of the unexpired term." Id. Thus, at least in 1909, the period constituting the full elected term had significance in the operation of the courts. In sum, the court found that "from first to last" the word "term" in Article VII dealt with the entire elected term. Id.
¶ 43. During the 1940s, this court twice revisited the language of Article VII, Section 10. Both cases, Wettengel v. Zimmerman, 249 Wis. 237, 24 N.W.2d 504 (1946) and State v. McCarthy, 255 Wis. 234, 38 N.W.2d 679 (1949), involved the election of Wisconsin circuit court judge Joseph R. McCarthy to a seat in the United States Senate. In Wettengel, 249 Wis. at 239-40, the petitioners sought to keep McCarthy's name off of the ballot, arguing that under Section 10, McCarthy, as a circuit court judge, was prohibited from holding an office such as that of United States Senator until his term expired in January 1952. Additionally, they argued that under the same provision, all votes cast for him were null and void. Id. at 240. This court, however, held *748that it had no jurisdiction to grant the petition sought, because the election was for federal office and controlled by the United States Constitution and solely within the realm of authority of the United States Senate. Id. at 247-48.
¶ 44. In 1949, we again dealt with Article VII, Section 10 when the Board of State Bar Commissioners filed a petition in the Wisconsin Supreme Court requesting that McCarthy be disciplined because he ran for office and was elected as a United States Senator without resigning and surrendering his office as a circuit judge. McCarthy, 255 Wis. at 238. In that case, we held that McCarthy violated the constitution and laws of the State of Wisconsin by conduct in "clear disregard of the provisions of sec. 10, art. VII, Const., and sec. 256.02(2) Stats." Id. at 242. We explicitly described the fault with McCarthy's actions:
In this case the defendant was not only a candidate for the office of United States senator but was a holder of that office during the term for which he was elected circuit judge, although he was not a holder of the office of circuit judge and United States senator contemporaneously.
Id. at 243. That is exactly the same problem that would arise in this case were the petitioner to resign from the bench and run for Milwaukee County Executive before August 2006. The court in McCarthy further explained the issue:
While a circuit judge may become a candidate under the laws of the United States for the office of United States senator at an election held and supervised under state law, he nevertheless does so in defiance of the laws of the state, which are not effective to *749prevent his candidacy, but his conduct is nevertheless a clear violation of provisions of the constitution and the statute. . . .
We again call attention to the fact that the constitution, sec. 10, art. VII, provides that a circuit judge shall hold no office of public trust except a judicial office "during the term for which they are respectively elected."
Under the facts of this case we can reach no other conclusion than that the defendant by accepting and holding the office of United States senator during the term for which he was elected circuit judge did so in violation of the terms of the constitution and laws of the state of Wisconsin, and in so doing violated his oath as a circuit judge and as an attorney at law.
Id. (emphasis in original). The petitioner asserts that this court's language was dicta and should not now bind us. We disagree, because this court explicitly took up the question, discussed it, and answered it. Under such circumstances, this court should be bound by our previous interpretation. See State v. Rodriguez, 221 Wis. 2d 487, 496-97, 585 N.W.2d 701 (Ct. App. 1998). The dissent goes a step further, suggesting that this court misinterpreted and "mistakenly attributed" its interpretation to its prior ruling. Dissent, ¶ 117. We also disagree with this assertion. The key passages of analysis, discussed above, do not rely upon the previous ruling in Wettengel. The only citation to Wettengel during the relevant analysis is for the statement that "those who opposed the candidacy of the defendant did not give full weight to the fact that citizens of this country are subject to two governments." McCarthy, 255 Wis. at 242. Moreover, in McCarthy, this court did have cause to raise the overall interpretation of Article *750VII, Section 10, and do an analysis previously undone, because the question of whether McCarthy could run for federal office had already been answered and the court was left with the more invidious question of a moral and professional wrong, which required a close examination of the scope of the relevant provision. Hence, we believe this court has already examined this provision and held, in strong terms, that the prohibition exists even beyond resignation. This previous interpretation should not be ignored.
¶ 45. Interestingly, we noted in McCarthy, 255 Wis. at 248, that at least three circuit judges became candidates for federal office while serving as judges. After an extensive discussion of the oaths taken by such officials and their meaning, this court took a step back. In concluding that the petition should be dismissed, this court found that the behavior, while wrong, was not likely to be repeated. Id. at 250. The court also held that the legislature's way of dealing with this type of constitutional breach was to leave it "to the condemnation of the electorate." Id. at 251. Candidates in the past may have been in a position to take their chances with the electorate. Like the McCarthy court, we do not dispute that such examples exist. The parties in McCarthy brought a variety of examples before the court, all, as far as we can discern, involving federal office. See id. at 244-45. Some involved federal judges or judges of other states. Id. at 245. We do not find the candidacies of the past to be persuasive regarding the correct interpretation of this provision. As we noted in McCarthy: "The conduct of other persons under the same or similar circumstances may have some bearing upon the question of the moral quality of the defendant's behavior but are not relevant on the question of the legal consequences of defendant's conduct." Id.
*751¶ 46. On November 14, 1967, a formal Code of Judicial Ethics was adopted by the Wisconsin Supreme Court. See Code of Judicial Ethics, 36 Wis. 2d 252, 155 N.W.2d 565 (1967). These rules have been modified over the years and are now embodied in the Code of Judicial Conduct, SCR Chapter 60.16 See SCR Chapter 60 (2002). Until 1997, when the Code of Judicial Conduct came into effect, two provisions in the rules dealt with a judge's obligations regarding nonjudicial offices of public trust. See SCR 60.04; SCR 60.05 (1996). Prior to the change, SCR 60.04 paralleled Section 10 of the constitution and its statutory corollary, stating: "A judge shall not hold any office of public trust except a judicial office during the term for which he or she is elected or appointed." SCR 60.04 (1996). The current Code does not contain such a provision. See Code of Judicial Conduct, SCR Chapter 60 (2002). Supreme Court Rule 60.05, the other related provision, remains in the Code, embodied in SCR 60.06. It states: "A judge shall not become a candidate for a federal, state or local nonjudicial elective office without first resigning his or her judgeship." The Comment following SCR 60.06(1) provides, in pertinent part: "This provision derives from former SCR 60.05, which was considered necessary because of the possibility that a candidacy for an office to take effect after the expiration of the judicial term would not be barred by former SCR 60.04." The 1992 Legislative Council's Staff Memorandum discussing the proposed amendment to Section 10 found that these ethical rules confirm the interpretation that the Section 10 restriction is unaffected by resignation:
*752The comment to SCR 60.05 appears to assume that a federal, state or local nonjudicial elective office, which ordinarily would be an office of public trust, is barred by SCR 60.04 (and, therefore, also by the applicable constitutional and statutory provisions) during the term for which a judge is elected or appointed, even if the judge resigns the judicial office.
1992 Eligibility Memorandum, at 3 (emphasis in original).
¶ 47. This court examined these particular ethical rules on at least two occasions. See In re Judicial Disciplinary Proceedings Against Stern, 224 Wis. 2d 220, 589 N.W.2d 407 (1999); In re Complaint Against Pressentin, 139 Wis. 2d 150, 406 N.W 2d 779 (1987). However, both of the cases are distinguishable from the situation at hand and are, therefore, of limited use in our analysis. In Pressentin, 139 Wis. 2d at 151-53, this court found that a municipal judge violated the then existing Code of Judicial Ethics by running for nonjudicial elective office, county supervisor, without resigning from the municipal judge position. Judge Pressen-tin lost the election in which he ran for a nonjudicial office of public trust, so the only provision at issue in the case was SCR 60.05 (now SCR 60.06), the Supreme Court Rule against running for office while a sitting judge. See id.
¶ 48. In Stern, 224 Wis. 2d at 221-22, this court found that a municipal judge violated the former provision of the Code of Judicial Ethics 60.04 by holding two offices of public trust — municipal judge and school board member. This court found that, unlike the related constitutional and statutory provisions, the Supreme Court Rule did apply to municipal judges. Id. at 224-25. Thus, this court found that Judge Stern violated only SCR 60.04. Id. Because the only conduct at issue in *753Stern was simultaneous office holding, this court had no reason to speculate about the type of situation that now faces this court. Also, Judge Stern did not resign from his judicial position, but ultimately decided to resign from the school board, his nonjudicial position of public trust. Id. at 226.
¶ 49. Now that we have examined the interpretation of the specific provision, we next take a step back to take a more general look at interpretation of the phrase. The Attorney General of this state has been asked to interpret the phrase "the term for which elected" on several occasions, not only in the context of constitutional amendments, but in other contexts as well. Consistently, the Attorney General has found that the phrase means the entire time for which a person is elected, not just the time served. For example, in 1908, the Attorney General found that a county board member was ineligible to serve as the county supervisor of assessments, because under sec. 2, ch. 523, Laws of 1925, "[n]o member of the county hoard shall be eligible to the office of supervisor of assessments during the term for which he was elected or chosen member of such board," and the member's term on the county board did not expire until after he would take office for the other position. Op. Att'y Gen. 763-64 (1908). The Attorney General noted: "[The board member] was not capable of being chosen to the said office during the term for which he had been elected. His resignation would not alter the case." Id. at 764.
¶ 50. Similarly, in 1912, the Attorney General responded to a question regarding the appointment of a city alderman to the position of marshal by the mayor. See Op. Att'y Gen. 785 (1912). At the time, § 925-249 of the Wisconsin Statutes stated: "No member of the common council shall, during the term for which he is *754elected, be eligible to any other municipal office, except the office of mayor, existing at the time of his election or created by the council subsequent thereto." Id. The Attorney General went on to discuss the interpretation of the phrase "term for which he is elected," stating:
The term for which a person is elected does not expire when he resigns. It refers to the time for which he was elected, and he is not eligible under a provision such as this until the full time has expired, whether he resigns the position then held by him or not.
Id.17 Thus, it appears that this court, the Office of the Attorney General, the legislature, and the people of this state have all agreed that "during the term for which elected" as used in Article VII, Section 10 amounts to more than a prohibition of simultaneous office holding.
¶ 51. This court's interpretation of Section 10 stands firm in comparison to the interpretation of similar language by courts in other states. Other states have found this type of language in constitutional provisions to be unambiguous. For instance, in 1895, the Minnesota Supreme Court interpreted the phrase "during the time for which he is elected" in the context *755of a restriction upon legislators. State ex rel. Childs v. Sutton, 65 N.W. 262, 263 (Minn. 1895). At the time, Article iy Section 9 of the Minnesota Constitution stated: "No senator or representative shall, during the time for which he is elected, hold any office under the authority of the United States or the state of Minnesota, except that of postmaster."18 Id. (emphasis added). In interpreting this provision, that court stated:
[I]t is not necessary for us to speculate upon the intention of the framers of the constitution in adopting the provision in question. A bare reading of this provision suffices to enable us to ascertain and understand its meaning, and we need not search for light through the uncertainties of extraneous interpretation or construction .... The respondent, Sutton, became a representative of the legislature of the state of Minnesota on the first Monday in January, 1895, and the time for which he was elected continues until the first Monday in January, 1897. He was not merely prohibited from *756holding any office during the time for which he might serve, but during the time for which he was elected. The difference is obvious, and the language too sweeping to be disregarded. The respondent could not nullify the constitutional prohibitory clause, "during the time for which he was elected," by his resignation of the office of representative. The time for which he was elected was the entire constitutional term of two years, and, whether he resigned during that time or not, he was not permitted to hold any other office, under the authority of this state, during such entire term.
Id. at 263 (emphasis added). The court explained further and noted the prohibition also applied to the judiciary.
There can be no serious question raised as to the right of a member of the legislature to resign his office; but, if he does so, it cannot enlarge his right to hold another office, in violation of this constitutional prohibition. The disability only ceases at the expiration of the full period of time for which he was elected. This prohibition against holding other offices also applies to the judiciary.
Id. at 263-64; see also Miller v. Holm, 14 N.W.2d 99 (Minn. 1944) (reaffirming the Childs interpretation). Other states in various contexts have found similarly. See, e.g., Wilson v. Shaw, 188 N.W 940, 942 (Iowa 1922) ("The term lives on even though the incumbent resigns, is impeached, or dies."); Baskin v. State, 232 P. 388 (Okla. 1925).
¶ 52. As seen in Childs, the context in which the interpretation has sometimes arisen is not with judges, but with other elected officials. Many states, including Wisconsin, have language somewhat similar to Article *757VII, Section 10 in provisions dealing with legislators. For example, Article IV Section 12 of the Wisconsin Constitution states:
No member of the legislature shall, during the term for which he was elected, be appointed or elected to any civil office in the state, which shall have been created, or the emoluments of which shall have been increased, during the term for which he was elected.
¶ 53. This provision has been examined by this court. However, the context of this provision and others like it, make comparisons to Article VII, Section 10 difficult. This court held in State ex rel. Johnson v. Nye, 148 Wis. 659, 668, 135 N.W. 126, (1912), that "[t]he constitutional provision under consideration should be narrowly construed in favor of eligibility." That case, like many others, raised a question concerning the clauses regarding creation of an office, or whether "emoluments" were increased during the term for which elected. Id. at 669. These types of cases are not helpful, because the subsequent phraseology of the provision affects the interpretation of the phrase itself. Only where the analysis focuses strictly on the phrase "term for which elected" can we compare these provisions. See, e.g., Chenowith v. Chambers, 164 P. 428, 430 (Cal. Dist. Ct. App. 1917).
¶ 54. In addition, although many states have interpreted language similar to that of Article VII, Section 10 somewhere along the line, many such provisions, if they existed, have now been weeded out in favor of resign-to-run type clauses. See, e.g., Minn. Const., art. VI, § 6 (2002); Haw. Const., art. II, § 7 (1993 & Supp. 2001); Ariz. Const., art. VI, § 28 (2001), Alaska Const., art. IV § 14 (2002). The effort of tracing the evolution of these clauses in other states is not war*758ranted, because, as we have discussed, our state has its own constitutional history that developed the provision we today examine.
¶ 55. From the review of the emergence of our own constitutional language and the various examinations of that language by other authorities alone, we are persuaded that the "term for which elected" is not effectively terminated by resignation, at least in this constitutional context. Our review of the other sources required by our constitutional analysis further supports this conclusion.
B. Constitutional Debates and Practices in Existence at the Time of the Writing of the Constitution
¶ 56. Having examined in depth the plain meaning of Section 10 in context, we now turn to the second part of our analysis, a discussion of the constitutional debates. In the context of the plain meaning analysis, we have examined much of the debate by the original drafters that resulted in the creation of Section 10. The constitutional debates do not, of themselves, provide an answer to the question posed by this case. Since even the most comprehensive accounts of the debates are incomplete, we are left to interpret what we have. However, the debates do provide significant clues regarding the concerns of those involved in drafting the constitution, and early versions of the provision at issue created during the process support the State's interpretation. As described in Part A, the debates focused on whether the judiciary should be elected and appointed and, after election was selected as the proper method, the debate shifted to the appropriate length for a judge or justice's term.
¶ 57. We reiterate here that the concerns about judicial independence raised at these early debates and *759the textual evolution of Section 10 during the drafting process lead us to the conclusion that the text of Section 10 was a compromise of two extreme views. The numerous drafts of Section 10 noted in Part A show a consistent effort to restrict judges even for a period after resignation. Thus, the debates support our conclusion that the phrase "during the term for which elected" means the entire period for which elected, not simply the time a judge or justice chooses to serve. Those advocating an elected judiciary were successful in creating a constitution providing for elected judges. However, those skeptical of the elective system also "won" to some degree in that they were able to have limitations placed upon that elected judiciary to distance the judiciary from the political landscape.
¶ 58. As we have noted, the dissent suggests that review of the 1846 constitution is unhelpful to interpreting the constitutional language adopted in 1848. The dissent states that the discussion is irrelevant "because it cites debates focusing on the wrong issue, from the wrong constitutional convention, to interpret a phrase that was not adopted at that convention, by delegates who were not elected to the subsequent and more relevant 1848 convention." Dissent, ¶ 89. We could not disagree more. The drafting of the Wisconsin Constitution was a process begun in 1846. The delegates to the convention in 1848 did not start from scratch and, in fact, intended mainly to address the specific issues that led to the first draft's failure. As noted in one analysis:
As previously pointed out the main outlines of the 1846 constitution were satisfactory. Its rejection was due to the controversial articles therein on banks and paper money, homestead exemptions, and the grant of separate property rights to married women. In the 1848 *760convention constant reference was made to the 1846 constitution and to the approval or disapproval by the people of specific articles therein. When the two constitutions are laid side by side it will be found that many provisions in the two instruments are identical.
Ray A. Brown, The Making of the Wisconsin Constitution, 1952 Wis. L. Rev. 23, 23 n.1 (hereinafter Part II).
¶ 59. The dissent suggests that the debate over election of judges was over by 1848, so the 1846 debates focusing on that point do not matter. Dissent, ¶ 90. We believe those discussions mattered a great deal and the issues discussed there began a debate that continued all the way through the second convention. In fact, "[t]he debate on the judiciary article was largely an echo of that in the 1846 convention on the same article with the result that in essential respects the article in the 1848 document was the same as that in the earlier constitution." Brown, Part II, at 36.
¶ 60. We agree that by the time of the second convention, it was clear that judges were to be elected. Dissent, ¶ 90. However, that does not mean everyone at the second convention readily acquiesced to the idea of an elected judiciary and certainly, the debates make clear that the delegates passionately disagreed about how to best implement such an elective system. As Brown states:
Although individual members of the 1848 convention expressed doubts of the elective principle as applied to judges, it was recognized that the popular will demanded election and no serious argument against it was made. The contentions pro and contra in the 1846 convention on the election of judges were, however, used in the 1848 convention on the question of the proper terms for supreme court and circuit court judges.
*761Brown, Part II, at 37. Other debated issues concerning the judiciary included whether or not a separate supreme court should be established, whether a tax should be levied on all civil suits, and whether membership in the bar was a prerequisite to practice in Wisconsin courts. Brown, Part II, at 36-37, 40-41.
¶ 61. The debates are our best information about the practices at the time the constitution was adopted. As shown through the discussions included in Part A, the debates show the concerns of the drafters and suggest the reasoning behind the text. As noted in our discussion of the McCarthy case, we do not dispute that judges in the past may have run for nonjudicial offices of public trust during what we have now defined as the "term for which elected." However, information we have on these cases and other possible "violations" is scant and analysis based on these examples could only be speculation on the part of this court.19 McCarthy, 255 Wis. at 245. Finally, as noted by this court in McCarthy, the existence of such conduct in the past makes no difference to the present legal analysis. Id. at 245. Simply put, multiple wrongs do not make a right.
*762¶ 62. In addition to the debates, contemporaneous statements at the time of the drafting support our interpretation. During the debate over ratification of the constitution following the conclusion of the first constitutional convention, the Racine Advocate published a series of letters about the proposed constitution, many of which were anonymous. Quaife, The Struggle Over Ratification at 13-66, 208-215, 436-513. One letter, almost certainly written by Edward G. Ryan,20 explained the provisions of the article on the judiciary, leaving little doubt of the intent regarding the prohibition against judges holding other office. The article stated:
And finally the prohibition of the judges to hold any other office during their full term of election, whether they remain on the bench or not, will forever end the disgraceful practice by which the sacred duties of the bench have been prostituted to the political advancement of the judges.21
*763Quaife, The Struggle Over Ratification 1846-1847 at 488 (1920) (emphasis added).
¶ 63. Similarly, one of the judges cited as an example by the dissent, actually discussed what the concerns were about the judiciary during the 1846 convention and after, during the ratification debates. His statements support our interpretation that the idea of restricting judges began during the first convention and had support as the debate continued. Isaac E Walker, in his "Address to the People of Wisconsin," given on March 31, 1847, discussed the benefits of the proposed constitution, particularly the provisions serving to restrain the political ambitions of those on the bench:
. . . But above all, by our constitution every officer, whether executive, administrative, legislative, or judicial, is expressly rendered ineligible during his term of office "to any other office of trust, profit, or honor in the state.
Now, fellow citizens, under such a system of government what opportunity is left for a corrupt office-seeking or office-holding regency, junto, clique, or dynasty either to concentrate or to combine to trample upon the people's rights and interests? .. . No; they have not only to pass the ordeal of our suffrage, but the constitution declares that each must have served out his term before he can take another station. And I have no fears but that he will be required to have served it faithfully before the people will call upon or elevate him again. Our constitution would present but few charms to such a politician as the Senator from Illinois, to whom I have alluded; and quite as few to another new-made Senator in Michigan, who in about two years past has leaped from the ranks of mere ambition to the bench, from the bench to the gubernatorial chair, and from that *764into the United States Senate, serving the people in neither capacity any longer than to enable himself to get a better office.22
Quaife, The Struggle Over Ratification, at 601 (emphasis added). Such written, contemporaneous interpretations lend credence to our interpretation by pointing out the prevalent concerns that prompted the drafters to institute various protections. Walker's statement indicates that even before the actual phrase "during the term for which elected" became part of the constitution at the second convention, there were those who believed it proper to restrain judges during the entire period of time for which the people originally elected them to serve and even beyond.
¶ 64. We note also, in discussing practices at the time the constitution was drafted, that other states were participating in similar debates. In August of 1847, only a few months before the second constitutional convention in Wisconsin, delegates to a convention in Illinois adopted a new constitution that was accepted by the people of Illinois in March 1848. See Illinois Constitutions 51 n.1 (Emil J. Verlie, ed.) (1919). Article V, Section 10 of that constitution, dealing with the judiciary, contained a provision extraordinarily similar to that eventually adopted in Wisconsin:
*765The judges of the supreme court shall receive a salary of twelve hundred dollars per annum, payable quarterly, and no more.... The judges of the supreme and circuit courts shall not be eligible to any other office or public trust of profit in this state, or the United States, during the term for which they are elected, nor for one year thereafter. All votes for either of them for any elective office (except that of judge of the supreme or circuit court,) given by the General Assembly or the people, shall be void.
Id. at 73. Thus, it was not unheard of to restrict judges beyond the time they actually served on the bench and, in fact, it appears that Wisconsin's convention delegates were not alone in believing it was necessary to do so.23
*766C. Earliest Legislation
¶ 65. The final part of our analysis leads us to seek the earliest interpretation of Article VII, Section 10 by the legislature as manifested in the first law passed following adoption. Oak Creek, 232 Wis. 2d 612, ¶ 18. Unfortunately, there was no law passed relative to Section 10 until 1913, over 50 years later, in Wis. Stat. ch. 115, § 2523-22 (1913).24 However, since Section 10 was amended in 1912, and because, technically, it is the first law passed on this provision, we find it appropriate to look at the 1913 legislation.
¶ 66. Wisconsin Stat. ch. 115, § 2523-22 (1913) provided:
No judge of any court of record in this state, except judges of county courts, shall he eligible to or hold any office of public trust, except a judicial office, during the term for which he is elected, and all votes cast for any such judge for any office, except a judicial office, shall be void.
This statutory language appears to simply codify the constitutional provision and provides no real guidance regarding correct interpretation. However, it is of note that the drafters of this statute carried over the language of the constitution and left intact the prohibition of holding any office of public trust "during the term for which [] elected." See id.
*767¶ 67. Although this early legislation does not allow much insight into the intent of the provision, we find it important that, similar to the constitution, the phrase "during the term for which elected" has remained in the statutes through a variety of alterations, during which the text of the provision was scrutinized, and remains in the present statute, Wis. Stat. § 757.02(2).
¶ 68. Because this first law is of so little use, we follow the trail of this statute a bit further in our quest for answers. In 1919, the statute, renumbered as Wis. Stat. § 2564m(2), was amended to read:
The judge of any court of record in this state shall be ineligible to hold any office of public trust, except a judicial office, during the term for which he was elected, and all votes cast for any such judge for any office, except a judicial office, shall be void.
(Emphasis added for amendments); see also § 5, ch. 93, Laws of 1919. One of the revisions, from "is" to "was," shows a focus on the past, on an occurrence that has already happened and is presently immutable. This focus again suggests that the language refers to the full term for which a candidate is originally elected, a set time period, rather than the time until a person chooses to resign.
¶ 69. In 1923, the legislature added penalties to the provisions of Wis. Stat. § 2564m. See ch. 134, Laws of 1923. Under Wis. Stat. § 2564m(2)(a) (1923), a judge that decided to run for an office of public trust during the term for which elected, vacated his office when becoming a candidate. Also, nomination papers were not to be accepted. Id. Under Wis. Stat. § 2564m(2) (b) (1923), becoming a candidate was a felony offense, punishable with a fine and prison. Under Wis. Stat. *768§ 2564m(2)(c) (1923), if convicted, a judge would thereafter be ineligible to a variety of offices of public trust, unless granted an executive pardon. However, under that same provision, excepted were those judges whose term would expire prior to the holding of office. Id. Although these provisions have long-since been repealed, the language used suggests that the drafters of the constitution and original statute meant what they said with the phrase "during the term for which elected." That phrase is used repeatedly in the 1923 version of the statute. See Wis. Stat. § 2564m(2) (1923).
¶ 70. By 1961, the clause stating the votes would be void was eliminated. See § 113, ch. 495, Laws of 1961. This might help explain the elimination of the same language in the 1977 constitutional amendment to Article VII, Section 10. In 1977, the statute was again amended. See ch. 187, Laws of 1977. We find it of particular import that although the constitutional language was amended the same year, the only revisions to the statute were to renumber it as Wis. Stat. § 757.02(2) (1977) and make it gender neutral. See id. Since that time, no substantive changes have been made to the provision.
¶ 71. This statutory history, while not a crystal clear mark of legislative intent, does provide support for a strict interpretation of Article VII, Section 10 in the constitution, particularly in light of plain meaning analysis and the timing and opportunity for change with regard to the statute. In essence, when the legislature reexamined the statute at or near the time of constitutional revision, neither the constitution nor the statutory history provides any indication that the phrase "during the term for which elected" was in*769tended to be anything other than a prohibition to last the entire period for which a judge or justice was originally elected.
IV
¶ 72. We have addressed the petitioner's arguments that Article VII, Section 10 is merely a dual office holding restriction. However, the amicus in this case disagrees both with the State and the petitioner and has presented an alternative interpretation of the "term for which elected" language. The amicus argues, and the dissent agrees, that "during the term for which elected" means the "term" ends when a successor is duly elected. See dissent, ¶ 100. We are not persuaded by this argument. While the position may present a "happy medium," we find no basis for this interpretation in the language of the constitution, the debates, or the relevant legislative acts.
¶ 73. This court does not have the freedom to start from scratch or redebate the best solution to the problem of judicial independence. That was the job of the drafters, and if changes are necessary, it will be the job of the legislature and citizens. Rather, we are presented with the duty to interpret the language of the constitution as written by the drafters and ratified by the citizens of this state. We are not persuaded that "the term for which elected" ends simply because a new person has been selected for a judicial position. The concerns debated by the drafters and the text of the constitution belie such an interpretation.
¶ 74. The dissent asserts that the amicus is correct in its argument that the "term for which élected" ends "when a successor is duly elected and qualified." *770Dissent, ¶ 100. Although such an interpretation would give the provision a meaning, we find that there is simply no basis, textual or otherwise, for drawing the line at the point of a new election. Based on our analysis in Part III, we find that while the word "term" may be interpreted in a variety of ways depending on the context in which it is used, and in the context of "during the term for which elected," a "term" is the fixed period of time set out by the constitution that cannot be altered by resignation. The plain language of the constitution and the numerous interpretations of that language since its adoption support no other alternative. Judges and justices, by accepting roles in the judiciary, accept a restriction on their ability to be candidates for nonjudicial offices of public trust for the entire period of time for which the voters elected them into office. These "terms" are specifically outlined in the constitution. Nothing requires a judge or justice to actually serve the entirety of the term for which he or she is elected, but it cannot be concluded on that basis that a judge or justice is automatically excused from the responsibilities acquired by assuming a role on the bench, even if a successor is elected.
¶ 75. The independence of the judiciary is a bulwark of the democratic system, arid promoting such independence may require those taking judicial positions to accept sacrifices even beyond the time they are actually on the bench to preserve the integrity of the system. See Clements, 457 U.S. at 968 n.5 ("The State's particular interest in maintaining the integrity of the judicial system could support § 19, even if such a restriction could not survive constitutional scrutiny with regard to any other officeholder."). The election of a new judge or justice does not negate the responsibili*771ties taken on by a prior judge or justice. We agree that a "term" may in one sense end with resignation, but we agree with the State that the "term for which elected" does not. That term is explicitly set by the constitution, and the restriction in Article VII, Section 10 supports voters' expectation that when they elect a judge or justice, he or she will serve the term constitutionally set — the term for which elected.
V
¶ 76. We turn now to petitioner's final argument, that a prohibition such as Article VII, Section 10 deprives the petitioner of his constitutional rights to liberty and equal protection of the law under both the Wisconsin Constitution and the United States Constitution. The analysis of restrictions on candidates for office often intermingles with an analysis of the effect on the rights of voters. See Anderson v. Celebrezze, 460 U.S. 780, 786-87 (1983). These types of cases often raise issues related to the First Amendment, due process, and equal protection under the law. See id. The analysis for all these types of cases is essentially the same. See id. at 786 n.7 (noting that various types of constitutional claims required the same analysis in the election context). Courts have recognized that the right to run for public office is a constitutionally protected liberty interest. See, e.g., Becton v. Thomas, 48 F. Supp.2d 747, 757 (W.D. Tenn. 1999).
¶ 77. In analyzing a constitutional challenge to a state's election law, á court "must first consider the character and magnitude of the asserted injury to the rights protected." Anderson, 460 U.S. at 789. Further, *772"[i]n passing judgment, the Court must not only determine the legitimacy and strength of each of [the state] interests, it also must consider the extent to which those interests make it necessary to burden the plaintiffs rights." Id. As noted by this court in the case of State v. Hezzie R., 219 Wis. 2d 848, 893, 580 N.W.2d 660 (1998): "Equal protection requires that there exist reasonable and practical grounds for the classifications created by the legislature." This court has held that the constitutional guarantees of the Wisconsin Constitution and United States Constitution are substantially equivalent. See id. at 891 (finding state and federal due process clauses equivalent); Treiber v. Knoll, 135 Wis. 2d 58, 68, 398 N.W.2d 756 (1987) (noting equivalency in equal protection guarantees). Fortunately, the analysis of the Supreme Court in Clements has already laid the groundwork for our analysis of the petitioner's liberty and equal protection interests.
¶ 78. While we agree that petitioner's rights are somewhat burdened in this case, we find that the State's legitimate interests in creating Article VII, Section 10 far outweigh the burdens put upon the petitioner's right to be a candidate for office. Petitioner concedes that his liberty and equal protection interests are only violated if there is no reasonable basis for the restriction, but argues that no such rational basis exists for this type of restriction. Following the guidance put forth in Clements, we cannot agree. We find there are significant state interests protected by a provision such as Section 10.
¶ 79. Under Clements, it is clear that no suspect classification or fundamental right is involved in this type of case, so strict scrutiny is not demanded. As the Clements court noted: "Far from recognizing candi*773dacy as a 'fundamental right,' we have held that the existence of barriers to a candidate's access to the ballot 'does not of itself compel close scrutiny.'" Id. at 963 (quoting Bullock v. Carter, 405 U.S. 134, 143 (1972)). That court went on to define the appropriate standards for examining a case such as this:
Decision in this area of constitutional adjudication is a matter of degree, and involves a consideration of the facts and circumstances behind the law, the interests the State seeks to protect by placing restrictions on candidacy, and the nature of the interests of those who may be burdened by the restrictions.
Id. (internal citations omitted). Wisconsin case law also supports our finding that the petitioner has no fundamental right to be a candidate. In Frederick v. Zimmerman, 254 Wis. 600, 617, 37 N.W.2d 473 (1949), this court held that although "the right to vote is an inherent or constitutional right, the right to be a candidate is not of that character." We must concede, based on Supreme Court precedent, that there is a recognized right in candidacy. However, Frederick and the Supreme Court precedent agree that the right is clearly something less than fundamental. In Anderson, 460 U.S. at 788, the United States Supreme Court held that a "State's important regulatory interests are generally sufficient to justify reasonable, nondiscriminatory restrictions." In Becton, 48 F. Supp.2d at 758, a district court found that the liberty interest in running for public office could not be denied or infringed "unless [the state] can offer a reasonable justification or rational basis for doing so."
*774¶ 80. In Clements, 457 U.S. 960, the United States Supreme Court dealt with Texas provisions very much like the one we interpret today.25 The Supreme Court there interpreted two provisions of the Texas Constitution. One provision was essentially a resign-to-run clause. See Clements, 457 U.S. at 960. The other, Article III, Section 19 of the Texas Constitution, was a provision much like Article VII, Section 10 of the Wisconsin Constitution. That section provided that "judges of any court" were not eligible to the legislature "during the term for which he is elected or appointed." Id. Regarding Section 19, the Supreme Court found:
Resignation is ineffective to avoid § 19 if the officeholder's current term of office overlaps the term of the legislature to which he seeks election. In other words, § 19 requires an officeholder to complete his current term of office before he may be eligible to serve in the legislature.
Id.
¶ 81. In upholding the Texas restrictions, the Court identified several important state interests: 1) the state has an interest in encouraging judges to devote full time to the duties of their office instead of *775spending time on a campaign for a different office; 2) there is a legitimate state interest in discouraging judges from vacating their offices early to avoid the difficulties accompanying interim appointments and elections; and 3) the state has a strong interest in insuring that sitting judges will not abuse their present power because of aspirations for higher office. Id. at 968. All of these apply with equal force to Article VII, Section 10 of the Wisconsin Constitution.
¶ 82. Similar to those rationale put forth in Clements are those put forth by the State in this case. The State asserts here:
It is reasonable to believe, moreover, that judges who seek a different office earlier in their term are more likely than judges who serve their entire term to view judicial office as a mere stepping stone to political office, and are therefore more likely to misuse their judicial office for the purpose of advancing their own career.
(Resp't Br. at 25.) We agree with the perspective that preventing judges from holding another office of public trust until their term expires, whether or not they resign, helps discourage people from taking positions on the bench to use as "mere stepping stone [s]" to political office. As the Supreme Court noted, such "waiting periods" are not substantial burdens in comparison to the state interests. Clements, 457 U.S. at 968.
¶ 83. In a somewhat similar case to that faced here,26 the West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals eloquently stated the strong state interest in creating restrictions upon those serving in the judiciary:
*776Concomitant to the sustained confidence of the public in the judiciary is the correlative responsibility that integrity must be the cynosure of all judicial endeavors, both actual and perceived. So crucial is the state's interest in maintaining the integrity of its judicial system that regulations or restrictions which temporally affect an officeholder's access to the ballot have been found to withstand constitutional challenge on this ground alone.
Carenbauer v. Hechler, 542 S.E.2d 405, 409 (W.Va. 2000). These considerations and those noted by the United States Supreme Court far outweigh any burden laid upon the petitioner to wait to become a candidate for a nonjudicial office of public trust. Even though the restriction does not end with the resignation of a judge or justice, it was concern for the integrity of the judiciary as a whole and desire to promote that integrity from sitting members of the bench that appropriately led to the creation of this type of restriction. These state interests are of the utmost importance. As noted in Carenbauer, 542 S.E.2d at 410: "Undergirding the constitutional prohibition against seeking nonjudicial elective office is the correlative objective of both removing and insulating judges from the political realm." Given all of these significant state interests, we conclude that the petitioner's rights to liberty and equal protection of the law have not been violated by Article VII, Section 10 of the Wisconsin Constitution.
¶ 84. By no means do we exalt the provision discussed in this case as the solution to all evils related to the judiciary or the best support for judicial independence. The reality is that this provision appears to us to *777fall short of optimum in more than one respect. However, it is not the job of this court to assess the wisdom of any given provision; rather, we ascertain what the law is and whether it may be applied when balanced against the constitutional protections guaranteed to citizens of this state and of this country. Moreover, the provision as it stands need not be the best option. The State's interests here are important and the purposes behind this law have long been served by the language of this provision.
VI
¶ 85. We therefore conclude that Article VII, Section 10(1) of the Wisconsin Constitution prohibits a circuit court judge or any judge or justice of a court of record in this state from holding a nonjudicial position of public trust during the entire term for which elected, regardless of whether he or she chooses to resign from the judicial position.
By the Court. — It is declared and adjudged that Article VII, Section 10 of the Wisconsin Constitution prohibits petitioner, a circuit judge, from holding a nonjudicial office of public trust during the full period of time for which he was originally elected and that, as such, petitioner is ineligible to run for Milwaukee County Executive or any other nonjudicial office of public trust until his term expires in August 2006.
Relief denied.
¶ 86. DIANE S. SYKES, J., did not participate.
Wisconsin Stat. § 8.30(1)(c) (1999-2000) provides:
Candidates ineligible for ballot placement. (1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the official or agency with whom declarations of candidacy are required to be filed may refuse to place the candidate's name on the ballot:
(c) If elected the candidate could not qualify for the office sought within the time allowed by law for qualification because of age, residence, or other impediment.
All subsequent references to the Wisconsin Statutes are to the 1999-2000 version unless otherwise indicated.
See also State ex rel. La Crosse Tribune v. Cir. Ct. for La Crosse County, 115 Wis. 2d 220, 228-29, 340 N.W.2d 460 (1983), stating:
[I]t is hardly in the interest of judicial economy or in the interest of the law-declaring function of this court if matters of serious public concern which are likely to cause judicial disputes in the future are not resolved when a factual basis on which a judicial declaration may be made to guide future conduct is presently before the court.
Resign-to-run clauses are today often found in state constitutions. Such a provision requires that an official resign his or her position in order to run for another office. If the person does not voluntarily vacate arid runs for office, the former position is automatically deemed vacated. See, e.g., Ariz. Const., art. XXII, § 18, art. XXII § 28 (2001); Joyner v. Mofford, 706 F.2d 1523, 1526 (9th Cir. 1983).
The court in Joyner stated:
Election cases like the present one come within the type of controversy that is "capable of repetition, yet evading review." "Evading review" for the purpose of the exception [to mootness] need not mean that review is impossible. It only means that in the ordinary course of affairs it is very likely to escape review. Appellate courts are frequently too slow to process appeals before an election determines the fate of a candidate. If such cases were rendered moot by the occurrence of an election, many constitutionally suspect election laws — including the one under consideration here — could never reach appellate review. Id. at 1527 (citing Rosario v. Rockefeller, 410 U.S. 752, 756 n.5 (1973); Dunn v. Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330, 333 n.2 (1972)).
As one authority noted: "The debate on the judiciary article was largely an echo of that in the 1846 convention on the same article with the result that in essential respects the article in the Í848 document was the same as that in the earlier constitution." Ray A. Brown, The Making of the Wisconsin Constitution, 1952 Wis. L. Rev. 23, 36.
Edward G. Ryan served as Chief Justice of the Wisconsin Supreme Court from 1874-1880. Wisconsin Legislative Reference Bureau, State of Wisconsin Blue Book 714 (2001-2002). He was appointed by Governor William Taylor in June 1874 to fill the seat left absent when Justice Luther S. Dixon resigned. Alfons J. Beitzinger, Edward G. Ryan, Lion of the Law, 106-10 (1960). He subsequently retained the position in the 1875 election, and continued serving as Chief Justice until his death in 1880. Id. at 121, 148, 169. At least one historian has credited Ryan with being the "father" of the judicial disqualification provision. Id. at 176-77 n.13.
See Milo M. Quaife, The Convention of 1846 58 (1919).
An examination of the debates at the first constitutional convention makes it apparent that Mr. Ryan was a major figure in the debates on the judiciary. See, e.g., Quaife, The Convention of 1846 at 590-603. As will be seen in our discussion, it is clear Mr. Ryan disagreed with elements of the draft provision created by the committee, but it is also clear that Mr. Ryan had significant influence during the debates.
The dissent takes issue with our discussion of Mr. Ryan's point of view. The dissent states: "[The majority] fails to note . .. that Ryan's proposal was for a judiciary appointed by the governor." Dissent, ¶ 91 n.l. The dissent also goes so far as to suggest: "Perhaps [the majority] does not realize that these statements [from the first constitutional convention] were made in a speech promoting the merits of an appointed judiciary, a position which was defeated in both constitutional conventions." Dissent, ¶ 92. The majority is well aware of Ryan's doubts about an elected judiciary. However, we note again that Ryan had qualms about both systems and during the first convention, he put forth proposals that he felt would work best. A description of the convention proceedings on November 30, 1846, validates this:
Mr. Ryan said that he had not voted for the amendment for simple appointment; he could not do it; he knew too well all the evils of the old system. He was opposed to election; he was also opposed to simple appointment on the old plan. Much reflection on the difficulties of both plans had led his mind to the principles embodied in his present proposition. This proposition avoiding altogether the difficulties of election seemed to him to avoid also all the objections of weight to the system of appointment.
Quaife, The Convention of 1846 at 590-91.
*731The dissent seems to suggest that the majority's interpretation rises or falls upon whether those that supported the type of phrase at issue here were in favor of or against an elected judiciary. Dissent, ¶¶ 90-92. Our whole point, however, is that the constitutional debates led to a compromised solution with which proponents of both systems could live, provided sufficient safeguards such as the section in issue here.
The divide over the method of selecting judges was reflected not only in the debates of the first convention, but also in public opinion of the time. As one author noted: "Those who favored the elected judiciary were in the majority, though many supported the time honored practice of appointment. All, however, recognized the need for a strong and independent judiciary." Ray A. Brown, The Making of the Wisconsin Constitution, 1949 Wis. L. Rev. 648, 656 (emphasis added.)
The fact of the amendment, at least, was noted. See Milo M. Quaife, The Attainment of Statehood 696 (1928).
The section, as then amended, read:
Section 10. Each of the judges of the supreme and circuit courts shall receive a salary, payable * * * at such time as the legislature shall fix, of not less than one thousand five hundred dollars annually... they shall hold no office of public trust, except a judicial office, during the term for which they are respectively elected, and all votes for either of them for any office, except a judicial office, given by the legislature or the people, shall be void.
Wis. Const., art. VII, § 10 (1912) (emphasis added to amended text).
The same was true when the constitution was adopted in 1848. Although the length of terms has varied, even in 1848, judges and justices were elected to serve for a set term of years. See Wis. Const. art. VII, §§ 4, 7; Tenney, H.A., Smith, J.Y., Lambert, David & Tenney, H.W., Journal of the Convention to Form a Constitution for the State of Wisconsin, With a Sketch of the Debates (1848) at 610-11.
Wisconsin Stat. § 10.01(2) (c) (1977) provided that public notice must be given for referendum issues. The statute at the time provided, in part:
*741Type C — The type C notice shall be given whenever referenda questions are submitted to a vote of the people. The notice shall contain the entire text of the referenda questions and an explanatory statement of the effect of either a "yes" or "no" vote. For state questions, the statement shall be prepared by the attorney general/. . .
Although the language of this provision has been modified since 1977, the requirement that the Attorney General provide an explanatory statement for state referendum questions has remained. See Wis. Stat. § 10.01(2)(c).
Notably, if one looks back at the original constitution, when Sections 9 and 10 of Article VII were created, the slant of Section 9 is different. Originally, Section 9 provided that once a successor was elected to fill a vacancy in a judicial office, that successor "shall hold his office the residue of the unexpired term." Wis. Const., art. VII, § 9 (1848).
Effective January 1,1997, the Code of Judicial Ethics was replaced with the Code of Judicial Conduct, SCR Chapter 60.
See also V Op. Att'y Gen. 762 (1916); II Op. Att'y Gen. 775 (1913)(stating that the term for which elected does not expire with resignation); II Op. Att'y Gen. 756 (1913)(explaining again that" '[t]he term for which a person is elected does not expire when he resigns'" (internal citations omitted) and that, as such, a county board member would not be eligible to be county superintendent of the poor, even if he resigned prior to being appointed superintendent); Op. Att'y Gen. 769-70 (1912)("The fact that Mr. Hudson resigned his office does not terminate the term for which he was elected."); Op. Att'y Gen. 773-74 (1912) ("The fact that Mr. Hudson resigned his office and did not serve out his full term does not change the fact that he was elected for the term of one year.").
In ¶ 119-122, the dissent attempts to negate our comparison of this section to the Wisconsin provision. However, in its attempts to do so, we believe the dissent is comparing apples to oranges. The dissent cites a different constitutional provision, Article VI, Section 11 of the Minnesota Constitution, which does not contain a phrase comparable to the "during the term for which elected" in the Wisconsin Constitution. The dissent also cites the case of Dougherty v. Holm, 44 N.W.2d 83 (Minn. 1950) as support. Again, because this case references Article VI, Section 11, for its analysis, rather than Article IV Section 9, which has the provision similar to Wisconsin's, it is simply not relevant. Id. at 86. The dissent appears to miss the point of our comparison. We compare Article VII, Section 10 of the Wisconsin Constitution and Article IV Section 9 of the Minnesota Constitution because the operative language contained therein is similar. The focus of the comparison is on the specific language used in the provisions which restricts eligibility for officeholding, not for whom the language applies.
Indeed, the dissent has put forth examples it asserts violate the provision. See dissent, ¶¶ 104-106, 108, 111-114. While there do appear to he some valid examples, we dispute the dissent's assertion that "examples abound." Dissent, ¶ 111. Many of the examples noted by the dissent, including Isaac Walker, George Noyes, and Herman Humphrey, must be discounted because the constitutional provision explicitly does not apply to the judicial offices they held. See dissent, ¶¶ 111-114. Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution, as adopted in 1848, expressly stated that it only applied to "judges of the supreme and circuit courts."
Quaife, The Struggle Over Ratification at 13 n.1; Beitzinger, Lion of the Law 177-78 n.14.
In ¶¶ 93-94, the dissent notes that Ryan was nominated by the Wisconsin Senate for the office United States Senator. The dissent suggests that because Ryan was serving as chief justice at the time, he either interpreted the provision at issue here differently than the majority or was willing to violate the constitution. Dissent, ¶ 94. This, however, can only be speculation. Ryan was never elected to the Senate, and never held a nonjudicial office of public trust during his term. 1879 Senate Journal, 65-72; see also Beitzinger, Lion of the Law 167 (noting that upon his loss, Ryan "hinted in a humorous vein that he had been the victim of a conspiracy on the part of the three Republican candidates. At this the legislators broke into good-natured laughter and applause.").
We disagree with the dissent's contention that Walker "apparently changed his mind" about these statements in later years of his life. See dissent, ¶ 112 n.4. As the dissent acknowledges, Walker was a territorial probate judge. See John R. Berryman, History of the Bench & Bar, Vol. 2, p.40 (1898). Although it appears he became a United States Senator before his term expired, the prohibition against holding other offices did not apply to probate judges. Wis. Const. art. 7, § 10 (1848).
The dissent cites the case of Ballou v. DuBois, 23 Ill. 498, [*547] (1860) to dispute the contention that Illinois interpreted the provisions similarly. Dissent, ¶ 123. We find this case, at best, ambiguous. An Illinois court was called upon to examine the constitutional provision similar to Wisconsin's when the legislature redistricted and essentially left a judge in office with no physical territory in which to serve. Ballou, 23 Ill. at 502. The dissent quotes a piece of the court's analysis, but conveniently leaves out an important attached statement. See dissent, ¶ 123. The court's whole statement regarding the constitutional provision is interesting, but ambiguous. The court stated:
The tenth section of the same article provides, that "the judges of the Supreme and circuit courts shall not be eligible to any other office or public trust, of profit, in this State, or the United States, during the term for which they are elected, nor for one year thereafter." If the legislature can legislate a judge out of office the next day after he is elected, he must stand disqualified for any other office, or trust, of profit, for the remainder of the seven years; while it was the intention of the constitution that he should only be disqualified for one year after he went out of office, unless he voluntarily resigns, or is impeached or addressed out of office.
Ballou, 23 Ill. at 502-03 (emphasis added).
The dissent points to the election of two judges to office as earlier legislative acts. Dissent, ¶ 116. As we have stated previously, we do not find such examples persuasive and in fact, as we have noted, one of the examples cited, Judge Isaac Walker, was a probate judge, a position for which the constitutional prohibition did not apply. See Berryman, History of the Bench & Bar, Vol. 2, at 40.
We note that since the United States Supreme Court decided Clements v. Fashing, 457 U.S. 957 (1982), the Texas Supreme Court has had the opportunity to again review the language of one of the provisions at issue in Clements, namely Article III, Section 19 of the Texas Constitution. See Wentworth v. Meyer, 839 S.W.2d 766 (Tex. 1992). The Texas Supreme Court in Wentworth found Section 19 should be construed strictly against ineligibility and overruled its previous interpretations of the provision to hold that Section 19 only applied during the officerholder's actual time of service. See id. at 767-68. We do not find that court's analysis persuasive and we maintain that the Clements analysis is proper.
In Carenbauer v. Hechler, 542 S.E.2d 405 (W.Va. 2000), the West Virginia Supreme Court of Appeals interpreted Article VII, Section 7 of its constitution, a resign-to-run restriction on justices, judges and magistrates. In the case, an incumbent *776supreme court justice filed a certificate of candidacy for another seat on the same court while still serving his unexpired term. Id. at 408.

=== CASE 9739331 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:29.15085+00 ===

ANN WALSH BRADLEY, J.
¶ 87. (dissenting). I agree with the majority that our task is to discern the meaning of the phrase "during the term for which elected" as intended by the drafters of the 1848 consti*778tutional convention. I acknowledge the tried and true analytical framework employed by the majority when determining the meaning of a constitutional provision: examine the words of the text, the constitutional debates, the practices at the time, and the earliest interpretations manifested by the legislature. Majority op., ¶ 18.
¶ 88. I part ways with the majority, however, because its interpretation is unsupported by the 1848 convention debates and is inconsistent with the early practices and legislative acts. Rather, after stripping away the irrelevant discussion of the majority, and employing the accepted analytical framework, I conclude that the "term for which elected" ends after a successor is duly elected and qualified.
¶ 89. First, let us discard some of what is irrelevant. Much of the discussion in both the plain meaning section and the constitutional debates section of the majority's opinion is irrelevant because it cites debates focusing on the wrong issue, from the wrong constitutional convention, to interpret a phrase that was not adopted at that convention, by delegates who were not elected to the subsequent and more relevant 1848 convention.
¶ 90. As the majority correctly notes, one of the issues of great debate at the first convention in 1846 focused on whether the constitution should provide for an elected or appointed judiciary. The eloquent orations of Charles Baker and Edward Ryan cited by the majority argue the pros and cons of an elected judiciary. Yet, the discussion from the first convention on this issue is largely unpersuasive because the issue of an elected judiciary had essentially been put to rest by the time of the second convention. It was recognized that the popular will demanded election and no serious argu*779ment against it was made at the second convention. Ray A. Brown, The Making of the Wisconsin Constitution, 1952 Wis. L. Rev. 23, 37.
¶ 91. Indeed, although the majority quotes liberally from Edward Ryan, it seems to be misguided about the influence that he had on the judiciary article at either convention. As the majority notes, Ryan never served on the all-important judiciary committee of the first convention. Most of his commentary on the article on the judiciary dealt with his determined opposition to the election of judges. See Milo M. Quaife, The Convention of 1846, 590-603. The 1846 convention ultimately presented for ratification a constitutional provision on the selection of judges that was at odds with the position espoused by Ryan. He was not a delegate to the second convention, and there is little to show that he had any influence on the relevant discussion, the meaning of the phrase "during the term for which they are respectively elected."1
¶ 92. It is curious that the majority relies so heavily on statements made by Edward Ryan at the first constitutional convention as support for its interpretation. Perhaps it does not realize that these statements were made in a speech promoting the merits of an appointed judiciary, a position which was defeated in both constitutional conventions. More pointedly, it is difficult to understand why the majority so heavily *780relies on Ryan because he did not interpret the phrase at issue as the majority does today.
¶ 93. In April 1875, Ryan was elected chief justice of the supreme court to fill the unexpired term of Chief Justice Luther Dixon, who had resigned. If he had lived, Ryan's term would have expired on the first Monday of January 1882. John R. Berryman, History of the Bench and Bar, Vol. 1, p. 180-81 (1898). On January 22, 1879, while Ryan was serving as chief justice of the Wisconsin Supreme Court, the Wisconsin legislature met in joint session to elect a United States Senator. Ryan was one of the three nominees for the position.
¶ 94. In a hotly contested election, Ryan finished second.2 1879 Senate Journal, pp. 96-101. If he had been elected senator, he would have had to resign his position on the court in the middle of his term. By his actions, we must conclude that either Chief Justice Ryan intentionally and publicly violated the constitutional prohibition, or that he did not interpret the prohibition as does the majority today. I conclude the latter. His actions reflect an interpretation of the phrase in issue that is decidedly at odds with that advanced by the majority.
*781¶ 95. Although the acceptance of an elected judiciary, which Ryan opposed, was well settled by the time of the second constitutional convention, other issues in the judiciary article remained in dispute. The remarks of Byron Kilbourn at the opening of the second constitutional convention indicate that the judiciary article, along with a handful of other articles, would be the most prominent at the new convention.
It was the province of this body to study out and avoid those measures known to be repugnant to the popular will, and although there might be some little difference of opinion as to what those articles were and precisely to what effect they had been condemned, yet he apprehended that all would agree that the judiciary article, the bank article, and the articles on exemption and the rights of married women were most prominent and had met with most disapprobation.
Milo M. Quaife, The Attainment of Statehood, 179 (1928).
¶ 96. The phrase at issue, which was introduced at the second constitutional convention, was not a part of the initial Article VII, Section 10 draft submitted to the 1848 convention by the Committee on the Judiciary. It first appeared before the convention on the afternoon of January 21, 1848. The Committee on the Judiciary reported Article VII back to the convention with "sundry amendments." Quaife, The Attainment of Statehood, at 691. Among the amendments advanced by the Committee on the Judiciary was a fifth amendment which added the phrase "during the term for which they are respectively elected." Id. at 696. Apparently the creation and discussion of this phrase took place in committee. No discussion is reflected in the written accounts of the convention. Id.
*782¶ 97. In addition to the largely unpersuasive discussions of the majority noted above, the opinion is replete with irrelevant, albeit interesting, discussion. The legislative history concerning the 1977 court reform (majority op., ¶¶ 34, 35) and the defeated 1995 referendum (majority op., ¶¶ 31-33, 36-39) offers current views of what the phrase provides or what it should provide. Such discussion sheds no light on the essential inquiry before us: what did the drafters of the 1848 constitution mean by the phrase "during the term for which they are respectively elected."
¶ 98. Likewise discussion concerning the adoption in 1967 of the Code of Judicial Ethics, and cases cited concerning enforcement actions brought under the Code, miss the mark of our essential inquiry. See Majority op., ¶¶ 45-47. Similarly, since the attorney general opinions cited are not interpreting the Wisconsin constitution, but are offered to interpret subsequent statutory provisions, they are of little assistance. See Majority op., ¶¶ 48-49.
¶ 99. The majority and I differ as to the length to which the prohibition is extended. The majority would extend the period of prohibition as though the judge had remained on the bench and not resigned.
¶ 100. I believe such an interpretation is not supported by the constitutional debates and is inconsistent both with the practices at the time and the early legislative acts. Rather, the more reasonable interpretation is that the prohibition ends when the term ends: when a successor is duly elected and qualified.
¶ 101. Unlike the majority, I focus not on Edward Ryan as providing the key to understanding the meaning of the phrase in question, but on Charles Dunn. Morgan Martin, president of the second constitutional convention, described Dunn as the strongest man intel*783lectually in the second constitutional convention. Quaife, The Attainment of Statehood, at 911. When Wisconsin became a territory in 1836, President Andrew Jackson appointed Dunn chief justice of the new court. He served as the chief justice during the entire territorial period. See also, John Bradley Winslow, Story of a Great Court, 33-36 (1912).
¶ 102. Of greater significance for our discussion, Dunn also served as chair of the five-member Committee on the Judiciary of the second constitutional convention. Quaife, The Attainment of Statehood, at 912. Serving as chair of the judiciary committee, he was considered very influential in preparing the judiciary article of the constitution. Id. As noted above, the wording of the phrase in question came from his committee and passed the constitutional convention without discussion by the convention as a whole. Since no record exists of the committee discussion, I look to his actions and the practices of the time for illumination of how the drafters interpreted the phrase "during the term for which they are respectively elected."
¶ 103. The majority builds a house of cards premised on the foundation that the drafters, out of a heightened concern for preserving judicial independence, intended that the prohibition at issue be interpreted to last the entire period for which the judge or justice was originally elected. Majority op., ¶¶ 28, 63. As with an examination of the life of Chief Justice Ryan, the house of cards collapses when we examine how Dunn and the early legislature approached this limitation.
¶ 104. After the second constitutional convention, Dunn was elected to the state senate and served as the chair of its Judiciary Committee. In 1857 he was a candidate for the United States Senate, which was a *784position elected by the state legislature. His main opponent, and the ultimate victor, was none other than James R. Doolittle, a former circuit court judge. Doolittle had been elected judge of the first circuit in 1853, taking office on January 1,1854, for a term of six years. He resigned two years later, in March of 1856, and within a month John Keep was elected to fill the judgeship. Berryman, History of the Bench and Bar, Vol. 1, p. 352.
¶ 105. In addition to Dunn, five members of the legislature in 1857 were also members of the second constitutional convention. Laws of 1857, pp. 3-6.3 All participated in this election of a former circuit court judge,, who resigned mid-term and accepted a position of trust, the United States Senate. But the election of Doolittle was not accomplished until his successor had already been duly elected and qualified.
¶ 106. Certainly, if such an election violated a judicial provision of the new constitution, a provision which he advanced as chair of the convention's judiciary committee, Dunn would have insisted that the votes cast for Doolittle, his opponent and the victor, should be voided. Surely if such an election violated the constitution which the five legislators/convention delegates had so recently drafted, they would not have condoned such a violation.
¶ 107. The majority's interpretation requires us to believe that Charles Dunn would silently acquiesce in allowing his opponent to unconstitutionally declare *785victory. It requires us to believe that the five former delegates quietly participated in an unconstitutional election. Instead, I believe that neither Dunn nor the 1857 legislature interpreted the phrase as does the majority.
¶ 108. Likewise, Charles Larrabee, a circuit court judge and early supreme court justice who served as a delegate to the second constitutional convention, did not interpret the phrase as does the majority. He resigned mid-term in 1858 to serve as a member of congress. Winslow, Story of a Great Court, p. 18.
¶ 109. Admittedly these positions of trust are federal positions. The constitutional provision at issue, however, makes no distinction between federal and state positions of trust. As the court noted in State v. McCarthy, 255 Wis. 234, 38 N.W.2d 679 (1949), the "clear" language of Article VII, Section 10 would have also applied to federal positions of trust: "It may have been argued that sec. 10, art. VII, Const. applied only to state offices of public trust. The subsequent language of the section that all votes cast for circuit judges by the legislature or the people makes perfectly clear that the office of United States senator was included." McCarthy, 255 Wis. at 248.
¶ 110. A review of the practices of the time reveal that the rationale espoused by the majority for extending the period of prohibition also lacks support. The majority asserts that a heightened concern for the "evils" attendant to an elected judiciary led the second constitutional convention to extend the period of prohibition not just until the incumbent resigned, or not just until a successor was duly elected and qualified, but for the entire length of the original term elected. Majority op., ¶ 28. The practices of the day do not reflect this heightened concern.
*786¶ 111. Examples abound in the early days of statehood of judges who resigned mid-term to accept positions of trust. Many of these were not justices or circuit court judges, but their practices illustrate that the heightened concern necessitating a prolonged period of prohibition simply did not exist.
¶ 112. Isaac Walker, the first probate judge from Milwaukee, resigned mid-term in 1848 after being selected by the legislature to serve as a U.S. Senator. The selection of this judge to a position of trust after his mid-term resignation represents one of the earliest acts of the newly created Wisconsin legislature. The legislature first convened on June 5, 1848, and three days later, on June 8, 1848, it selected Walker as one of the two initial senators from Wisconsin. 1848 Senate Journal, pp. 1, 17.4
¶ 113. George Noyes, the first superior court judge in Milwaukee, resigned in March of 1890 after serving only two years of a six-year term. He was well acquainted with the early leaders of the bench and bar, having been a law partner with the former chief justice *787of the Wisconsin supreme court, Luther Dixon. Shortly after his resignation Governor Hoard appointed Noyes to a position of trust as a regent of the state university of Wisconsin. Berryman, History of the Bench and Bar, Vol. 2, p. 51-53.
¶ 114. Other examples include Herman Humphrey, a county judge, who resigned in February 1862, to become a member of the state legislature, after serving only one year of his judicial term (Berryman, History of the Bench and Bar, Vol. 2, p. 300); and A. P. Hodges, a Winnebago county judge, who resigned in December 1861 to occupy a position of trust, the state prison commissioner, which at that time was an elected position. Berryman, History of the Bench and Bar, Vol. 2, pp. 76-77.
¶ 115. Thus, not only do the practices of the day undermine the interpretation advanced by the majority, but also the early acts of the legislature evince a contrary interpretation. The majority advances that the earliest legislative interpretation of Article VII, Section 10 did not occur until over 50 years after its ratification when in 1913 the constitutional language was codified in Wis. Stat. Ch. 115, § 2523-22. (Majority op., ¶ 65). It acknowledges that the codification of the constitutional language "provides no real guidance regarding correct interpretation." Id. at ¶ 66.
¶ 116. The majority has overlooked the earliest legislative acts shedding light on the interpretation of this phrase. As noted above, as one of its first acts the legislature selected Judge Isaac Walker to a position of trust in the middle of his judicial term. Such an act by the legislature undermines the rationale which is central to the majority's interpretation of the phrase. Additionally, the election of former Judge James *788Doolittle to the United States Senate represents an early legislative act that is completely at odds with the majority's interpretation.
¶ 117. In buttressing its interpretation, the majority discusses at length the case of State v. McCarthy, 255 Wis. 234, 38 N.W.2d 679 (1949). The question before the court in that case was whether to impose judicial discipline against a judge who ran for the United States Senate while still serving in his capacity as a circuit court judge. In its per curiam decision, the court mistakenly attributed to an earlier McCarthy case, State ex rel. Wettengel v. Zimmerman, 249 Wis. 237, 24 N.W.2d 504 (1946), an interpretation to Article VII, Section 10, which the Zimmerman court did not make.
¶ 118. The Zimmerman court had no need to analyze and interpret Article VII, Section 10 because it based its holding on the premise that a state could not prescribe qualifications for the United States Senate in addition to those prescribed the constitution of the United States. Zimmerman, 249 Wis. at 247. The petitioner argued that Article VII, Section 10 precluded McCarthy from seeking the nomination by the Republican party for the office of senator of the United States. Without addressing whether the language of Article VII, Section 10 precluded such a candidacy, the court held that even "if the argument of the [petitioner] is sound," the state does not have the authority to prescribe the qualifications for United States senator "in addition to those prescribed by the United States Constitution." Id.
¶ 119. In a further attempt to support its interpretation, the majority cites to the constitutions of Minnesota, Majority op., ¶ 51, and Illinois, Majority op., ¶ 64. In State ex rel. Childs v. Sutton, 65 N.W. 262 (Minn. 1895), the Minnesota Supreme Court inter*789preted a provision in the Minnesota Constitution prohibiting senators and representatives from holding any office "during the time for which he is elected." However, the constitutional provision prohibiting judges from holding another office does not contain a similar phrase.
¶ 120. Article 6, § 11 provides: "[t]he justices of the supreme court ... shall hold no other office under the United States nor any other office under this state." Thus, the majority opinion correctly details the Minnesota court's analysis as it relates to senators and representatives, but the language relating to the judiciary is different in the Minnesota constitution, and different from the language in our constitution.
¶ 121. The majority advances that the purpose for including the phrase in the Wisconsin constitution is to preserve the independence of the elected judiciary. It is unclear how that stated purpose applies to Minnesota legislators given that there is no similar phrase in the judiciary article of the Minnesota constitution.
¶ 122. In 1950, Minnesota Supreme Court Justice Harry H. Peterson resigned his seat on the court and immediately became a candidate for governor. See, Dougherty v. Holm, 44 N.W.2d 83 (Minn. 1950). In a case involving the election, the Minnesota Supreme Court noted that Peterson could not ethically have announced his candidacy while he occupied the bench. Id. at 86. Nothing in the court's opinion suggests that he was constitutionally prohibited from resigning and then seeking the position of governor. Contrary to the majority's suggestion, neither the Minnesota constitutional provision on the judiciary nor the practice in Minnesota supports the majority's interpretation.
¶ 123. Likewise, the earliest Illinois case interpreting the cited constitutional provision falls short of *790supporting the majority's claim. The court in Ballou v. DuBois, 23 Ill. 547 (1860) interpreted article 5, section 10 of the Illinois Constitution which provides: "the judges of the Supreme and circuit courts shall not be eligible to any other office or public trust, of profit, in this State, or the United States, during the term for which they are elected, nor for one year thereafter." However, it appears as though the Ballou court did not interpret this provision to apply when a judge voluntarily resigns: "it was the intention of the constitution that he should only be disqualified for one year after he went out of office, unless he voluntarily resigns, or is impeached or addressed out of office." Id.
¶ 124. I look instead to how a relatively early Wisconsin case, State ex rel. Johnson v. Nye, 148 Wis. 659, 668, 135 N.W 126 (1912), interpreted the same phrase "during the term for which he was elected" as it appears in Article iy Section 12 of the Wisconsin Constitution. Article iy Section 12 provides:
No member of the legislature shall, during the term for which he was elected, be appointed or elected to any civil office in the state, which shall have been created, or the emoluments of which shall have been increased, during the term for which he was elected.
¶ 125. Although the court in that case dismissed the complaint concluding that it failed to state a cause of action because no emoluments of office were increased during the relevant period, it gave a cautionary instruction: "The constitutional provision under consideration should be narrowly construed in favor of eligibility." Johnson, 148 Wis. at 668. Although acknowledging the Johnson court directive that the provision interpreting the same phrase for legislators should be narrowly construed in favor of eligibility, the *791majority fails to explain why such a directive does not apply to the same language set forth for the judiciary in Article VII, Section 10.
¶ 126. I would apply the Johnson directive and interpret the same language in Article VII, Section 10 in favor of eligibility, limiting the majority's extended period of prohibition after resignation. The majority's interpretation is simply incorrect. It is not supported by the constitutional debates and is inconsistent with the practices at the time and the early legislative acts. In addition, it does not make good sense.
¶ 127. The majority's interpretation is premised on the belief that Article VII, Section 10 allows two people who are elected to have the same judicial term for the same judicial position at the same time. It mistakenly defines the length of all judicial terms as though the judges had remained on the bench.
¶ 128. Here, the essential question before us is: when does the judicial term end when the judge resigns? The question of course is important because it is instructive as to how long the period of prohibition extends.
¶ 129. I conclude that the period of prohibition after resignation extends until the successor is duly elected and qualified. This interpretation is consistent with the practices of the times and the earliest legislative acts, and finds support in Article VII, Section 9 of the Wisconsin Constitution. Article VII, Section 9 provides:
When a vacancy occurs in the office of justice of the supreme court or judge of any court of record, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the governor, which shall continue until a successor is elected and qualified. There shall be no election for a justice or *792judge at the partisan general election for state or county officers, nor within 30 days either before or after such election.
Wis. Const. art. VII, § 9 (2001-02) (emphasis added). The interpretation is also supported by Wis. Stat. § 17.19:
Vacancies in elective state offices shall be filled as follows: ... (2) JUDICIAL. In the office of justice of the supreme court, court of appeals judge or circuit judge, by temporary appointment by the governor, which shall continue until a successor is elected, as provided in s. 8.50(4)(f), and qualifies. When so elected the successor shall hold office for a full term and shall take office on August 1 succeeding the election.
Wis. Stat. § 17.19 (2001-02) (emphasis added).
¶ 130. Thus when a successor is duly elected and qualified, the successor commences an entirely new term on August 1 for a full six or ten years. When the new full term commences, the predecessor's judicial term ends.
¶ 131. In sum, the majority interprets the constitutional provision as barring a former judge from holding another office until the judicial term to which the judge was previously elected would have expired if the judge had remained on the bench. Such an extended prohibition is not supported by the 1848 constitutional debates and is inconsistent with the practices of the times and the earliest legislative acts. Instead, for the reasons set forth above, I interpret the period of prohibition to extend until a successor is duly elected and qualified. Accordingly, I respectfully dissent.
*793¶ 132. I am authorized to state that CHIEF JUSTICE SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON joins this dissent.
The majority observes that Ryan recommended similar language during the debate over the 1846 constitution. Majority op., ¶ 27. It fails to note, however, that Ryan's proposal was for a judiciary appointed by the governor.
The word "respectively" was removed as part of the revisions to this section made in 1977. See 1975 Enrolled Joint Resolution 13; 1977 Enrolled Joint Resolution 7.
Both the Assembly and Senate voted for nominees for United States Senate. They met first separately and then met in a joint session. In the initial vote in the Senate, Ryan finished second out of four candidates. He fared better in the Assembly, finishing first out of five candidates. However, when the Senate and Assembly voted in joint session, Ryan ultimately lost the election.
The majority attempts to minimize Ryan's nomination by noting that he was not elected. The fact remains, however, that his name was placed in nomination for an office of public trust while he was serving as chief justice of the supreme court.
Members of the 1857 legislature who were also members of the second constitutional convention were: James Fagen from Cedarburg; Ezra Albert Foot from Footville; Louis Powell Harvey from Shopiere; Frederick S. Lovell from Kenosha (he was also chair of the Assembly Judiciary Committee in 1857); and James Denoon Reymert from Milwaukee.
I am perplexed by the majority's lengthy quote and discussion of Isaac Walker, a delegate of the first constitutional convention. Majority op., ¶ 63. The quote is offered by the majority as a contemporaneous statement decrying the kind of ambition which would cause a jurist to leap from the bench to a higher office of trust. Walker is quoted as complaining about men who . . leaped from the ranks of mere ambition to the bench . .. into the United States Senate.1'
What the majority fails to note or connect is that Walker himself later became an example of the very thing he earlier decried. In "leaping" from the position of probate judge to the United States Senate, Walker apparently changed his mind about the wisdom set forth in the quote which the majority now embraces.

=== CASE 9739332 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:29.77947+00 ===

Hoffman, C.J.
This appeal arises from the overruling of defendants-appellants’ motion to correct errors. Plaintiff-appellee initiated the action requesting a declaratory judgment that certain promissory notes bearing an interest rate of 9% were not usurious under the applicable statute.
*368Acts 1969, ch. 106, § 1, p. 248, Ind. Stat. Anno., § 19-12-101, Burns’ 1970 Cum. Supp., reads as follows:
“Legal rates of interest on loans or forbearances. — The interest on loans or forbearance of money, goods, or things in action, shall be as follows:
(a) When the parties do not agree on the rate, interest shall be at the rate of six dollars [$6.00] per year per one hundred dollars [$100] ;
(b) By agreement in writing signed by the party to be charged thereby, and not otherwise, any obligor other than a corporation or a partnership, limited partnership, joint ventures and trusts may lawfully agree to pay any rate of interest not in excess of eight dollars [$8.00] per year per one hundred dollars [$100] ;
(c) By agreement in writing duly signed by it, and not otherwise, any corporation, partnership, limited partnership, joint ventures and trusts may lawfully agree to pay any rate of interest whatever.
“Interest as used in this and the succeeding sections of this act [§§ 19-12-101 — 19-12-108] shall include discount and may be paid and collected in advance.” (Emphasis supplied.)
The emphasized words were added in 1969 by our Legislature. Those words gave rise to three transactions which led to the litigation presently before us for review.
This is an appeal of three actions which were properly consolidated in this court under Rule AP. 5(B), Indiana Rules of Procedure. All three cases were submitted to the trial court on an agreed statement of facts which may be summarized as follows:
On April 1, 1970, appellants, husband and wife, entered into a partnership agreement for the purpose of securing the loan in question, investing the proceeds, with a view towards long-term appreciation and resulting gain. On April 15, 1970, appellants, as partners, borrowed $100 at an interest rate of 9 % per annum by properly executing a promissory note payable to appellee.
On April 15, 1970, appellants, husband and wife, entered *369into a joint venture for the purpose of obtaining the loan in question, investing the proceeds, with a view towards long-term appreciation and resulting gain. On the same day appellants, members of the joint venture, borrowed $100 at an interest rate of 9 % per annum by properly executing a promissory note payable to appellee.
On April 15, 1970, appellants, husband and wife, entered into a trust agreement for the purpose of obtaining the loan in question, investing the proceeds, with a view towards long-term appreciation and resulting gain. On the same day appellants, as trustees, borrowed $100 at an interest rate of 9% per annum by properly executing a promissory note payable to appellee.
On April 15, 1970, appellee filed complaints for declaratory judgment on the notes executed by appellants as partners and as members of the joint venture. On April 16, 1970, appellee filed a similar complaint on the note executed by appellants as trustees. In each complaint appellee prayed that the court construe § 19-12-101, supra, and declare each of the notes not to be in conflict with the statute, and that the 9 % per annum interest on the loans be held valid, binding and not usurious.
On April 22, 1970, appellants answered each of the three complaints admitting all material allegations of the complaints and praying that the notes be declared invalid as in violation of § 19-12-101, supra.
As previously stated, the cases were submitted on an agreed statement of facts. On May 28, 1970, the trial court entered judgment in each of the three causes for appellee. The court held the notes not to be in violation of § 19-12-101, supra. The court further held the notes to be binding obligations according to the terms set forth therein and that the notes were not usurious.
Appellants timely filed their motion to correct errors which was overruled by the trial court. In their brief appellants have chosen to brief and argue;
*3701. That the decision is not supported by sufficient evidence upon all necessary elements of a claim in that:
(a) The evidence is insufficient to sustain a finding that there exists a valid partnership — joint venture — or trust — between the appellants;
(b) The evidence is insufficient to support a decision that the parties’ note is not usurious; and
(c) The evidence is insufficient to support a decision that the parties’ 9 % interest rate note is a valid and binding obligation as to interest.
2. That the decision is contrary to law in that:
(a) It is contrary to § 19-12-101, supra;
(b) It is contrary to Acts 1929, ch. 220, § 3, p. 804, Ind. Stat. Anno._, § 19-12-104, Burns’ 1964 Repl., in awarding plaintiff any interest over 6 % ; and
(c) It held that the parties’ 9% interest rate note is not usurious.
It is clear that the Legislature, when amending § 19-12-101, supra, intended to expand the exemptions to the usury statute to include partnerships, limited partnerships, joint ventures and trusts as well as the only previous exception — corporations. This appeal must decide whether exemptions contained in the usury statute include transactions of the nature here involved.
We must, therefore, look to the language of the statute, the interaction of the statute with other legislative enactments, and the transactions which give rise to this appeal.
Section 19-12-101, supra, of the usury statute is not wholly consistent with § 19-12-104, supra, which is as follows:
“Usurious rate of interest in contract — Debtor’s recoupment. — When a greater rate of interest than is hereby allowed shall be contracted for, the contract shall be void as to the usurious interest contracted for; and if it appears that interest at a higher rate than eight per cent [8%] has been, directly or indirectly, contracted for by an obligor other than a corporation, the excess of interest over six per cent [6%] shall be deemed usurious and illegal, and, in an action on a contract affected by such usury, the excess over the legal interest may be recouped by the debtor, whenever *371it has been reserved or paid before the bringing of the suit.” (Emphasis supplied.)
Although § 19-12-101, supra, exempts partnerships, limited partnerships, joint ventures and trusts, as well as corporations from the 8% limit in § 19-12-104, supra, apparently all but corporations are given a right of recoupment.
One interpretation of this inconsistency is that a lender may loan money at a rate higher than 8% to all the named exceptions in § 19-12-101, supra, but if interest in excess of 8% is stated such note is voidable as to any interest in excess of 6% at the option of any named exception other than a corporation. This interpretation is not logical and cannot be accepted.
The words, “[w]hen a greater rate of interest than is hereby allotoed”, found in § 19-12-104, supra, relate back to § 19-12-101, supra, and deny a right of recoupment by the named exceptions in § 19-12-101, supra, regardless of whether or not they are again named as exceptions in § 19-12-104, supra. This interpretation makes the two sections consistent with each other and is the only one which will retain the effectiveness of each of the sections, i.e., not render one nugatory at the expense of the other.
It was clearly the intention of the Legislature to exclude partnerships, limited partnerships, joint ventures and trusts. This interpretation is consistent with 2 Sutherland, Statutory Construction (Horack, 3d Ed.), § 4704, at 339, where the following statement is made:
“If upon examination the general meaning and object of the statute is inconsistent with the literal import of any clause or section, such clause or section must, if possible, be construed according to that purpose. But to warrant the change of the sense to accommodate it to a broader or narrower import, the intention of the legislature must be clear and manifest.”
Appellants attack the validity of the partnership, joint venture, and trust involved in this appeal. It is not contended *372that they were not legally created or fail to conform to any “technical” rules for the creation of a partnership, joint venture, or trust under the laws of the State of Indiana. Appellants argue that in the instant case they are mere shams disguising the individuals involved — admittedly formed for the purpose of borrowing money at 9 % interest and, thus, as they relate to the usury statute § 19-12-101, supra,, are not valid.
Appellee argues that the statute is clear and unambiguous. It makes no distinction or condition on the type of partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, trust or corporation that is excluded from § 19-12-101, supra. Thus, under the wording of the statute it makes no difference that the expressed purpose of the transactions was to obtain a loan which they could not have otherwise obtained.
Usury statutes or the condemnation of usurious rates have very deep roots into American society, indeed, all of western civilization. The Holy Bible relates that Moses was told:
“If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury.” (Exodus 22:25)
The Legislature did not repeal the usury statute, § 19-12-101, supra. They added to the sole exception (corporations) partnerships, limited partnerships, joint ventures and trusts.
The notes involved in this appeal are not usurious on their face. The facts need no interpretation inasmuch as it was agreed that the purpose of forming the partnership, joint venture and trust was to obtain loans at a rate that would have otherwise been usurious on its face.
The issue presented by this appeal is: May individuals, through the use of words and paper creating a partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, trust or a eorporation purposely circumvent the usury statute? They cannot, for to allow such action would effectively repeal the usury statute.
*373This is a case of first impression in Indiana. Therefore, we look to other jurisdictions for assistance. However, these cases are not binding upon the courts of Indiana. In Allen etc. v. Van Buren Township etc., 243 Ind. 665, at 671, 184 N. E. 2d 25, at 28 (1963), our Supreme Court, speaking through Judge Bobbitt, said:
“While well-reasoned opinions from other jurisdictions may be persuasive in the determination of a new question of law they are, however, not conclusive.”
The corporation exception to usury is the oldest and most widespread. Consequently, the cases dealing with issues analogous to the one in the instant case involve corporations as borrowers rather than a partnership, joint venture or trust.
Appellee cites and relies heavily upon Jenkins v. Moyse, 254 N. Y. 319, 172 N. E. 521 (1930). In Jenkins a corporation was formed and had as its assets a commercial building. A loan was obtained and a mortgage given upon the building to secure the loan. The interest agreed upon was in excess of the rate allowed by the usury laws as applied to individuals. The mortgage was then foreclosed by court action. Jenkins, the sole stockholder in the corporation and who had transferred the building to the corporation, brought an action to set aside said mortgage as usurious. The court found that the loan was payable only by the corporation and out of property which the corporation had a right to mortgage. The court at 522-523 of 172 N. E. stated:
“The test of whether this loan is usurious is whether it was in fact made to the plaintiff. Doubtless at times loans are made in fact to an individual though in form they are made to a corporation to hide the fact that the lender has exacted an illegal rate of interest from the real borrower. We do not now deal with such a situation. Here the corporation was formed and the loan made to it, rather than to the individual who owned the corporate stock, because the parties sought to avail themselves of the rights the law accords to those who do business in corporate form under a franchise from the state. The fact that the sole owner *374of the stock of the corporation is an individual does not change those rights. He did not in his individual capacity borrow any money or agree to repay any money.” (Emphasis supplied.)
The formation of the corporation and the transactions involved in Jenkins made it distinguishable from the instant case. In the instant case it is clear from the agreed facts and circumstances that the loans in question were in fact made to appellants. The manipulation of paper in the instant case will not be sufficient to circumvent the purpose of the usury statute, § 19-12-101, supra. To so hold would, in effect, render § 19-12-101, et seq., nugatory, i.e., effectively repeal the statutes by implication so that there would be no limit on the amount of interest chargeable in Indiana. If the Legislature had intended such a result it would have repealed, and not amended, § 19-12-101, supra.
Furthermore, if this court were to sanction transactions such as those involved in the instant case, the result would be to repeal, by implication, Acts 1963, ch. 233, § 1, p. 320, et seq., Ind. Stat. Anno., § 18-3001, et seq., Burns’ 1964 Repl.— the Act controlling small loan companies. Section 18-3001, supra, reads as follows:
“License required — Application — Issuance. — Except as otherwise authorized by this act [§§ 18-3001 — 18-3005] and unless and until a license shall have been obtained as in this act provided no person, copartnership, or corporation shall engage in the business of making loans of money, credit, goods, or things in action in the amount or of the value of one thousand dollars [$1,000] or less and charge, contract for, or receive on any such loan a greater rate of interest or consideration therefor than the lender would be permitted by law to charge if he were not a licensee hereunder. * *
If, by the completion of a very simple document making husband and wife partners at the same time a loan is procured, the lender and borrower could effectively sidestep the 8% limit on loans — to any degree desired — there would be no *375reason why anyone would obtain a license as required in order to charge the higher rates allowed by § 18-3001, et seq., supra. The State would then lose whatever control it presently has— through the licensing process — over such small loan businesses. The Legislature did not intend such a result.
The Court of Appeals of California, Division One, in Mission Hills Dev. Corp. v. Western Small Business Inv. Co., 67 Cal. Rptr. 505, 260 Cal. App. 2d 923 (1968), aptly stated the role of the trial court in lifting the veil which hides usurious transactions hidden behind a cloak of legality, and at 926 of 260 Cal. App. 2d, stated:
“Where, as in the instant case, the transaction is not usurious on its face, the trial court may look beyond the form of the transaction and ascertain its substance. [Citing authorities.] The court will not permit an evasion of the usury law by a subterfuge, and it is always permissible to show that a transaction obstensibly lawful is in fact a usurious loan. The test is whether there was an intent to evade the law, and the circumstances and negotiations which attended the transaction are material and should be considered in determining such intent. [Citing authorities.] It is immaterial whether the borrower or the lender takes the initiative in a usurious transaction.”
Other cases have held that whether a particular transaction is usurious is a question of fact. See: Simmons v. Patrick, 27 Cal. Rptr. 347, 356, 211 Cal. App. 2d 383 (1963) ; Massie v. Rubin, 270 F. 2d 60, 62 (10th Cir. 1959) ; Janisse v. Winston Investment Company, 154 Cal. App. 2d 580, 317 P. 2d 48, 50 (1957).
The exceptions created by the Legislature may not be used by individuals to obtain a loan ostensibly as one of the named exceptions, but in reality to the individuals themselves.
When presented with such a situation the courts of Indiana will not look exclusively to the legality of the creation of the entity which is excepted from the usury statute, but will look to the facts and circumstances of the case and, if the individuals involved are lurking behind a cloak of legality to *376circumvent the statute, shall declare any interest in excess of 6% void.
Judgment of the trial court is reversed, and the trial court is instructed to enter judgment consistent with this opinion.
Judgment reversed with instructions.
Sharp and Staton, JJ., concur; White, J., concurs with opinion.

=== CASE 9739333 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:29.784259+00 ===

Concurring Opinion
White, J.
I agree that individuals who are not bona fide partners, joint venturers, or trustees cannot bind themselves to pay more than eight percent interest on ordinary loans merely by signing papers saying they are partners, joint venturers, or trustees. Individuals, including husbands and wives, may, nevertheless, become bona fide partners or joint venturers in investment enterprises or trustees of such a trust.1 In fact it would seem to me that whenever two or more persons associate themselves together as active participants in a business enterprise, without incorporating, they probably become either a joint venture, a partnership, or a business trust.2
There is almost no evidence in the case at bar that the husband and wife appellants were engaged in any business enterprise. They stipulated that they “entered into this partner ship/joint venture/trust agreement/for the purpose of obtaining the loan in question and investing the proceeds of this loan, with a view towards long term appreciation and resulting gain.” That vague general statement could refer to a *377business enterprise but seems more descriptive of the purchase of a painting or an antique for the home, which they could well be buying “with a view toward long term appreciation.” Had the amount of the note been sufficient (e.g., $10,000.00 instead of $100.00) the described investment might well have been a family home or a vacant lot on which they expected to build their home in the future.
The evidence was quite obviously insufficient to sustain the finding that the husband and wife “entered into a valid partnership agreement”/". . . a valid joint venture”/". . . a valid trust agreement.” But the greatest doubt as to the bona fides of any of these agreements arises out of the very obvious fact that they were entered into for purpose of creating “facts” on which to base these three test cases. The findings in each of these cases “[t]hat a genuine controversy exists between the parties” is wholly unsupported.3
It may be that we are performing a public service by interpreting the 1969 amendment to the usury statute. I cannot believe, however, that any interpretation based on the vague generalizations here called “An Agreed Statement of Facts” can be of much help in the later decision of a live case arising out of real facts. Nor do I believe the time of trial courts and appellate courts should be devoted to the decision of moot cases or the rendition of advisory opinions. My inclination is to follow the rule stated in Zoercher v. Agler (1930), 202 Ind. 214, 221, n. 1, 172 N. E. 186, 70 A. L. R. 1232, as follows:
“While declaratory judgments acts should be liberally interpreted, Tennessee Eastern Electric Co. v. Hannah (1928), 157 Tenn. 582, 12 S. W. (2d) 372, an examination of the recent cases shows that in a large number of them the courts are compelled to refuse to determine controversies which are not real. Moot or theoretical questions cannot be litigated under such acts, Kelly v. Jackson (1925), 206 Ky. 815, *378268 S. W. 539; Miller v. Miller, supra [149 Tenn. 463, 261 S. W. 965] ; Garden City News v. Hurst (1929), 129 Kans. 365, 282 Pac. 720; nor can actions be brought merely to secure free advice where there is no present existing controversy, Post v. Metropolitan Casualty Ins. Co. (1929), 227 App. Div. 156, 237 N. Y. Supp. 64; Dietz v. Zimmer (1929), 231 Ky. 546, 21 S. W. (2d) 999).”
With these reservations I concur in the court’s opinion by Chief Justice Hoffman.
Note. — Reported in 266 N. E. 2d 221.
. “Appellant could become the business partner of her husband, and is bound by an estoppel in pais as any other person. Her representations to the bank that she was such partner and was borrowing money with her husband to be used in the partnership business were as binding upon her as if she were a feme sole.” Anderson v. Citizens Nat. Bank (1906), 38 Ind. App. 190, 193, 76 N.E. 811, 812.
. “If the intent to do those things which constitute a joint venture exists, the parties will be joint venturers even though they also intended to avoid the personal liability that attaches to joint venturers.” 46 Am. Jur. 2d 31, Joint Venturers § 9, citing Bryce v. Bull, 106 Fla. 336, 143 So. 409.
. The stipulation of the parties that the controversy is genuine can have little weight dn the face of the inferences which arise out of the simultaneous execution of the three agreements, the three loans of $100.00 each, and the immediate filing of the three declaratory judgment actions.

=== CASE 9739334 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:30.59594+00 ===

Givan, J.
Appellant was originally charged by an indictment in two counts, Count 1 charging involuntary manslaughter and Count 2 charging reckless homicide. Upon the conclusion of the State’s evidence the State moved for and *640obtained a dismissal of the charge of reckless homicide. At the conclusion of the trial the jury returned a verdict finding appellant guilty of involuntary manslaughter. Upon this verdict appellant was sentenced to the Indiana State Prison for a period of two to twenty-one years.
The record in this case discloses the following facts:
On June 5, 1966, the appellant and decedent, Henry Stidham, were riding in appellant’s automobile traveling in a northerly direction on Indiana State Highway 37A. At a point north of 116th Street in Hamilton County appellant’s automobile was in the process of overtaking traffic traveling in the same direction. In passing these vehicles it was necessary for appellant’s automobile to be driven in the westerly lane of the two lane highway, in other words the lane for oncoming traffic. As appellant’s car traveled in this position on the highway an automobile driven by Donald H. Schuette appeared over a rise of the highway. Mr. Schuette testified that as he drove south he was meeting a line of north bound traffic and the south bound lane was clear, that upon coming over the rise he was confronted with the presence of appellant’s automobile. Whereupon, he immediately turned to his right onto the west berm of the highway. Appellant attempted evasive action to his left which also carried him onto the west berm of the highway. At this point the two vehicles collided, the front portion of Mr. Schuette’s vehicle striking appellant’s vehicle in the vicinity of the right front door. The resulting crash caused the death of the decedent, Henry Stidham. Mr. Stidham died of extensive injuries to the right side of his body.
At the time appellant’s vehicle left the highway it was traveling beside and in the same direction as a vehicle operated by one Phillip Bruner, who testified that upon seeing oncoming traffic and the car beside him he pulled to the right to the eastern berm of the road where he was immediately struck from the rear by a vehicle traveling in the same direction. The distance from 116th Street to the point of impact was 1,581 feet. Beginning at a point some forty feet north of the 116th Street intersection and extending to several hundred *641feet north of the point of impact the highway was marked by a yellow line indicating that it was a no passing zone for north bound traffic. The reason for the no passing zone was the existence of a slight rise in the highway north of the point of impact which obstructed vision of traffic approaching from the north.
A Mrs. Fish testified as a witness for the State that she arrived at the scene as the accident occurred. Immediately after the impact she saw two occupants in defendant’s automobile; that the occupant on the right or passenger side of the vehicle was slumped over. A person whom she identified as the appellant was seated on the driver’s side. The appellant got out of the vehicle, then reached across the front seat and pulled the passenger from the right side of the front seat to a position on the left side behind the steering wheel.
Appellant first claims the verdict of the jury was not sustained by sufficient evidence in that the State did not prove he committed an unlawful act as alleged in the indictment. The indictment alleged the defendant unlawfully attempted to pass several cars traveling in the same direction and failed to yield the right of way to an oncoming car driven by Donald H. Schuette, thereby causing the fatal accident.
It is appellant’s contention that the State only proved the appellant was attempting to pass one car at the time of the accident. Therefore, there is a fatal variance in that the state failed to prove he was attempting to pass several cars as alleged. The jury could infer from the facts above recited that the appellant was attempting to pass at least two cars, one driven by Mr. Bruner and the one which was immediately behind Mr. Bruner which struck the Bruner car at almost the same time appellant’s vehicle was struck by the Schuette car. The gravamen of the offense charged was the killing of another person while engaged in an unlawful act, which in this case was the unlawful passing. It would seem immaterial as to how many vehicles the appellant was passing at the time of the accident. The fact that he was pass*642ing any vehicle in an unlawful manner is sufficient to establish proof of the fact charged.
The test of a fatal or material variance is whether the defendant was misled or surprised and thereby harmed in the preparation of his defense. Madison v. State (1955), 234 Ind. 517, 130 N. E. 2d 35. The appellant here alleges no surprise nor does he point out how he was harmed in the defense of his case by any variance, if there was one, as to the number of cars he was passing at the time of the accident. We see no material variance between the facts proved and the facts alleged.
The defendant also contends there is insufficient evidence to prove that he failed to yield the right of way to an oncoming car. He bases the contention upon the fact that the collision with the Schuette car occurred on the west berm of the road thus proving that he did yield the right of way to the Scheutte car, but that Mr. Schuette’s action in driving off onto the berm in fact caused the collision. We cannot accept appellant’s interpretation in this regard. Mr. Schuette was proceeding south on the highway in a lawful manner driving in the correct lane. As he came over a small rise in the highway he was suddenly confronted with appellant’s vehicle meeting him head on in his lane of traffic. Faced with that circumstance it was entirely reasonable for Mr. Schuette to use any means at his disposal to attempt to avoid a collision. Although it was quite natural for the appellant to also attempt to avoid the collision by driving onto the berm of the road, it was the appellant, not Mr. Schuette, who had created the unexpected situation which placed two rapidly moving vehicles on a collision course in the highway. The jury was fully justified in finding from these facts that the appellant was guilty of failure to yield the right of way to an oncoming vehicle.
*643*642Appellant also alleges there is insufficient evidence to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that he acted with a wilful, *643wanton, reckless disregard for the rights of others. A person may be found guilty of manslaughter if they involuntarily, but in the commission of some unlawful act, caused the death of another person. Burns Ind. Stat., (1956 Repl.), § 10-8405. In the case at bar the count of the indictment under which the appellant was convicted charged that appellant caused the death of Henry Stidham while in the commission of the unlawful act of attempting to pass a moving vehicle in such a manner as to fail to yield the right of way to oncoming traffic.
It is true this Court has repeatedly stated that mere negligence is not enough to sustain a conviction for involuntary manslaughter. Minardo v. State (1932), 204 Ind. 422, 183 N. E. 548. In the case at bar the question before the Court is whether or not the appellant was deliberately violating a traffic law of the State of Indiana or whether his presence on the “wrong side of the road” was the result of mere negligence on his part. This Court held in the case of Seibert v. State (1959), 239 Ind. 283, 156 N. E. 2d 878, that the mere fact a driver was passing another vehicle on a two lane road as he approached the crest of a hill did not in and of itself establish a deliberate violation of the statute. It was pointed out in the Seibert case that the hill in question was “a fooler” and that the appearance of the highway at that point could lead a driver to believe that he was in fact seeing the entire road ahead when as a matter of fact an oncoming car might be concealed in a depression in the road, which was not evident. The Court further pointed out that there was no sign or any yellow line warning persons of the obstructed view ahead. However, in the case at bar the facts above recited were sufficient for the jury to find that the appellant had consciously chosen to cross a yellow line to pass other vehicles; that his voluntary act exceeded mere negligence and the fact that his deliberate, unlawful act resulted in the death of another person constituted manslaughter.
*644*643Appellant next claims the State did not establish beyond a *644reasonable doubt that he was the driver of the automobile. It is true that the appellant himself testified that the decedent was the driver. However, as above pointed out Mrs. Fish testified that the appellant was the driver, and she further specifically stated that the presence of the decedent behind the wheel was accomplished by the deliberate act of the appellant in placing him there following the accident. We have repeatedly stated we will not weigh conflicting evidence on appeal. Broderick v. State (1967), 249 Ind. 476, 231 N. E. 2d 526, 12 Ind. Dec. 168. There is ample evidence from which the jury could conclude that appellant was in fact the driver of the car.
Appellant also contends the verdict of the jury was contrary to law because it was not sustained by sufficient evidence. We hold that the verdict was sustained by sufficient evidence and was, therefore, not contrary to law because of lack of evidence.
Appellant next claims error in that irregularities and abuse of discretion on the part of the trial judge prevented his having a fair trial. Under this assignment he first claims the court abused his discretion in overruling a motion for a continuance prior to the beginning of the trial. Appellant based his request for continuance on the fact that the State had submitted a partial list of its witnesses some two weeks before the trial, then six days before the trial the State submitted an additional list. Appellant’s counsel complains that he could not be adequately prepared and that his request for continuance should have been granted. However, he does not state how he was harmed or in what way he was surprised, if he was, by the testimony of any particular witness. We have previously stated if a continuance is based upon other than statutory grounds the motion is directed to the court’s discretion. Calvert v. State (1968), 251 Ind. 119, 239 N. E. 2d 697, 15 Ind. Dec. 227. Where there is no showing of harm this Court must conclude that the trial court did not abuse his sound discretion and that the denial of the motion for continuance was not reversible error. Jay v. State (1965), *645246 Ind. 534, 206 N. E. 2d 128, 5 Ind. Dec. 231. We hold that the trial court did not commit error in refusing to grant the continuance requested by appellant.
Appellant next contends the trial court commited error in repeatedly sustaining objections to defense counsel’s questions addressed to witnesses and criticized counsel for his method of questioning. It is true the trial court from time to time in the course of the trial admonished counsel for the appellant as to his method of questioning. However, the court also admonished the jury that they were to disregard the remarks of the court. The very nature of a trial requires a judge to rule upon objections made by counsel. Each time such a ruling is made a claim might be made by the attorney against whom the court had ruled that he was being placed in a bad light before the jury. We can only say that an examination of this record fails to disclose any showing of bias or prejudice of the trial court, and that he was merely properly exercising his discretion as to whether or not he would allow certain types of leading questions. Shipman v. State (1962), 243 Ind. 245, 183 N. E. 2d 823, certiorari denied 371 U. S. 958, 83 S. Ct. 515, 9 L. Ed. 2d 504.
Appellant next claims the trial court erred in refusing to declare a mistrial because of the publishing of a newspaper article which appeared on the evening of the day in which the trial commenced. The objectionable part of the article stated that three of the State’s witnesses would remain unidentified until the trial because they feared the consequences of testifying and that each of the three had had a conversation with the defendant wherein the defendant stated he was the driver of the car in which Stidham was killed. An examination of the court room procedure had at the time the article was published in THE NOBLESVILLE LEDGEE discloses that the trial judge did everything reasonably within his power to remind the jury of his preliminary instruction that they should disregard any thing heard on the radio or television or anything read in the newspapers concerning the case, and that they *646should make their decision based solely upon the evidence received in court. Although several of the jurors admitted reading the article they all stated that they could disregard the article and base their decision solely upon the evidence. This in and of itself might not be sufficient in some instances, but in the case at bar the objectionable part of the article was that three witnesses would testify at the appellant’s trial to the effect that the appellant had told them that he was driving the automobile. Although witnesses did appear and testify against the appellant following the publishing of the article, no witnesses testified as to any such statement by the appellant. The jurors were expressly told by the judge that the statement contained in the article was absolutely false.
This case does not present the question of facts being disclosed through the news media to jurymen, which facts were inadmissible in evidence and as such had been excluded or were destined to be excluded at the trial. We concede that a disclosure by a newspaper of such information would be extremely difficult to cure. However, to reverse a case such as the one at bar because a newspaper stated witnesses would tesify in a certain manner when they in fact did not so testify by holding that the trial judge was powerless to correct such misinformation in the minds of the jurors is to place the court in an unreasonable position as to his ability to protect court room proceedings against irresponsible actions of third parties.
We hold that the case at bar does not come within the purview of Marshall v. U. S. (1959), 360 U. S. 310, 3 L. Ed. 2d 1250, 79 S. Ct. 1171. In the Marshall case evidence which had been excluded by the trial court as being inadmissible was published in the newspaper and read by the jurors. In the case at bar the evidence which the newspaper claimed to be forthcoming was never submitted by the State. There was no claim in the newspaper article that it was evidence which the trial court had excluded. It was merely a promise of things to come which did not materialize. The appellant does not *647show this Court nor do we find from the record how this situation could have prejudiced the appellant. In the absence of a showing of prejudice the trial court will be affirmed. Harris v. State (1967), 249 Ind. 681, 231 N. E. 2d 800, 12 Ind. Dec. 279.
Appellant claims the trial court erred in permitting witnesses to testify that at the time of his death the decedent himself did not have a valid driver’s license. Appellant claims this fact was totally immaterial to the crime charged and its admission in evidence was highly prejudicial to his defense. With this we cannot agree. Part of the appellant’s defense in this case was that Henry Stidham was the driver of the automobile. Whether Henry Stidham was or was not a licensed driver at the time would be a matter which might have a bearing upon the fact presented for the jury’s consideration as to whether or not he was the driver of the car. The evidence, slight though it might be, was pertinent to the issue and therefore admissible. It was within the province of the jury to hold what weight, if any, it would give to such evidence. Compton v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 103, 235 N. E. 2d 181, 13 Ind. Dec. 547.
Appellant also claims the trial court erred in permitting witnesses to answer questions calling for conclusions. Although such questions are objectionable, it does not necessarily follow that it is reversible error to permit the witness to answer such questions. Cockrum v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 366, 234 N. E. 2d 479, 13 Ind. Dec. 288.
Appellant merely states the above objection abstractly and does not cite us to a particular place in the testimony where a witness was permitted to draw a conclusion. The question is therefore waived under Appellate Rule 8.2 (b) 5.
Appellant next contends that Instructions No. 2 and 5 were erroneously given over appellant’s objection. Instruction No. 2 reads as follows:
“If you find from the evidence beyond a reasonable doubt, that the allegations of this indictment are true, and that *648Billy Lee Napier willfully drove his automobile to the left of the center line at a time when his vision ahead was obstructed for a distance of less than five hundred feet and/or while attempting to pass several cars traveling in the same direction and failing to yield the right of way to an oncoming automobile or in a manner expressly forbidden by statute and thereby caused the caused the death of Henry Stidham, you may find the defendant guilty of involuntary manslaughter.”
Appellant’s objection to Instruction No. 2 is as follows:
“Also the defendant would object to the giving of Instruction #2; for the reason that it is also an improper statement of the law, because it refers only to willfully drove and it does not refer to willful, wanton and reckless conduct. It also refers in the Instruction ‘was observed for a distance of less than five hundred feet,’ which is not a proper statement of anything. It is not proper affidavit, it is not a part of the indictment, it is not a part of the law and it’s not the proper instruction. The let’s—see— see two, three and were the ones.”
The above instruction although not artfully worded and not recommended as a model instruction could only be interpreted as instructing the jury that if they found that the appellant wilfully drove his automobile in a manner forbidden by statute thereby causing the death of Henry Stidham he could be found guilty of involuntary manslaughter. As previously stated in this opinion, this is a correct statement of the law. We, therefore, find no reversible error in the giving of Instruction No. 2.
Instruction No. 5 reads as follows:
“Members of the jury, I instruct you, if the defendant, through inadvertance, or lack of attention or thoughtless negligence, failed to see the other car involved in this accident, but in addition had willfully committed an unlawful act which placed another in physical danger and that such willfull and unlawful act resulted in the death of Henry Stidham, you may find this sufficient to support a conviction under the statute for involuntary manslaughter.”
The objection to Instruction No. 5 reads as follows:
“Yes, we object to #5, for the reason it presupposes facts. Namely, that do not say—it does not indicate that they have *649to find that the defendant was the driver of the automobile in question. It also leaves out the most important part of the law, that being willful and wanton misconduct. That’s the objections and that’s all the State has—or the defendant.”
Here again the instruction is not recommended as a model instruction. However, we fail to see that it would mislead the jury. It does specifically state that if the jury finds the appellant had wilfully committed an unlawful act resulting in the death of Henry Stidham he could be found guilty of involuntary manslaughter. This is a true statement of the law. We, therefore, hold the trial court did not err in giving Instruction No. 5.
The trial court is, therefore, in all things affirmed.
Arterburn, C.J., and Hunter, J., concur; DeBruler, J., dissents with opinion; Prentice, J., not participating.

=== CASE 9739335 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:30.600931+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion
DeBruler, J.
On October 2, 1968, the day appellant’s jury trial started, the Noblesville Daily Ledger, a newspaper of general circulation in Hamilton County, printed an article concerning a hearing held on September 30, 1968, on one of appellant’s pre-trial motions. The article said:
“On Monday Judge Edward F. New, Jr. held that three ‘newly discovered witnesses’ in the case may remain unidentified until the trial. The prosecution maintains the three have feared the consequences of testifying. The three were involved in a conversation with Napier in which he stated he was the driver of the car in which Stidham was killed. . . .” (Emphasis added.)
The record discloses that not one witness ever testified in the trial of this cause as to a conversation with appellant in which the latter admitted being the driver of the death vehicle. At trial appellant testified that he was not the driver of the car.
On October 3, 1968, appellant called this article to the trial court’s attention and the court held a hearing which revealed *650that five jurors admitted having read the article. The trial court then proceeded to question the jurors in order to determine whether their having read the article would influence their decision in the case. The following is the relevant part of the record of that examination of the jurors:
“Now you folks that read those articles, can you assure me that you can go ahead with this trial without any influence on your decision in this case, based upon anything you read in these articles? You sir? You think you can? I think it’s got to be a little stronger than that. Are you sure you can?
JUROR: I’ll say I’m quite sure.
THE COURT: All right good. Who else here?
JUROR: I’m positive sir.
THE COURT: All right good. Who else sir. Mr. Evans?
JUROR: (Answer is not audible)
THE COURT: Well you know the facts then?
JUROR: Right.
THE COURT: Well what I’m interested in, is whether or not you can continue as a juror during the rest of this trial and deliberate with your fellow jurors without anything that you read having any influence or bearing on your final decision.
JUROR: I can.
THE COURT: You can? About you? Have you read it?
JUROR: Yes I read it.
THE COURT: Can you disregard it?
Juror: (Answer not audible).
THE COURT: All right, Mr. Roberts?
JUROR: No, fact is I don’t think I read anything that wasn’t brought out or that we have already heard here. (Emphasis added.)
THE COURT: All right, good enough. All right show the defendant’s motion is overruled.”
Appellant made a motion for a mistrial which the trial court overruled and it is that ruling which is urged as error on appeal.
*651The Sixth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States and Art. 1, § 13, of the Constitution of the State of Indiana specifically guarantee to every accused the absolute right to a public trial by an impartial jury. This guarantee necessarily encompasses the requirement that the jury’s verdict be based upon evidence received in open court, not evidence obtained from outside sources. Sheppard v. Maxwell (1966), 384 U. S. 333, 86 S. Ct. 1507, 16 L. Ed. 2d 600; Rideau v. Louisiana (1963), 373 U. S. 723, 83 S. Ct. 1417, 10 L. Ed. 2d 663; Baniszewski v. State (1970), Ind., 261 N. E. 2d 359. In Patterson v. Colorado (1907), 205 U. S. 454, 27 S. Ct. 556, 51 L. Ed. 879, Mr. Justice Holmes stated:
“The theory of our system is that the conclusions to be reached in a case will be induced only by evidence and argument in open court, and not by any outside influence, whether of private talk or public print.” 205 U. S. at 462.
The above quoted article was obviously the kind of outside influence which could undermine appellant’s constitutional right to an impartial jury and the trial court, when the article was called to his attention by appellant, took the proper first step of determining whether any of the jurors had read the article. The record shows that five jurors admitted having read the article. It was then up to the trial court to decide the ultimate issue of whether there was a “reasonable likelihood that prejudicial news will prevent a fair trial”. Sheppard v. Maxwell, supra. The Sheppard test was recently adopted by a unanimous Court in Baniszewski v. State, supra, and is clearly applicable here.
In order to resolve the ultimate issue the trial court proceeded to question the jurors who had read the article to determine whether having read the article would influence their decision in the case. Regardless of whether the trial court’s question reflected the proper legal standard it is clear that in the case of two of the jurors, the record does not permit us to affirm the trial court ruling permitting them to remain on the jury.
*652First, it is clear that the last juror’s answer to the trial court inquiry was ambiguous at best and could reasonably be interpreted as revealing that he had been greatly prejudiced by the article. That response was as follows:
“JUROR: No, fact is I don’t think I read anything that wasn’t brought out or that we have already heard here.”
This answer was given in spite of the fact the juror admitted having read the article which stated that three witnesses would testify that appellant admitted driving the death car, and no such evidence was brought out at trial. It might have been that the juror had already forgotten part of the article and was not being influenced by it. On the other hand it would be reasonable to interpret his response as revealing that he had so absorbed the extra judicial allegation that he. was treating it as if it had come out at the trial. Due to this latter possible interpretation of the juror’s response, I would hold that the trial court erred in permitting the juror to remain on the panel without a thorough probing of his state of mind.
Second, it is obvious that we cannot determine how the fourth juror answered the trial court inquiry because the record merely shows an inaudible response. Therefore, we have no way to know how the juror rated his own ability to be impartial in spite of the article, and thus no way to review the trial court decision to permit the juror to remain on the panel. It is not sufficient to say that since the trial court left the juror on the panel he must have given an adequate answer to the trial court. The United States Supreme Court has held that in cases concerning the pre-judicial impact of media publicity the appellant tribunal has a duty to make an independent evaluation of the relevant facts. Sheppard v. Maxwell, supra; Baniszewski v. State, supra.
I believe my position is support by Marshall v. United States (1959), 360 U. S. 310, 79 S. Ct. 1171, 3 L. Ed. 2d 1250, where the jurors had been exposed through “news accounts” to information concerning the defendant’s prior convictions and *653other past conduct which the trial court ruled too prejudicial to be submitted to the jury. The court described the trial court procedure as follows:
“The trial judge on learning that these news accounts had reached the jurors summoned them into his chamber one by one and inquired if they had seen the articles. Three had read the first of the two . . . and one had read both. Three others had scanned the first article and one of those had also seen the second. Each of the seven told the trial judge that he would not be influenced by the news articles, that he could decide the case only on the evidence of record, and that he felt no prejudice against petitioner as a result of the articles. The trial judge, stating he felt there was no prejudice to petitioner, denied the motion for mistrial.” 360 U. S. at 312.
In spite of that the Supreme Court reversed saying:
“We have here the exposure of jurors to information of a character which the trial judge ruled was so prejudicial it could not be directly offered as evidence. The prejudice to the defendant is almost certain to be as great when that evidence reaches the jury through news accounts as when it is a part of the prosecutor’s evidence. ... It may indeed be greater for it is then not tempered by protective procedures.” 360 U. S. at 312, 313.
It is not crucial that in Marshall the evidence disclosed to the jurors in the news reports was ruled legally inadmissible in the trial court. An accused’s constitutional right to an impartial jury is violated when there is a reasonable likelihood that the jury’s decision will be influenced by facts or allegations that were not presented to the jury during the trial. Why they were not presented to the jury at the time is irrelevant. In Marshall, as in our case, the jurors were exposed to news reports of facts which were never submitted to the jury at the trial. As Justice Holmes said in Patterson v. Colorado, supra:
“The theory of our system is that the conclusions to be reached in a case will be induced only by evidence and argument in open court, and not by any outside influence, whether of private talk or public print.” (Emphasis added.)
*654In future cases of this kind I recommend that the trial court follow the procedures outlined in the approved draft of the ABA Standards Eelating to Fair Trial and Free Press. In particular, Standard 3.5(f) reads:
“(f) Questioning jurors about exposure to potentially prejudicial material in the course of the trial; standard for excusing a juror.
“If it is determined that material disseminated during the trial goes beyond the record on which the case is to be submitted to the jury and raises serious questions of possible prejudice, the court may on its own motion or shall on motion of either party question each juror, out of the presence of the others, about his exposure to that material. The examination shall take place in the presence of counsel, and an accurate record of the examination shall be kept. The standard for excusing a juror who is challenged on the basis of such exposure shall be the same as the standard of acceptability recommended in section 3.4(b), above, except that a juror who has seen or heard reports of potentially prejudicial material shall be excused if reference to the material in question at the trial itself would have required a mistrial to be declared.” (Emphasis added.)
Standard 3.4(b):
“ (b) Standard of acceptability.
“Both the degree of exposure and the prospective juror’s testimony as to his state of mind are relevant to the determination of acceptability. A prospective juror who states that he will be unable to overcome his preconceptions shall be subject to challenge for cause no matter how slight his exposure. If he has seen or heard and remembers information that will be developed in the course of trial, or that may be inadmissible but is not so prejudicial as to create a substantial risk that his judgment will be affected, his acceptability shall turn on whether his testimony as to impartiality is believed. If he admits to having formed an opinion, he shall be subject to challenge for cause unless the examination shows unequivocally that he can be impartial. A.prospective juror who has been exposed to and remembers reports of highly significant information, such as the existence or contents of a confession, or other incriminating matter's that may be inadmissible in evidence, or substantial amounts of inflammatory material, shall be subject to chai*655lenge for cause without regard to his testimony as to his state of mind.”
Under this standard the trial court would have had to excuse the jurors who had read the article in question because any statement at the trial by a witness that there were three other witnesses who would testify that appellant admitted driving the car, when in fact there were no such witnesses would clearly have required a mistrial be declared.
The Standards also set out methods by which the trial court can minimize the publication of prejudicial information at critical times in the criminal process and thus possibly prevent this type of thing from occurring in the future.
Note.—Reported in 266 N. E. 2d 199.

=== CASE 9739336 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:31.162452+00 ===

LAVORATO, Chief Justice.
The State appeals from the district court’s ruling on the defendant Matthew Dale Rankin’s motion to dismiss. The State contends the district court erred by interpreting Iowa Code section 124.401(5) (2001) and ruling that Rankin should have been charged with a serious rather than an aggravated misdemeanor. We agree and reverse and remand.
I.Background Facts and Proceedings.
On June 28, 2002, Rankin was convicted of possession with intent to deliver marijuana in violation of Iowa Code section 124.401(l)(d) and 124.410 (2001). His conviction was determined to be an accommodation offense under section 124.410.
Two days later, a police officer stopped the car in which Rankin was a passenger for a traffic violation. According to the officer, as he approached the car he was “hit with a large amount of burnt marijuana smoke coming from inside the vehicle.” Rankin was trying to brush smoking ashes off his lap. The officer found a marijuana cigarette in the car and residue all over the passenger seat where Rankin was sitting.
The State charged Rankin with possession of marijuana in violation of Iowa Code section 124.401(5). The State also alleged that Rankin had previously been convicted of possession with intent to deliver on Juné 28, 2002, making the current offense an aggravated misdemeanor.
Rankin moved to dismiss. In his motion, Rankin asserted that no basis existed to charge him with the enhanced offense under section 124.401(5).
. Following a hearing,on-the motion, the district court, determined that the punishment would be that provided for a serious misdemeanor.
The State appealed, contending that the district court erred by interpreting section 124.401(5) and ruling that Rankin should have been' charged with a serious rather than an aggravated misdemeanor. For reasons that follow, we agree.
II. Scope of Review.
We review issues of statutory interpretation for errors at law. State v. Snyder, 634 N.W.2d 613, 615 (Iowa 2001).
III. Analysis.
We first begin our analysis wjth the fundamental rules of statutory interpretation that guide our resolution of the issue before us:
[In .interpreting statutes] [o]ur goal ... is to discover the true intention of the legislature. In searching for legislative intent, we consider not only the language of the statute, but also its. subject matter, the object sought to be aceom-plished, the purpose to be served, underlying. policies,, remedies provided, and the consequences of various interpretations. Additionally, we construe a statute in a way that would avoid impractical or absurd results. And'we look at the whole statute, not just separate parts. '
State v. Albrecht, 657 N.W.2d 474, 479 (Iowa 2003) (citations omitted);
Rankin contends the district court was' correct. In support of the district court’s ruling, Rankin argues, as he did in the district court, that at the time of the first conviction he'was sentenced pursuant to section 124.410, as though he had been convicted of possession of marijuana. Therefore, according to Rankin, the second paragraph of section 124.401(5) applied *610and the charge for a second offense should have been a serious misdemeanor rather than an aggravated misdemeanor under section 124.401(5). (An aggravated misdemeanor carries a sentence not to exceed two years (Iowa Code section 903.1(2)) and a serious misdemeanor under section 124.401(5) carries a sentence not to exceed six months for the first offense and not to exceed one year for a second offense under Iowa Code section 903.1(1)(6).)
To understand Rankin’s argument, we first set out Iowa Code section 124.410, the provision under which he was sentenced for his first conviction:
In a prosecution for unlawful delivery or possession with intent to deliver marijuana, if the prosecution proves that the defendant violated the provisions of section 124.401, subsection 1, by proving that the defendant delivered or possessed with intent to deliver one-half ounce or less of marijuana which was not offered for sale, the defendant is guilty of an accommodation offense and rather than being sentenced as if convicted for a violation of section 124.401, subsection 1, paragraph “d”, shall be sentenced as if convicted of a violation of section 12J/.401, subsection 5....
Iowa Code § 124.410 (emphasis added).
The second paragraph of section 124.401(5) — that part of the statute that Rankin claims applies — provides:
If the controlled substance is marijuana and the person has been previously convicted of a violation of this subsection in which the controlled substance was marijuana, the punishment shall be as provided in section 903.1, subsection 1, paragraph “b” [serious misdemeanor].
Iowa Code § 124.401(5) (emphasis added).
Reading these two provisions together as we must, we conclude, contrary to Rankin’s contention, that he was not “convicted of’ a violation of section 124.401(5) when he was sentenced under section 124.410 for his first offense. By the language “shall be sentenced as if convicted of a violation of’ section 124.401(5), the legislature simply intended that section 124.401(5) should only serve to supply the sentencing court with the proper sentence for a defendant found guilty of accommodation. A defendant found guilty of accommodation is not “convicted of’ a violation of section 124.401(5). Rather such a defendant is convicted of accommodation'— a delivery offense under section 124.410. See State v. Metcalf, 260 N.W.2d 857, 860 (Iowa 1977) (holding that accommodation is a lesser included offense of possession with intent to deliver); Iowa Code § 124.410 (“An accommodation offense may be proved as an included offense under a charge of delivering or possessing with the intent to deliver marijuana in violation of section 124.401, subsection 1.”).
We agree with the State that the second paragraph of section 124.401(5) does not apply to Rankin for two reasons. First, as we just explained, Rankin was not “convicted of’ a violation of section 124.401(5) when he was found guilty of an accommodation offense under section 124.410. Second, as the State correctly points out, the second paragraph of section 124.401(5) applies only to those persons convicted of possession of marijuana. Accommodation is a delivery offense; it is not a possession-of-marijuana offense. All of this is borne out by the following language in the second paragraph of section 124.401(5): “If the controlled substance is marijuana and the person has been previously convicted of a violation of this subsection in which the controlled substance was marijuana. ...” Iowa Code § 124.401(5) (emphasis added). Because Rankin was convicted of an accommodation offense in violation of section 124.410 and not a possession-of-*611marijuana offense, his previous conviction does not fall within the “this subsection” language of paragraph two of section 124.401(5).
As the State suggests, Rankin’s case falls within the following language of section 124.401(5) found in the first paragraph of that provision:
It is unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess a controlled substance.... Any person who violates this subsection is guilty of a serious misdemeanor for a first offense. A person who commits a violation of this subsection and who has previously been convicted of violating this chapter ... is guilty of an aggravated misdemeanor.
Rankin was previously convicted of violating sections 124.401(d) and 124.410 (“this chapter”). By using the language “this subsection,” rather than “this chapter,” in the second paragraph of section 124.401(5), the legislature clearly intended to grant leniency only to those charged with possession of marijuana.
We therefore conclude the State properly charged Rankin with an aggravated misdemeanor pursuant to the first paragraph of section 124.401(5). The district court erred in concluding otherwise. We therefore reverse the district court’s ruling on Rankin’s motion to dismiss and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.
All justices concur except CARTER, J., who dissents and STREIT, J., who takes no part.

=== CASE 9739337 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:31.166112+00 ===

CARTER, Justice
(dissenting).
I respectfully dissent.
The sentencing enhancement provided in the first paragraph of section 124.401(5), although purporting to apply to “any person who violates this subsection,” clearly does not apply to a conviction for possession of marijuana. The penalties for that offense, including first-offense and subsequent-offense convictions, are contained in the second paragraph of section 124.401(5). In applying that paragraph, the issue that must be decided is whether a person charged with possession with intent to deliver marijuana under Iowa Code section 124.401(l)(d), but sentenced “as if convicted under Iowa Code section 124.401(5),” because found to be an accommodation offender as provided in section 124.410, should be considered a person previously convicted of a violation of section 124.401(5). I am satisfied that the answer to this question is yes.
The statutory scheme for enhancing sentences imposed under section 124.401(5) is designed to increase the degree of offense by one classification for each prior conviction. Thus, for violations found under the first paragraph of section 124.401(5), involving possession of controlled substances other than marijuana, one prior conviction enhances a sentence from a serious misdemeanor to an aggravated misdemeanor. Two or more prior convictions enhances the sentence from a serious misdemeanor to a felony.
Similarly in the second paragraph of section 124.401(5), governing possession of marijuana, one prior conviction will enhance an offense calling for a prison term of six months to a serious misdemeanor (providing a maximum sentence of twelve months). Two or more prior convictions enhance an offense calling for six months imprisonment to an aggravated misdemeanor.
This defendant’s prior sentence was “as if convicted of section 124.401(5).” That sentence was limited to a maximum of six months, the same as provided for defendant’s present offense but for the enhance*612ment to be applied as the result of the prior conviction. Yet, the enhancement that the majority endorses, although based on a single prior conviction, increases the penalty by two sentencing classifications rather than one. That is inconsistent with the statutory scheme. I would affirm the judgment of the district court.

=== CASE 2219375 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:12.623115+00 ===

131 Ill. App. 2d 264 (1970)
266 N.E.2d 752
THE PEOPLE ex rel. LARRY D. PETERSON, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JOSEPH S. VALENCIK et al., Defendants-Appellants.
No. 53896.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District.
December 30, 1970.
*265 Sullivan & Sullivan, of Chicago, and Gerhardt J. Gleege, of Oak Lawn, (John M. Sullivan, of Chicago, of counsel,) for appellants.
LeRoy W. Gudgeen, of Chicago, for appellee.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. JUSTICE EBERSPACHER delivered the opinion of the court:
This is an appeal from the Circuit Court of Cook County by the defendants, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of Oak Lawn, Illinois; Joseph S. Valencik, Chairman; Frank A. Micklin, Secretary; and Cornelius Ruiter, Member. The Circuit Court granted petitioner's prayer for relief by ordering a writ of mandamus to issue directed to and against the defendants commanding them to reinstate the plaintiff on the Fireman Eligibility List and to appoint the plaintiff to the first vacancy as a fireman.
The plaintiff, Larry D. Peterson, hereinafter called "plaintiff", is a resident of the Village of Oak Lawn. The plaintiff on November 7, 1966, took a written examination for the position of fireman. He had also taken physical examinations and both were successfully passed.
On December 5, 1966, the defendants published a Fireman Eligibility List and the plaintiff's name appeared thereon in the number four position. The persons posted in the first three positions, taking precedence over the plaintiff in appointment, either refused to accept appointment or were appointed on or before January 2, 1967.
The defendants adopted new rules for placement on the Fireman Eligibility List on April 6, 1967. The preamble to the new rules stated "no action or proceeding commenced before these rules and regulations as amended take effect shall be affected by these amended rules and regulations. All actions or proceedings which occur from incidents or events after adoption of these rules shall conform with the presently effective rules and regulations as amended". (emphasis ours)
The defendants did, however, direct the plaintiff and all others on the Fireman Eligibility List to take another physical examination. Section 130.6 of the new rules provided in part "If at any time before appointment the Commission determines the necessity for an additional medical examination, applicant shall comply with such request". The record does not disclose if there was a determination of "necessity" by the commission *266 as required by the section. In any event, the plaintiff took another physical examination on June 24, 1967. The new rules provided in Section 120.6 again in part "Each applicant shall meet the following requirements": Whereupon followed a list of medical requirements that differed from the previous requirements, as concerned the plaintiff, only in eyesight qualifications. The new rules providing minimum requirements of 20-40 uncorrected which the plaintiff could not meet. The plaintiff had met the eyesight requirements for the old rules.
On June 29, 1967, the Secretary of the Board notified the plaintiff by telephone that the plaintiff was no longer on the Fireman Eligibility List because of his failure to meet the physical requirements.
The Board thereafter did appoint persons who had been lower than plaintiff on the December 5, 1966 list. The plaintiff then made demand upon the Board for appointment to the Fire Department of the Village of Oak Lawn. On April 18, 1968, the defendants were advised that the plaintiff had retained an attorney. Whereupon, the defendants then advised the plaintiff and his attorney that they would hold a hearing pursuant to his request. The meeting was held on May 13, 1968 between the defendants, plaintiff and his attorney. The defendants, in writing, denied the relief sought by the plaintiff. On June 7, 1968, plaintiff filed his Petition for writ of mandamus and the Court issued the Writ on January 3, 1969.
The defendants had filed a Motion to Strike and Dismiss asserting that this action was controlled by the "Administrative Review Act", (Ill. Rev. Stat., ch. 110, pars. 264 through 279), and that as a result thereof mandamus would not lie. The Court on July 30, 1968, denied the defendants' motion.
The defendants now urge that the Court erred in failing to grant the motion asserting that the "Administrative Review Act", supra, governs every action to review judicially a final decision of the Administrative Agency, and that mandamus will not lie to review the action of the defendants in removing the plaintiff's name from the Fireman Eligibility List.
The defendants urge that the case of People ex rel. Fike v. Slaughter (1961), 31 Ill. App. 2d 175, 175 N.E.2d 585 is determinative of the issues of this cause. The case of People ex rel. Fike, v. Slaughter is quite different from the present cause. The Board in removing Mr. Fike's name from the Policeman's list had been made aware of certain charges against Fike which pertained to his moral qualifications to be a member of the police force. An informal hearing was granted to Fike and thereafter Fike was notified in writing that he had been removed from the list.
We feel that the present cause is controlled by the case of Chestnut v. *267 Lodge (1966), 34 Ill. 2d 567, 216 N.E.2d 799 which states in discussing the intent of the act, "The Administrative Review Act is a salutary act to provide a simple review from specified administrative decisions, but it was not intended to be a trap for the unwary to establish a bar to relief. Since it is an exclusive method of review in the proper case, the areas of its applicability must be clearly defined. Under the Personnel Code, the Administrative Review Act is only applicable to decisions of the Civil Service Commission. Since we find no clear right in these plaintiffs to obtain a review of their layoffs by the Commission, we hold the Administrative Review Act is inapplicable". (emphasis ours)
 1, 2 After careful reading of the Rules and Regulations of the Oak Lawn Board of Fire and Police Commission, it is unclear as to whether or not the present plaintiff is entitled to a review or rehearing. The section which is urged by the appellants as bringing the plaintiff within the Act is Section 170.4 of the rules which states "Appeals may be filed on all decisions reached by the Commission, however, all such appeals must comply with the provisions of the Administrative Review Act as shown in the Illinois Revised Statutes 1965 or as may thereafter be amended". This section is the last of fourten sections under the Seventh Article entitled "Discipline". The removal of the plaintiff's name from the list was not for disciplinary reasons and it would be reasonable for the plaintiff to not seek review as provided by that Article. Thus the procedure that the plaintiff must follow for review is unclear if, indeed, there is a procedure for him to follow to obtain review. The applicability of the Act to this present case is not clearly defined. Therefore the Administrative Review Act does not apply and mandamus will lie. Chestnut v. Lodge, supra.
Defendants also assert that the case of Davis v. Wilson (1968), 96 Ill. App. 2d 225, 238 N.E.2d 237 supports their contentions quoting:
"It is, however, well established that where the Administrative Review Act is expressly referred to in the Act conferring power on an administrative agency the prior equitable modes of review cannot be obtained. (People ex rel. Chicago and N.W. Railway v. Hullman, 21 Ill. 2d 166, 201 N.E.2d 103; People ex rel. Fike v. Slaughter, 31 Ill. App. 2d 175, 175 N.E.2d 585; Moline Tool Co. v. Dept. of Revenue, 419 Ill. 35, 101 N.E.2d 71.) Nor do we find equitable grounds for dispensing with the requirements of the act. The thirty-five day period within which plaintiff had to file his complaint in administrative review commenced not with the date of the decision but the date of his notification."
Here, however, the Administrative Review Act is not "expressly referred" to in the Rules and Regulations as applying to Article 2, which *268 has to do with physical requirements nor to Article 3 which has to do with appointments; neither is the Administrative Review Act referred to in Article 8 which embraces miscellaneous provisions applying to all the other Articles.
Judgment affirmed.
MORAN and GOLDENHERSH, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2219378 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:12.682734+00 ===

131 Ill. App. 2d 443 (1970)
266 N.E.2d 444
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
CLARENCE MORRIS, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 54331.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District.
December 7, 1970.
*444 Leonard Karlin, of Chicago, for appellant.
Edward V. Hanrahan, State's Attorney, of Chicago, (Elmer C. Kissane and Michael Scott Cisney, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel,) for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
*445 Mr. JUSTICE ADESKO delivered the opinion of the court:
Defendant Clarence Morris was convicted of aggravated battery and attempt with intent to commit robbery following a jury trial and was sentenced on both counts to two to five years in the State penitentiary, sentences to run concurrently. Defendant appeals his conviction on the grounds that (1) the in-court identification of the defendant was tainted by an improper line-up identification; (2) the search without a warrant that produced a weapon was too remote in time and place from defendant's arrest; and (3) the State failed to present an accurate Bill of Particulars within sufficient time to allow the preparation of a defense.
The evidence in this case indicates that on February 2, 1968, Mr. Frank Cooper left a wake at 8:35 p.m., in the City of Chicago and drove to 79th and Drexel where he parked his car. Because the snow was deep on the sidewalk he chose to walk down the middle of the street. After a few steps he heard someone behind him say, "Hold it, don't turn around; don't take your hands out of your pockets." Mr. Cooper testified that he did turn around and saw the defendant six to eight feet away crouched down at the rear end of a car. The illumination, according to the witness, was "light as day", since the street lighting was intensified by snow on the ground. As he turned around, Cooper testified that the defendant shot at him four times, hitting him once in the shoulder.
Mr. Cooper described his assailant as approximately 17 years old, better than 5 feet tall, wearing a cap, and having a dark complexion, a sloped face, and a smirk on his face that he (Cooper) would never forget. Frank Cooper testified that he also saw the gun which the defendant was holding and described it as being dark and of a small caliber.
Seconds after the shooting, Mr. Cooper followed his assailant toward a gangway, heard someone else with him, but gave up the chase and went to a drugstore to call the police. The police arrived and twenty minutes later brought in a youth for Mr. Cooper to identify at the drugstore. Mr. Cooper said the youth was not his assailant.
On March 24, 1968, the defendant Clarence Morris and a friend were apprehended by two police officers while they were standing on the corner of 68th and Stony Island. The officers suspected them of being curfew violators. Officer Jasagielnik testified that as he approached the defendant by car, the defendant ran down the street, put something behind a parked car, and returned to the corner. The officer went to the car with a flashlight and found a .32 caliber hand gun behind one of the tires. He put the gun in his belt and returned to the corner whereupon the defendant said, "that ain't my gun". Officer Jasagielnik then arrested the defendant and his friend.
On March 26, 1968, the defendant was arrested again and his home *446 searched pursuant to a search warrant. Nothing was found. On the same day defendant was placed in a police line-up with two adults. One of the men was a police officer who had a mustache; the other man had a round face. Both men, like the defendant, were Negroes. Frank Cooper identified the defendant as his assailant, stating "that number three man I never will forget him."
Defendant contends on appeal that the line-up used by the police to obtain an identification of the defendant was so unnecessarily suggestive that the subsequent in-court identification of the defendant was prejudicial and violative of due process. Defendant relies exclusively on United States v. Wade, 388 U.S. 218, Gilbert v. California, 388 U.S. 263 and Stovall v. Denno, 388 U.S. 298. Two of these three landmark cases decided by the U.S. Supreme Court, United States v. Wade and Gilbert v. California, dealt with the abuses of the police line-up as a means of pre-trial identification, and the consequences thereof. Wade and Gilbert specifically held that the in-court identification by a witness to whom the accused was exhibited before trial in the absence of counsel must be excluded unless it can be established that such evidence had an independent origin or that error in its admission was harmless. (United States v. Wade, 388 U.S. 218, 219, Gilbert v. California, 388 U.S. 263, 264.) The holding in these cases applies to the case before us since the pre-trial line-up occurred after June 12, 1967, the date of the Wade and Gilbert decisions.
The Supreme Court and Appellate Court of Illinois have applied the rule enunciated in Wade, Gilbert, and Stovall v. Denno, in the following cases:
In People v. Nelson, 40 Ill. 2d 146, 238 N.E.2d 378 (1968), the Supreme Court of Illinois, relying on Stovall v. Denno, supra, affirmed the conviction of a narcotics pusher. In that case the court found that the defendant stood out at a line-up not because of any suggestive conduct by the police, but because of his own attempt to conceal his face. The court also found that the in-court identification of the defendant was independent of the line-up since the witnesses had known the defendant as a customer up to five months before the sale in question.
In People v. Blumenshine, 42 Ill. 2d 508, 250 N.E.2d 152 (1969), four victims of a robbery in a laundromat first viewed the defendant alone in a room in a police station, then viewed the defendant with a suspected accomplice in the same room. The Illinois Supreme Court found the viewing to be a suggestive confrontation and consequently vacated judgment, remanding to the trial court to afford the State an opportunity to prove that the four witnesses' identification of the defendant at trial had an origin independent of the improper confrontation.
*447 In People v. McMath, 104 Ill. App. 2d 302, 244 N.E.2d 330 (1968), the Illinois Appellate Court held that a pre-trial confrontation between the victim of a robbery and the accused first at a gas station shortly after the robbery and later at a police station where the accused was the lone suspect was unfairly suggestive. Yet, the court also held that the victim's observation of the defendant at the time of the robbery disclosed a sufficiently independent source to stand as the basis for the court room identification. The sufficiently independent source consisted of the victim's observation of his assailant's height, build, and dress (a dark zipper jacket and gray hat) even though the assailant wore a stocking cap over his face at the time of the robbery.
 1 It appears from these cases that in an attack by a defendant on the admissibility of an in-court identification, it must be shown, first, that the pre-trial identification confrontation was unnecessarily suggestive and conducive to mistaken identification and second, that the State did not prove by clear and convincing evidence that the subsequent in-court identification had an independent origin arising from the uninfluenced observation of the defendant.
 2 In the instant case, we believe the facts and circumstances of the pre-trial line-up were prejudicial and suggestive. The 18 year old defendant was placed in a line-up with two adults physically dissimilar to him. The police officer who conducted the line-up claimed that after the defendant was informed of his right to have an attorney present at the line-up, he stated he did not want an attorney. An attorney in the station spoke to the defendant before the line-up but was not present at the confrontation itself. We believe the trial court acted properly in suppressing the line-up identification of the defendant.
 3 However, we also believe that the State met its burden by clear and convincing proof that the subsequent in-court identification of the defendant Clarence Morris did have an independent origin arising out of an uninfluenced observation of the defendant. The identifying witness, Frank Cooper, had an adequate opportunity to observe the defendant at the time of the crime. Cooper stood six to eight feet away from his assailant; the illumination was bright; and there were no obstructions between the victim and his assailant. It is true that as Cooper turned around, a shot hit him in the shoulder, yet, Cooper's description of his assailant's face as well as his clothing was detailed. Furthermore, we believe Frank Cooper's identification of the youth brought by the police to the drugstore almost immediately after the incident as not being his assailant is particularly significant. The United States Supreme Court ruled in Wade that impediments to an objective observation are increased when the witness is the victim. (U.S. v. Wade, 388 U.S. 218, 230.) A *448 victim's understandable outrage may excite vengeful or spiteful motives and cause him to lash out at the first available opportunity. Frank Cooper's rejection of the youth seized by the police after the incident as his assailant mitigates that particular hazard in this case. For these reasons we hold that the trial court did not err in finding that the in-court identification of the defendant had an origin independent of the line-up.
 4 Defendant's second contention is that the trial court improperly denied defendant's motion to suppress evidence of a gun. The gun was found by a police officer behind a parked car over a month and a half after the alleged crime. Officer Jasagielnik testified that as he approached the defendant on a street corner at 4 o'clock in the morning, the defendant ran down the street and put something behind the parked car. The officer went to the spot and found the gun in question. Immediately thereafter he arrested the defendant. Two days later the defendant was arrested again. Defendant contends that this action amounts to a search without a warrant that is remote both in time and place from defendant's arrest. We disagree. Since possession of a concealed firearm constitutes the offense of unlawful use of weapons, the officer correctly searched for it without a warrant. We do not require of the police that they close their eyes until they can secure a search warrant where to do so would guarantee that the fruits of a crime would disappear. Ill. Rev. Stat, ch. 38, par. 108-1 (c) and (d) allow reasonable searches without a warrant for the purpose of discovering the fruits of a crime or discovering any instruments, articles or things which may have been used in the commission of an offense when a lawful arrest is effected.
 5, 6 Defendant's third contention is that the State failed to present an accurate Bill of Particulars within sufficient time to allow the preparation of a defense consequently denying to defendant the right to a fair trial and due process of law. On June 27, 1968, in response to defendant's motion, the trial court ordered the State to submit a Bill of Particulars within one week. The order was not complied with until July 8, 1968. The State claims a stenographic delay was responsible. Defense counsel accepted photostatic copies of the handwritten Bill of Particulars on July 8, 1968. The defendant answered ready for trial on July 8, 1968, even though he could have asked for a continuance. From July 8 to July 11, the trial court was occupied with motions to suppress. The trial itself began July 11. In reviewing defendant's contention, we find that the defendant failed to specify instances of prejudice and surprise that would deny him the right to a fair trial. (People v. Bond, 99 Ill. App. 2d 45, 52, 241 N.E.2d 218 (1968).) Furthermore, defendant waived formal arraignment, entered a plea of not guilty, and according to the common law record, received a list of the names of the witnesses. If the defendant *449 does not demand a list of witnesses at the time he waives formal arraignment, he waives his statutory right to such a list. (Kelly v. People, 132 Ill. 363 (1890).) We hold that with regard to the matter of the Bill of Particulars, defendant was not deprived of due process and was not denied the right to a fair trial.
For the foregoing reasons the judgment of the Circuit Court of Cook County is affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
BURMAN, P.J., and MURPHY, J., concur.

=== CASE 9739338 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:34.758524+00 ===

Hunter, J.
Appellant was charged by affidavit with the crime of theft. Trial by jury resulted in a verdict of guilty and a sentence to the Indiana State Prison for not less than one (1) nor more than ten (10) years.
The sole question raised on this appeal relates to the sufficiency of the evidence sustaining such conviction. Briefly stated, the evidence is as follows: On the morning of January 30, 1969, ah employee of Farmer’s Marketing Association, Columbus, Indiana, arrived at his place of employment, a saddle shop, and discovered two saddles and some other items missing. The theft was immediately reported to the police; an examination of the premises disclosed that entry had probably been accomplished by prying open a rest room window.
On February 8, 1969, appellant asked one Arthur Petro if he would assist him in selling a couple of saddles which he *679claimed to have brought back with him from California. Petro agreed and they drove to Scottsburg, Indiana, where appellant sold the two saddles for a total of one hundred and twenty five dollars ($125). Both saddles were subsequently resold by the purchasing party in Scottsburg, but one was recovered and was identified as being one of the saddles stolen from the saddle shop.
Appellant, at trial, testified that he had originally purchased the saddles on the evening of January 31, 1969, from an individual he met in a bar on his way home from work. According to appellant, he purchased the saddles for one hundred and fifty dollars ($150) with the understanding that he was to keep them for a week to enable the man to redeem them; if they were not redeemed, the saddles were to be the property of appellant.
As pointed out by appellant, the evidence in this case is wholly circumstantial and, being of the nature that it is, appellant urges its alleged in sufficiency as cause for reversal. However, it has long been held that possession of stolen property shortly after the time of the theft is a circumstance from which a jury is entitled to draw an inference of guilt. Bolton v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 648, 261 N. E. 2d 841; Finch v. State (1967), 249 Ind. 122, 231 N. E. 2d 45; Spiker v. State (1966), 247 Ind. 595, 219 N. E. 2d 904 ; Underhill v. State (1966), 247 Ind. 388, 216 N. E. 2d 344; Colton v. State (1965), 247 Ind. 56, 211 N. E. 2d 158; Johnson v. State (1964), 245 Ind. 295, 198 N. E. 2d 373 and other cases too numerous to cite. By the direct admission of appellant, he had possession of the saddles within at least two days of the theft. What inferences are to be drawn from this fact was a matter for the jury and not this court, as was the credibility of appellant’s story relating to his purchase of the saddles from a stranger in the bar. Likewise such matters as appellant’s familiarity with horses, horse equipment and the horse business, his sale of the saddles for substantially less than their actual value and his conflicting representations to *680Petro and the Police regarding his acquisition of the saddles were all facts which the jury may .have cumulatively weighed in determining appellant’s guilt.
That a conviction may be sustained wholly on circumstantial evidence is not in doubt provided the evidence is of such probative value that a reasonable inference of guilt may be drawn. Coach v. State (1968), 250 Ind. 226, 235 N. E. 2d 493; Medsker v. State (1968), 249 Ind. 369, 232 N. E. 2d 869; Melvin v. State (1968), 249 Ind. 351, 232 N. E. 2d 606; Stallings v. State (1967), 249 Ind. 110, 231 N. E. 2d 29.
We are here unable to say that the evidence was, as a matter of law, insufficient to support appellant’s conviction. For this reason the judgment of the trial court must be affirmed.
Judgment affirmed.
Arterburn, C.J., Givan and Prentice, JJ., concur; DeBruler, J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 9739372 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:13:08.270094+00 ===

SHIRLEY S. ABRAHAMSON, J.
(dissenting). The controlling principles of law applicable to this case are *218firmly established. I disagree with the majority opinion's application of these principles to the facts of this case to.determine the validity of a pat-down frisk. The validity of a pat-down frisk is an area of law which is particularly fact sensitive.
I agree with the circuit court's stated reasons for suppressing the evidence. I conclude that the factors the majority relies upon to justify the pat-down search of the defendant do not give rise to the "reasonable suspicion" that the defendant was armed, as required under Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968). Consequently, I would reverse the decision of the court of appeals and remand the matter to the circuit court with directions to reinstate its suppression order.
I am particularly troubled by the majority opinion's reliance on the fact that the defendant was stopped in what the police officer described as "a high crime area or what I would consider [a] high crime area." The officer failed to state the basis for his portrayal of the area and did not define the geographic locality about which he was speaking.
Many of the cases cited by the majority for its ruling that a police officer's sweeping and imprecise characterization of an area as high crime can justify a pat-down frisk have demanded far more specificity than one can glean from the record in this case.1
*219I think the circuit court was right in concluding that "if the state wants the Court to rely on a high-crime area theory in justifying a Terry pat down, there has to be a clear and specific record" documenting both the specific boundaries and the nature of the criminal activity in the area in question. Crime itself is obviously a variegated phenomenon. Some effort must be made to correlate the specific type of crime allegedly endemic to a particular area with the police officers' reasonable suspicion that an individual whom they intend to search is armed.
No such correlation was made here. I agree with Professor LaFave's conclusion that "[u]nspecific assertions that there is a crime problem in a particular area should be given little weight, at least as compared to more particular indications that a certain type of criminal conduct of the kind suspected is prevalent in that area."2
Even were I to accept the majority's designation of the place of the stop as a high crime area, "even in high crime areas, where the possibility that any given individual is armed is significant, Terry requires reasonable, individualized suspicion before a frisk for weapons can be conducted." Maryland v. Buie, 494 U.S. 325, 334-35 n.2 (1990). The other factors cited by the majority in reaching its conclusion that the state had the requisite reasonable suspicion to search the defen*220dant for arms do not add up to such "reasonable individualized suspicion."
With reference to the defendant's allegedly erratic driving, the police officer conceded during the suppression hearing that the defendant violated no traffic ordinances and that nothing about the defendant's driving had triggered suspicion that he was engaged in criminal activity. Instead, the officer began trailing the defendant's car because of "a general sense of unease that [he] had because it was late at night and the car was driving in a way that [he] couldn't put [his] finger on." This testimony represents precisely the sort of "inchoate and unparticularized suspicion or 'hunch'" which is insufficient under Terry to trigger the requisite reasonable suspicion that a defendant is armed. Terry, 392 U.S. at 27. Such a hunch stands in marked contrast to the facts triggering reasonable suspicion in the Williamson case relied upon by the majority, in which the defendant's erratic driving evinced an obvious effort to evade the police. State v. Williamson, 58 Wis. 2d 514, 517-18, 206 N.W.2d 613 (1973).
I also question the majority's reliance on the officer's description of the defendant as nervous. While it is true, as the majority opinion notes, that the officer testified to the defendant's being more nervous than the usual person stopped by the police, his testimony indicates that he was neither fully sure that such a behavioral difference truly existed nor fully capable of articulating what it entailed.3
*221The circuit court concluded that the defendant's nervousness was attributable to the fact that people with expired plates who cannot find their licenses "are often nervous." What the officer was observing, the circuit court stated, "was a person nervously trying to come up with their driver's license and thinking it's there and not being able to find it."
This finding of historical fact is entitled to greater deference from this court than it received in the majority opinion. As the majority opinion itself states, when this court reviews an order granting suppression, it must uphold the circuit court's findings of fact unless they are against the "great weight and clear preponderance of the evidence." State v. Kiper, 193 Wis. 2d 69, 79, 532 N.W.2d 698 (1995) (quoting State v. Richardson, 156 Wis. 2d 128, 137, 456 N.W.2d 830 (1990)).
The evidence in this record supports the inference which the circuit court expressly drew: that to the limited extent that the officer could describe how the defendant was "more nervous" than the average person stopped, his description — of someone "checking his pockets" "extremely fast" — suggests no more than the nervousness of the average person unable to produce a driver's license requested by a law enforcement officer. For the majority opinion to speculate as it does about other possible reasons for the defendant's nervousness is not only to read into the record facts which are not there, but also to ignore the deferential standard of review to which the circuit court's findings are entitled.
I acknowledge, as this court has previously stated, that there can be no litmus test concerning the quantum and nature of information necessary to constitute *222the "specific and articulable facts" necessary to trigger the "reasonable suspicion" that a defendant is armed as required by Terry and its progeny. State v. Guzy, 139 Wis. 2d 663, 676, 407 N.W.2d 548 (1987). And I also recognize that a concatenation of factors individually consistent with innocent behavior may, under particular facts and circumstances, give rise to the requisite reasonable suspicion which Terry requires. Reid v. Georgia, 448 U.S. 438, 441 (1980); State v. Jackson, 147 Wis. 2d 824, 835, 434 N.W.2d 386 (1989).
Before a concatenation of factors individually consistent with innocent behavior can trigger reasonable suspicion, however, some degree of suspicion must attach to the specific acts which, when combined, add up to reasonable suspicion. United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, 10 (1989). Hence in Sokolow itself, for example, which involved a stop rather than a pat-down frisk, the Court pointed to the fact that the respondent traveled under an alias, paid for two plane tickets costing $2100 with a roll of $20 bills, took a 20-hour flight from Honolulu to Miami but only stayed in Miami for 48 hours, and checked no luggage as among the factors triggering reasonable suspicion that the respondent was a drug courier and therefore justifying his brief detention.
But in this case, while the defendant's expired plates provided the officers with a reason to stop him, none of the factors relied upon by the majority warrants upholding the subsequent pat-down frisk. Neither the time of night, nor the undocumented assumption that an unspecified "area" was prone to crime, nor the defendant's manner of driving, nor the defendant's entirely understandable nervousness constituted behavior specifically and articulably related to *223a reasonable suspicion that the defendant was armed and dangerous.
Consequently, these non-specific and non-individualized factors do not add up to the totality of circumstances justifying the requisite reasonable suspicion that the defendant was armed and dangerous. United States v. Cortez, 449 U.S. 411, 417-18 (1981); Brown v. Texas, 443 U.S. 47, 51 (1981). Zero plus zero will always equal zero. To conclude otherwise is to lend significance to "circumstances [which] describe a very large category of presumably innocent travelers" and subject them to "virtually random seizures." Reid, 448 U.S. at 438.
One might try to justify the officers' actions in this case by hindsight. The officers' frisk produced a loaded gun. But hindsight does not satisfy the federal or state constitution. One might also try to justify the officers' actions in this case in the name of crime prevention and police protection. Crime prevention and police protection might well be served by allowing law enforcement officers to frisk everyone they stop. But the federal and state constitutions do not allow such frisks.
In contrast to the majority opinion, I agree with the circuit court's depiction of this case as a routine traffic stop. The defendant displayed no behavior to support a reasonable belief that he might be armed and dangerous. Therefore I conclude that the circuit court was correct when it suppressed the evidence.
For the reasons set forth, I dissent.
£>ee, e.g., United States v. Sharpe, 470 U.S. 675, 677 (1985) (stop lawful in area under surveillance for suspected drug trafficking); United States v. Rickus, 737 F.2d 360, 362 (3d Cir. 1984) (area of stop and pat-down had recently been victimized by 12 unsolved burglaries); People v. Souza, 885 P.2d 982, 984 (Cal. 1994) (stop lawful when officer described area of stop as a "high crime" area "known for burglaries and drug activities" and officer had recently make two arrests "in the exact area"); State v. Dean, 645 A.2d 634, 634-35 (Me. 1994) (stop lawful in *219uninhabited area patrolled at the request of its owners because of numerous complaints of vandalism); State v. Valentine, 636 A.2d 505, 505-06 (N.J. 1994) (pat-down lawful; officer who was personally familiar with area of stop as a high crime area stated that he had made more than 100 arrests in the area).
3 Wayne R. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 9.3(c), at 457 (2d ed. 1987).
Q: Now, Officer Muiock, not that this has ever happened, when I'm pulled over, I act a little nervous too. Is this anything — anymore unusual than the usual person stopped by the police?
A: I think so. Yes, it was.
Q: What was different about it?
*221A: Just the look on his face. He just appeared nervous and the way he was checking his pockets. He was doing it extremely fast.

=== CASE 9739339 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:34.762518+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion
DeBruler, J.
I joined in the dissent of Judge Amos Jackson in Bolton v. State (1970), 254 Ind. 648, 261 N. E. 2d 841, cited by the majority. That dissent applies with equal vigor here. In that case the evidence first placed the defendant in possession of a tractor, at least a week after it had been stolen. The Court in affirming Bolton’s conviction held:
“We hold that the State had made its prima facie case before the trial court when it presented evidence of exclusive possession in appellants shortly after the theft of the tractor. The weight of this evidence was to be determined -by the trier of fact and not by this court. At the point in the trial when the state had made its prima facie case, if the appellants had evidence which would have explained their possession it was their privilege to present the same. In the absence of such explanation, the trier was entitled to believe the evidence presented by the state in making its prima facie case. (See Durrett, supra.) ”
We dissented to that holding in part on the ground that evidence of possession of stolen goods, a week after their *681theft, standing alone, would be insufficient to sustain a conviction for the theft of those goods. In like fashion, I would hold in the case at bar that the jury was not entitled to draw the inference that the defendant was guilty of stealing the saddles, solely from his possession of them two days after they had been stolen.
Note.—Reported in 266 N. E. 2d 219.

=== CASE 2219382 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:12.749272+00 ===

539 N.W.2d 15 (1995)
248 Neb. 679
WESTERN SECURITY BANK, formerly known as Ames Bank, a Nebraska banking corporation, Appellant,
v.
UNITED STATES FIDELITY & GUARANTY COMPANY et al., Appellees.
No. S-94-043.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
October 27, 1995.
*16 Patrick M. Heng, of Raynor, Rensch & Pfeiffer, Omaha, for appellant.
David L. Crawford and Christopher D. Curzon, of Schmid, Mooney & Frederick, P.C., Omaha, and Norman R. Carpenter, of Faegre & Benson, Minneapolis, MN, for appellee United States Fidelity & Guaranty.
Robert J. Bothe and W. Greg O'Kief, of McGrath, North, Mullin & Kratz, P.C., Omaha, for appellee Constructors Bonding Co.
WHITE, C.J., and CAPORALE, FAHRNBRUCH, LANPHIER, CONNOLLY, and GERRARD, JJ.
CONNOLLY, Justice.
Western Security Bank, formerly known as Ames Bank, appeals from an order entered by the district court for Douglas County, sustaining the motions for summary judgment by Constructors Bonding Company (Constructors) and United States Fidelity & Guaranty Company (USF & G). Because we find as a matter of law no enforceable contract exists, we conclude that the district court did not err by sustaining Constructors' and USF & G's motions for summary judgment. We therefore affirm.
*17 BACKGROUND
In early 1988, Terry A. Lambert Plumbing, Inc. (Lambert), sought to obtain a loan from the bank. At that time, Lambert was experiencing financial difficulty. The bank drafted a proposed credit agreement in which it reserved a first priority security interest in Lambert's accounts receivable. Prior to execution of the loan agreement, the bank sent a copy of the proposed agreement to Constructors, which had in the past served as an agent for USF & G in obtaining bonds for Lambert. The record does not indicate that any form of correspondence accompanied the proposed agreement when it was sent to Constructors.
Constructors replied to the bank by letter, stating that "[w]e have reviewed your pro forma credit agreement and based on that agreement we will be in a position to continue writing bonds for Lambert...." The bank then executed the loan agreement, disbursing a total of $392,000 to Lambert.
Following execution of the loan, USF & G asked the bank to relinquish its first priority security interest in Lambert's accounts receivable. However, the bank refused to relinquish its interest. USF & G then refused to bond Lambert, which was subsequently unable to finance its occupational endeavors. As a result, it was alleged that Lambert went out of business, filed for bankruptcy, and was unable to pay the bank its loan debt.
The bank brought this action for breach of contract against Constructors and USF & G, seeking $124,000 in damages for failing to bond Lambert. The bank alleges it would not have made the loan had Constructors not agreed to continue bonding Lambert. The bank argues that sending Constructors a copy of its loan agreement with Lambert constituted an offer to Constructors to continue bonding Lambert. The bank further argues that Constructors' reply letter constituted an acceptance of the offer. Finally, the bank alleges that an agency relationship existed between Constructors and USF & G in which USF & G was bound by the representations and commitments made by Constructors. Constructors and USF & G filed motions for summary judgment asserting that no enforceable contract existed. In addition, USF & G asserted in its motion that Constructors was not acting as USF & G's agent in relation to the alleged agreement. The district court sustained the motions, having found no genuine issue of material fact.
ASSIGNMENT OF ERROR
The bank alleges that the district court erred in sustaining Constructors' and USF & G's motions for summary judgment.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
Summary judgment is proper only when the pleadings, depositions, admissions, stipulations, and affidavits in the record disclose that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact or as to the ultimate inferences that may be drawn from those facts and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Poppleton v. Village Realty Co., 248 Neb. 353, 535 N.W.2d 400 (1995); Krohn v. Gardner, 248 Neb. 210, 533 N.W.2d 95 (1995); Walpus v. Milwaukee Elec. Tool Corp., 248 Neb. 145, 532 N.W.2d 316 (1995). In reviewing a summary judgment, an appellate court views the evidence in a light most favorable to the party against whom the judgment is granted and gives such party the benefit of all reasonable inferences deducible from the evidence. Id.
ANALYSIS
The bank contends that the district court erred by sustaining Constructors' and USF & G's motions for summary judgment because genuine issues of material fact existed. The bank argues that the proposed loan agreement it sent to Constructors, along with Constructors' reply letter, created an enforceable written contract.
When the provisions of an alleged contract being sued upon are "so cursory, indefinite, and conditional as to fail as a matter of law to establish an objective intent on the part of the parties to be bound thereby," no factual issues exist and summary judgment is appropriate. Viking Broadcasting Corp. v. Snell Publishing Co., 243 Neb. 92, 97, 497 N.W.2d 383, 386 (1993).
In the instant case, the proposed agreement, sent by the bank to Constructors, did *18 not request Constructors to issue bonds to Lambert. In fact, the proposed agreement mentions neither bonding Lambert by Constructors nor the terms and nature of any proposed offer. Thus, nothing in the record raises a genuine issue of material fact as to whether the bank manifested a willingness, in the form of a definite offer, to enter into a bargain with Constructors.
Furthermore, the reply letter, sent by Constructors to the bank, merely states that "[w]e have reviewed your pro forma credit agreement and based on that agreement we will be in a position to continue writing bonds for Lambert...." This letter merely expresses that Constructors had the ability to bond Lambert if it so chose. Clearly, the minds of the parties did not meet, and much was left open for future arrangement. Thus, nothing in the record raised a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Constructors manifested assent, in the form of an unconditional and absolute acceptance, to bond Lambert.
As a result, even when viewing the evidence in a light most favorable and giving the benefit of all reasonable inferences to the bank, we find that the alleged agreement is so cursory, indefinite, and conditional that it fails as a matter of law to establish an objective intent on the part of parties to be bound. See Viking Broadcasting Corp. v. Snell Publishing Co., supra.
CONCLUSION
We find as a matter of law that no enforceable contract exists, and thus, we conclude that the district court did not err by sustaining Constructors' and USF & G's motions for summary judgment.
AFFIRMED.
WRIGHT, J., not participating.

=== CASE 9739340 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:35.61052+00 ===

Mr. JUSTICE MORAN delivered the opinion of the court: Charles Edwards brought this action for a declaratory judgment that he was illegally discharged as chief of police of the City of Marion, or in the alternative that he was illegally discharged as a member of the City of Marion Police Department, for the purpose of determining his right to pension benefits and recovering salary accrued from the date of his discharge. The trial court entered judgment that Edwards had been legally discharged as chief of police of the City of Marion by the city council, but that he had not been discharged as a member of the police department and that he was a duly appointed member of that department until the date of his death. All parties appeal. Edwards was appointed chief of police by the Marion City Council on June 21, 1954. He had been a deputy sheriff and never held any position on the City of Marion Police Department other than chief of police. In 1957 the City of Marion became subject to the provisions of Article 14 of the Revised Cities and Villages Act known as the Fue and Police Commissioners Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1957, ch. 24, par. 14 et seq., hereinafter referred to as “the Act”.) Pursuant to the Act, the City Council appointed a board of fire and police commissioners on August 12, 1957. Thereafter, on June 30, 1959, the city council, acting under the authority granted by Section 4 of the Act, adopted Ordinance No. 372 providing that “the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed by the Council and said appointments need not be made from the members of the Police and Fire Departments respectively.” On May 8, 1967, acting under the authority of this ordinance, the city council dismissed Edwards as chief of police. No charges were ever filed before the board of fire and police commissioners nor was any hearing held prior to his discharge as provided in Section 10—2.1—17 of the Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 24, par. 10—2.1—7.) Edwards died on October 21, 1968 and his widow, Vivian Edwards, as executor of his estate was substituted as plaintiff. The relevant portions of Sections 10—2.1—4 and 10—2.1—17 provide: “Fire and police departments — Appointment of members — Certificates of appointments. The board of fire and police commissioners shall appoint all officers and members of the fire and police departments of the municipality, including the chief of police and the chief of the fire department, unless the council or board of trustees shall by ordinance as to them otherwise provide; except that in any municipality which adopts or has adopted this Division 2.1 and also adopts or has adopted Article 5 of the Code, the chief of police and the chief of the fire department shall be appointed by the municipal manager, if it is provided by ordinance in such municipality that such chiefs, or either of them, shall not be appointed by the board of fire and police commissioners. If a member of the department is appointed Chief of Police or Chief of the Fire Department prior to being eligible to retire on pension he shall be considered as on furlough from the rank he held immediately prior to his appointment as chief. If he resigns as Chief or is discharged as Chief prior to attaining eligibility to retire on pension, he shall revert to and be established in such prior rank, and thereafter be entitled to all the benefits and emoluments of such prior rank, without regard as to whether a vacancy then exists in such rank. All appointments to each department other than that of the lowest rank, however, shall be from the rank next below that to which the appointment is made, except that the chief of police and the chief of the fire department may be appointed from among members of the police and fire departments, respectively, regardless of rank, unless the council or board of trustees shall have by ordinance as to them otherwise provided.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 24, par. 10—2.1—4. “Removal or discharge — Investigation of charges — Retirement. Except as hereinafter provided, no officer or member of the fire or police department of any municipality subject to this Division 2.1 shall be removed or discharged except for cause, upon written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard in his own defense. The board of fire and police commissioners shall conduct a fair and impartial hearing of the charges, to be commenced within 30 days of the filing thereof, which hearing may be continued from time to time. In case an officer or member is found guilty, the board may discharge him, or may suspend him not exceeding 30 days without pay. The board may suspend any officer or member pending the hearing with or without pay, but not to exceed 30 days. If the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners determines that the charges are not sustained, the officer or member shall be reimbursed for all wages and testimony of witnesses and the production of books and papers relevant to the hearing.” Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 24, par. 10—2.1—17. The essence of the judgment of the trial court was that Edwards, having held the position of chief of police for more than one year prior to the time the City of Marion was subject to the provisions of the Fire and Police Commission Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1957, ch. 24, par. 14 et seq.), was blanketed into office on the date the Act became effective and was thereafter entitled to its provisions (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1957, ch. 24, par. 14—11; People ex rel. Siegal v. Rogers, 397 Ill. 187); that by virtue of his appointment as chief of police of the City of Marion, Edwards was also a member of the police department of that city; that Ordinance No. 372 adopted on June 30, 1959 reserved to the city council the power to appoint and discharge the chief of police, but only as the chief of police and not as a member of the police department; that the power to remove Edwards as a member of the police department was vested only in the board of fire and police commissioners in accordance with the provisions of Section 10—2.1—17 of the Act; and that upon Edwards’ discharge as chief of police by the city council he remained a member of that police department until the date of his death on October 21, 1968, since he had never been discharged as a member of the department pursuant to the provisions of section 10—2.1—17. The cardinal rule in the interpretation and construction of statutes is that the legislative intention should be ascertained and given effect. This is done primarily from a consideration of the legislative language itself which affords the best means of its exposition and if the legislative intent can be ascertained therefrom, it must prevail and be given effect. The words employed in a statute should be given their plain and ordinary or commonly accepted or popular meaning, unless to do so would defeat the legislative intent. Droste v. Kerner, 34 Ill.2d 495. Section 10—2.1—17 provides that: “No officer or member of the fire or police department of any municipality subject to this Division 2.1 shaH be removed or discharged,” except in the manner provided. Emphasis added.  Initially, the issue is whether the chief of police is an “officer or member” of the police department within the meaning of that phrase as it is used in Sections 10—2.1—4 and 10—2.1—17. The first sentence of Section 10—2.1—4 states that the board of fire and police commissioners shaH appoint all officers and members “including the chief of police and the chief of the fire department” indicating that the chiefs of those departments are either officers or members. In Division 3 of the Act setting the salary of policemen, “policeman” is defined as “any member of a regularly constituted police department of any municipality sworn and commissioned to perform police duties and includes the chief of police * # Emphasis added. Finally, the ordinance which established the police department of the City of Marion in 1929 provides that the department “shaH consist of such officers of the city as are by law clothed with police powers, a chief of police, a traffic patrolman, two police officers and such other police officers as the City Council shall from time to time by ordinance or resolution prescribe.” Emphasis added. We conclude, therefore, that the chief of police is an “officer or member” of the pohce department, covered by the provisions of the Fire and Police Commissioners Act unless otherwise excluded by the terms of the Act.  The plain meaning of section 10—2.1—17 is that no officer or member of a police department subject to the provisions of the Act may be discharged except in accordance with those provisions and any discharge not in accordance with those provisions is ineffective. In 1957, when the City of Marion became subject to the Act, Edwards had held his position for more than one year as chief of police, and thus as a member of the department, so that, on the effective date of the Act, he was blanketed into office and was entitled to all the provisions of the Act, including Section 10—2.1—17. People ex rel. Siegal v. Rogers, supra, Ill. Rev. Stat. 1957, ch. 24, par. 14—11.  Since the city council did not comply with the provisions of section 10—2.1—17, then attempted discharge of Edwards as a member of the police department of the City of Marion was ineffective and he remained a member of that department until the date of his death. The issue remains whether the clause “unless the council or board of trustees shall by ordinance as to them (chief of police) otherwise provide” in section 10—2.1—4 grants to the city council the authority to exclude the chief of police by ordinance only from the power of appointment by the board of fire and police commissioners pursuant to section 10—2.1—4 or from the power and manner of discharge provided in section 10—2.1—17 as well. Plaintiff contends that the city council was without authority to discharge Edwards as chief of police because the power of discharge was vested in the board of fire and police commissioners under section 10—2.1—17 (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 24, par. 10—2.1—17), and could only be exercised in accordance with the procedure set forth in that section. Defendants contend that the power to discharge the chief of police is incidental to the power to appoint, which is delegated to the board of fire and police commissioners unless otherwise provided by the city council (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 24, par. 10—2.1—4), and that the city council has otherwise provided by the ordinance passed on June 30, 1959. As we have previously indicated, the cardinal rule in the interpretation and construction of statutes is that the legislative intention should be ascertained and given effect, and this is done primarily from the plain meaning of the statutory language unless to do so would defeat the legislative intent.  Section 10 — 2.1—17 provides that “except as hereinafter provided, no officer or member of the fire or police department of any municipality subject to this Division 2.1 shall be removed or discharged,” except for cause, upon written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard in his own defense. The plain meaning of this language is that no officer or member of a police department subject to the provisions of the act may be discharged except in the manner provided. Any discharge not in accordance with these provisions is ineffective. We have already concluded that the chief of police is an officer or member within the meaning of that phrase and it is obvious that there is no subsequent language in section 10—2.1—17 excluding or permitting the city council to exclude the chief of police from the operation of this section.  Furthermore, the exclusionary clause in Section 10—2.1—4 relied upon by defendants is a proviso in that it permits the exclusion of the chief of police from the power of appointment granted to the board of fire and police commissioners contained in the enacting clause. Ordinarily, the grammatical and logical scope of the proviso would confine it to the subject matter of the provision to which it is attached unless it appears that the legislative intent was that the proviso be extended to other provisions of the statute or construed as a substantive act in itself. Anderson v. City of Park Ridge, 396 Ill. 235. The proviso “unless the council * * * shall by ordinance as to (the chief of police) otherwise provide” modifies the section authorizing the board of fire and police commissioners to appoint all officers and members of the fire and police departments including the chiefs of those departments. This section is entitled “Fire and Police Departments— Appointment of Members — Certificates of Appointments.” The power and manner of discharge is provided separately in Section 10—2.1—17 entitled “Removal or Discharge — Investigation of Charges — Retirement,” wherein there is no proviso that the chief of police may be excluded from the operation of the section corresponding to the proviso in section 10—2.1—4. Finally, it has been stated that the purpose of the Fire and Police Commissioners Act was to provide a method by which the personnel of the fire and police departments could be taken out of the realm of political patronage and given a tenure that depended upon merit in order to encourage the application and retention of qualified persons for those departments. (People ex rel. Cadell v. Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, 345 Ill.App. 415.) There is no persuasive reason that this policy is not as applicable to the position of chief of police as to all other officers and members. Since the powers of appointment and discharge are provided in separate sections and the proviso authorizing the exclusion of the chief of police is attached only to the section provided for appointment, and since there is no indication in the language of thet proviso that it was intended as a separate enabling statute to provide for excluding the chief of police from the power of the board of fire and police commissioners as to appointment and discharge, we conclude that the proviso of Section 10 — 2.1—4 authorized the city council to exclude the chief of police from the power of the board of fire and police commissioners only as to appointment. Defendants argue that the power of appointment implies the power to discharge so that the proviso in Section 10 — 2.1—4 authorizes the city council to exclude the chief of police from the operation of the act both as to appointment and discharge. In People ex rel. Cadell v. Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, supra, the court stated that one of the purposes of granting to the city council the power to appoint the chiefs of the fire and police departments was to enable the council to formulate, promulgate and carry out the general policies of its administration. Defendants contend that this purpose would be frustrated if the power to appoint the chief of police granted in section 10—2.1—4 does not impliedly include the power to discharge, and they rely on certain dictum in People ex rel. Borzewski v. Rayniak, 19 Ill.App.2d 417, that section 10—2.1—4 “was intended to give the village the right to exclude the village marshall (chief of police) from the operation of the Act and not merely to control appointment only.” Defendants also rely on Lightfoot v. Village of Evergreen Park, 207 Ill.App. 411, which approved the dismissal of a village attorney pursuant to a grant of authority to the president and board of trustees to appoint certain officers, wherein it was stated at 413: “While there is no provision made in the statute in regard to the removal of village officers, the law of this state is that, in the absence of anything to show a contrary intention, the power to remove is incidental to the power to appoint.” As we have already indicated, we believe that the structure and language of these sections negate the construction that the power to discharge is incidental to the power to appoint. With respect to the argument that the purpose of the Act enabling the city council to appoint the chiefs of the police and fire departments will be frustrated, we believe that if the legislature intended to grant the city council the power to exclude the chiefs of these departments from all the provisions of the Act or from the provisions as to appointment and discharge and not only as to power of appointment, it would have expressly so provided. This does not mean that the chief of police may not be discharged, but only that the discharge must be carried out in accordance with the provisions of section 10—2.1—17; nor does this conclusion lead to inconsistency since the power of appointment often does not include the power to discharge. Hulman v. Old Reliable Savings and Loan Association, 115 Ill.App.2d 313. On May 16, 1967 Edwards had held his position for more than one year as Chief of Police. When the City of Marion became subject to the Act he was blanketed into office in that position and was entitled to all the provisions of the Act, including section 10—2.1—17 (People ex rel. Siegal v. Rogers, supra.). Since the city council did not comply with the provisions of Section 10—2.1—17, their attempted discharge of Edwards as chief of police of the City of Marion was ineffective and he must be considered to have held that position until the date of his death. For the foregoing reasons, that part of the judgment of the Circuit Court of Williamson County holding that Charles Edwards was not discharged as a member of the City of Marion PoHce Department is affirmed, that part holding that Edwards was discharged as chief of police is reversed, and this cause is remanded to the Circuit Court of Williamson County for proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion. Judgment affirmed in part, reversed in part and remanded. EBERSPACHER, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739342 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:36.854877+00 ===

LEE D. ANDERSON, Circuit Judge.
In this consolidated appeal, we hold that the trial court erred in granting a motion to dismiss by defendant, West River Mental Health Center and in granting a motion for summary judgment in favor of defendant, Eldon Lenz. Thus, we reverse and remand for trial.
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
In October 1987 Edward and Tammy Richards (Richards) approached West River Mental Health Center (WRMH) seeking marriage counseling. WRMH assigned Eldon Lenz (Lenz), a licensed psychologist who worked at WRMH to provide counseling services for the Richards. The counseling included joint and individual sessions.
Shortly after beginning therapy, Tammy Richards and Lenz began a personal, romantic relationship, although not a sexually physical relationship. Tammy would meet with Lenz outside his office both at home and at a public restaurant. Lenz was aware that Tammy was experiencing transference * and *82that it was inappropriate to continue his personal relationship with her. Lenz also knew that his involvement with Tammy would be detrimental to the Richards’ marriage. Lenz discussed with Tammy that he could not have a personal, physical relationship while she was his patient. Lenz left WRMH in September 1988 and began an independent counseling practice on his own. The Richards continued counseling with Lenz at his private practice.
In August 1989 Edward stopped seeing Lenz for therapy because Edward felt Lenz’s relationship with Tammy was improper. Tammy stopped seeing Lenz professionally in July 1989, but continued to meet with him out of his office. Lenz moved to Indiana in August 1990 and Tammy continued to talk on the telephone with Lenz while he lived in Indiana. Lenz met personally with Tammy when he visited Spearfish in the summer of 1991, and in Rapid City in January 1992. During these meetings, Lenz and Tammy continued to discuss personal issues and problems and they would discuss their personal feelings for each other. Tammy’s feelings for Lenz did not change after he moved.
During 1990 and 1991 Edward and Tammy were still pursuing marriage counseling with WRMH through other counselors. Although these counselors were aware of Tammy’s relationship with Lenz, neither counselor confronted the relationship nor informed the Richards of the detrimental effect it might be having on their marriage. Tammy finally terminated all contact with Lenz in April 1992.
Edward served a summons and complaint against the defendants on or about April 15, 1992. Tammy filed a summons and complaint against the defendants with service in April 1998. After some discovery was completed WRMH moved to dismiss and Lenz moved for summary judgment. Both motions were presented on the grounds that the two-year statute of limitations in the matter had run prior to the completed service of the summons and complaints against the defendants. Shortly after the filing of the motion to dismiss, the Richards moved to file their second amended complaints. There is no record of any hearing being held on this motion to file second amended complaints, nor any ruling by the trial court on said motion. The second amended complaints contained eight counts, including the causes of action alleging negligence, misrepresentation or fraud, and breach of contract.
The trial court issued a lengthy letter decision which granted WRMH’s motion to dismiss and Lenz’s motion for summary judgment. In the written decision, reference was made to the allegations in Richards’ second amended complaints. Therefore, it appears that the trial court was considering all of the causes of action in the second amended complaints when ruling on the motions to dismiss and for summary judgment. Approximately six months later the trial judge filed a lengthy written decision ruling on both the motion to dismiss and the motion for summary judgment filed by Lenz.
ISSUE I
WHETHER THE TRIAL COURT IMPROPERLY TREATED WRMH’S MOTION TO DISMISS AS A MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT.
A motion to dismiss tests the legal sufficiency of the pleading; for purposes of the pleading, the court must treat as true all facts properly plead in the complaint. SDCL 15-6-12(b)(5); Johnson v. Kreiser’s, Inc., 433 N.W.2d 225, 226 (S.D.1988). Pleadings should not be dismissed merely because the court entertains doubts as to whether the pleader will prevail in the action as this is a matter of proof, not pleadings. Janklow v. Viking Press, 378 N.W.2d 875, 877 (S.D.1985).
In this case, the trial court’s written decision does not indicate that the trial court considered the legal sufficiency of the Richards’ pleadings with respect to the various causes of action in deciding the motion to dismiss. Rather, the trial court focused on WRMH’s duty to disclose its knowledge of *83Lenz’s activities. Specifically the trial court stated, “[Tjhere could be no fraudulent concealment of a legal act to which the plaintiff was a participant in and had full knowledge of as evidenced by her own testimony.” Our review of the second amended complaints reveals that the Richards have each plead legally sufficient causes of action for negligence, misrepresentation, and breach of contract. On the basis of the sufficiency of the pleadings, the trial court should not have granted WRMH’s motion to dismiss.
Further, the trial court’s written decision indicates that it considered matters outside of the pleadings, including the deposition testimony of Tammy, in ruling on the motion to dismiss. As we expressed in Norwest Bank Black Hills v. Rapid City Teachers Federal Credit Union, 433 N.W.2d 560, 562 (S.D.1988):
Under SDCL 15 — 6—12(b)(5), where one moves to dismiss for failure to state a claim and “matters outside the pleading are presented to and not excluded by the court, the motion shall be treated as one for summary judgment and disposed of as provided in § 15-6-56, and all parties shall be given the reasonable opportunity to present all material made pertinent to such a motion by § 15-6-56.”
See also, Jensen Ranch, Inc. v. Marsden, 440 N.W.2d 762, 764 (S.D.1989); In re P.A.M., 505 N.W.2d 395, 396 & n. 1 (S.D.1993); Wasserburger v. Consolidated Management Corp., 459 N.W.2d 561, 565 (S.D.1990).
Here the trial court made extensive reference to testimony taken from Tammy’s deposition, including her diary which was admitted as an exhibit as part of that deposition. The record clearly shows that the trial court did not advise or notify the parties of its intent to convert the motion to dismiss into one for summary judgment, although such notice is mandatory. Id. The reason for this rule has previously been stated by Wright & Miller:
It is important that the court give the parties notice of the changed status of the motion and a ‘reasonable opportunity to present all material made pertinent to such a motion by rule 56.’ In this way no one will be taken by surprise by the conversion. Once the proceeding becomes one for summary judgment, the moving parties’ burden changes and he is obliged to demonstrate that there exists no genuine issue as to a material fact and that he is entitled a judgment as a matter of law.
Norwest, 433 N.W.2d at 562 (citing 5 C. Wright & A. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure § 1366 (1969) (footnotes omitted)). Since the trial court failed to follow these mandatory steps, we hold it erred in treating the motion to dismiss of WRMH as one for summary judgment and in granting the motion.
ISSUE II
WHETHER THE TRIAL COURT ERRED IN HOLDING THAT THE TWO-YEAR STATUTE OF LIMITATION FOR MEDICAL MALPRACTICE GOVERNED THE RICHARDS’ CAUSES OF ACTION AND GRANTING SUMMARY JUDGMENT IN FAVOR OF DEFENDANT LENZ.
The pertinent summary judgment principles are well settled and were summarized in Morgan v. Baldwin, 450 N.W.2d 783, 785 (S.D.1990):
The party moving for summary judgment has the burden to show that here is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. SDCL 15-6-56(c). The evidence, including all pleadings, affidavits and deposition testimony, must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, and reasonable doubts should be resolved against the moving party. All reasonable inferences that may be drawn from the facts must be accepted in favor of the non-moving party. Groseth International, Inc. v. Tenneco, Inc., 410 N.W.2d 159 (S.D.1987); Wilson v. Great Northern Railway Co., 83 S.D. 207, 157 N.W.2d 19 (1968). Summary judgment is a drastic remedy, and should not be granted unless the moving party has established the right to a judgment with such clarity as to leave no room for controversy. Jewson v. Mayo Clinic, 691 F.2d 405 (8th Cir.1982).
*84The trial court granted summary judgment against the Richards and in favor of Lenz. The trial court held that the gravamen of the Richards’ complaints was one alleging medical malpractice. The trial court ruled that Lenz was a practitioner of the healing arts in providing marital counseling and that the two-year statute of limitations under SDCL 15-2-14.1 barred all of the Richards’ claims against Lenz.
The Richards argue that the trial court erred in holding that the allegations in then-amended complaints are in the nature of a medical malpractice action, subject to a two-year statute of limitations. The Richards assert that a psychologist providing marriage counseling is not a practitioner of the healing arts as defined in SDCL 36-2-1(3). The Richards also assert that the conduct of Lenz constitutes a continuing tort and that then-causes of action did not accrue until Lenz’s wrongful conduct actually terminated in April 1992.
Alternatively, the Richards argue that they have alleged misrepresentation or fraud and breach of contract, in addition to negligence. The Richards assert that the six-year statute of limitations controlling misrepresentation or fraud and breach of contract claims should be applicable in this case.
For the reasons set forth, we determine that Lenz is not a practitioner of the healing arts and the applicable statute of limitations is the one applied to contracts, which is six years. See SDCL 15-2-13. Thus we need not resolve the issue of whether Lenz’s conduct would constitute a continuing tort.
South Dakota law provides a two-year statute of limitations for “[a]n action against a physician, surgeon, dentist, hospital, sanitarium, registered nurse, licensed practical nurse, chiropractor, or other 'practitioner of the healing arts for malpractice, error, mistake or failure to cure, whether based upon contract or tort[.]” SDCL 15-2-14.1 (emphasis added). If Lenz is included in this group, both tort and contract claims of the Richards would be barred if not brought within the two-year period.
Lenz is a psychologist and does not hold a medical degree. Therefore it must be determined whether a psychologist providing marriage counseling is a practitioner of the healing arts. The healing arts is defined by statute as:
[A]ny system, treatment, operation, diagnosis, prescription or practice for the ascertainment, cure, relief, palliation, adjustment, or practice for the ascertainment, cure, relief, palliation, adjustment, or correction of any human disease, ailment, deformity, injury, unhealthy or abnormal physical or mental condition.
SDCL 36-2-1(3).
Lenz has been unable to provide any authority to support his argument that a psychologist, under the facts of this case, is a practitioner of the healing arts. This appears to be an issue of first impression in this state. In a Texas case dealing with a statute with language somewhat different than SDCL 36-2-1(3), the Texas Appeals Court ruled that a psychologist was not a health care provider for the purpose of the Texas medical statute of limitations. Lenhard v. Butler, 745 S.W.2d 101 (Tex.App.1988).
When the Richards contacted WRMH in 1987 they were seeking marriage counseling. They were not specifically seeking treatment for a “human disease, ailment, deformity, injury, unhealthy or abnormal physical or mental condition.” See SDCL 36-2-1(3). Our legislature, in enacting SDCL 15-2-14.1 certainly could have included other professional occupations or classes of persons, such as psychologists, in the list of specified medical service providers, if it intended to include them in the statutory definition. Since the legislature declined to do so, we choose not to expand the language of this statute beyond its plain language. Under the facts presented in this case, negligent marriage counseling is not medical malpractice within the language of SDCL 15-2-14.1. We hold that the trial court erred in holding that the two-year statute of limitations provided in SDCL 15-2-14.1 is an affirmative defense to the Richards’ amended complaints.
In Richards’ second amended complaints, they separately state causes of action against the defendants for negligence, misrepresen*85tation or fraud, and breach of contract. The causes of action alleging negligence are subject to a three-year statute of limitations, SDCL 15-2-14, and the causes of action alleging fraud and breach of contract are subject to a six-year statute of limitations. SDCL 15-2-13.
In Morgan v. Baldwin, 450 N.W.2d at 786 we held:
[I]n South Dakota, when one of two statutes of limitations may be applicable, such application should always be tested by the nature of the allegations in the complaint, and if there is any doubt as to which statute applies, such doubt should be resolved in favor of the longer limitation period.
We now must apply the nature of the allegations test to the Richards’ complaints in this case. In their second amended complaints the Richards have alleged eight counts. We limit our discussion to the counts deemed pertinent to the resolution of this issue. In Count One the Richards’ claim that in October 1987 Tammy and Edward began counseling with Lenz and WRMH who was employing Lenz; that they entered into an employment agreement for consideration with regard to counseling to improve their marital relationship; that Lenz manipulated Tammy; and that Lenz was negligent in the manner in which he provided counseling and failing to follow good practices and also failing to provide necessary procedures.
In Count Two the Richards claim that WRMH was negligent in its hiring and monitoring of Lenz and failing to warn the Richards of Lenz’s behavior. In Count Three the Richards allege that the defendants occupied a fiduciary relationship and position of trust with the Richards and that the defendants were negligent in breaching their professional duties.
In Count Five the Richards allege that defendants made misrepresentations regarding the counseling with the intent to deceive and defraud the Richards. Specifically, the Richards allege that Lenz never intended to counsel them to improve their marriage relationship and WRMH never intended to provide competent professional services to improve their marriage relationship. The Richards further allege that they relied on the misrepresentations and were induced to enter into an employment agreement with regard to the marriage counseling.
In Count Seven the Richards allege that they entered into an employment agreement with the defendants for counseling to improve their marriage relationship; that defendants breached their contract with the Richards by failing to improve the marriage relationship and by engaging in and permitting behaviors and relationships which were detrimental to the marriage.
It thus appears that the Richards’ claims of negligence, fraud, and breach of contract are all interwoven as allegations of the defendants’ wrongful conduct. The Richards’ separate complaints state a single wrong for which there can be only one recovery, although the allegations in the complaints purport to state several distinct causes of action arising from negligence, fraud or misrepresentation, or breach of contract. The Richards’ claims arise out of their agreement with WRMH to provide marriage counseling and WRMH’s action in assigning Lenz to provide such counseling service to the Richards. The allegations in the complaints lead to the conclusion that the gravamen of the complaints is as much based in contract as it would be in negligence or fraud.
What was said in Morgan v. Baldwin, 450 N.W.2d at 786, is pertinent here:
This court, generally, has, almost without exception, viewed with disfavor any overly technical construction of our statutes, rules and pleadings, that would make effective use of our court system needlessly complex rather than simple, or unreasonably inaccessible rather than available to all who seek redress of wrongs.
All pleadings shall be so construed as to do substantial justice. SDCL 15-6-8(f). By this statutory mandate we are required to construe pleadings liberally for the purpose of determining its effect with a view of doing substantial justice between the parties. Burmeister v. Youngstrom, 81 S.D. 578, 139 N.W.2d 226 (1965).
*86What was said in Williams v. Lee Way Motor Freight, 688 P.2d 1294 (Okla.1984) is pertinent here:
Generally if there is a substantial question of which of two or more statutes of limitations should be applied, the doubt should be resolved in favor of the application of the statute which contains the longest limitation. This serves the legislative intent of protecting defendants from stale claims, yet provides an approach of liberality which affords a plaintiff party-litigant maximum free access to our court system.
In this instance doubt remains as to which statute of limitations applies because the Richards’ claims are grounded in tort, fraud and contract. Any such doubt should be resolved in favor of the longer limitation period. Morgan v. Baldwin, 450 N.W.2d at 786. The Richards’ separate actions were commenced within six years of when the alleged wrongful conduct occurred. We therefore hold that the six-year statute of limitations governing breach of contract claims applies to this entire action and the trial court erred in granting summary judgment to Lenz.
In light of our ruling, we decline to decide the other issues raised in the appeals, including the awarding of costs. We reverse and remand this matter for trial.
MILLER, C.J., and AMUNDSON, J., concur.
SABERS, J., dissents.
LEE D. ANDERSON, Circuit Judge, for KONENKAMP, J., disqualified.
GILBERTSON, J., not having been a member of the Court at the time this case was submitted did not participate.
The Richards cite a discussion of transference from Simmons v. United States, 805 F.2d 1363, 1365 (9th Cir.1986) where the court stated in part, "[A]s therapy develops ... the client comes *82to ... regard the therapist as a child might regard the parent.... And, so what happens when therapy is working ... is that this transference relationship grows so that the client comes to experience the therapist as a powerful, benevolent parent figure.”

=== CASE 9739343 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:36.86015+00 ===

SABERS, Justice,
dissenting.
The trial court was correct in holding that the two year statute of limitation for medical malpractice governed the Richards’ causes of action based upon tort or contract. South Dakota law provides a two-year statute of limitation for “[a]n action against a ... practitioner of the healing arts ... whether based upon contract or tort.” SDCL 15-2-14.1.
The trial court was correct that Lenz, a psychologist, is a practitioner of the healing arts under the facts of this case because the Richards were seeking treatment for a “human disease, ailment, ... injury, unhealthy or abnormal physical or mental condition.” SDCL 36-2-1(3). They had an “unhealthy mental condition” and they were seeking marriage counseling from a practitioner of the healing arts. We do not need to “expand the language of the statute beyond its plain language,” we simply need to read and interpret it 'plainly.
Under the facts of this case, we should reverse and remand to the trial court to determine whether the continuing representation doctrine or fraudulent concealment extended the two year period of the statute of limitation. The same rationale should apply to the Richards’ causes of action against West River Mental Health Center. See Koenig v. Lambert, 527 N.W.2d 903, 905-06 (S.D.1995).

=== CASE 2219392 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:13.000928+00 ===

539 N.W.2d 632 (1995)
248 Neb. 785
Louis G. RIHA and Shirley A. Riha, Appellees,
v.
FIRSTIER BANK, National Association, Omaha, Trustee, Appellant.
No. S-94-031.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
November 9, 1995.
*633 George A. Penry, Omaha, for appellant.
Dixon G. Adams, Papillion, for appellees.
WHITE, C.J., and CAPORALE, FAHRNBRUCH, LANPHIER, WRIGHT, CONNOLLY, and GERRARD, JJ.
LANPHIER, Justice.
This is an appeal from an order granting an injunction brought by Louis G. Riha and Shirley A. Riha against an adjoining landowner, FirsTier Bank. A natural drainageway carried water over the Rihas' land and onto FirsTier's land and then to the Platte River. The Rihas alleged that their land was being damaged due to the backup of water because of FirsTier's blockage of the natural drainageway for water. The Rihas sought an injunction ordering FirsTier to remove the obstruction on FirsTier's land or to provide an alternative route for the drainage of water.
After a bench trial, the court found that a mandatory injunction was warranted, and an injunction was imposed. FirsTier appealed to the Court of Appeals, and pursuant to our authority to regulate the caseloads of lower courts, we removed the case to our docket. Finding no merit in any of the assignments of error, we affirm the holding of the trial court.
BACKGROUND
The Rihas alleged in a petition filed in the district court for Sarpy County that they owned land which slopes and drains water generally to the south and east and over and across FirsTier's land. They further alleged that a culvert, designated "culvert A" at trial, formerly existed under the roadbed of old state Highway 50 (Old # 50) as it existed prior to its relocation. This culvert drained surface waters from the Rihas' land to the south and east over land currently owned by FirsTier. The Rihas further alleged that a natural drainageway from their property existed on FirsTier's land. The Rihas alleged that culvert A had been removed and that the FirsTier land, including the natural drainageway, leveled for farming. They further alleged that these actions resulted in water backing up onto their land. The Rihas requested an injunction ordering FirsTier to remedy the situation.
FirsTier answered in a broad-based pleading. FirsTier admitted that both parties owned land in Sarpy County used for farming *634 and denied everything else. FirsTier then recited six "defenses":
[1.] Defendant denies the allegations contained in paragraphs IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, and XI of Plaintiffs' Petition.
....
[2.] Plaintiffs' Petition does not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action.
....
[3.] Plaintiffs have "unclean hands."...
....
[4.] In the 1970's, the 1980's and the 1990's on lands lying north and west of State Highway No. 50 the Plaintiffs constructed dikes, roadways and embankments to accumulate and to collect surface waters, diverted the surface waters on such lands from their natural courses, increased the flows and discharges of surface waters, created depressions and drainways that did not previously exist, and attempted to increase the flow and discharge of surface water to other properties....
....
[5.] In January of 1981 the Plaintiff Louis Riha desired to remove the north culvert in the Northwest quarter of section 2 under the old abandoned highway no. 50, and following the removal of such culvert Mr. Riha used a part of the culvert for his own purposes....
....
[6.] Defendant has acted prudently concerning its own land, and has acted properly in using and improving its own property.
Following a hearing and a viewing of the property, the district court filed an order on July 14, 1993. In that order, the court outlined its findings:
With some exceptions, the following findings of fact are made based upon both the evidence and the Court's view of the property. The first two findings are made based only upon the evidence adduced by testimony and exhibits; findings of fact that are made based principally upon the Court's view are identified with an asterisk at the end of each finding.
1. Plaintiffs are the owners, occupiers, and/or mortgage holders of a tract of land lying west and north of new State Highway 50 and south of Buffalo Road;
2. Defendant is the owner of land lying to the east and south of Plaintiffs' land;
3. The Platte River lies to the south and east of both tracts of land;
4. Plaintiffs' land is higher than the land of the Defendant, and prior to any man-made obstacles, drained to the south and east across the land of the Defendant;
5. These respective tracts of land are separated, from the west to the east, by new State Highway 50 (hereafter referred to as "New # 50), an abandoned roadbed for the Missouri-Pacific railroad (hereafter referred to as the "Mo-Pac ROW") and the abandoned roadbed of old State Highway 50 (hereafter referred to as "Old # 50");
6. All times subsequent to the construction of roadbeds, drainage from Plaintiffs' land was through three points on the roadbeds, identified as `A' on the north, `B' in the center, and `C' on the south;
7. These three drainage ways still exist through New # 50 and the Mo-Pac ROW;
8. There is an old farmstead road (Johnny Kay Road) on Defendant's property that runs in a generally easterly direction from drainage point `B';
9. There is a drainage ditch located on the north side of Johnny Kay Road in approximate alignment with drainage point `B' in the roadbeds, which carries runoff water to the Platte River;
10. At all times subsequent to the construction of the roadbeds, after runoff water passed through points `A', `B', and `C', it was collected in the Johnny Kay ditch and carried to the Platte River;
11. At the present time, the collection from point `C' is through a drainway that exists on the west side of Old # 50, another (but separate) drainway on the east side of the Mo-Pac ROW, and by some drainage along the east side of New # 50;
12. Water from point `C' flows north in these mentioned drainways, through a culvert *635 in Johnny Kay Road, and then east in the Johnny Kay ditch to the Platte River;
13. Water draining through point `B' is collected immediately into the Johnny Kay ditch and carried to the Platte River;
14. Prior to the construction of New # 50, water passing through point `A' drained to the south along the east side of Old # 50 to the Johnny Kay ditch and thence east to the Platte River;
15. The Defendant has leveled the roadbed of Old # 50 north of Johnny Kay Road, and converted it to farm land;
16. The Defendant has leveled the roadbed to a height that approximately corresponds with the top of a four-foot culvert existing at point `A' under new # 50;*
17. The only drainage from point `A' to the Johnny Kay ditch, at the present time, is by a small ditch dug by the Plaintiffs along the east side of the Mo-Pac ROW, and a low spot existing between the west side of the Mo-Pac ROW and the east side of New # 50;
18. That the actions of the Defendant in converting the roadbed of Old # 50 to farming and leveling it to a height of the existing culvert in New # 50 has obstructed the natural flow of water from the Plaintiffs' land;
19. That the actions taken by the Defendant were taken at various and sundry times, but completed in 1990;
20. Plaintiffs have timely brought this litigation and in good faith;
21. Plaintiffs farming practices on the drainways leading from the diversion terrace to drainway `A' and `B' has contributed to the silting, but is not the sole proximate cause of the resulting damage;
22. The actions of the Defendant in converting Old # 50 to farm land and leveling it to the height aforementioned has caused, and will cause in the future, damage to the property owned by the Plaintiffs as well as damage to the property in which Plaintiffs have a remaining security interest by preventing natural drainage; and
23. Plaintiffs have no adequate remedy at law.
In the same order, the court made specific findings of law:
1. Lower-land owners who build structures in natural water courses have a continuing duty to provide for the passage through such construction of all waters which may reasonably be anticipated to flow or to be carried therein;
2. Where an obstruction in a natural water course constitutes a continuing and permanent injury to adjoining landowners, injunctive relief may be granted;
3. The Defendant's actions in removing the culverts and leveling the right-of-way of Old # 50 to its present height constitutes an obstruction and structure that prevents the natural flow of surface waters from Plaintiffs' land; and
4. Plaintiffs are entitled to injunctive relief, although the specific requirements as to the method of its accomplishment are uncertain.
In the order's conclusion, the trial court ordered FirsTier to submit a proposed mandatory injunction in favor of the Rihas within 60 days. The Rihas would then have 30 days to respond. The order provided that if an agreement could not be reached, then a further hearing would be set to determine the specific terms and conditions of the injunction. The order included a dismissal of FirsTier's counterclaim for attorney fees and the taxation of costs to FirsTier.
FirsTier filed a pleading with the court stating that FirsTier objected to the order of the court that FirsTier should be required to suggest what would be an appropriate remedy, if any, in the case. FirsTier, in six pages, apparently sought a rehearing of the case. No proposed mandatory injunction was submitted. Following receipt of FirsTier's pleading, the court scheduled a hearing at which the Rihas, but not FirsTier, appeared. At that hearing, the court accepted the Rihas' suggested injunction which stated:
Defendant is hereby ordered to locate and construct a drainageway along the western portion of its lands (whether those lands be the old Highway 50 right of way or the Missouri Pacific right of way) which drainageway shall be adequate to provide *636 for the passage of all waters which may reasonably be anticipated to flow or be carried therein, so that surface waters draining through the present culvert under new Highway 50 at the point designated as point "A" in the evidence are carried to the Johnny Kay Road ditch, and then on to the PlatteRiver [sic].
It is this order that FirsTier appeals.
ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
FirsTier broadly asserts as errors that the district court erred in entering a mandatory injunction against FirsTier and that the district court should have entered judgment for FirsTier on the claim of the Rihas and should have heard evidence on FirsTier's claim for attorney fees.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
In all appeals from the district court in suits in equity in which review of some or all of the findings of fact of the district court is asked by the appellant, it shall be the duty of the Court of Appeals or the Supreme Court to retry the issue or issues of fact preserved in the bill of exceptions and, upon trial de novo of such question or questions of fact, reach an independent conclusion as to what finding or findings are required under the pleadings and all the evidence without reference to the conclusion reached in the district court or the fact that there may be some evidence in support thereof. Neb.Rev.Stat. § 25-1925 (Cum.Supp.1992).
In de novo review, this court is guided by the rule that a party seeking an injunction must establish by a preponderance of the evidence every controverted fact necessary to entitle him or her to relief. Romshek v. Osantowski, 237 Neb. 426, 466 N.W.2d 482 (1991).
The court viewed the property in this case. This court has often stated that where the trial court has viewed the premises, this court is required to consider any competent and relevant facts revealed by the view and any findings made by the trial court, provided that the record contains competent evidence to support the findings. Id.; Nixon v. Harkins, 220 Neb. 286, 369 N.W.2d 625 (1985); Burgess v. Omahawks Radio Control Org., 219 Neb. 100, 362 N.W.2d 27 (1985); Darsaklis v. Schildt, 218 Neb. 605, 358 N.W.2d 186 (1984).
ANALYSIS
In order for the plaintiffs in such circumstances to prevail under their theory that the leveling of the area obstructed a natural drainway, they must show by a preponderance of the evidence that the water traversed through the leveled area, that the drainageway was formed and existed in a state of nature and that it carried water from a higher estate to a lower estate. Romshek, supra; Gruber v. County of Dawson, 232 Neb. 1, 439 N.W.2d 446 (1989); Belsky v. County of Dodge, 220 Neb. 76, 369 N.W.2d 46 (1985).
FirsTier claims that there never was a natural drainageway, starting at point A, across its land and on to the Platte River. To accept this contention would require a conclusion that the 48-inch culverts under Old # 50 provided drainage only up to FirsTier's land and not across its land to the Platte River. As found in other cases, natural drainageways probably existed across FirsTier's land prior to the building of the highways and the culverts that were placed in those drainageways. See Wilson Concrete Co. v. County of Sarpy, 189 Neb. 312, 202 N.W.2d 597 (1972). To be sure, culvert B was put in place to provide access for water to flow from the Rihas' land, under Old # 50, across FirsTier's land via the Johnny Kay ditch, and on to the Platte River. The same purpose of access can be inferred from the record for culverts A and C. When FirsTier removed culvert A, which removal is clear from the record, the natural flow of water was interrupted.
The record lacks evidence to sufficiently establish FirsTier's "defenses." The evidence does show some farming practices by the Rihas which contributed to drainage problems, but these practices were by no means the significant cause of drainage problems. The record supports the finding that the actions of FirsTier were a proximate cause to the damage to the Rihas' land.
*637 The court's findings upon viewing the premises are supported by the record. The water had traversed through the leveled area of Old # 50, that is, culvert A, and through that point flowed from the Rihas' land to and over FirsTier's land to the Platte River. The record also clearly shows that the flow of water from the Rihas' land over FirsTier's land and then to the Platte River has now been obstructed by FirsTier's actions.
The evidence of injury suffered by the Rihas is also clear from the record. The water will not drain off their land upon which they intend to farm.
The flow of water cannot be interfered with by a lower proprietor to the detriment of the upper proprietor. Romshek, supra; Belsky, supra; Fink v. O'Neill Country Club, 218 Neb. 30, 352 N.W.2d 166 (1984). The proper remedy in water drainage disputes is an injunction. Romshek, supra. Injunctions sound in equity. University Place-Lincoln Assocs. v. Nelsen, 247 Neb. 761, 530 N.W.2d 241 (1995); Nebraska Irrigation, Inc. v. Koch, 246 Neb. 856, 523 N.W.2d 676 (1994); CAE Vanguard, Inc. v. Newman, 246 Neb. 334, 518 N.W.2d 652 (1994).
Injunctive relief may be granted to an adjoining landowner upon a proper showing that an obstruction in a drainageway or natural watercourse constitutes a continuing and permanent injury to that landowner. Romshek, supra; Gruber, supra; Wilson, supra.
The record establishes that the mandatory injunction ordered against FirsTier was and is necessary and proper to stop the damage to the Rihas' land.
CONCLUSION
Our de novo review establishes that there is a proper showing of continuing and permanent injury to an upper proprietor of land due to the lower proprietor's interference with the flow of water. The mandatory injunction was necessary and appropriate. The decision of the district court is hereby affirmed.
AFFIRMED.

=== CASE 2219398 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:13.140008+00 ===

131 Ill. App. 2d 379 (1970)
266 N.E.2d 439
CHESTER A. STARK, d/b/a CHESTER A. STARK & ASSOCIATES, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
RALPH F. ROUSSEY AND ASSOCIATES, INC. et al., Defendants-Appellants.
No. 54183.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District.
December 7, 1970.
Philip Conley, of Chicago, for appellants.
Economos, Alexander & Regas, of Chicago, (Albert J. Horrell and James A. Regas, of counsel,) for appellee.
Affirmed in part, dismissed in part.
Mr. JUSTICE LEIGHTON delivered the opinion of the court:
This appeal requires us to decide whether the trial court erred in vacating two dismissals for want of prosecution and denying a petition for change of venue. The questions arose in a suit to foreclose a mechanic's lien.
In December 1963, Chester A. Stark, doing business as Chester A. Stark & Associates, sued Ralph F. Roussey & Associates, Inc., a corporation; Ralph F. Roussey, Chicago Title and Trust Company, a corporation as trustee and Unknown Owners, alleging that defendants employed *380 plaintiff, a duly licensed registered professional architect, to perform architectural services on real estate they owned in Cook County. It was claimed that plaintiff was entitled to a mechanic's lien on the real estate in the sum of $34,800.00 with interest, to secure what was due for services performed. March 19, 1965 the case was assigned to Judge Walker Butler. On June 28 he referred it to a master in chancery to take testimony and report conclusions of fact and law. Between July 1965 and November 10, 1966, the parties appeared before the master. On November 15, 1965, although hearings were in progress, the cause was on the call of the chief judge of the chancery division. No one appeared. It was dismissed for want of prosecution.
On February 13, 1968, although proofs before the master were closed and the parties were waiting for his report, the cause was on the calendar call of Judge Nathan M. Cohen. No one responded. He ordered the cause dismissed. Within 30 days of this order, plaintiff filed a petition to vacate it. Defendants moved to strike plaintiff's petition; and by an affidavit, called attention to the dismissal order of November 15, 1965. By allegations in the affidavit, defendants contended that the cause stood dismissed; and because more than two years had passed since the dismissal, the court lacked jurisdiction to grant plaintiff any relief.
In apparent response to this contention, plaintiff amended his petition to allege that the 1965 dismissal order was the result of an error which placed the case on a trial call while it was pending before a master in chancery. It was alleged that no notice of the dismissal was mailed by the clerk of the court; that in compliance with the reference, and after the November 15, 1965 dismissal, the master held hearings at which witnesses were presented by both plaintiff and the defendants.
One corporate defendant answered the petition, admitting that defendants had participated in proceedings before the master after the dismissal; that the attorney who represented defendants in those proceedings knew of the dismissal order; that the order was treated as erroneous and the cause as pending before the master; and that in April 1967, plaintiff's attorney learned of these facts. Thus, it was claimed, plaintiff having had knowledge of the dismissal and more than two years having passed, the trial court did not have jurisdiction to vacate the order. October 29, 1968, plaintiff's petition and defendants' answer were heard. The dismissal orders of November 15, 1965 and February 13, 1968 were vacated. Within the time required by rules, defendants filed a post-trial motion praying that the vacatures be set aside.
While this motion was pending, defendant Ralph F. Roussey filed a petition for change of venue alleging that he feared "[h]e will not receive a fair trial in said court, on account that the Judge thereof is prejudiced *381 against him, the petitioner, so that he cannot expect a fair trial in said court. (sic)" On March 27, 1969 the trial judge denied the petition in an order which found it was untimely. Then on April 7, 1969 defendant's post-trial motion was denied and the parties were ordered to "[f]ile with the Master in Chancery to whom this cause is referred, any objections which they may desire to file to said Master's Report dated March 18, 1969 by June 9, 1969 and that hearing on said objections is set for 2:00 P.M. June 18, 1969 before said Master. (sic)" On the same day, defendant Roussey renewed the petition for change of venue. The trial court, again because of untimeliness, denied it.
It is well settled that the dismissals were involuntary nonsuits, final and appealable, over which the trial court retained jurisdiction for a period of 30 days, to entertain a motion such as the one plaintiff made concerning the February 13, 1968 order. Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 110, § 50(6); Athletic Ass'n of University v. Crawford, 43 Ill. App. 2d 52, 192 N.E.2d 556. The trial court could have vacated either order within 30 days, on a showing of good cause. Gilmer v. Dunn, 59 Ill. App. 2d 202, 208 N.E.2d 85; Trojan v. Marquette Nat. Bank, 88 Ill. App. 2d 428, 232 N.E.2d 160. Indeed, defendants do not question the vacature of the February 13, 1968 dismissal. It is concerning the order of November 15, 1965 that they contend the trial court committed error. They argue that plaintiff's petition to vacate has to be construed as one that invoked section 72 of the civil practice act, a provision they say was inapplicable because more than two years had passed when plaintiff filed his petition. Meeting this argument, plaintiff insists that the 1965 dismissal order was void because it was entered by a judge to whom the cause was not assigned.
 1 We need not decide whether the dismissal order of November 15, 1965 was void or only erroneous. When a court loses jurisdiction, after expiration of 30 days following a dismissal order, the parties may, by appearing voluntarily and participating in further proceedings, revest the court with jurisdiction. The elements essential to revesting are (1) the active participation of the parties without objection and (2), further proceedings inconsistent with the prior order of dismissal. Ridgely v. Central Pipe Line Co., 409 Ill. 46, 97 N.E.2d 817.
 2 This being so, the appearance of the parties before the master after November 15, 1965 revested the trial court with jurisdiction despite the undisturbed dismissal order. As we held in Stevens v. City of Chicago, 119 Ill. App. 2d 366, 256 N.E.2d 56, under circumstances similar to the case before us, the court was revested with jurisdiction by the conduct of the parties; therefore, it was not error to sustain plaintiff's petition to make clear that the cause was on the docket for disposition.
*382  3 Defendants also contend that the trial judge erred when he denied the petition for change of venue. We observe that the denial followed the order of October 29, 1968 which vacated the two dismissals and the one of April 7, 1959 which denied defendant's post-trial motion. Standing alone, denial of the petition for change of volume was not a final judgment. 4 C.J.S. Appeal & Error § 115a. No rule of our Supreme Court authorizes an appeal from an interlocutory order of this kind. This has been called to our attention by a motion to dismiss the appeal filed by the plaintiff. We took the motion with the case. We now sustain it as it pertains to the order denying the change of venue. See McCowan v. Ellis, 323 Ill. App. 291, 55 N.E.2d 554. Therefore, judgment as to the vacature of the two dismissals is affirmed; and the appeal as to the order denying the petition for change of venue is dismissed.
Affirmed in part, dismissed in part.
MURPHY and ADESKO, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 9739344 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:43.744932+00 ===

VANDE WALLE, Chief Justice.
The State of North Dakota appealed from an order of the district court, Stutsman County, which granted Stacy A. Ova’s motion to suppress evidence in support of the State’s complaint charging Ova with driving while under the influence of alcohol in violation of section 39-08-01, NDCC. We reverse.
*858At approximately 1:25 a.m., on September 11,1994, while traveling east on paved County Road 42, in Stutsman County, Officer Craig Beedy of the North Dakota Highway Patrol noticed a pickup facing north in a stationary position on a gravel road on the north side of County Road 42. The pickup was 25 to 30 feet north of County Road 42. Beedy spotted the pickup when he was about 75 yards away from the pickup. Beedy watched the pickup as it “began backing rapidly in what [he] would term as exhibition or careless type driving towards the paved road.” He determined that the pickup was “accelerating rapidly” in reverse at approximately 20 miles per hour.
Based upon his own driving experience on gravel roads and seeing others travel on gravel roads, Beedy testified that he observed “an unusual amount of dust” illuminated by Ova’s headlights and taillights which “engulfed” the pickup. Because it was dark, Beedy was unable to actually see the pickup’s tires spinning, but he assumed the pickup was skidding because of the amount of dust which he observed.
Beedy met and passed the pickup as it was just backing from the gravel road onto the pavement of County Road 42 to travel west. Beedy then turned around and stopped the pickup within a short distance. After issuing warnings to Ova for care required under section 39-09-01.1, NDCC,1 “[d]ue to the careless nature of her driving,” and for failure to change her address on her driver’s license, Beedy commented to Ova about the dust and how it looked like she was “spitting up the dust there pretty good.” Ova responded that her brakes kept sticking, but she did not deny or confirm Beedy’s observation. During their conversation, Beedy detected the odor of alcohol and Ova was ultimately charged with driving while under the influence of alcohol.
Because of the time of night, the location where he spotted the pickup, and the manner of driving, Beedy testified that he thought that there was a possibility of drinking activity in the pickup. Although the possibility was a factor in his decision to stop the pickup, Beedy testified that he stopped the vehicle based upon his observations of rapid acceleration and excessive dust which he testified made him suspect “exhibition/careless driving,” emphasizing that “it was just the manner that she was driving; the careless manner that brought my attention to her vehicle.” Beedy testified that he checked “erratic driving” as his basis for reasonable suspicion to stop the vehicle based upon his observations.
In her motion to suppress evidence, Ova alleged that Beedy lacked reasonable and articulable suspicion to stop Ova’s vehicle. After a hearing and in its oral decision in open court, the court suppressed “all evidence based upon [the] illegal stop.” The State appealed the order granting suppression of the evidence pursuant to section 29-28-07(5), NDCC. The sole issue on appeal is whether Officer Beedy had a reasonable and articulable suspicion to stop Ova.
On review of a trial court’s disposition of a motion to suppress, we defer to a trial court’s findings of fact and resolve conflicts in testimony in favor of affirmance, recognizing the trial court’s superior opportunity to assess credibility and to weigh the evidence. State v. Konewko, 529 N.W.2d 861, 863 (N.D.1995); State v. Halfmann, 518 N.W.2d 729, 730 (N.D.1994). Although the underlying factual disputes are findings of fact, whether the findings meet a legal standard, in this instance a reasonable and artic-ulable suspicion, is a question of law. See, e.g., Salter v. North Dakota Dept. of Transp., 505 N.W.2d 111, 112 (N.D.1993). Whereas we do not conduct a de novo review of a trial court’s findings of fact, questions of law are fully reviewable. Konewko, 529 N.W.2d at 863; State v. Zimmerman, 529 N.W.2d 171, 173 (N.D.1995).
To justify an investigative stop of a moving vehicle, an officer must have a reasonable and articulable suspicion that a mo*859torist has violated or is violating the law. State v. Hornaday, 477 N.W.2d 245, 246 (N.D.1991); Geiger v. Backes, 444 N.W.2d 692, 693 (N.D.1989). Precedent reminds us that the reasonable suspicion legal standard is less stringent than probable cause:
“Probable cause is a much more exacting standard. Unlike the probable cause standard where it is necessary that a prudent person believe that the suspect had committed or was committing an offense, a stop of a person or vehicle requires only suspicion that a law has been violated or is being violated. However, this suspicion must be ‘articulable and reasonable.’ The articulable aspect requires that the stop be justified with more than just a vague ‘hunch’ or other non-objective facts; and the reasonable aspect means that the artic-ulable facts must produce, by reasonable inference, a reasonable suspicion of unlawful conduct.”
State v. VandeHoven, 388 N.W.2d 857, 858 n. 1 (N.D.1986) [citations omitted]; see McNamara v. North Dakota Dept. of Transp., 500 N.W.2d 585, 587 (N.D.1993) [recognizing that reasonable and articulable suspicion is not as stringent as probable cause].
We use an objective standard to determine whether an investigative stop is valid and look to the totality of the circumstances. Geiger, 444 N.W.2d at 693. “The question is whether a reasonable person in the officer’s position would be justified by some objective manifestation to suspect potential criminal activity.” Hornaday, 477 N.W.2d at 246. The officer is not required to isolate single factors which signal a potential violation of the law; “[r]ather, officers are to assess the situation as it unfolds and, based upon inferences and deductions drawn from their experience and training, make the determination whether all of the circumstances viewed together create a reasonable suspicion of potential criminal activity.” Geiger, 444 N.W.2d at 693.
To investigate a reasonable and artic-ulable suspicion, a police officer need not wait for an actual violation of the law for an investigative stop to be valid. State v. Nelson, 488 N.W.2d 600, 602 (N.D.1992). Validity does not depend upon whether an officer’s grounds for the stop ultimately results in a conviction. State v. Smith, 452 N.W.2d 86, 88 (N.D.1990).
Utilizing these principles in this instance, we conclude the trial court did not apply the appropriate legal standard, despite its recitation of the standard. Although an actual violation is not required for an officer to have reasonable and articulable suspicion to make an investigative stop, the trial court in its analysis required proof of a violation of the exhibition driving statute:
“[A rapid backing and an unusual amount of dust] ... are the articulable facts that [Beedy] is asserting and the statute that ... is being violated is the exhibition driving statute. However, there is no evidence that he heard the tires spinning. There is no evidence that he saw the tires spinning. There is no evidence that he saw evidence of tires spinning, such as gravel flying, gravel hitting his car, gravel hitting her car, loose gravel flying in through the air as a result of spinning tires, and there is no evidence that while he drove past the spot, that he saw tracks in the gravel as a result of spinning tires. What he does base his suspicion upon is the unusual amount of dust. His testimony was that from a slow rate of speed to a higher rate of acceleration as he saw it, there had to be spinning of the tires that occurred. That’s his conclusion based upon his observation. We will get back to that in a minute. But his first fact of rapid backing, I mean that — so what I guess. There was rapid backing. He doesn’t assert that it was unsafe. He doesn’t really assert that it was inappropriate other than it was inappropriate to the exhibition driving statute. So we come back to the exhibition driving statute ... which doesn’t help a lot except that it does define exhibition driving as unnecessary engine noise, tire squeal, skid, or slide upon acceleration or braking; or driving or executing or attempting one of a series of unnecessarily abrupt turns. He doesn’t allege abrupt turns, although it would seem that if there was some tire spinning on this turn or backing in order to get onto the blacktop, it would’ve been necessary, but he doesn’t *860say that. So we’re just — we’re just back to this unusual amount of dust at night. He submitted no testimony as to the type of gravel that was there, the amount [of dust] that that type of gravel generates ... or to the moisture content or when the last time it rained or when the last time it hadn’t rained_”
Consistent with its quest for proof of an actual violation, the trial court reasoned that the officer “probably stopped the car a little too quickly” and that the officer should have followed Ova because Ova’s actions “in conjunction with some other driving actions might have been appropriate enough to find articulable facts_” Perhaps Beedy’s further observation would have established more evidence for the DUI offense, but such further observation would have been irrelevant as to the suspected traffic violation. See, e.g., VandeHoven, 388 N.W.2d at 859 [stating that “subsequent actions which do not enhance the suspicion are irrelevant to a reasonably prompt stop of a vehicle”].
Notwithstanding the flawed analysis, the judge’s comments indicate that he found the officer’s testimony credible: the officer saw what the officer characterized to be “rapid backing” and an unusual amount of dust. Although Beedy was able to articulate to the court his reasons for stopping Ova, Beedy’s bases for the stop must also be reasonable. When assessing reasonableness, courts are to consider the officer’s inferences and deductions based upon the officer’s training and experience which may elude laypersons. Hornaday, 477 N.W.2d at 246-47 [officer reasonably relied on her experience to determine that drinking was taking place in a vehicle parked at a shopping center parking lot]; State v. Beyer, 441 N.W.2d 919, 922 (N.D.1989) [officer used his hearing to determine that a vehicle was making “excessive or unusual noise”]; State v. Thordarson, 440 N.W.2d 510, 512 (N.D.1989) [officer used his senses to determine that a vehicle was speeding]. In this instance, the trial court did not give the officer the benefit of the inferences which the officer was entitled to draw from his training and experience.
Officer Beedy explained to the trial court that at about 1:25 a.m., he saw the pickup rapidly accelerating in reverse and creating an unusual amount of dust on a gravel road. The officer inferred from his observations that the dust was caused by the acceleration or spinning tires; the officer thereby suspected a traffic violation. We cannot say that the officer’s inference was unreasonable. The circumstances in this instance, viewed as a whole, were sufficient to give rise to a reasonable and articulable suspicion of a potential violation of the law. We reverse the order which granted suppression of the evidence and remand for further proceedings.
MESCHKE, J., concurs in the result.
VANDE WALLE, C.J., and SANDSTROM and NEUMANN, JJ., concur.
. Beedy testified that a patrol policy did not permit written warnings for exhibition driving under section 39-08-03.1, NDCC, or careless driving under section 39-09-01, NDCC, and that he used his discretion to issue a warning for care required rather than a traffic summons or citation.

=== CASE 9739345 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:43.749254+00 ===

NEUMANN, Justice,
concurring.
I agree with the majority opinion, which I have signed. I write separately to clarify a troublesome mischaracterization of the majority opinion in Justice Levine’s dissent.
Despite my colleague’s statement in her dissent, the majority opinion most emphatically does not state that “findings on the existence of reasonable and articulable suspicion ... are subject to full review by this court.” I would not sign an opinion which said that. The majority opinion very clearly and explicitly says we defer to the trial court’s factual findings, and resolve eviden-tiary conflicts in favor of affirmance. It is only the legal standard applied by the trial court which is subject to full review.
In this case the trial court applied the standard of probable cause, rather than reasonable and articulable suspicion, in reviewing the propriety of the officer’s stop. Probable cause is not the correct legal standard by which to judge the legality of an investigative stop which falls short of an arrest. The trial court’s error was therefore one of law, fully reviewable by this court.

=== CASE 9739346 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:43.753008+00 ===

LEVINE, Justice,
dissenting.
This case presents a problem because the only finding the trial court explicitly made was “the officer did not have articulable facts leading to a reasonable suspicion that a stat*861ute was being violated.” The majority states that findings on the existence of reasonable and articulable suspicion involve questions of law, and are subject to full review by this court. It has therefore put the trial court’s finding on reasonable suspicion under a microscope. Yet, the factfinder cannot make a decision on the existence of reasonable suspicion in a vacuum; it must evaluate the facts of the case before making its legal conclusion. See Salter v. N.D. Dept. of Transp., 505 N.W.2d 111 (N.D.1993); United States v. Campbell, 843 F.2d 1089 (8th Cir.1988).
Clearly, the trial court evaluated the facts here; it is not clear, however, what the trial court found the facts to be. Under Rule 12(e), NDRCrimP, “[i]f factual issues are involved in determining a motion, the court shall state its essential findings on the record.” We have not previously addressed the issue of what steps should be taken if a trial court fails to make factual findings as required under Rule 12(e). Our Rule 12(e) is almost identical to Rule 12(e), FRCrimP. Two federal circuits, interpreting Federal Rule 12(e) strictly, order remands when trial courts fail to make factual findings when determining pretrial motions. United States v. Moore, 936 F.2d 287 (6th Cir.1991); United States v. Prieto-Villa, 910 F.2d 601 (9th Cir.1990). I believe the better view, and one consistent with our approach in civil cases, see, e.g., Lentz v. Lentz, 353 N.W.2d 742 (N.D.1984), is the view that a remand is not always necessary when trial courts fail to make factual findings as required by Rule 12(e), FRCrimP. United States v. Bloomfield, 40 F.3d 910 (8th Cir.1994); United States v. Griffin, 7 F.3d 1512 (10th Cir.1993); United States v. Harley, 990 F.2d 1340 (D.C.Cir.1993); United States v. Yeagin, 927 F.2d 798 (5th Cir.1991). These courts will decline a remand if “any reasonable view of the evidence” supports the trial court’s decision on a motion to suppress. Bloomfield, 40 F.3d at 913-14. In United States v. Williams, 951 F.2d 1287 (D.C.Cir.1991), the court explained that refusal to remand is justified when “any reasonable view of the evidence” supports the trial court’s decision because the trial court, “in reaching its legal conclusion, presumably made whatever factual findings were needed to support the conclusion.” Id. at 1291. When remand is denied, the reviewing court therefore “review[s] facts we infer were actually, albeit silently, found.” Id.
The trial court’s legal conclusion here was that the trooper did not have articulable and reasonable suspicion to stop the defendant. On review of the record before us, a reasonable view of the evidence supports this finding. There are indications, which the trial court noted, that the trooper acted because he “had a suspicion and a hunch that something was going wrong.” It is well established that “reasonable and articulable suspicion” must be founded on objective facts. Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648, 99 S.Ct. 1391, 59 L.Ed.2d 660 (1979); Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 88 S.Ct. 1868, 20 L.Ed.2d 889 (1968). Mere subjective feelings, ie., hunches, do not provide a rational basis for reasonable suspicion. See Nicacio v. I.N.S., 797 F.2d 700 (9th Cir.1985). In addition, there were inconsistencies between the trooper’s testimony before the trial court and his prior testimony before an administrative tribunal where the trooper admitted that he had a hunch, based on the time and location, that the people in the truck might be drinking. Finally, the events upon which the trooper said he based his decision to stop occurred within only a few seconds. Considering the result reached by the trial court, it is reasonable to infer from the record that the trial court implicitly found that the trooper acted on a bare hunch that the people in the truck were drinking and that it also found the trooper’s testimony that he stopped the truck for other reasons not to be credible. Under the “any reasonable view of the evidence” rule, it would be appropriate to affirm the trial court’s order.
The majority does not deal with the trial court’s failure to make explicit factual findings. Instead, the majority concludes that the trial court found the trooper’s testimony to be credible. Based on this conclusion, the majority treats the trooper’s testimony as if it were a factual finding of the court. This is problematic because the record suggests that the trial court found the trooper’s testimony to be incredible. The trial court, in general, *862questioned the trooper’s testimony, characterizing it as being full of holes.
Questions involving witness credibility are in the realm of the trial court, and we defer to the trial court on such questions. E.g., State v. Konewko, 529 N.W.2d 861 (N.D.1995); see also State v. Nelson, 488 N.W.2d 600 (N.D.1992) (Levine, J., dissenting). A finding of incredibility need not be articulated, but can often be inferred from the trial court’s decision. Becker v. Becker, 262 N.W.2d 478 (N.D.1978). In cases like this one, where we can gather from the result that the trial court discounted a witness’s testimony, we should not rely on the same discredited testimony in making our decision.
Moreover, the majority does not merely disregard the trial court’s implicit finding on the trooper’s credibility, it criticizes the trial court for questioning the trooper’s credibility. The majority states that the trial court “did not give the officer the benefit of the inferences” which he was “entitled” to draw. Yet, the trial court clearly was not persuaded that the trooper’s actions were based on reasonable inferences; it indicated that the trooper acted on a bare hunch.
The majority states that the trial court erred because it “did not apply the appropriate legal standard.” The majority’s analysis, however, does not focus on the legal standard at issue but instead on why the trial court should have interpreted the facts differently. The trial court looked at the facts and decided the officer did not have reasonable suspicion to stop the ear. The majority looks at the same facts and decides the opposite. There is an obvious disagreement, but it is a disagreement based on different interpretations of the evidence, not on a right and wrong view of the law. It is the trial court’s prerogative to find the facts, and it implicitly found that the facts did not support a finding of reasonable and articulable suspicion to stop the defendant’s ear.
Because a reasonable view of the evidence supports the trial court’s decision, I would affirm the trial court’s order.

=== CASE 9739347 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:46.173034+00 ===

ON REMAND
Before: Jansen, P.J., and Corrigan and T. G. Kavanagh,* JJ.
T. G. Kavanagh, J.
Plaintiff was awarded worker’s compensation benefits by a magistrate who found that plaintiff was totally and permanently disabled because of various physical disabilities that were causally connected to his employment as a truck mechanic. Plaintiff’s employer, Jones Transfer Company (hereinafter defendant) appealed, and the Worker’s Compensation Appellate Commission reversed the magistrate’s decision, ruling that plaintiff’s disabilities were not work-related. Plaintiff’s application for leave to appeal to this Court was originally denied, but our Supreme Court, on reconsideration, in lieu of granting leave to appeal, remanded the case to this Court for consideration as on leave granted. See 444 Mich 977 (1994). We now reverse the wcac’s decision and remand for further proceedings.
Plaintiff was employed by defendant for twenty-*47five years as a truck mechanic. His job duties, which are not disputed, are described in the magistrate’s decision as follows:
As a diesel mechanic, plaintiff described many tasks and various functions performed by him while working in defendant’s garage on tractor trailers; including, but not limited to repairing flat tires, changing tire rims, removing rear axle shafts, straightening bumpers, removing water pumps, springs, transmissions, king pins, taking out drive lines, repairing engines, water pumps, brakes and brake lines, removing and replacing alternators, pulling and repairing heaters, drive lines, heater coils, making electrical repairs and generally performing all mechanical work on defendant’s trucks.
In order to perform his mechanical work, plaintiff used various hand tools, impact tools, vibrating tools, wrenches and some of them were air driven. He further described the tools as being light and small, and others weighed 50 pounds and upwards, and having as much as 900 pounds of torque. For some tasks, he used a sledge hammer weighing 1C pounds or more to break away bolts and rims when repairing tires.
Often plaintiff had to lift truck parts weighing as much as 150 pounds. He indicated that hydraulic devices and chain falls were available to assist him with some tasks.
Further, much of plaintiff’s work required him to lift, bend, stoop, reach, stretch, climb, to lay on his back or stomach, work in awkward positions, stand off balance, walk and carry various equipment as the job required.
On May 1, 1986, plaintiff injured his right hand at work while installing a heater into a truck. Plaintiff received medical treatment and was off work for three weeks because of that injury. On July 10, 1986, plaintiff was injured again at work *48when he fell from a trailer onto a cement floor. Plaintiff complained of pain in his legs, ankles, knees, shoulders, and back. He was examined by a series of doctors and did not return to work because of continuing pain in his back and lower extremities, and also numbness and collapsing of his right leg.
On January 10, 1987, plaintiff fell and broke his left foot while walking in his yard at home. According to plaintiff, he fell because his right leg "gave away” because of numbness. Plaintiff continued to seek treatment for his back and lower extremity conditions and, about the same time, began seeking treatment for problems associated with his right hand and weakness of grips in both hands. The medical diagnoses generally attributed plaintiff’s physical complaints to advanced degenerative arthritis affecting his extremities, neck, and lower back, to carpal tunnel syndrome involving his wrists, and to ulnar nerve root entrapment at the elbow.
On February 17, 1987, plaintiff filed a petition for worker’s compensation benefits, asserting total and permanent disability due to the loss of the industrial use of his hands, arms, and legs. Defendant challenged plaintiff’s entitlement to benefits, in part, on the basis that plaintiff’s numerous physical complaints were not work-related. At a hearing before a worker’s compensation magistrate in June 1987, defendant introduced evidence that plaintiff was sixty-nine-years old and diabetic, that he had operated a twenty-acre farm since 1954, that he was off work for nine months in 1975 after injuring his foot on a farm combine, that he was receiving medication for an irregular heartbeat, and that he had a history of colon cancer. Defendant maintained that plaintiff’s numerous *49physical complaints were attributable to activities and medical conditions unrelated to his work.
After receiving testimony from several doctors concerning the nature, extent, and cause of plaintiffs injuries and physical complaints, the magistrate found that plaintiff’s hand pathology, elbow pathology, and carpal tunnel condition were all causally related to his work as a truck mechanic. Additionally, the magistrate found that plaintiff sustained a compensable injury to his shoulders, back, legs, ankles, and knees arising from his fall at work on July 10, 1986, that plaintiff’s ongoing lower extremity and back pathologies were causally related to the fall at work, and that, plaintiff’s fall at home on January 10, 1987, resulted from his ongoing lower extremity pathology. The magistrate concluded that plaintiff was totally and permanently disabled because of the loss of the industrial use of both lower extremities, but that plaintiff had not lost the industrial use of his upper extremities. The magistrate, however, denied plaintiffs request for nursing care benefits.
Both parties appealed the magistrate’s decision to the wcac, raising several issues. The wcac reversed the magistrate’s decision, finding that the evidence before the magistrate was insufficient to show that plaintiff’s injuries and disabilities were work-related. Although acknowledging that plaintiff had presented medical testimony "asserting work-relatedness,” the wcac ruled that "[t]he record in this case firmly establishes that plaintiff had a history of non-work-related physical exertions and problems . . . [which] easily and directly explains the sources for plaintiffs physical complaints.” The wcac concluded that, "[i]n the context of this strong causal evidence, plaintiff failed to provide substantial evidence by which to attach any contributing relationship to his work, whether *50cumulatively over time or through the two specific injuries plaintiff had in ,1986.” In light of its reversal on the basis, that the injuries were not related to work, the wcac found it unnecessary to address the other claims raised by the parties.
Plaintiff now argues, and we agree, that the wcac erred in reversing the magistrate’s findings of work-relatedness.
In reviewing a magistrate’s decision, the wcac must perform both a qualitative and quantitative review of the record. MCL 418.861a(13); MSA 17.237(861a)(13). The wcac’s review is not de novo, however, and the wcac may not merely substitute its opinion for that of the magistrate. Kovach v Henry Ford Hosp, 207 Mich App 107, 111; 523 NW2d 800 (1994). A magistrate’s findings of fact are to be regarded as conclusive if supported by "competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record.” MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3).
On review by this Court, findings of fact by the wcac are conclusive if there is any competent evidence to support them. MCL 418.861a(14); MSA 17.237(861a)(14); Holden v Ford Motor Co, 439 Mich 257, 263; 484 NW2d 227 (1992). However, a decision of the wcac is subject to reversal if the wcac operated within the wrong legal framework or its decision was based on erroneous legal reasoning. O’Connor v Binney Auto Parts, 203 Mich App 522, 527; 513 NW2d 818 (1994). In Holden, supra at 269, our Supreme Court stated:
If it appears on judicial appellate review that the wcac carefully examined the record, was duly cognizant of the deference to be given to the decision of the magistrate, did not "misapprehend or grossly misapply” the substantial evidence standard, and gave an adequate reason grounded in *51the record for reversing the magistrate, the judicial tendency should be to deny leave to appeal or, if it is granted, to affirm. . . .
In this case, we find that reversal of the wcac’s decision is justified because the wcac’s finding that "plaintiff failed to provide substantial evidence by which to attach any contributing relationship to his work” is not supported by competent evidence and because other reasons given by the wcac for reversing the decision of the magistrate are not grounded in the record.
An employee bears the burden of proving the relationship between an injury and the workplace by a preponderance of the evidence. Morris v Soloway, 170 Mich App 312, 315; 428 NW2d 43 (1988). An employee is entitled to compensation where the nexus between the employment and the injury is sufficient to conclude that the injury was a circumstance of the employment. Collier v J A Fredman, Inc, 183 Mich App 156, 161; 454 NW2d 183 (1990). Worker’s compensation benefits are payable not only for a disability caused solely by working conditions, but also for any preexisting illness, disease, or deterioration accelerated or aggravated by the workplace and for any injury that was caused by work coupled with a preexisting condition. Kostamo v Marquette Iron Mining Co, 405 Mich 105, 116; 274 NW2d 411 (1979). Conditions of the aging process are compensable if contributed to, or aggravated or accelerated by, the employment in a significant manner. MCL 418.301(2); MSA 17.237(301)(2) and MCL 418.401(2) (b); MSA 17.237(401)(2)(b).
In the instant case, the wcac stated that reversal was warranted because, with regard to plaintiff’s injuries, plaintiff "failed to provide substantial evidence by which to attach any contributing *52relationship to his work.” The wcac also stated that the medical testimony "pointed strongly” toward plaintiffs diabetes as the "fundamental basis” for his extremity complaints and carpal tunnel problem. Indeed, the wcac stated that Dr. Donald Austin, a defense witness, had "explicitly connected plaintiffs carpal tunnel nerve problems to his diabetes.” A review of the record discloses that these reasons are not grounded in the record.
Dr. Jerry Taylor, who is an osteopathic physician and surgeon, agreed that plaintiff had longstanding degenerative osteoarthritis of both upper extremities and also carpal tunnel syndrome involving both wrists. He opined, however, that plaintiffs job duties as a mechanic led to the development of the carpal tunnel syndrome and also accentuated the development of plaintiffs arthritis in his hands, wrists, and arms. Dr. Taylor also explained the basis of his opinions. Regarding plaintiffs carpal tunnel syndrome, Dr. Taylor stated:
It’s my impression that the carpal tunnel syndrome that he has bilaterally was related to the repetitive and heavy use of his hands. So, in this order of sequence, number one, the use of his hands caused carpal tunnel syndrome. The carpal tunnel syndrome having been present for a long period of time caused the thenar atrophy in both places.
Most people feel that work-related carpal tunnel syndrome results from a microtenosynovitis, a swelling of the tendons, the nine tendons that are in the carpal tunnel, that they swell and they eventually compress the nerve. And the use of vibrating tools, for instance, would, over a period of time, [cause] this tenosynovitis to develop. The same is true when one is flex[ing] and extending *53the wrists and doing a lot of grasping, twisting, pushing and pulling. It eventually cause[s] the tenosynovitis and eventually the carpal tunnel syndrome.
Regarding plaintiffs degenerative arthritis, Dr. Taylor stated:
Degenerative arthritis and osteoarthritis are basically the same conditions. They are not conditions that are due to any disease within the person’s body as rheumatoid arthritis which is something a person develops which is in the bloodstream, for instance.
Osteoarthritis, in layman’s terms, is a wearing out of the joint surfaces. . . . It’s my feeling that the joint surfaces have worn out and deteriorated, partially because of the fact he’s done extremely heavy work for a long period of time, thus, the wearing out of the joint surfaces is another way of saying that the arthritis he has developed is because the joints have degenerated from wear and tear, a portion of which is certainly related to his job.
Dr. Taylor further opined that plaintiffs conditions were related to plaintiffs employment in a significant manner.
Dr. Taylor: Yes, I feel the conditions I diagnosed are related to his employment and the injury of July.
Q: Do you have an opinion, as to whether the relationship of the job duties and his employment is related in a significant manner?
Dr. Taylor: Yes, it is significant.
Dr. Frank Cullis testified that trauma contributes to arthritis, and he likewise opined that plaintiffs work activities and fall at work were "significant factors” in the development of plaintiffs up*54per and lower extremity pathologies, as well as his neck and back conditions.
Dr. Austin agreed that repeated use of power tools and hand tools would be a "definite factor” in the cause of carpal tunnel syndrome and ulnar nerve root entrapment. In response to a hypothetical question describing plaintiffs job duties and medical history,1 Dr. Austin agreed that "the most likely factor involved in his carpal tunnel syndrome would be his job.” During later questioning, Dr. Austin again opined that plaintiffs work as a mechanic "was the significant contributing factor to the development” of plaintiffs ulnar nerve entrapment and carpal tunnel conditions. Dr. Austin also agreed that plaintiffs July 10, 1986, fall at work could have aggravated plaintiffs neck and back conditions.
Defense witness Dr. Fred Lamb also agreed that repetitive activity can contribute to degenerative arthritis and another defense witness, Dr. Herman Remsperger, agreed that repetitive use of power tools can lead to carpal tunnel syndrome.
The foregoing medical testimony constituted substantial evidence under MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3) on which the magistrate could find that plaintiffs disabilities were work-related.
Regarding the role of plaintiffs diabetes, Dr. Austin testified that diabetics are more "prone” to nerve entrapment syndromes and, therefore, opined that "some” of plaintiffs carpal tunnel and ulnar nerve problems could be "at least partly due to that diabetes.” He added, however, that the repetitive use of power tools and wrenches would also be a "definite factor” in those conditions. More significantly, in the context of the hypotheti*55cal question describing plaintiffs job duties, Dr. Austin stated:
I think the diabetes makes him more prone to the involvement of it, but the primary cause would be the repetitive activity itself. [Emphasis added.]
The remainder of the record is devoid of support for the wcac’s characterization of the medical evidence as "pointing] strongly” toward plaintiffs diabetes as the "fundamental basis” for his extremity complaints and carpal tunnel problems. To the contrary, Dr. Taylor specifically negated plaintiffs diabetes as a contributing cause of his conditions, explaining:
[Plaintiff] was diagnosed as having diabetes in the late 1960’s, which would be a rather late onset of diabetes. From a medical point of view, diabetes that begins in later life is not usually as significant as diabetes that develops in a child or young adult. Furthermore, we tend to classify diabetes, the severity of diabetes on the basis of whether or not it ever required insulin to control it. Obviously, the more severe cases of diabetes require the use of insulin . . . where the less severe cases don’t require it.
In this case, this man has never required insulin and based on the fact his diabetes was rather late onset and based upon the fact that it never required the use of insulin, it is my feeling that it was not a significant case of diabetes and the significance in this case is this: That carpal tunnel syndrome and other neuropathies can be related to long-standing cases of diabetes, the type of diabetes being the ones that required insulin. The milder cases of diabetes, as I believe was true in this case, are not involved in neuropathies. So, I don’t feel his carpal tunnel syndrome and/or his ulnar neuropathies in either upper extremity are in any way related to the fact he has had mild diabetes for several years.
*56Dr. Lamb also stated that plaintiffs degenerative arthritis was not related to his diabetes. Dr. Cullis stated, without elaboration, that plaintiffs diabetes "may play some part” in his carpal tunnel condition, but that it was not a factor with regard to plaintiffs lower extremity conditions. On this record, the wcac erred in finding that the evidence "pointed strongly” toward plaintiffs diabetes as the "fundamental basis” for his extremity complaints and carpal tunnel problems.
While it is true, as the wcac recognized, that plaintiff has "a history of non-work-related physical exertions and problems,” there was substantial evidence supporting the magistrate’s finding that plaintiffs present complaints were related to his employment as a truck mechanic. The wcac simply substituted its opinion for that of the magistrate in concluding otherwise. As this Court observed in Kovach, "this is not proper review pursuant to statute and Holden, supra.”
Accordingly, for the reasons stated, we reverse the decision of the wcac and reinstate the decision of the magistrate with regard to the issue of work-relatedness and remand this case to the wcac for consideration of the remaining issues that were raised by the parties but not considered by the wcac.2
Reversed and remanded. We do not retain jurisdiction.
Each of the assumptions employed in the hypothetical were supported by evidence in the record.
In light of our disposition, it is unnecessary to address plaintiffs claim that reversal is required on the alternative ground of "pro-defendant” bias on the part of one of the wcac panel members. Furthermore, we note that plaintiff did not raise this issue below and, therefore, it was not preserved. Benavides v Edward C Levy Co, 117 Mich App 722, 726; 324 NW2d 149 (1982). Cf. Armstrong v Ann Arbor, 58 Mich App 359, 368-369; 227 NW2d 343 (1975).

=== CASE 9739348 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:46.178096+00 ===

Jansen, P.J.
(concurring). I concur with Justice Kavanagh’s decision to reverse the decision of the *57Worker’s Compensation Appellate Commission and remand for the reasons set forth in the opinion. I write separately to emphasize a growing trend of the wcac to exceed its administrative reviewing authority and deny benefits to eligible employees. That is, the wcac, with increasing regularity, is setting aside the findings of the magistrates and substituting its own findings. This constitutes improper review de novo.
This case, as do many other worker’s compensation cases before this Court, requires the correct application of the standard of review set forth in MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3). I write separately to emphasize that the standard of review set forth in this statutory provision is not a de novo standard of review and the wcac may not simply substitute its opinion for that of the magistrate.
Beginning October 1, 1986, under 1985 PA 103, review de novo by the wcac was eliminated. Thereafter, findings of fact by a worker’s compensation magistrate were to be considered conclusive, on administrative appellate review by the wcac, if supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record. MCL 418.861a(3); MSA 17.237(861a)(3); Holden v Ford Motor Co, 439 Mich 257, 261; 484 NW2d 227 (1992). A review of the evidence by the wcac must include both a qualitative and quantitative analysis of that evidence and ensure a full, thorough, and fair review of the evidence. MCL 418.861a(13); MSA 17.237(861a)(13). Our Supreme Court has made clear that the wcac’s findings must be consistent with the concept of administrative appellate review that is less than review de novo of the magistrate’s decision, but is a more searching review by the wcac than the "any evidence” standard. Holden, supra, pp 261-262; Farrington v *58Total Petroleum, Inc, 442 Mich 201, 218; 501 NW2d 76 (1993).
The present case is an excellent example of the growing trend of the wcac to exceed its statutory authority and engage in what is essentially review de novo of the record to deny benefits to eligible workers. The record in this case provided overwhelming evidence to support the magistrate’s decision. Indeed, a claimant in a worker’s compensation case need only establish by a preponderance of the evidence both a personal injury and a relationship between the injury and the workplace. Jishi v General Motors Corp (On Remand), 207 Mich App 429, 432; 526 NW2d 24 (1994).
This growing trend of the wcac is particularly troubling in light of the purposes of the worker’s compensation act. The worker’s compensation act is remedial legislation and, as such, is to be liberally construed in favor of injured employees. Gardner v Van Buren Public Schools, 445 Mich 23, 49; 517 NW2d 1 (1994); Smeester v Pub-N-Grub, Inc (On Remand), 208 Mich App 308, 312; 527 NW2d 5 (1995). The primary purpose underlying the worker’s compensation act is to provide compensation to eligible persons for covered disabilities. Therefore, any statutory ambiguity generally should be construed in favor of awarding compensation. Gardner, supra, p 49. As aptly stated by our Supreme Court:
The statutory workers’ compensation scheme was enacted for the protection of both employees and employers who work and do business in this state. The system assures covered employees that they will be compensated in the event of employment-related injuries. In addition, employers are assured of the parameters of their liability for such injuries. By agreeing to assume responsibility for all employment-related injuries, employers pro*59tect themselves from the possibility of potentially excessive damage awards. In order to effectuate these policies, the statute has been liberally construed to provide broad coverage for injured workers. [Wells v Firestone Tire & Rubber Co, 421 Mich 641, 651; 364 NW2d 670 (1984).]
Thus, the worker’s compensation act is not intended to benefit employees only. The statutory scheme represents a compromise to both employees and employers. Therefore, while one policy underlying the worker’s compensation act is prompt payment to injured employees, the liability of employers is limited because they are shielded from common-law tort actions. Badon v General Motors Corp, 188 Mich App 430, 441; 470 NW2d 436 (1991). Employees, therefore, may collect only worker’s compensation benefits for personal injury or occupational disease against the employer, and the only exception is a claim for an intentional tort. MCL 418.131(1); MSA 17.237(131X1).
I reiterate these purposes underlying the worker’s compensation act because the wcac is required to act within the scheme of the worker’s compensation act. As Justice Kavanagh correctly notes, the wcac may not review a magistrate’s decision de novo and may not substitute its judgment for that of the magistrate. Kovach v Henry Ford Hosp, 207 Mich App 107, 111; 523 NW2d 800 (1994).
Finally, I do not agree with Justice Kavanagh’s statement, in footnote two, that the issue of a pro-employer bias on the part of one of the wcac panel members was not preserved for appellate review because plaintiff did not raise the issue below. Requiring a party to raise this issue of bias in front of the same panel member is onerous, given that it is extremely doubtful that the panel member would concede such an assertion. As this *60Court has noted, a failure to object to the conduct of a trial judge is understandable given that counsel may be reluctant to challenge a judge’s own behavior on the bench. People v Sterling, 154 Mich App 223, 231; 397 NW2d 182 (1986).
Further, this claim is a serious one, resulting in all seven justices of our Supreme Court to remand this case, on reconsideration, to this Court for consideration as on leave granted. See 444 Mich 977 (1994). Contrary to Judge Corrigan’s suggestion, I would not foreclose the opportunity of the commissioner to respond. I would not, however, dispose of the claim because of a so-called preservation requirement. Because there does appear to be a trend in the wcac to exceed its reviewing authority and deny benefits, I would not so plainly dismiss this claim.

=== CASE 9739349 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:46.182182+00 ===

Corrigan, J.
(concurring). Although I concur with Justice Kavanagh’s opinion, I write separately to address Judge Jansen’s concurring opinion. I cannot agree with my colleague’s suggestion that the present case represents a "growing trend of the wcac to exceed its administrative reviewing authority,” ante at 57, nor do I agree that we should entertain an issue of alleged bias that was not even- presented until plaintiff moved for reconsideration after the Supreme Court initially denied his application for leave to appeal. I would not excuse plaintiff from the duty to make a record because it is "extremely doubtful that the panel member would concede such an assertion.” Ante at 59.
I. TREND TO EXCEED ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEWING AUTHORITY
I cannot agree that this case presents an appro*61priate vehicle to chastise the Worker’s Compensation Appellate Commission, much less to recognize a trend toward excess in that agency. Because this Court does not enjoy general supervisory authority over the wcac or any other agency, I would leave the analysis of trends to the commentators and decide only the merits of this particular controversy.
But if this case somehow represents a "growing trend” of the wcac to "exceed its administrative reviewing authority,” that realization certainly escaped a significant number of appellate judges before it reached this panel. A three-judge panel of this Court (Neff, P.J., and Murphy and Weaver, JJ.) originally denied plaintiffs application for leave to appeal from the unanimous wcac opinion, citing Holden v Ford Motor Co, 439 Mich 257; 484 NW2d 227 (1992). All seven justices of our Supreme Court thereafter denied plaintiffs application for leave to appeal. Illes v Jones Transfer Co, 444 Mich 897 (1993). Only on plaintiffs motion for reconsideration, when plaintiff first presented his claim that one of the commissioners was biased, did the Supreme Court remand this case for consideration as on leave granted.1 Illes v Jones Transfer Co, 444 Mich 977 (1994). That the wcac exceeded its reviewing authority did not strike ten judges who are generally attuned to issues of agency excess.
In any event, I see no "trend to excess” in this case. In my view, the problem of causation in reinjury cases ranks among the most difficult questions in worker’s compensation litigation. The problem is further magnified when an aged worker *62like Mr. liles suffers from a preexisting, ordinary disease of life such as diabetes, arthritis, and degenerative joint disease. Competent adjudicators can legitimately differ, and can even commit error, about such questions of causation without exceeding their lawful authority. Cf. Altman v Nelson, 197 Mich App 467; 495 NW2d 826 (1992).
By July 10, 1986, sixty-nine-year-old John liles had a long history of disease and injury. That history included chronic (but mild) diabetes, colon cancer, an irregular heartbeat, diffuse degenerative joint disease, arthritis, two hernias, and a fractured leg. He also apparently suffered from as yet undiagnosed carpal tunnel syndrome, ulnar nerve entrapment, and spinal stenosis. On July 10, 1986, plaintiff was injured when he fell thirteen feet from the top of a truck trailer.2 He experienced persistent pain in his back, legs, neck, arms, hands, and shoulders and was treated with pain medication, whirlpool therapy, and advised to use a cane. He was also treated by a chiropractor.
Plaintiff never returned to work after July 10, 1986, despite his thirty-two years’ seniority as a diesel mechanic at defendant Jones Transfer. In August and October 1986, however, two doctors pronounced him recovered and fit to return to work. One doctor recommended work restrictions, the other did not. One of those doctors related plaintiff’s multiple health problems to aging and not to his employment. Both doctors who examined plaintiff found degenerative joint disease or arthritis, while one found calcification in the arteries in plaintiff’s right leg.
Compensation was voluntarily paid from July 10, 1986, through January 15, 1987. It was termi*63nated on the basis of Dr. Lamb’s November 24, 1986, examination of plaintiff. The doctor found plaintiff able to return to work. Dr. Lamb noted that plaintiff had much to complain about medically, but did not relate the symptoms to work.
Unfortunately, on January 10, 1987, plaintiff fell in his yard at home and broke his left leg. He later claimed that his right leg gave out, although he never reported this cause at the time. Plaintiff broke his left leg in exactly the same place as a 1975 break during an accident on the family farm. The January 10, 1987, fracture of the left leg did not heal, although the leg was placed in a cast four times. Thereafter, plaintiff was finally diagnosed with carpal tunnel syndrome and ulnar nerve entrapment.
Plaintiff subsequently claimed total and permanent disability and loss of the industrial use of his hands, arms, and legs. The magistrate found a causal relationship between the July 10 accident and the January 10, 1987, injury. The magistrate found that plaintiff had not lost the use of his upper extremities, but had lost the industrial use of his lower extremities. On appeal, the wcac rejected the magistrate’s conclusion of work-relatedness. The decision fairly can be read as an attempt to apply the "significant manner” standard to plaintiff’s claims. MCL 418.301, 418.401; MSA 17.237(301), 17.237(401). A finding of fact is conclusive on the wcac if it is supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence, as stated in Doom v Brunswick Corp, 211 Mich App 189, 195; 535 NW2d 244 (1995):
Findings of fact made by a magistrate are conclusive on the wcac if they are supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record. MCL 418.861a(3); MSA *6417.237(861a)(3). Judicial review is of the findings of fact made by the wcac, not those made by the magistrate. The findings of fact made by the wcac are conclusive if there is any competent evidence in the record to support them. Holden v Ford Motor Co, 439 Mich 257, 263; 484 NW2d 227 (1992).
The medical testimony obviously was in conflict. Seven doctors either saw plaintiff or reviewed his case. One doctor aptly testified that he found it very difficult to sort out just what factors had caused or aggravated plaintiff’s conditions. I share his belief. In this tough case, I have approved the reasoning in Justice Kavanagh’s opinion. But I do not agree that our decision to reverse warrants criticism of the wcac’s decisional process in this or any other case.
II. BIAS OF WCAC MEMBER
Because the issue of alleged pro-employer bias of one commissioner has not been preserved for appellate review, it is not properly before us. Preservation requirements serve overriding juridical interests, including notice, an opportunity to be heard, economy, and efficiency. If error is corrected when it is first claimed, an appellate remedy is unnecessary. My colleague would excuse plaintiff from the duty to preserve his claim of bias because it is extremely doubtful that the commissioner involved would concede that he is biased.
A golden thread in our tradition of justice is an accused person’s right to notice and an opportunity to be heard. A judicial officer who is accused of bias should also be entitled not only to the courtesy of notice, but also to a fair chance to respond to the charges. Our canons of ethics seem *65to bar judicial officers from responding to attacks in the public arena. Thus, the official record provides the only means by which a judicial officer can answer a claim of disqualifying bias. My concurring colleague would seem to foreclose even this limited opportunity to respond.
Moreover, we should not consider an untested statistical compilation of instances of alleged bias. The statistics plaintiff offers us for the first time on appeal have not been subjected to any form of adversary testing. Nor has plaintiff even attempted to show that the underlying cases were wrongly decided.
Finally, even if plaintiff successfully proved that the commissioner has some statistically measurable bias against claimants, he has not established a deprivation of due process. Even generalized hostility to a certain class of claimants does not present disqualifying bias. Aetna Life Ins Co v Lavoie, 475 US 813, 820-821; 106 S Ct 1580; 89 L Ed 2d 823 (1986). In Williams v Hofley Mfg Co, 430 Mich 603; 424 NW2d 278 (1988), our Supreme Court saw no constitutional impediment to a system in which members of the Worker’s Compensation Appeal Board were appointed as representatives of employer or employee interest groups, or of the public, even though two panel members might be made up of an employer or employee representative and a presumably neutral general public representative. As our less gender-neutral Supreme Court then observed:
Much harm is done by the myth that, merely by putting on a black robe and taking the oath of office as a judge, a man ceases to be human and strips himself of all predilections, becomes a passionless thinking machine. [Williams, supra at 616.]
*66As Williams noted, to condemn an adjudicator as a representative of á particular interest group "is to foreclose experience as a criterion for appointment.” Id. at 615.
The accused commissioner should have a right to present a defense, and not merely to concede the charge. For these reasons, I fully concur with the observation in the lead opinion that the claim of bias has not been preserved for appellate review.
The Supreme Court again entered a form order that gives our Court not a glimmer of guidance, a practice that I have previously criticized. Feldbauer v Cooney Engineering Co (On Remand), 205 Mich App 284; 517 NW2d 298 (1994).
Plaintiffs hand previously was injured at work on May 1, 1986. He was off work for a few weeks and received worker’s compensation benefits during that time.

=== CASE 9739350 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:48.025744+00 ===

Arterburn, C.J.
Defendant was indicted for the crime of murder in the first degree while attempting to perpetrate a robbery. Defendant was tried by jury in the Kosciusko Circuit Court and was adjudged guilty of first degree murder.
Considering only the evidence most favorable to the State, we find that on May 12, 1967, at about 12.30 a.m., police officers found a man identified as Everett Bechtel lying on the floor of Pete and Beck’s Tavern in Fort Wayne, Indiana. His death was caused by a shotgun blast which resulted in massive hemorrhaging.
*671A witness who testified at the defendant’s trial stated that at about 12:00 a.m., he entered Cap’s Rib Bar, which is just across the street from Pete and Beck’s Tavern. Looking out the window, he saw two subjects standing on the steps of Pete and Beck’s Tavern. There was a noise like a pop-gun and the witness looked back towards the tavern where he saw a man come running out the front door. The witness identified the defendant as being one of the three men that he saw.
Janet Van Dyke testified that early on May 12, 1967, about 12:30 a.m., defendant came to her apartment along with Larry Henderson and Morris Jones. Jones was holding his hand, which was hurt. Her testimony was supported by the testimony of Roger Miller.
Additionally, defendant signed a warning and a waiver and then proceeded to make a statement regarding his participation in the crime.
Defendant first complains that he was never adequately warned of his constitutional rights, especially his right to have a lawyer present prior to any questioning, even if he could not afford one, and that this lack of adequate warning precluded him from making an intelligent waiver of his rights to the presence of an attorney. In the case before us, defendant was warned of his rights by Captain Chambers, who read the warning to defendant. Defendant appeared to read along with Chambers and in fact asked what the words “indigent” and “pauper” meant. After being advised, defendant signed the waiver and then tried to secure the services of a lawyer. Unable to do so, he stated, according to Captain Chambers: “I might as well tell you the whole story now without the aid of an attorney.” Miranda does not require “that each police station must have a ‘station house lawyer’ present at all times to advise prisoners.” Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U. S. 436, 474, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 1628, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 724. Though a request for counsel has been made, an accused may, at a later time, waive his right to *672counsel. In the case before us, the warning and waiver read to the defendant, and signed by him, .consisted of the. following:
“YOUR RIGHTS
“FORT WAYNE POLICE DEPARTMENT
Place: Station; Date: 5-18-67; Time: 1:45 P.M.
“Before we ask you any questions, you must understand your rights. You have the right to remain silent. Anything you say can be used against you in court. You.have the right to talk to a lawyer for advice before we ask you any questions, ánd to have him with you during questioning. You have this right to the advice and presence of a lawyer even if you cannot afford to hire one. We have no way of giving you a lawyer but one will be appointed for you, if and when you go to court and the court finds that you are a pauper. If you wish to answer questions now without a lawyer present, you have the right to stop answering at any time. You also have the right to stop answering questions until you talk to a lawyer.
“WAIVEE
“I have read the statement of my rights shown above. I understand what my rights are. I am willing to answer questions and make a statement. I do not want a lawyer. I understand and know what I am doing. No pressure of any kind has been used against me.
SIGNED Johnny Bouse
' Witness: Lt. J. EÍlenwood; Witness: Sgt. Chambers; Time: 1:45 P.M.”
In Jones. v. State (1969), 253. Ind. 235, 252 N. E. 2d 572 (a companion case involving the same crime) we held.that an identical warning was adequate under the standards set out in Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U. S. 436, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694. Morris Jones participated in this attempted robbery with the defendant and another person. Accordingly, we again hold that this warning was adequate and that the defendant intelligently waived his constitutional rights.
Defendant next, alleges that reversible error, was committed *673when the prosecution was able to admit a confession into evidence, over defendant’s objections, before the corpus delicti of the crime charged was established by clear and independent evidence of probative value. This issue was also raised in Jones v. State (1969), 253 Ind. 235, 252 N. E. 2d 572, 580, where we stated:
“However, in first degree murder under our felony-murder statute we do not require that the exact felony or attempted felony be established by evidence independent of the confession nor do we require that premeditation be proved by outside independent evidence where the charge is purposeful and premeditated first degree murder. These elements may be shown by use of the confession in connection with any independent evidence in making out the case.”
Corpus delicti is not synonymous with a prima facie case. Evidence independent of the confession indicates that the homicide was one of violence occurring under circurnstances from which it could be drawn that it was criminal in nature. The cause of death was a shotgun blast and the victim was found on the floor of his tavern lying in a pool of blood. Shotgun pellets were found near the body, but there was no weapon near the body, thus negating the possibility of suicide. Therefore, the confession was properly admitted into evidence.
Defendant contends that it was prejudicial error for the court to allow Donald Molargik, a witness for the State of Indiana, to identify the defendant when asked to do so by the prosecuting attorney on redirect examination. In Shipman v. State (1962), 243 Ind. 245, 254, 183 N. E. 2d 823, 828, we stated:
“The scope of re-direct examination is within the sound discretion of the trial court, and although he permits evidence to be introduced under such re-direct examination for the first time, this fact will not, under ordinary circumstances, constitute reversible error unless the opposite party is prevented from further interrogating the witness on the subject matter and of presenting other *674evidence in contradiction of the testimony adduced if it is prejudicial to his position in the case. These circumstances do not appear in this case. Brazil Block Coal Co. v. Gibson (1903), 160 Ind. 319, 326, 66 N. E. 882, 885; Wells v. State (1959), 239 Ind. 415, 425, 426, 158 N. E. 2d 256, 260, 261-262.”
In the case before us, the identity of the defendant was put in issue on direct examination when witness Donald Molargik testified that he could not identify the features of any of the subjects he saw. On cross-examination, counsel for the defendant tested Molargik’s opportunity to perceive the subjects in considerable detail. Then, on re-direct examination, the prosecuting attorney cleared up defense counsel’s intimations that Molargik had too short a time to view the subjects by simply asking him if he had ever seen the defendant before, and if so, when. It was at that point that the witness identified the defendant. Under these circumstances, we find that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in this matter.
Judgment is therefore affirmed.
Givan, Prentice and Hunter, JJ., concur;

=== CASE 9739378 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:13:28.188895+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion
DeBruler, J.
Appellant was charged with giving false sworn testimony to the Marion County Grand Jury on August 24, 1966. The sole evidence in the record on appeal of the questions asked appellant and her answers to the Grand Jury consists of a purported transcript of the Grand Jury proceedings, which transcript was read into the trial record in this case by two of appellee’s witnesses. The transcript was never authenticated and the trial court refused to permit it to be introduced in evidence. The trial court did, however, permit the two witnesses to read the transcript on the theory that they were merely using it to refresh their recollection of the Grand Jury testimony of appellant.
There is no question that a witness may use a written memo to refresh his memory concerning past events. Clark v. State (1853), 4 Ind. 156; DeArmond v. Carter (1956), 127 Ind. App. 34, 134 N. E. 2d 239; 3 WIGMORE, EVIDENCE, § 758 (3d ed. 1940). When this is permitted, the evidence concerning the past events is the testimony relating the independent recollection of the witness and not the written memo. In Clark v. State, supra, the Court said:
. “A witness may be permitted to refresh his memory of facts, by referring to a written memorandum, written either by himself or by another, at or near the time of the occurrences; but the memorandum cannot be substituted in the *663stead of the recollection of the witness.” (Emphasis added.) 4 Ind. at 157.
In Southern R. Co. v. State (1905), 165 Ind. 613, 75 N. E. 272, this Court said:
“While it was proper for this witness to refresh or stimulate his memory by reference to the original memoranda, still as a general rule he could not be permitted to testify wholly or entirely therefrom, which, to some extent at least, he apparently did. It was essential that he possess some knowledge or recollection independent of the memoranda, or, in other words, it could not be substituted instead of the recollection of the witness. This is the rule adhered to and enforced at least in this jurisdiction.” (Emphasis added.) 165 Ind. at 625.
See also: Elmore v. Overton (1885), 104 Ind. 548, 4 N. E. 197; U.S. v Riccardi, 174 F. 2d 883 (3d Cir. 1949) ; 3 WIGMORE, EVIDENCE, § 763 (3d ed. 1940).
The major safeguard which minimizes the risk that the memo will create or shape the witness’ memory rather than revive or refresh it, is that after looking at the written memo, the witness must be able to testify from his own memory. To guarantee that the witness is doing that, he must lay the memo aside and testify from memory, and he is not permitted to read the memo into evidence. Otherwise the written memo would be the evidence of the past events and not the refreshed recollection of the witness.
I believe the record clearly shows that the only evidence of appellant’s Grand Jury testimony was supplied by appellee’s two witnesses reading into evidence a purported verbatim transcript of the Grand Jury proceedings. During the questioning of the Grand Jury foreman, he was handed State’s Ex. 1, a purported transcript of appellant's testimony before the Grand Jury, and the following occurred:
“Q. Would you tell the court what questions were asked of Mary Richardson and what answers she gave August 24, 1966 before the Marion County Grand Jury?
A. All the questions, sir?
*664Q. All the questions.
MR. WARD: Your Honor, I will object to the witness reading from the exhibit.
THE COURT: He said he needed it for specific help. Overruled. (Emphasis added.)
* H* H«
THE COURT: Now, the answer to the question, Mr. Witness ?
A. The question to Mary Richardson was, ‘Within the last two weeks. And where was it that you met Dorothy Tucker?’ Mary Richardson’s answer was, ‘I’ve never met her.’ The second question to Mary Richardson, ‘Well, when did you first see her?’ Mary Richardson answered, ‘Never have.’ The third question to Mary Richardson, T understood you to say that you do know her.’ ‘By name’ was the answer by Mary Richardson. The next question, ‘Oh by name, you don’t know her? You do know her name, is that right?’ Mary Richardson’s answer was ‘Yes.’ The next question to Mary Richardson was, ‘When was the first time that you heard her name?’ Mary’s answer, ‘Well, it was about that that me and Mr. Battles broke our relationship.’
MR. WARD: I object, as being irrelevant.
THE COURT: Overruled.
A. The next question to Mary Richardson, ‘Oh. What caused you and Battles to break your relationship?’ Her answer was T had some information that he was a panderer which to my knowledge was supposed to have been Miss Tucker and that’s why I broke my relationship with him.’ The next question, T see. How had you heard that he was a panderer or procurer for Dorothy Tucker, how did you learn that?’ Mary’s answer, ‘Through the newspaper.’ Question to Mary Richardson, ‘You saw it in the newspaper, right?’ Mary’s answer, ‘Yes.’ Next question to Mary, ‘And did you then have a conversation with Don Battles?’ Answer by Mary, ‘Yes, I did.’ Next question to Mary, ‘What did you say to him, what did he say?’ Mary’s answer, ‘I asked him if it was true and he said that it was and I said, well, I didn’t think that you would do such a thing.’ Next question, ‘What else did He say?’ *665Mary’s answer, ‘And while this was going on I said that we should quit going together and that I didn’t want anything else to do with him.’ Next question, ‘What did he say to that?’ Mary’s answer, ‘Nothing he said okay.’ Next question, ‘Where did you have this conversation with him?’ Mary’s answer, ‘At my place.’ Next question, ‘Where you live?’ ‘Yes’ was Mary’s answer. Question, ‘Well, did he just go ahead and leave then?’ Mary’s answer, ‘Yes.’ Next question, ‘You’ve never talked to Dorothy Tucker though, is that right?’ Answer, ‘Yes.’ Next question, ‘Have you ever known a Faith Adams?’ Mary’s answer, ‘No.’ Next question, ‘Have you ever known a girl that went by the name of Faith Adams?’ Mary’s answer, ‘No.’
MR. WARD: No, Your Honor, I move to strike all the testimony. It appears it is the product of a third person. I have no opportunity to cross examine.
THE COURT: Overruled. He said he knew the questions and answers and used that to refresh his memory.”
It is obvious that the witness is reading the transcript verbatim and is not testifying from memory concerning the testimony of appellant before the Grand Jury. The same thing occurred with the second witness, who read the exact same portion of State’s Ex. 1 into the record.
This is not a mere technicality, especially in a perjury case, where the appellee was required to show that appellant’s answers to certain questions were wilfully false. This can only be determined if we know exactly what questions appellant was asked and exactly what she answered. The Grand Jury proceedings were on August 24, 1966, and the trial was on October 2, 1967, over a year later. It may be true that in spite of this time gap the witnesses had an independent recollection of appellant’s testimony before the Grand Jury and could have testified on that basis. However, we have no way of knowing that because their recollection is not placed in evidence and all we have is the reading verbatim of an unauthenticated, inadmissible, purported transcript of the grand jury proceedings. I dissent.
*666Prentice, J., concurs with separate opinion.
Note.—Reported in 266 N. E. 2d 51.

=== CASE 9739357 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:54.732843+00 ===

SHORT, Judge
(dissenting).
While I agree that vicarious official immunity does not bar respondent’s discrimination claims, I respectfully dissent on the non-immunity issues because those issues are not properly before us.
Federal case law on the appealability of orders involving immunity claims may serve as a guide to our interpretation of the right to appeal under our rules of appellate procedure. Cf. Anderson v. City of Hopkins, 393 N.W.2d 363, 364 (Minn.1986) (holding that federal case law “ought to be followed” in interpreting appealability of rulings on immunity of state officials for violations of federal law). Precedent of the United States Supreme Court limits interlocutory review of immunity rulings to cases involving neat abstract issues of law and undisputed facts. Johnson v. Jones, - U.S. -, -, 115 S.Ct. 2151, 2158, 132 L.Ed.2d 238 (1995) (quoting 15A Charles A. Wright et al., Federal Practice and Procedure § 3914.10, at 664 (1992)).
The conditional adjudication on the statute of limitations issue is subject to modification prior to entry of a final judgment, and the trial court is free to consider the impact of later evidence and rulings. See Minn. R.Civ.P. 54.02 (in the absence of an express determination that immediate entry of final judgment is appropriate, order adjudicating less than complete case “is subject to revision at any time before the entry of judgment”). A decision that “is tentative, informal or incomplete” is not appealable. Swint v. Chambers County Comm’n, - U.S. -, -, 115 S.Ct. 1203, 1208, 131 L.Ed.2d 60 (1995) (quoting Cohen v. Beneficial Indus. Loan Corp., 337 U.S. 541, 546, 69 S.Ct. 1221, 1225, 93 L.Ed. 1528 (1949)). The ruling on the statute of limitations is not final, and it is not, on its own, immediately appealable.
The right of a governmental entity to take an immediate appeal on an immunity issue confers no right on other parties to interlocutory review of unrelated rulings not ‘Inextricably intertwined” with the immunity issues. Id. at -, 115 S.Ct. at 1212. This court should not “encourage parties to parlay [immunity] orders into multi-issue interlocutory appeal tickets” by extending review to other issues. Id. at -, 115 S.Ct. at 1211. Review of the statute of limitations ruling in this case is in no way “necessary to ensure meaningful review of’ the immunity issue and thus, not properly before us. Id. at -, 115 S.Ct. at 1212. I dissent because it is inappropriate to expand the scope of this appeal by extending discretionary review. See McKenzie v. Northern States Power Co., 440 N.W.2d 183, 185 (Minn.App.1989) (declining to expand the scope of discretionary review); Clark v. Monnens, 436 N.W.2d 830, 831 (Minn.App.1989) (same); Karlstad State Bank v. Fritsche, 374 N.W.2d 177, 184 (Minn.App.1985) (same).

=== CASE 9739358 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:55.02125+00 ===

Arterburn, C.J.
On November 22, 1967, defendant was arrested for possession of narcotics. Defendant surrendered certain valuable articles of personal property for safekeeping purposes to the police intake officer, Albert J. Bragalone, among which was a certain wristwatch later identified and admitted as State’s Exhibit Number 1. After the wristwatch was accepted for safekeeping, Officer Bragalone turned it over to Captain Edwards of the Detective Bureau of the Fort Wayne Police Department. Appellant was charged with second degree burglary and found guilty as charged.
*682Appellant urges on this appeal that he was compelled to give possession of his valuables to the Fort Wayne Police Department, which was merely a bailment for the safekeeping of defendant’s valuables during his incarceration. Appellant argues that the warrantless seizure of the watch was not incidental to the arrest on the charge of Second Degree Burglary. As the fruits of an alleged illegal seizure, defendant claims it should not have been admitted into evidence over his objection.
We find that regardless of whether or not a bailment situation existed, there was no illegal seizure of defendant’s watch. When Officer Bragalone gave the watch to Captain Edwards there was merely a transfer of the watch within the Fort Wayne Police Department.
Our decision in this case is compatible with similar cases in our neighboring states of Ohio and Illinois and in certain Federal district courts. In People v. Hambrick (1968), 98 Ill. App. 2d 481, 240 N. E. 2d 696, the Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, Second Division, held that marijuana found during the ordinary course of inventorying the defendant’s effects for safekeeping should have been admitted into evidence. Becently, the Supreme Court of Ohio held that it is not unreasonable to search a person in a routine station-house search, without a warrant, before he is locked in a cell or room. This would normally require an inventorying and safekeeping of such personal effects. The fruits of such a search were held admissible into evidence. State v. Dempsey (1970), 22 Ohio St. 2d 219, 259 N. E. 2d 745.
In Baskerville v. United States (10th Cir. 1955), 227 F. 2d 454, the court held that a lawful search occurred where the defendant was arrested, taken into custody, and then searched by jail officers who placed his personal property in an envelope. About two weeks later incriminating evidence was found in said envelope by a United States Secret Service agent. The court held it was properly admitted into evidence. Similarly, in Cotton v. United States (9th Cir. 1967), 371 F. 2d 385, 393, *683the court stated, concerning evidence found upon searching the defendant at the jail after his arrest:
“If a lawful search or examination produces evidence of other crimes than that for which the prisoner was arrested, that is not something to which he can object. See Taglavore v. United States, 9 Cir., 1961, 291 F. 2d 262, 265. Indeed, as we there said, it is proper for the police to look for just such evidence, so long as the arrest is not a mere pretext for doing so, as it was found to be in that case. . . . And if the papers were validly available to the state police, there is no reason that the F.B.I. could not make use of them in their investigation and prosecution.”
A search incidental to a valid arrest is lawful regardless of what it reveals. In the case at bar defendant does not challenge the validity of the arrest. A search is no less valid when conducted by a jailer when an accused is booked and is to be confined in a cell in the jail or stationhouse.
We thus find that the search was not unreasonable and that therefore the evidence was properly admitted.
Judgment affirmed.
Givan and Prentice, JJ., concur; Hunter, J., concurs in result ; DeBruler, J., dissents with opinion.

=== CASE 9739359 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:55.026022+00 ===

Dissenting Opinion
DeBruler, J.
The defendant here was arrested for violation of the Uniform Narcotics Act, and was taken to the Fort Wayne City Jail. There, as part of the routine of admitting prisoners to the jail, he was required to turn over valuables on his person to the admitting officer for safekeeping. He handed his wristwatch to the admitting officer and received a receipt for it. The receipt was admitted in evidence at trial and appears as follows:
“Name of Prisoner C. B. Farrie Case No.__
*684FORT WAYNE POLICE DEPARTMENT PRISONER’S PROPERTY RECEIPT
Date of Arrest 11-22-67 Officer Receiving Property
Biagaloni
The following articles were received from the above named prisoner at the time of his/or her arrest and same will be returned to prisoner after his release. The duplicate copy of this receipt must be presented to the Ident. & Records Bureau, Room 216, City Hall. The Police Department will not be responsible for articles not claimed by any prisoner over 30 days after his release.
1 Westclox wristwatch Model 770_
Received by-Date-19—
(Prisoner’s Signature)
s/ State’s Ex 111-21-69 ask”
After having been received by the admitting officer, at a time not disclosed by the record before us, the admitting officer took the watch to the detective bureau at the request of one of the detectives. Thereafter, the watch was identified by its owner as having been stolen in a burglary. The appellant was then charged with the burglary and convicted. At the trial of the burglary charge the appellant objected to the admission of the watch into evidence on the ground that it had been seized in violation of his Fourth Amendment rights.
The search at the police station cannot be justified as a valid search incident to an arrest because it was not contemporaneous with the arrest. In Preston v. U. S. (1964), 376 U. S. 364, 84 S. Ct. 881, 11 L. Ed. 2d 777, the United States Supreme Court said:
“The rule allowing contemporaneous searches is justified, for example, by the need to seize weapons and other things which might be used to assault an officer or effect an escape, as well as by the need to prevent destruction of evidence of the crime—things which might easily happen when the weapon or evidence is on the accused’s person or under his immediate control. But these justifications are absent when *685a search is remote in time or place from the arrest. Once an accused is under arrest and in custody, then a search made at another place, without a warrant, is simply not incident to the arrest.” (Emphasis added.) 376 U. S. at 367.
See Wisconsin v. Stevens (1965), 26 Wis. 2d 451, 132 N. W. 2d 502.
The search of this appellant and the seizure of his wristwatch for inventory and safekeeping in the police property room, made by the police routinely at the time of appellant’s admission to the jail, is a legitimate police procedure, necessitated by the following considerations:
1. to safeguard the property of a prisoner from loss by theft during his incarceration.
2. to protect the police from unfounded charges of theft from prisoners.
3. to protect the lives of prisoners and guards from assaults by prisoners with the use of weapons carried in.
However, the scope of a warrantless search and seizure is limited by the justifiable purposes which free the police from first obtaining a search warrant. In Paxton v. State (1970), 255 Ind. 264, 263 N. E. 2d 636, quoting from Terry v. Ohio (1968), 392 U. S. 1, 88 S. Ct. 1868, 20 L. Ed. 2d 889, we said, “[T]he scope of [a] search must be ‘strictly tied to and justified by’ the circumstances which rendered its initiation permissible”. Again, this Court, quoting from Sibron v. New York (1968), 392 U. S. 40, 88 S. Ct. 1912, 20 L. Ed. 2d 917, said, “The search was not reasonably limited in scope to the accomplishment of the only goal which might conceivably have justified its inception—the protection of the officer by disarming a potentially dangerous man.” See also Preston v. U. S., supra; Chimel v. Calif. (1969), 395 U. S. 752, 89 S. Ct. 2034, 23 L. Ed. 2d 685. Therefore, the scope of the search and seizure here for inventory and safekeeping purposes is limited to achieving those three purposes outlined above which necessitate such search and seizure. Those purposes were not being served when the appellant’s wristwatch was removed from *686the property room and made the subject of a general investigation intended to establish whether or not it had been stolen.
A case, precisely on point, which supports this dissenting opinion is Brett v. U. S., 412 F. 2d 401 (5th Cir. 1969).
There the defendant was convicted of unlawful importation and concealment of heroin. The defendant was involved in a scheme in which heroin was mailed into the United States from Mexico in letters. The defendant was arrested but was not thoroughly searched at the time of the arrest and was taken to the United States Commissioner and then to jail. He was booked into jail in the customary manner and was required to remove all of his clothing and personal effects and to don prison garb and his clothing and effects were placed in the property room. Three days later an agent thoroughly searched the clothing in the property room and there discovered some cellophane papers in the pocket of his trousers containing heroin. This heroin was admitted into evidence at the trial. The Fifth Circuit held that this search was invalid and that the fruits not admissible for any purpose, the state having failed in their burden to show that this warrantless search came within one of the exceptions to the Fourth Amendment requirement of a warrant. The court said:
“The fact that the police have custody of a prisoner’s property for the purpose of protecting it while he is incarcerated does not alone constitute a basis for an exception to the requirement of a search warrant. Preston v. U.S., 367 U. S. 364, 84 S. Ct. 881, L. Ed. 2d 777 (1964) ; Barnett v. U. S., supra; Williams v. U. S., supra. Of course, property in police custody may be subject to warrantless searches under exceptions springing from reasons other than custody alone. The focus in Fourth Amendment cases today is on privacy rather than on property rights. E.g., Katz v. United States, 389 U. S. 347, 88 S. Ct. 507, 19 L. Ed. 2d 576 (1967). Warden, Maryland Penitentiary v. Hayden, supra.
“We are not prepared to say that an accused whose, effects are held by the police for safekeeping has, by the single fact alone of the police custody of the property, surrendered his expectations of the privacy of those effects.”
*687I dissent to the holding of the majority that the Fourth Amendment does not constitute a limitation upon the right of the police in the use and handling of items routinely taken from the person of the arrestee for safekeeping. I cannot accept an interpretation of the Fourth Amendment which would permit the police to search an arrestee, let us say arrested and in the process of being incarcerated for a minor traffic offense, and seize the contents of his pockets, briefcase and car for safekeeping purposes, and then to use these items in a general investigation for evidence of criminal conduct unrelated to the offense for which the person was arrested. I would hold that the officers in this case had ample opportunity to obtain a warrant and the Fourth Amendment requires them to do so in cases of this type.
Note.—Reported in 266 N. E. 2d 212.

=== CASE 9739360 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:55.278928+00 ===

Arterburn, C.J.
This is an appeal from the Marion Criminal Court, Division 2, where appellant was tried before Judge Saul I. Rabb without the intervention of a jury. The appellant was found guilty as charged of the crimes of first degree burglary and sodomy.
Evidence introduced at the trial indicates that on August 10, 1969, at about 2:30 a.m., Mrs. Janet Ballard was awakened when a man put his hand upon her neck and threatened her with a knife and said: “Don’t move and don’t scream.” Mrs. Ballard was then advised that her assailant wanted to engage in an act of sexual intercourse with her and also that he wanted her to commit an act of sodomy upon him. Mrs. Ballard was told “Be quiet” on more than one instance and was also told: “Don’t move the pillow until I heard the door click.” Mrs. Ballard estimated that the whole occurrence lasted about one-half hour and stated that she heard the defendant talking the whole time.
Appellant argues on this appeal that the trial court erred in admitting certain testimony concerning a pair of shoes which was found in the defendant’s apartment. The court refused to admit this pair of shoes into evidence but there was testimony concerning them which connected the defendant to the crime. The defendant, however, failed to object to the testimony and thus failed to preserve this issue for review. This Court has reiterated on many occasions that objections not made in the trial court cannot be urged on appeal, Widmer v. Sweeney et al. (1955), 234 Ind. 263, *676124 N. E. 2d 385; Eiffe v. State (1948), 226 Ind. 57, 77 N. E. 2d 750; Meadows v. Thomas (1918), 187 Ind. 216, 118 N. E. 811; Seisler v. Smith et al. (1897), 150 Ind. 88, 46 N. E. 993.
It is next contended that the judgment of the trial court is not sustained by sufficient evidence regarding the identification of the defendant. In this case, the defendant was identified by his voice. This Court has recognized the validity of voice identification in criminal prosecutions. Allison v. State (1960), 240 Ind. 556, 166 N. E. 2d 171; Deal v. The State (1895), 140 Ind. 354, 39 N. E. 930. See also 29 Am. Jur. 2d, Evidence § 368 where it is stated: “Since an early period, witnesses’ testimony of identification of a person by having heard his voice has been regarded as legitimate and competent to establish identity in both criminal and civil cases.”
The defendant was also identified at the time of his arrest by a very distinctive cologne that he was wearing. Additional evidence regarding the identity of the defendant involved a footprint outside the victim’s window which was matched by a police officer with a tennis shoe discovered in the defendant’s apartment. We accordingly find that there was sufficient identification of the defendant.
Judgment affirmed.
Givan and Hunter, JJ., concur; DeBruler, J., concurs in result ; Prentice, J., concurs in part—dissents in part.

=== CASE 9739361 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:55.282876+00 ===

Concurring in Part—Dissenting in Part
Prentice, J.
I concur with Judge Arterburn in the affirmance of the conviction of first degree burglary, but dissent as to the conviction of sodomy.
I take exception to any conviction or charge under the first portion of the Acts of 1905, ch. 169, § 473, p. 584, (1956 Repl.) Burns’ § 10-4221, i.e., “Whoever commits the abominable and detestable crime against nature with mankind or beast * * * shall be deemed guilty of sodomy, * *
*677The Revised Statutes of 1852, ch. 61, § 2, p. 351, (1956 Repl.) Burns’ § 9-2401, provides “Crimes and misdemeanors shall be defined and punishment therefor fixed by statutes of this state and not otherwise.” I am not unmindful of the decision holding that when a public offense has been declared by statute in the general terms of the common law, without more particular definition, the courts will resort to the common law for the particular acts constituting the offense. This rule, however, should not be enlisted to emasculate the statute requiring crimes to be defined by statute. In this era of relative enlightenment and freedom of expression there can be no excuse for offenses regarding sex acts to be vague. “The abominable and detestable crime against nature” is so general as to be meaningless. It can be utilized to mean whatever its user wants it to mean. What is “abominable” or “detestable” to one may be perfectly acceptable to another, and no one should be subjected to criminal prosecutions except upon clear and definite charges. The undesirability of the expression of certain words or thoughts within the chambers of Victorian society, nevertheless, cannot obviate the requirement that crimes be defined with that degree of particularity that will permit persons or ordinary knowledge to know or ascertain what is lawful and what is unlawful, and should not make persons insecure by the possibility that others in position of authority may find their acts undesirable. If certain acts of a sexual nature are considered by our Legislature to be objectionable in our society, and if their prohibition would not violate the constitutional rights of others, then let such acts be enacted as crimes fully defined in clear, unequivocal language.
I would affirm the conviction of burglary and reverse the charge of sodomy.
Note.—Reported in 266 N. E. 2d 617.

=== CASE 9739362 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:12:57.60534+00 ===

SANDSTROM, Justice.
Kenneth E. Gabel suffered a fatal aneurysm while driving his pickup truck. His wife and his estate (Gabels) appeal from summary judgment dismissing their claims against State Farm Mutual Auto Insurance Company for benefits under their no-fault insurance policy, and from an order denying their motion for attorney’s fees. Because the death was not the result of an accident, and did not arise out of the use of a motor vehicle, we affirm the summary judgment. Because the insurance policy does not provide for payment of attorney’s fees, we affirm their denial.
I
Kenneth Gabel suffered the aneurysm, on February 23, 1993, while driving his pickup truck in a Dickinson parking lot. Following the aneurysm, his pickup collided with the Kmart building across the street. Death was the result of the ruptured aneurysm. Gabels sought coverage from State Farm, their automobile insurer, under the policy’s no-fault clause. The parties stipulated the aneurysm was neither caused by, nor aggravated by, the trauma of the collision.
State Farm denied Gabels benefits under the policy and initiated a declaratory action to determine any contractual obligations. State Farm moved for summary judgment based on the facts stipulated by the parties. The Gabels counterclaimed alleging bad-faith, and asked the district court to award them attorney’s fees. On January 25, 1995, the district court granted State Farm’s motion for summary judgment, and denied the Gabels’ counterclaim and motion for attorney’s fees under the policy.
The district court had jurisdiction under Art. VI, § 8, N.D. Const., and N.D.C.C. § 27-05-06. The appeal was filed in a timely manner under Rule 4(a), N.D.R.App.P. This Court has jurisdiction under Art. VI, § 6, N.D. Const., and N.D.C.C. § 28-27-01.
II
Summary judgment is granted only in the absence of any genuine dispute of material fact. Ellingson v. Knudson, 498 N.W.2d 814, 817 (N.D.1993). The party seeking summary judgment must show that absence clearly. Ellingson. All evidence is viewed in the light most favorable to the party opposing summary judgment. Ellingson. This Court decides if the “information available to the trial court, when viewed in the light most favorable to the opposing party, precluded] the existence of a genuine issue as to any material fact and entitle[s] the moving party to summary judgment as a matter of law.” Binstock v. Tschider, 374 N.W.2d 81, 83 (N.D.1985) (citing Johnson v. Haugland, 303 N.W.2d 533, 537 (N.D.1981)). Questions of law are fully reviewable on appeal. Nagel v. Emmons County North Dakota Water Resource Dist., 474 N.W.2d 46, 47 (N.D.1991).
III
Gabels assert this Court’s holding in Weber v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 284 N.W.2d 299 (N.D.1979) is controlling and entitles them, as a matter of law, to partial summary judgment on the company’s obligations under the policy. In Weber, this Court held a driver on a hunting trip accidentally shot in the back by a passenger exiting his pickup could recover under the North Dakota no-fault statute. In Weber, the driver was “occupying” the vehicle for no-fault purposes. Ertelt v. EMCASCO Ins. Co., 486 N.W.2d 233, 235 (N.D.1992). Gabel was also occupying the vehicle within the meaning of the statute.
Occupancy is not the only no-fault requirement a potential beneficiary must satisfy. Under the North Dakota Auto Reparations Act, “accidental bodily injury” is “injury ... arising out of the operation of a motor vehicle, and which is accidental as to the person claiming basic or optional excess no-fault benefits.” N.D.C.C. § 26.1^1-01(1).
A
In addition to the occupancy requirement, the injury must arise out of the “operation of a motor vehicle.” “Operation of a motor vehicle” is “operation, maintenance, or *293use of a motor vehicle as a vehicle.” N.D.C.C. § 26.1 — 41—01(13). In Ertelt, this Court affirmed a summary judgment denying no-fault benefits. Ertelt, after fleeing a burning car, ran about three-eighths mile to get help, ran the three-eighths mile back to the car, and then suffered a fatal heart attack. While Ertelt was not “occupying” his car within the meaning of the statute, this Court decided the ease on causation grounds, stating the death was not an accident “arising out of the operation of the motor vehicle” as a vehicle. Ertelt at 235.
The North Dakota Auto Reparations Act was adopted, largely, from the Uniform Motor Vehicle Accident Reparations Act [Uniform Act]. As this Court has said, “Unless one believes in a miraculous coincidence in choice of words or widespread plagiarism, it is difficult to escape the conclusion that North Dakota and many other jurisdictions have enacted parts of the [Uniform Act], and efforts ought to extend toward uniform construction.” St. Paul Mercury Ins. Co. v. Andrews, 321 N.W.2d 483, 487 (N.D.1982).
Both the N.D.C.C. and the Uniform Act define the insurable act as “maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle as a vehicle.” N.D.C.C. § 26.1 — 41—01(13); Uniform Act § 1(a)(6), 14 U.LA. 43 (1995). According to the Comment to Uniform Act § 1(a)(6), this language “describes initial eligibility for the receipt of [accidental bodily injury] benefits, which cover ‘loss suffered through injury arising out of the maintenance or use of a motor vehicle.’” Uniform Act § 1(a)(6) Comment, 14 U.L.A. 47 (1995). The comment adds that the words “as a motor vehicle” limits eligibility of benefits only to those activities whose “costs should be allocated to motoring as part of an automobile insurance package.” Uniform Act § 1(a)(6) Comment; 14 U.L.A. 47 (1995). Illustrating that “courts have included accidents too far removed from the general activity of motoring and that a narrower construction of the term would be more consistent with the policy of this Act,” the comment explains a person slipping and falling within a parked “travel trailer” should not be awarded no-fault benefits. Uniform Act § 1(a)(6) Comment, 14 U.L.A. 47 (1995). The policy of the Act is to provide coverage for injury “resulting directly from motoring accidents and to leave to other forms of insurance and compensation systems those losses which are tangential to motoring.” Uniform Act § 1(a)(6) Comment, 14 U.L.A. 47 (1995).
The automobile must provide more than the location of the injury. The fact the injury took place within an automobile does not transport the accident into the scope of the no-fault act. Alvarino v. Allstate Ins. Co., 370 Pa.Super. 563, 537 A.2d 18 (1988) (denying no-fault coverage to a driver bitten by a dog in a van); Shellenberger v. Ins. Co. of North America, 182 Mich.App. 601, 452 N.W.2d 892 (1990) (stating the injury caused to a truck driver by reaching across the cab for a briefcase did not fall within the no-fault arena).
Gabel’s death, resulting from an aneurysm neither caused by, nor aggravated by the accident, is not within the statutory defined no-fault coverage. The Gabels offered no evidence showing the aneurysm was caused by any aspect of the use of the motor vehicle as a motor vehicle. Accidents happen somewhere. The mere fact an accident takes place within an automobile is not enough. Accidents fortuitously taking place inside an automobile are not costs we believe the legislature intended the automobile insurer to bear.
B
The Act also requires the injury to be “accidental as to the person claiming ... benefits.” N.D.C.C. § 26.1-41-01(1). Gabel’s death, the result of an aneurysm unrelated to motoring, was not an “accident” within the definition. We do not believe the legislature intended the no-fault law to include coverage for injuries resulting from “the failure of the human body to function properly as a result of internal, not external causes. Were the opposite true, every person ‘injured’ while leaning against, sitting in, or perhaps looking at, an automobile would have [no-fault] coverage.” JFK Memorial Hospital v. Kendal, 205 N.J.Super. 456, 501 A.2d 197, 199 (Law Div.1985) (holding death from a cerebrovascular accident, a “stroke,” is not an “accident” for no-fault purposes). If death “results from natural processes un*294related to the victim’s presence in an automobile, it is not an accident as the word is used in [the no-fault act].” Kordell v. Allstate Ins. Co., 230 N.J.Super. 505, 554 A.2d 1, 2 (A.D.1989) (holding “[a] death from an infarction fortuitously occurring in an insured vehicle is ... not an occasion for [no-fault] benefits.”).
IV
Gabel argues the language of the insurance contract obligates State Farm to pay his attorney’s fees and expenses. The liability section of the contract provides:
“SECTION I — LIABILITY-COVERAGE A
* * * *
“In addition to the limits of liability, [State Farm] will pay for an insured any costs listed below resulting from such accident.
* * * *
4. Expense incurred by an insured:
* * * *
c. at our request.”
Gabels assert this provision applies to no-fault coverage, although it appears only in the liability portion of the contract. The section entitled “SECTION II — NO FAULT — COVERAGE P, What We Pay” does not include attorney’s fees.
When the language of an insurance contract is “clear and explicit, the language should not be strained in order to impose liability on the insurer.” Stetson v. Blue Cross of N.D., 261 N.W.2d 894, 897 (N.D.1978). If the intent is apparent from the language of the policy, we do not look to construction. Cormier v. Nat. Farmers U. Prop. & Cas., 445 N.W.2d 644, 646 (N.D.1989).
The terms of the Gabels’ policy are clear. The “What We Pay” section under the “No-Fault” heading does not list attorney’s fees for actions against the insurer. Nothing in the contract indicates that excerpts of the “Liability” section apply to other sections of the policy. In the absence of any language in the “No-Fault” section indicating an intent to provide attorney’s fees, or that the language Gabels extracted from the liability section should apply to other sections of the policy, we do not find any support for their argument.
Gabels assert, because State Farm, their no-fault insurer, initiated this declaratory action, they were forced to incur “attorney’s fees and expenses.” Gabels rely on our decision in Sigman, in which we noted an insured does not enter an insurance contract intending to purchase a lawsuit. State Farm Fire and Cas. Co. v. Sigman, 508 N.W.2d 323, 326-27 (N.D.1993). In some instances, an insurer is obligated to pay an insured’s attorney’s fees. Sigman. Gabels overlook the first footnote of Sigman in which we clearly stated: “In deciding this case, we express no opinion about an insurer’s obligation to pay its insured’s attorney fees in a declaratory judgment action when the court determines that there is no insurance coverage.” Sigman, at 325 n.l.
Absent specific contractual or statutory authority, the “American Rule” requires parties to bear their own attorney’s fees. Duchscherer v. W.W. Wallwork, Inc., 534 N.W.2d 13, 16 (N.D.1995). Finding neither, we determine the “American Rule” to control attorney’s fees in this case.
V
The district court’s summary judgment in favor of State Farm, and its decision denying Gabels’ counterclaim and motion for attorney’s fees, is affirmed.
NEUMANN, LEVINE and MESCHKE, JJ., concur.
VANDE WALLE, C.J., concurs in result with separate opinion.

=== CASE 2219445 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:14.236147+00 ===

539 N.W.2d 646 (1995)
248 Neb. 821
Rebecca BUCKINGHAM, Appellant,
v.
CREIGHTON UNIVERSITY, Appellee.
No. S-95-275.
Supreme Court of Nebraska.
November 17, 1995.
*647 John C. Nimmer, Omaha, for appellant.
*648 Dennis R. Riekenberg, of Cassem, Tierney, Adams, Gotch & Douglas, Omaha, for appellee.
WHITE, C.J., and CAPORALE, FAHRNBRUCH, LANPHIER, WRIGHT, CONNOLLY, and GERRARD, JJ.
CONNOLLY, Justice.
Rebecca Buckingham appeals an order of the Nebraska Workers' Compensation Court review panel granting partial summary judgment on claims for medical expenses and for injuries to her right hand and arm as described in a petition for modification of her initial workers' compensation award.
The question we are asked to decide is whether the Workers' Compensation Court is empowered to grant summary judgments. We conclude that the compensation court does not have such power and therefore reverse the court's order granting partial summary judgment to the appellee, Creighton University, and remand the cause for further proceedings.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
On March 31, 1993, Buckingham filed a petition with the Nebraska Workers' Compensation Court seeking benefits for a work-related injury to her left wrist and arm that occurred while she was employed with Creighton. At trial, Buckingham added to the petition by interlineation, a claim for injury to her right hand and arm. The trial judge specifically found that Buckingham "failed to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that she sustained any right hand or arm injury as a result of a work related accident while employed [with Creighton]."
The trial court judge found that Buckingham was entitled to benefits of $228.03 per week for 41 2/7 weeks for temporary total disability and $228.03 per week for 17½ weeks for a 10-percent permanent partial disability to the left hand. The Workers' Compensation Court trial judge ordered that Creighton receive credit for $2,358.74 in medical bills that were paid prior to the hearing date.
After Buckingham applied for a rehearing, the review panel affirmed the trial judge's decision without opinion. Buckingham filed a petition for modification, citing unpaid medical expenses, increase in the injury to her right hand and arm, and increased incapacity and requesting additional vocational benefits. Creighton filed a motion for partial summary judgment on the issues of medical expenses and the right-hand and right-arm injury, stating that both claims were barred by collateral estoppel and res judicata.
The trial judge granted Creighton's motion for partial summary judgment, and Buckingham filed an application for rehearing on the issue of medical expenses. The review panel affirmed the order of the trial judge. Buckingham appeals.
ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
Buckingham assigns three errors: (1) The trial court and the review panel erred in granting summary judgment because the compensation court does not have the authority to grant summary judgments, and in the alternative, (2) the trial court and review panel erred in granting summary judgment with respect to the pre-October 19, 1993, medical bills and (3) the trial court and review panel erred in granting summary judgment with respect to Buckingham's right-arm and right-hand injuries.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
Pursuant to Neb.Rev.Stat. § 48-185 (Reissue 1993), an appellate court may modify, reverse, or set aside a Workers' Compensation Court decision only when (1) the compensation court acted without or in excess of its powers; (2) the judgment, order, or award was procured by fraud; (3) there is not sufficient competent evidence in the record to warrant the making of the order, judgment, or award; or (4) the findings of fact by the compensation court do not support the order or award. Hemmerling v. Happy Cab Co., 247 Neb. 919, 530 N.W.2d 916 (1995); Shade v. Ayars & Ayars, Inc., 247 Neb. 94, 525 N.W.2d 32 (1994).
ANALYSIS
The threshold issue in this case is whether the compensation court has the power to grant motions for summary judgment.
*649 The Nebraska Workers' Compensation Court was created pursuant to the Legislature's power to create courts inferior to the state court as found in Neb. Const. art. V, § 1. See, Anderson v. Tiemann, 182 Neb. 393, 155 N.W.2d 322 (1967); City of Lincoln v. Nebraska Workmen's Compensation Court, 133 Neb. 225, 274 N.W. 576 (1937). As a statutorily created court, the compensation court is a tribunal of limited and special jurisdiction and has only such authority as has been conferred on it by statute. Smith v. Fremont Contract Carriers, 218 Neb. 652, 358 N.W.2d 211 (1984). Therefore, we must determine if the granting of preliminary motions such as summary judgment motions is statutorily authorized for the compensation court.
Neb.Rev.Stat. § 48-162 (Reissue 1993) explains the powers of the compensation court. It provides in part:
The Nebraska Workers' Compensation Court, or any judge thereof, is authorized and empowered to examine under oath or otherwise [certain persons], to issue subpoenas for the appearance of witnesses and the production of books and papers, to solemnize marriages, and to administer oaths with like effect as is done in other courts of law in this state. In the examination of any witness and in requiring the production of books, papers, and other evidence, the compensation court shall have and exercise all of the powers of a judge, magistrate, or other officer in the taking of depositions or the examination of witnesses, including the power to enforce his or her orders by commitment for refusal to answer or for the disobedience of any such order.
Furthermore, the compensation court may by a majority vote of judges, adopt and promulgate all reasonable rules and regulations necessary for carrying out the intent and purpose of the Nebraska Workers' Compensation Act and shall administer and enforce all provisions of the act. Neb.Rev.Stat. § 48-163 (Reissue 1993). Additionally, the compensation court is authorized to require production of books or papers and to expedite the hearing of a disputed case. Id.
The procedure before the compensation court is described in Neb.Rev.Stat. §§ 48-173 through 48-177 (Reissue 1993). When a dispute arises with regard to workers' compensation, the statutory procedure in § 48-173 requires the filing of a petition which sets forth
the names and places of residence of the parties and the facts relating to the employment at the time of the injury for which compensation is claimed, the injury in its extent and character, the amount of wages being received at the time of the injury, the knowledge of or notice to the employer of the occurrence of such injury, and such other facts as may be considered necessary for the information of the compensation court....
After being served with a petition, a party has 7 days to file an answer. § 48-176. The next procedural step is a hearing on the merits. § 48-177. No provision is made in this statute for a motion for summary judgment.
The absence of authorization for summary judgment motions found in the workers' compensation statutes contrasts with the express statutory authorization for the use of summary judgment motions in the district and county courts. The procedure for summary judgments in district courts is set forth at Neb.Rev. Stat. §§ 25-1330 through 25-1336 (Reissue 1989). County courts are authorized to grant summary judgments through Neb.Rev.Stat. § 25-2701 (Reissue 1989) which provides:
All provisions in the codes of criminal and civil procedure governing actions and proceedings in the district court not in conflict with statutes specifically governing procedure in county courts and related to matters for which no specific provisions have been made for county courts shall govern and apply to all actions and proceedings in the county court.
As there are no specific statutory provisions prohibiting the use of summary judgment motions in the county courts, § 25-2701 specifically authorizes their use in county courts.
While the district courts and county courts are given specific authorization to use the summary judgment procedure, no provision *650 is made for the procedure in the workers' compensation statutes. As a court of limited jurisdiction, the compensation court must be specifically authorized to grant motions for summary judgment. See Smith v. Fremont Contract Carriers, 218 Neb. 652, 358 N.W.2d 211 (1984).
Furthermore, this court has recognized several situations in which the compensation court is limited by its statutory authorization. For example, in civil cases, a court of general jurisdiction has inherent power to vacate or modify its own judgments at any time during the term at which they are rendered. Manske v. Manske, 246 Neb. 314, 518 N.W.2d 144 (1994); Jarrett v. Eichler, 244 Neb. 310, 506 N.W.2d 682 (1993). However, the compensation court has no inherent power to vacate or modify its own judgment. Smith v. Fremont Contract Carriers, supra. Additionally, this court has held that the compensation court cannot grant a motion for a new trial. Carter v. Weyerhaeuser Co., 234 Neb. 558, 452 N.W.2d 32 (1990). See, also, Black v. Sioux City Foundry Co., 224 Neb. 824, 401 N.W.2d 679 (1987).
As the previous authorities indicate, this court has recognized that the compensation court is limited by its statutory authorization. Because the compensation court is of statutory creation, its powers are appropriately limited to those delineated in the statute. See Smith v. Fremont Contract Carriers, supra. There is no authorization for a grant of a summary judgment motion in the statute; therefore, the compensation court acted outside its powers when it granted Creighton's motion for partial summary judgment.
A judgment, order, or award of the compensation court may be modified, reversed, or set aside upon grounds that the compensation court acted without or in excess of its powers. Hemmerling v. Happy Cab Co., 247 Neb. 919, 530 N.W.2d 916 (1995).
CONCLUSION
The Workers' Compensation Court's grant of partial summary judgment was improper because the court is not statutorily authorized to grant motions for summary judgment. As we find the granting of summary judgment to be improper in this case, we need not consider the other errors assigned by Buckingham. This case is reversed and remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
REVERSED AND REMANDED FOR FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.

=== CASE 2219447 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:14.272051+00 ===

131 Ill. App. 2d 257 (1970)
266 N.E.2d 398
THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS, Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
ISAAC GRIGGS, Defendant-Appellant.
No. 53873.
Illinois Appellate Court  First District.
December 3, 1970.
*258 Gerald W. Getty, Public Defender, of Chicago, (James N. Gramenos, Assistant Public Defender, of counsel,) for appellant.
Edward V. Hanrahan, State's Attorney, of Chicago, (Elmer C. Kissane and John Gibaites, Assistant State's Attorneys, of counsel,) for the People.
Judgment affirmed.
Mr. PRESIDING JUSTICE DEMPSEY delivered the opinion of the court:
Isaac Griggs was tried by the court, found guilty of rape and sentenced to the penitentiary for a term of four to eight years.
The prosecutrix was a 16-year-old girl who was baby-sitting at home with her 2-year-old nephew. Griggs rang the doorbell about 11:00 in the morning and identified himself as a cosmetic salesman. The prosecutrix removed the chain lock from the door and told him to come in. He displayed his samples and she ordered one or two items. She testified that as she started to sign the order he seized her neck, placed a knife at her throat, ordered her into a bedroom, told her to remove part of her clothing and raped her. She said she was crying and hysterical and too frightened to scream. He asked her if there was money in the house and she said there was none but gave him one dollar of her own. He went to the kitchen where the small boy was watching television. He took the portable television set from the kitchen and two transistor radios from the bedrooms and placed them in a large box. After telling her that he would kill her and bomb her house if she told the police about him, he picked up the box and his cosmetic case and walked out the front door.
When he was gone, she telephoned her mother who in turn called the police. The police came five or ten minutes later. She told them she had *259 been raped but did not tell them that the rapist was a cosmetic salesman; she said the rapist had entered the house through a window and accosted her while she was sleeping. She told the same story to a doctor at the emergency room of the hospital where the police immediately took her.
The hospital report, which was admitted into evidence by stipulation, described her condition as excited and hysterical. Policemen tried to talk to her at the hospital but could not because she was screaming and crying. However, the following day, when they interviewed her, she informed them that assailant sold cosmetics. She explained, at the trial, that she had concealed this information the first day because of the threats Griggs had made.
Griggs was arrested at his home the day after the rape. The television set and two radios were found in his bedroom.
At his trial he admitted having sexual relations with the prosecutrix but claimed it was with her consent. He testified that he showed her samples of his merchandise. As she was about to sign her name on the order he asked for a glass of water. She brought one from the kitchen and inquired about the brand of pipe tobacco he was smoking. This led to talk about marijuana and he produced two "reefers" which they smoked. She asked if he could get her some narcotics and gave him $10.00, the television set and the two radios to use for this purpose. They were "high" from the marijuana and started kissing; she removed her garments voluntarily and they had sexual relations. After promising to return with the narcotics late that afternoon, he left by the front door with a box containing the articles in one hand and his briefcase in the other.
Griggs further testified that he was on his way to the complainant's house with the TV set and radios when the police arrested him. He also said that he intended to stop on the way and get her three or four cans of "reefers" and three or four bags of cocaine. The arresting officer testified in rebuttal that the defendant had nothing in his possession at the time of the arrest.
 1-3 Because the prosecutrix gave two inconsistent statements about the attack, took off her own slacks and underclothing, made no outcry and did not resist him, the defendant argues that there is a reasonable doubt that the intercourse was against her will. When a conviction for rape depends upon the testimony of the prosecutrix, her testimony, unless clear and convincing, must be corroborated by other evidence. (People v. Brown (1967), 86 Ill. App. 2d 163, 229 N.E.2d 922.) The evidence must establish that the sexual act was forcible, was against her will and that her will to resist was overcome. (Ill. Rev. Stat. 1967, ch. 38, par. 11-1.) *260 There is no definite standard for determining the resistance required and each case must be judged by its own facts and circumstances. When the victim has the power to resist, voluntary submission, no matter how reluctantly yielded, constitutes consent. Resistance, however, is unnecessary where the prosecutrix is overcome by fear or where resistance would be useless or dangerous. People v. Strong (1970), 120 Ill. App. 2d 52, 256 N.E.2d 76; People v. Scott (1967), 82 Ill. App. 2d 109, 227 N.E.2d 72.
 4, 5 The prosecutrix' failure to tell the police officers and the doctor in the hospital that the rapist was a cosmetic salesman who entered the home with her consent detracts little from the credibility of her testimony. The defendant himself testified to these facts. Her explanation that she was afraid of reprisal if she identified him is understandable. The prosecutrix candidly stated that she removed her own clothing, but her doing this, in view of the fact that the defendant ordered her to do so after seizing her by the neck and threatening her with a knife, does not establish the voluntary submission necessary to constitute consent. (People v. Strong, supra.) Nor does her failure to scream support an inference of consent. She was distraught, in tears and helpless; resistance would have been futile; screaming, if she had the impulse to do so, useless.
 6 The prosecutrix' testimony was corroborated as well as convincing. The arrival of the police on the scene in response to her mother's telephone call substantiated the prompt complaint she made to her mother. She repeated this complaint to the police within five or ten minutes after the rape occurred. A complaint promptly made is corroborative of a rape victim's testimony. (People v. Hayes (1961), 93 Ill. App. 2d 198, 236 N.E.2d 273.) Moreover, her hysterical condition after the occurrence supported her version of what had taken place. The testimony of the prosecutrix was convincing, that of the defendant was not. The evidence established the defendant's guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
 7 The defendant questions the court's acceptance of his jury waiver and claims that he did not knowingly and understandingly waive his right to a jury trial. When the defendant's case was called the following occurred:
The Clerk: "Isaac Griggs.
The defendant's attorney: Your Honor, Isaac Griggs is before the court relative to indictment 67-2351 charging him with the offense of armed robbery. Mr. Griggs is 19 years of age.
The defendant: Right.
The defendant's attorney: And is filing his jury waiver at this time.
*261 Is that your understanding, Mr. Griggs?
The defendant: Yes.
The court: You ready for trial and waiving a jury, right?
The defendant: Yes.
The court: Swear the witnesses."
This record shows that a jury trial was waived by both the defendant and his counsel. The waiver by his attorney, made in the defendant's presence and without objection by him, was itself sufficient to constitute a knowing and understandingly made jury waiver.
The judgment is affirmed.
SCHWARTZ and McNAMARA, JJ., concur.

=== CASE 2219448 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:14.300607+00 ===

539 N.W.2d 671 (1995)
In the Matter of the Application of Harold Kearl WIDDISON for Review of the Decision Of the Board of Bar Examiners.
No. 19199.
Supreme Court of South Dakota.
Argued September 12, 1995.
Decided November 8, 1995.
*672 Mark Barnett, Atty. Gen., Craig M. Eichstadt, Asst. Atty. Gen., Pierre, for Board of Bar Examiners.
R. Scott Rhinehart, N. Sioux City, for applicant Widdison.
GILBERTSON, Justice.
On October 19, 1994, the South Dakota Board of Bar Examiners held a formal hearing to determine whether Harold K. Widdison had demonstrated good moral character necessary to be admitted to the practice of law in South Dakota. Widdison appeals the Board's order denying his admission to practice law in this state and denying his motion for a new hearing. We affirm.
FACTS AND PROCEDURE
Harold K. Widdison matriculated at the University of South Dakota School of Law in its summer screener program in 1991.[1] Following successful completion of his coursework in this program, he was invited to join the class beginning that fall. During Widdison's first year of law school he was elected president of his class and joined Phi Alpha Delta, a legal fraternity. He partnered with a fellow law student, D.S., in the first-year Appellate Advocacy course. This association was to continue his second and third years of law school as the two students collaborated in study groups and note-taking in several classes.
*673 In the fall of 1992, during Widdison's second year of law school, he wrote and submitted a casenote for law review publication. It was discovered by the editor-in-chief of the law review that Widdison had included in his article material from secondary sources which he had failed to cite.[2] This was brought to the attention of the law review's faculty advisor who, following an independent investigation, agreed.[3] The faculty advisor spoke to Widdison who denied any dishonest intentions in failing to credit his source material. Although the advisor indicated to Widdison his intention to turn the matter over to the Law School Disciplinary Committee for further action, the advisor changed his mind and ultimately sent Widdison a strongly worded letter admonishing Widdison for his behavior and advising him not to get into a similar situation in the future. The faculty advisor also assigned Widdison a failing grade in the law review course with zero credit. Widdison did not object nor appeal the faculty advisor's actions.
During Widdison's third year and final semester of law school[4] he, along with D.S. and other second- and third-year students, enrolled in the school's Worker's Compensation course. The final examination in this course consisted of ten questions handed out in the first few weeks of the semester. The students were given the entire semester to work on completing their examination answers. The instructions regarding completion of the exam, both written in the syllabus handed out the first week of class and given orally by the professor in class on three occasions, were that students were not to consult with one another when working on the questions.[5] The professor reminded her students this was a final examination and was to be treated as such pursuant to the USD School of Law Honor Code, that is, students' answers to the ten questions were to be their own work and not the result of group effort. At the regular final examination administration period at the end of the semester, the Law School examination proctor informed the students which three of the ten prepared answers were to be handed in for grading and course credit.
During the grading process, the Worker's Compensation professor discovered two students' examination answerson all three of the collected answerswere strikingly similar, almost verbatim copies of one another. She had no knowledge of the students' names at this time as all answers were handed in by examination number rather than name. At this point, the professor withheld assigning a grade to either exam until the Law School Disciplinary Committee met to discern how the answers came to be so similar and if one of the students claimed to be an innocent victim.[6] This action was taken following the *674 professor's meeting with, first the Associate Dean and later, the Dean of the Law School to decide what to do about the situation. Following the Disciplinary Committee's hearing, and learning that neither student claimed to be a victim of the other, the professor assigned a failing grade to each examination with no credit given for the course.
Widdison initially had been granted a provisional diploma from the Law School during its December graduation ceremony. He applied, and sat for, the February 1994 bar examination. The Board of Bar Examiners (Board) received a dean's certificate of study signed by Dean Barry Vickrey of the Law School but with the caveat that Dean Vickrey could not attest to Widdison's good moral character. By attachments to the certificate, Vickrey explained the nature and outcome of the Worker's Compensation final examination incident.[7]
Upon learning he did not have sufficient credit hours to graduate because of the failing grade received in the Worker's Compensation course, Widdison filed a grievance against the Worker's Compensation professor to attempt to have his grade changed so that he could meet the ninety credit hour graduation requirement. At some point, Widdison registered for a summer school course to attain the additional two hours of credit he needed to graduate. He successfully completed his summer course and was awarded a second diploma from the Law School in August 1994.
Widdison learned that he had passed the South Dakota bar examination but would not be admitted for practice until the matter of his moral character was resolved. To this end, a character and fitness hearing was held October 19, 1994 to hear evidence of Widdison's moral character as well as the circumstances surrounding the two instances of alleged misconduct involving the law review article and the final examination. In addition, the Board was concerned that Widdison had failed to disclose to the Board the existence of the law review matter on his application for admission.[8]
The result of this hearing was the Board's order, issued December 1994, denying Widdison's admission to practice after determining Widdison had failed to demonstrate, by clear and convincing evidence, good moral character necessary for admission to the bar. Widdison moved for a new hearing based upon new evidence; an anonymous letter had been sent him claiming information surrounding the Worker's Compensation final examination incident. This motion was denied. Widdison now appeals to this court raising five issues:
1) That the Board erred in ignoring evidence that another student copied his examination answers;
2) That the Board erred in allowing testimony regarding his law review article;
3) That the Board erred in allowing Dean Vickrey to remain in the hearing room;
4) That the Board abused its discretion in denying Widdison's motion for a new hearing; and,
5) That the Board erred in condoning the actions of its expert witness, Dean Vickrey, following the hearing.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
This appeal is brought pursuant to SDCL 16-16-16.[9] This statute provides a request *675 for review by this Court of the Board of Bar Examiners' decision may be made within six months of that decision. Widdison timely filed his Notice of Review May 25, 1995 and amended said notice June 1, 1995.
"The ability to receive or reject an applicant for the bar is inherently a function of the judicial system. This court has the authority to oversee all applications for admission." In re Shemonsky, 379 N.W.2d 316, 318 (S.D.1985). As long ago as 1928, we noted:
`the right to practice law' is not in any proper sense of the word a `right' at all, but rather a matter of license and high privilege. Certainly, it is in no sense an absolute right. It is in the nature of a franchise to the enjoyment of which no one is admitted as a matter of right, but only upon proof of fitness and qualifications which must be maintained if the privilege is to continue in enjoyment.
In re Egan, 52 S.D. 394, 398, 218 N.W. 1, 2-3 (1928).
In Shemonsky we held that under SDCL 16-16-16, this Court is the final arbiter of the decisions of the Board of Bar Examiners, and as such, we can accept or reject the Board's conclusion. Shemonsky, 379 N.W.2d at 318. SDCL 16-16-16 provides this Court will "conduct such investigation as it deems necessary to a decision as to the qualifications of the applicant for admission." We interpret this statute to require that we perform a de novo review of both questions of law and fact in all bar admission cases. Nevertheless, we will carefully consider the recommendations of the Board which had the opportunity to hear live witnesses. In re Discipline of Stanton, 446 N.W.2d 33, 35 (S.D.1989).
As noted, Widdison raises five separate issues in his brief to this Court. However, Widdison has waived his argument involving testimony regarding his law review article by failing to cite supporting authority as required by SDCL 15-26A-60(6). Failure to cite supporting authority in an appellate brief violates SDCL 15-26A60(6) and waives the issue before this Court. Kostel Funeral Home v. Duke Tufty Co., 393 N.W.2d 449, 452 (S.D.1986). Widdison's waiver of this issue leaves for our consideration the issues involving evidence of another student's copying his examination, the Board's allowing Dean Vickrey to remain in the hearing room, denying Widdison's motion for a new hearing, and an issue characterized by Widdison as condoning actions taken by Dean Vickrey following conclusion of the October 1994 hearing.
ISSUE I
Whether the Board erred by failing to find that another student had copied Widdison's answers to the worker's compensation final examination?
Widdison advances this argument through a selective sifting of the facts presented to the Board. However, in its findings, the Board stated that there was no satisfactory explanation for the similarities of the answers of either Widdison or D.S. The Board correctly noted that it was up to Widdison to establish that he was of good moral character and, based on the state of the entire record, he had failed in that burden of proof as no satisfactory explanation for the identical content of the answers was produced.
Our review of the record indicates that Widdison's evidence that another student at the law school copied his final examination answers came in the form of hearsay testimony which was objected to and stricken from the record at the hearing and an anonymous letter received post-hearing and addressed later in this opinion. Further, when given the opportunity by the Board to explain how his answers and D.S.'s answers were so similar, Widdison could not. SDCL 16-16-2.2 places the burden of proof by clear and convincing evidence upon Widdison. We agree with the Board's determination that he failed to provide any satisfactory explanation as to the similarities in the examination answers. Further, we find no error in the Board's failure to consider hearsay statements stricken from the record and an anonymous letter.
ISSUE II
Whether the Board erred by allowing the law school dean to remain in the hearing room following sequestration of other witnesses?
Although Widdison claims a violation of a *676 confidentiality right in the private hearing,[10] he additionally argues an invasion of the Board's province by Dean Vickrey's opining as to what is considered academic misconduct at the University of South Dakota School of Law. Widdison contends any probative value of Vickrey's testimony was outweighed by unfair prejudice and his testimony should not have been admitted.[11]
We note at the outset that, during the hearing, Widdison agreed his objections to Vickrey's testimony were satisfied if that testimony were limited to addressing the degree of seriousness of allegations of misconduct, rather than any determination of actual misconduct. Our review of the record indicates Vickrey's testimony was so limited, thus, Widdison's objections to Vickrey's testimony were satisfied. Nevertheless, we address this issue as it is a question of first impression and may arise again.
At the hearing, the Board permitted Vickrey to testify as an expert witness regarding the degree of seriousness of the allegations of Widdison's conduct within the law school environment. Vickrey testified he became Dean of the Law School at the University of South Dakota in July 1993, and had eleven years of teaching and administration at the University of North Dakota School of Law prior to that date. He did not give his opinion as to whether Widdison should be admitted to the practice of law by the Board, but whether allegations such as those made against Widdison, if true, would be considered to be serious academic misconduct. Therefore, he did not usurp the Board's decision-making power. SDCL 16-16-2.3(1)(b) makes academic misconduct a relevant subject for inquiry into a state bar applicant's moral character. SDCL 16-16-2.4(1)(d) requires the Board to consider the seriousness of the conduct when an applicant's moral character is brought into question.
Arguably, Dean Vickrey's testimony was necessary to the proceedings. We have held that in professional licensing cases, expert testimony is necessary to establish an appropriate standard of care or conduct and whether the person seeking to retain his or her license met or fell below that standard. In re Schramm, 414 N.W.2d 31, 36 (S.D. 1987). This is to insure meaningful appellate review. An exception to this requirement is where the conduct or misconduct of the professional is so obviously substandard, that such expert testimony is unnecessary. Id. at 37. We do not need to decide whether Vickrey's testimony as an expert witness was necessary as Widdison does not raise the point.
It is well settled in South Dakota that the admissibility of an expert's opinion is within the trial court's discretion. SDCL 19-15-2; Peery v. Dep't of Agriculture, 402 N.W.2d 695, 696 (S.D.1987); Buckley v. Fredericks, 291 N.W.2d 770, 771 (S.D.1980). The trial court's decision to admit expert witness testimony will not be reversed absent a clear showing of an abuse of discretion. State v. Hill, 463 N.W.2d 674, 676 (S.D.1990); State v. Logue, 372 N.W.2d 151, 156 (S.D. 1985). In addition to waiving this issue, Widdison has not made a clear showing that the Board abused its discretion in permitting the Dean of the Law School to testify regarding whether the allegations would be considered serious academic misconduct.
*677 ISSUE III
Whether the Board abused its discretion in denying Widdison's motion for a new hearing?
Widdison claims new evidence in the form of an anonymous letter surfaced after the Board rendered its decision regarding his admission to practice law in this state. Widdison argues to this Court that this evidence was sufficient for the Board of Bar Examiners to grant his motion for a new hearing pursuant to SDCL 15-6-59(a)(4)[12] as it "clearly explains who the true culprit is" and that the Board abused its discretion in denying this motion.
Before a motion for a new hearing based on new evidence may be granted, it must be shown that the evidence was not discoverable before the hearing and that it would have changed the outcome. Massey Ferguson Credit Corp. v. Bice, 450 N.W.2d 435, 441 (S.D.1990). The decision whether to grant a new hearing based on a claim of newly discovered evidence rests in the first instance with the Board and we will not disturb that decision on appeal unless it appears affirmatively from the record that there has been an abuse of discretion. State v. Steele, 510 N.W.2d 661, 664 (S.D.1994); Enchanted World Doll Museum v. Buskohl 398 N.W.2d 149, 153 (S.D.1986).
Widdison claims he received an anonymous letter dated April 5, 1995 which describes the circumstances by which Widdison's Worker's Compensation final examination answers were so similar to another student's answers. Widdison claims this letter, written by a purported eyewitness, completely exonerates him of any wrongdoing. However, the letter, anonymously written and submitted, constitutes inadmissible hearsay. SDCL 19-16-1(3) and -4. See Wayne v. State, 498 N.W.2d 446, 448 (Minn.1993) (post-trial receipt of anonymous letter could not support appellant's motion for a new trial as an "attorney would not be able to lay the foundation necessary to admit the letter at trial."). Considering the absence of any indicia of reliability of the anonymous letter, we hold that the Board did not abuse its discretion in denying Widdison's motion for a new hearing. Further, the record reflects, and the Board's letter denying the motion reveals, that the situation involving Widdison's Worker's Compensation examination was only one of many items the Board considered in reaching its decision that Widdison did not prove his qualifications for admission to practice law in this state. Thus, even if it were admissible, this new evidence would not have changed the outcome of the hearing as the Board clearly knew of the contents of the letter and gave it no credence.
ISSUE IV
Whether the Board erred by condoning its expert witness' actions following the hearing?
Widdison claims the Board condoned actions taken by Dean Vickrey at the Law School after the hearing had concluded. Specifically, Widdison claims Vickrey disclosed, orally and in writing, aspects of the hearing contrary to the Board's directive not to discuss the matter. This, and Widdison's claim that the Law School is suppressing evidence, is argued by Widdison to be grounds for a new hearing under SDCL 15-6-59(a)(1), irregularity in the proceedings.
"The expression `irregularity in the proceedings' ... relates generally to departures by the court, during the trial of a case, from the due and orderly method of disposition of a case.... In South Dakota this concept includes misconduct on the part of the court, the attorneys, and the parties." Bakker v. Irvine, 519 N.W.2d 41, 46 (S.D. 1994) (citations omitted). We note that "irregularity in the proceedings" as contemplated by the statute and our recent definition of the term refers to occurrences during, and not after, trial. We also note the definition does not include alleged misconduct by witnesses.
*678 However, we proceed to address Widdison's argument in this regard.
The record fails to support either of Widdison's contentions that the Board condoned Vickrey's actions or that the Law School is suppressing evidence. The record includes a copy of a memorandum dated June 15, 1995 sent to Law School students by Dean Vickrey requesting anyone with exculpatory evidence regarding the Widdison matter to come forward and submit such evidence to the Board of Bar Examiners and the Law School separately. Widdison's evidence to the contrary is found within a second anonymous letter, dated May 2, 1995, received by his attorney. As previously noted, this evidence cannot be seriously considered as it lacks reliability. Further, the record includes a copy of a letter to Vickrey from the Board chairperson regarding Vickrey's discussions of the matters before the Board involving Widdison that clearly establishes that the Board did not participate in these actions. We, therefore, find Widdison's claims to be contrary to factual evidence in the record.
CONCLUSION
Widdison has the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence his qualifications for admission to practice law in this state. SDCL 16-16-2.2. One of those qualifications is that he "be a person of good moral character." SDCL 16-16-2. SDCL 16-16-2.1 defines "good moral character" as including, but not limited to, "qualities of honesty, candor, trustworthiness, diligence, reliability, observance of fiduciary and financial responsibility, and respect for the rights of others and for the judicial process." That statute also provides that "[a]ny fact reflecting a deficiency of good moral character may constitute a basis for denial of admission." SDCL 16-16-2.1 (emphasis added). Good moral character is a prerequisite to practice law in every state. Layon v. North Dakota State Bar Bd., 458 N.W.2d 501, 503 (N.D. 1990); In re Admission of Martin, 181 Wis. 2d 27, 510 N.W.2d 687, 688 n. 2 (1994); In re Haukebo, 352 N.W.2d 752, 754 (Minn. 1984).
The Board found Widdison failed to meet his burden. Moreover, Widdison's age,[13] recency of the conduct at issue, and lack of candor with his attorney, the Law School Disciplinary Board,[14] and the Board of Bar Examiners do not weigh in his favor. We also find there was neither remorse nor rehabilitation shown by Widdison.[15] All of these factors may be considered in the determination of Widdison's moral character. SDCL 16-16-2.4.
Widdison's additional failure to inform the Board of the law review incident compounds his problems with the Board. See In re Application of Majorek, 244 Neb. 595, 508 N.W.2d 275, 281 (1993) (listing courts which hold that false, misleading, or evasive responses to bar application questions may be grounds for finding a lack of good moral character). The Board, in its findings, cited this failure as an independent basis for support of its ultimate determination. We have repeatedly held in attorney disciplinary cases that those attorneys who seek to defend their license against complaints must fully cooperate with, and inform the Disciplinary Board of all relevant facts. To do otherwise weighs "`heavily against the plea that we exercise leniency in imposing discipline.'" In re Discipline of Tidball, 503 *679 N.W.2d 850, 855 (S.D.1993) (quoting In re Rude, 88 S.D. 416, 425, 221 N.W.2d 43, 49 (1974)). It also provides the basis for "increasing the severity of the appropriate discipline imposed for the commission of other acts of unprofessional conduct." Id. We recognize the present case involves a question of admission to the bar rather than attorney discipline, however, the same rationale applies here with equal justification.
"`[T]he state bears a special responsibility for maintaining standards among members of the licensed professions" such as attorneys at law. Schramm, 414 N.W.2d at 34 (quoting Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass'n, 436 U.S. 447, 460, 98 S. Ct. 1912, 1920, 56 L. Ed. 2d 444, 456 (1978)). In South Dakota, that obligation and duty, pursuant to Art. V, § 12 of our Constitution, ultimately falls upon this Court. In re Discipline of Hopewell, 507 N.W.2d 911, 917 (S.D.1993). "Public confidence that the legal profession, under the supervision of this Court, can keep its affairs in order must be zealously maintained." Tidball, 503 N.W.2d at 856 (citing In re Kunkle, 88 S.D. 269, 218 N.W.2d 521, 527 (1974)). The same zeal to protect the public from the unfit within the bar must also be applied to the unfit who would seek to enter the bar.
With these great responsibilities to protect the public and ensure the ethics and professionalism of the bar in this State which it serves, we cannot accept the view placed in the record by a Law School faculty member in support of Widdison that this was merely a case of "senioritis." The failure to act in accordance with the rules is compounded by the failure to accept responsibility for these acts. The violations here are of the most serious nature as they go to the heart of the judicial systemthe matter of personal legal ethics and trust. He acts at his peril who treats the rules for admission to the bar with the indifference accorded an unsolicited invitation to join a book club. Tidball, 503 N.W.2d at 855 (quoting Rude, 88 S.D. at 423, 221 N.W.2d at 47).
We determine that Widdison has not met his burden of proving good moral character. We affirm the Board's order in its entirety, with leave to reapply at a future date provided Widdison is able to rectify his character deficits and show he has gained an understanding of, and the ability to put into practice, the qualities of honesty, candor, and responsibility required for admission to practice in this state.
MILLER, C.J., and SABERS, AMUNDSON and KONENKAMP, JJ., concur.
NOTES
[1]  Previous to his law school attendance, Widdison had obtained an undergraduate degree in criminal justice from the University of Northern Arizona and had worked as a certified paralegal.
[2]  Specifically, the law review faculty advisor testified at the October 1994 hearing that six pages of Widdison's law review manuscript matched an earlier South Dakota Law Review article written by Michael Marlow. The advisor testified it was a verbatim match encompassing both textual material and footnotes. There was no citation or other notation indicating this was Marlow's original material.
[3]  Part of this investigation involved Widdison turning over to the faculty advisor a box containing copies of all of the research materials and notes Widdison said he used in preparing his law review article. Although Widdison informed the Board of Bar Examiners at the October 1994 hearing, and this Court, that he turned over all his research materials, the advisor stated he could not recall the Marlow article being included in the box. The faculty advisor's independent search turned up two additional articles quoted but not cited by Widdison.
[4]  Widdison had taken coursework the previous two summers so that he would acquire sufficient credits to graduate in December 1993.
[5]  The instructions on the course syllabus read as follows: "CAVEAT: You must keep in mind at all times that this is a final examination. While you may use all written and computer resources available in the library, you may not discuss the questions or the test with any other person, whether student, faculty, attorney, or anyone else. Failure to adhere to this rule is an honors violation." (emphasis in original).
[6]  Widdison hired attorney James McCulloch to represent him in this matter. Widdison did not, however, inform his attorney about his law review plagiarism incident until McCulloch learned of the incident from another source after the disciplinary committee hearing was completed. At the start of the disciplinary committee hearing, Widdison requested and agreed to sign a stipulation of certain facts, one of which included the statement, "[D.S.] and Harold are honorable students who have never previously had any allegations of misconduct during their three years at the Universdity [sic] of South Dakota Law School." As Widdison was out of town the day the stipulation was due, his attorney signed on his behalf, with Widdison's agreement. McCulloch had no knowledge at this time of the law review incident.
[7]  Dean Vickrey was also unaware of the law review incident when he signed the dean's certificate.
[8]  The record reflects the Board of Bar Examiners learned of the law review incident when it received a letter from the law review faculty advisor following the advisor's awareness of the Worker's Compensation disciplinary matter involving allegations of plagiarism.
[9]  This matter is not a contested case under SDCL ch. 1-26, since the Unified Judicial System is specifically excluded as an agency under that chapter.
[10]  Widdison does not provide any supporting authority for this assertion. Under SDCL 15-26A-60(6), previously discussed herein, we deem this claim waived. However, we note:
[t]he sequestering of witnesses is within the trial court's discretion, and this includes the sequestering of expert witnesses. While witnesses who are to testify in an expert capacity only and not to the facts of the case should be exempt from a sequestration order, and it has been generally held or stated that experts are usually excepted from sequestration, numerous cases have held that the sequestering of an expert witness was not an abuse of discretion.
State v. Traversie, 387 N.W.2d 2, 6-7 (S.D.1986) (citations omitted). SDCL 19-14-29(3).
[11]  Widdison's criticism of Dean Vickrey as biased against Widdison is curious in light of the following statements contained in Widdison's brief:
It is important to note here that Dean Vickrey had only been Dean of the law school for one semester. Dean Vickrey had never taught Hal [Widdison] in any law school class. Dean Vickrey did not personally know Hal. In fact, Dean Vickrey had never spoken to Hal during his tenure.
Appellant's Brief at 21.
[12]  We note that under SDCL 15-6-1, chapter 15-6 applies only to actions in circuit courts. Sioux Falls Argus Leader v. Young, 455 N.W.2d 864, 867 (1990). However, the statutes cited herein contained in chapter 15-6 provide a useful analytical framework for examination of the arguments advanced by Widdison.
[13]  Widdison was age 32 at the time of the hearing.
[14]  Throughout these proceedings, Widdison has attempted to bring in the activities of the Law School Disciplinary Board. He criticized it for what he considered a lack of fairness in the Worker's Compensation final examination matter and then reverses course and states that the law review matter was so minor it was not even considered by the Disciplinary Board. The Law School Disciplinary Board is a separate and distinct entity from the Board of Bar Examiners. While both may have mutual interests, the decisions of one board has no binding effect on the other.
[15]  Throughout these proceedings, Widdison has blamed his problems on D.S., Dean Vickrey, the Law School, the Disciplinary Board, the law review faculty advisor, the Worker's Compensation professor, and the Board of Bar Examiners. This attitude evidences not remorse, but a blaming others' mentality. In re Discipline of Jeffries, 500 N.W.2d 220, 227 (S.D.1993) (Jeffries II) (Henderson, J., dissenting).

=== CASE 9739364 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:13:00.115509+00 ===

Per Curiam
Defendant was indicted for theft and found guilty as charged. Evidence introduced at the trial reveals that the defendant concealed a man’s sweater in her dress and that she left Shoppers Fair Discount Department Store of Indianapolis without paying for the sweater. A witness to the theft, Willie Wells, testified that he saw Doris Owens in the dress department of the store and that he saw her put a man’s sweater underneath her clothing. He watched her until she went to the front of the store and then he called a security officer. The store’s security officer, Michael Beaver, testified that he followed the defendant out of the store and asked her if she had anything that she had failed to pay for as she came through the store’s check-out counter. The witness testified that the defendant answered, “Yes, I have this blouse.” Thereafter, she was placed under arrest.
Defendant first argues that during the trial, the judge followed a persistent course of judcial misconduct, over repeated objections, with results that were demeaning to the court, the judiciary, and the bar, and which were contrary to law. For example, the following colloquy took place during the trial between the court and the opposing counsel:
*695“THE COURT: State ought to raise this fellow Beaver’s salary. Are you still with them? Here I was going to try to raise your salary, you did such a good job here.
MR. CARTER: State will recall Mr. Wells.
THE COURT: Come on, Mr. Carter. You’ve had all week to prepare this case.
MR. CARTER: I understand that, but we thought we would try the other case first, your Honor.
THE COURT: We can’t try the other case first this is an earlier number.
MR. CARTER: As you may understand, we have some problems.
THE COURT: I don’t see why. You’ve got so many witnesses in the courtroom. You have no problem. All you got to do is use your own little head a little bit.
MR. CARTER: That’s right.
THE COURT: You’ve got two beautiful girls sitting in front of you that can answer all of your questions.
MR. CARTER: That’s right, they’re in the other case, that’s why they’re sitting there.
THE COURT: No, they’re not. Just use your head, sir.” The court at another point felt it necessary to assist the Prosecutor in getting the value of a sweater into evidence during direct examination of Willie Wells:
“Q. Can you read the tag on that sweater ?
MR. RYAN: To which we object.
THE COURT: Objection sustained. Object if he knows the value of it.
Q. Do you know the value of it ?
MR. RYAN: To which we object.
A. $8.99.
THE COURT: Let the answer go out. Do you know the value of it ?
A. Yes.
THE COURT: He knows the value, now ask him.
Q. What is the value of that sweater ?
MR. RYAN: I’m going to object.
*696A. $8.99.
MR. RYAN: I want to ask a preliminary question.
THE COURT: Over-ruled. Authority Wilson vs. State. Supreme Court says when a Judge sees an inept lawyer, such as the Prosecutor, he should help him.
MR. RYAN: Yes, but he’s got a witness that’s talking out of his mouth and doesn’t know what he’s talking about. . .
THE COURT: No.
MR. RYAN: And doesn’t know what he’s talking about and being lead by . . .
THE COURT: Over-ruled. Authority Wilson verses State, about 220 Indiana.”
Concerning the defendant’s taking the witness stand, the Court stated:
“MR. CARTER: Your Honor, I’m going to object. These questions are all leading.
THE COURT: Over-ruled. You ought to be thankful he put her on.”
We do not commend such running commentaries by a judge who is clothed with the robe and behind the bench, with all the perogatives adhering to such an office, particularly when they are made against a young attorney and one who is unable to retaliate in kind. Tolerance and understanding are much more worthy judicial attitudes under the circumstances.
Initially, we point out that the trial was conducted without a jury and that therefore any remarks made by the judge in the course of the trial could not be said to have prejudiced the defendant’s case in the minds of legally untrained triers of fact. The basic issue is whether defendant received a fair and impartial trial. Defendant contends she received a hearing punctuated with quips and running commentary, judicial intrusion, and premature resolution of the most vital issue of fact. We point out, however, that the trial judge in actuality was critical of the prosecuting attorney. No evidence is apparent that defendant received an *697unfair trial by reason of certain comments by the judge, though we would question the propriety of some of the statements. The evidence was conclusive that the defendant was guilty of shoplifting from the store.
Defendant next claims that there was a fatal variance between the specific allegations of stolen property which appeared in the indictment and the proof made at trial in that the indictment alleged the theft of one blouse, two pairs of men’s pants, and three men’s sweaters. Evidence of the theft of one of the men’s sweaters was introduced in court. Since the theft of just one sweater would be sufficient for a conviction of theft, no further proof was necessary.
A certificate from the Secretary of State established that Shoppers Fair Discount Department Store of Indianapolis existed as of July 4, 1967. The theft occurred August 16, 1967. Since witnesses Willie Wells and Michael Beaver both testified that they worked for Shoppers Fair on August 16, 1967, the existence of the store on that date is recognized. Willie Wells further testified that the sweater taken by the defendant was from the Shoppers Fair Discount Department Store. This is sufficient to prove the allegation in the indictment that the property was in the possession of Shoppers Fair Discount Department Store. Thomason v. State (1970), 255 Ind. 326, 263 N. E. 2d 725.
Officer Beaver stated at the trial that he apprehended the defendant just outside the doors of the store. Before advising her of her constitutional rights, Officer Beaver proceeded to ask the defendant if she had anything in her possession that she failed to pay for at the counter. The defendant pulled out a blouse from her purse and said that she had not paid for it. We can only conclude that this testimony was properly admitted. Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U.S. 436, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694 requires that warnings be given before the onset of questioning if the situation is one of “custodial interrogation”. In the case before us, defendant was merely *698asked a question that in fact could have cleared up an inadvertent mistake. Miranda says:
“General on-the scene questioning as to facts surrounding a crime or other general questioning of citizens in the fact-finding process is not affected by our holding. It is an act of responsible citizenship for individuals to give whatever information they may have to aid in law enforcement. In such situations the compelling atmosphere inherent in the process of in-custody interrogation is not necessarily present.” Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U. S. 436, 477, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 1629, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694, 725.
The Miranda warning was given after the store manager indicated to the security officer that he would prosecute, the warning not having been necessary prior to that time.
Judgment affirmed.
DeBruler, J., concurs in result with opinion, in which Prentice, J., concurs.

=== CASE 9739365 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2023-08-26 20:13:00.120558+00 ===

Concurring in Result
DeBruler, J.
I concur in the opinion of the majority in its resolution of the issues of the alleged misconduct of the trial judge and the alleged insufficiency of the evidence. I must depart from the majority, however, in resolving the issue of whether a certain statement made by the appellant would be deemed inadmissible under the ruling of Miranda v. Arizona (1966), 384 U. S. 436, 86 S. Ct. 1602, 16 L. Ed. 2d 694.
The appellant was allegedly seen to have hidden some store merchandise upon her person. A witness, Willie Wells, a store employee, testified that he had personally observed the appellant appear to be shoplifting some merchandise and that he immediately contacted Officer Beaver, the arresting officer. Officer Beaver followed the appellant outside the store where he stopped her and asked her whether she “had anything in her possession that she had failed to pay for at the counter”. This question posed by Officer Beaver to the appellant was elicited on the direct examination of Officer Beaver by the State’s prosecution. The appellant’s incriminating response *699to this question was brought forth only upon the defendant’s cross-examination of the witness Officer Beaver during the following colloquy:
“Q. Now then you said then that you asked her some questions, what did you ask her?
A. I asked her if she had anything she had failed to pay for, as she came through the store . . . through the stand, and she said ‘Yes, I have this blouse.’ ”
Appellant contends that her Fifth Amendment rights were violated in that evidence was introduced which was obtained prior to the warning required by Miranda v. Arizona, supra. The record shows that Officer Beaver did give the required warnings after placing the appellant under arrest subsequent to the conversation described above.
The question then is whether the statement made prior to the warnings was inadmissible as being in violation of the holding of Miranda. The majority holds that Miranda is without application in this instance as the officer’s question was within the ambit of “general on-the-scene questioning” which is not affected by the Miranda holding. The majority further states that the Miranda warning was not necessary prior to the time when the store manager indicated he intended to prosecute. I cannot agree. The decision of a prosecuting witness to “prosecute” is neither a necessary nor a sufficient element in the actual prosecution of an accused. Nor can any such decision, regardless of by whom it is made, be the touchstone in determining when the Fifth Amendment rights of the accused attach themselves.
In the case at bar, whether the statement elicited from the appellant was inadmissible is decided by determining whether the statement was made during custodial interrogation.
The language of the Supreme Court in Miranda deserves quotation:
“The prosecution may not use statements, whether exculpatory or inculpatory, stemming from custodial interrogation of the defendant unless it demonstrates the use of *700procedure safeguards effective to secure the privilege against self-incrimination. By custodial interrogation, we mean questioning initiated by law enforcement officers after a person has been taken into custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom of action in any significant way. (This is what we meant in Escobedo when we spoke of an investigation which had focused on an accused.) ”
While the determination of when custodial interrogation begins is not without difficulty, I believe the facts in the case at bar do not lend themselves to a conclusion that the officer’s question to the appellant falls within the meaning of general on-the-scene questioning and, therefore, outside the scope of Miranda.
As a result of information received from a store employee, Officer Beaver had reason to believe that the appellant had shoplifted certain goods from the store. He followed her outside the store, stopped her and asked her whether she had any articles on her which she had failed to pay for before she left the store. At that time Officer Beaver’s attention was focused upon the appellant not as a general citizen who.might assist in the fact finding process surrounding an unsolved crime but rather as a person who was herself suspected of just having committed a felony. Certainly, a question posed to a suspect which invites an incriminating answer cannot be termed general on-the-scene questioning. Any such question posed to suspects by the police must be preceded by the warnings and waiver required by Miranda.
Turning to the issue of whether the statement by the appellant that “Yes, I have this blouse” was erroneously admitted, I must conclude that it was not. As stated above this statement was not brought out on direct examination of Officer Beaver. Upon cross-examination the appellant’s counsel asked Officer Beaver only what question he had asked the appellant. Officer Beaver replied with both the question and the appellant’s answer. A motion to strike Officer Beaver’s answer as not being responsive to the question may have been appropriate but it was not forthcoming. An earlier motion to sup*701press all further evidence of Witness Beaver, a later motion for finding of Not Guilty and discharge were properly overruled. In absence of a move to strike the answer of the witness, I believe it was not erroneously admitted and, therefore, concur in result reached by the majority.
Prentice, J., concurs.
Note.—Reported in 266 N. E. 2d 612.

=== CASE 2219453 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:14.378967+00 ===

539 N.W.2d 847 (1995)
4 Neb.App. 165
STATE of Nebraska, Appellee,
v.
Dennis L. LEWCHUK, Appellant.
No. A-94-1234.
Court of Appeals of Nebraska.
November 21, 1995.
*849 David A. Domina and Denise E. Frost, of Domina & Copple, P.C., Omaha, for appellant.
Don Stenberg, Attorney General, and Mark D. Starr, Lincoln, for appellee.
HANNON, IRWIN, and MILLER-LERMAN, JJ.
IRWIN, Judge.
I. INTRODUCTION
Appellant in this case was charged with assault in the first degree. Appellant was tried twice, the first trial resulting in a hung jury and the second in a conviction. Appellant failed to appear at sentencing and was arrested 14 years after the conclusion of the second trial and sentenced to a term of imprisonment. Appellant seeks to have his conviction set aside because the district court in his second trial refused to admit testimony relating to specific instances of the victim's violent conduct. Because we find the district court committed reversible error, we reverse, and remand for a new trial.
II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
The events which gave rise to this case occurred during the nighttime hours of December 21, 1979, and early morning of December 22. Viewed in the light most favorable to the State, the record reveals the following facts:
On the evening of December 21, 1979, appellant, Dennis L. Lewchuk, accompanied a friend to various bars and lounges in the Norfolk, Nebraska, area. Lewchuk eventually arrived at the Brass Rail bar in Norfolk at approximately midnight. While at the Brass Rail, Lewchuk encountered a man named James Warner, the victim in this case.
Although there is some conflict as to the specific details of Lewchuk's encounter with *850 Warner, it appears that Warner was aware Lewchuk had some affiliation with the Joker's Wild, a motorcycle gang, and Warner had been making obnoxious and insulting remarks about Joker's Wild members and questioning how "tough" they really were. At some point, Lewchuk and Warner proceeded to get into an automobile which Lewchuk drove away from the Brass Rail. According to Lewchuk, the two were going to Lewchuk's home to see his bar. Warner claimed to have gotten into the car with Lewchuk to go somewhere and smoke marijuana. The accounts of the events after Lewchuk and Warner left the Brass Rail in the automobile differ substantially.
Lewchuk alleged that Warner again began to make disparaging remarks about the Joker's Wild members and questioned how tough they were. Lewchuk claimed that Warner touted his skills in karate and at some point threatened to "do [Lewchuk] in right where [he] sat." Lewchuk alleged that Warner suddenly hit him with a karate chop to the throat, pulled him to the floor of the car, and began choking him until he nearly blacked out. Lewchuk claimed to then have obtained a knife from a sheath on Lewchuk's belt and stabbed Warner in self-defense until Warner released him and fled from the car.
Warner alleged that he was merely sitting in the car listening to Lewchuk talk about how people were afraid of the Joker's Wild members for various things they had done to other people. Warner claimed that Lewchuk, without warning, struck him in his left arm. Warner alleged that he attempted to grab Lewchuk's arm, missed, and was struck in the head by Lewchuk and began bleeding. When he began bleeding, Warner claimed, he realized that Lewchuk was using more than his fists and that he had actually been stabbed. Warner claimed to have attempted to get out of the car, continually feeling blows coming from over his right shoulder. Warner testified that he remembered Lewchuk shouting, "`Why don't you die, you son-of-a-bitch.'" Eventually the car ran off the road, and Warner alleged that he was able to make his escape, seek refuge, and contact the police.
As a result of the incident, Warner suffered numerous lacerations, some of which were very large and very deep. Among the wounds were at least two chest wounds. The doctor who examined Warner testified at trial that there may have been as many as 25 knife wounds, which required approximately 500 stitches.
After the incident, Lewchuk proceeded to go home. A couple of days later, after learning that a warrant had been issued for his arrest, Lewchuk turned himself in to the Norfolk Police Department.
The case proceeded to trial the first time in June 1980. The first trial ended with a hung jury on June 21. During the course of the first trial, the court allowed Lewchuk to call several witnesses to testify about alleged specific instances of Warner's violent conduct on the night of December 21, 1979.
Mark Volquardson testified that he was a bartender at the Brass Rail on December 21, 1979, and that Warner had forcefully shoved a female patron into him. Volquardson testified that on that night Warner was being very loud and belligerent and was "raising hell" in the bar. Volquardson also testified that he observed Warner hit another patron in the chest.
Gary Biggerstaff testified that he was in the Brass Rail on the night of December 21, 1979, and that Warner repeatedly made obscene comments to him, bragged about his proficiency in karate, and attempted to gouge Biggerstaff's eyes out. Biggerstaff further testified that he went outside of the bar with Warner, and Warner beat him. Biggerstaff also testified to Warner's reputation for using force, knives, and guns on other people.
B.J. Hoile testified that he was in the Brass Rail on the night of December 21, 1979, and had an altercation with Warner. Hoile testified that Warner directed obscene comments at him and then asked him to step out behind the bar. Hoile testified that he went out behind the bar with Warner, Warner swung at him and missed, and as Hoile attempted to return to the bar, Warner grabbed him from behind and tried to gouge his eyes out. Hoile testified that Warner was generally very vulgar and obnoxious on *851 that night, and Hoile observed Warner shove the female patron.
Janell Hackler testified that she was in the Brass Rail on the night of December 21, 1979. Hackler testified that she was the female patron Warner shoved in the bar that night. Hackler testified that the shove was forceful enough to move her a couple of steps, but not enough to push her to the ground.
Leonard Haines testified that he was in the Brass Rail on the night of December 21, 1979, and observed Warner shove Hackler. Haines testified that Warner was acting in a very vulgar, drunken, disrespectful manner throughout the evening.
Richard Bear testified that he was in the Brass Rail on the night of December 21, 1979, and that Warner made disparaging remarks about the Joker's Wild to Lewchuk and tried to start a fight with Bear while they were in the bar.
Lewchuk was tried a second time on September 23 through 30, 1980. On September 11, the State filed a motion in limine seeking to prevent the defense from presenting any evidence of specific instances of violent, aggressive, or assaultive conduct by Warner toward third persons, unless Lewchuk was aware of Warner's conduct prior to the charged assault. After a hearing on September 12, the court sustained the motion. On September 26, Lewchuk's counsel made an offer of proof concerning the substance of the excluded testimony by offering a transcript of the witnesses' testimony about specific acts of violence by Warner from the first trial. The parties stipulated to the form, foundation, and accuracy of content of the offer of proof. The State noted on the record its objection to the jury hearing the testimony in the offer of proof, and the court sustained the objection. On September 30, the jury returned a verdict of guilty against Lewchuk.
On November 6, 1980, Lewchuk failed to appear for sentencing, and his bond was forfeited. During the time period from November 1980 to December 1994, Lewchuk lived primarily in Alabama under an assumed name. After he was identified and arrested by the FBI in Alabama, Lewchuk was returned to Nebraska in 1994. Lewchuk was sentenced on December 16, 1994. Lewchuk then filed his appeal to this court, challenging his conviction.
III. ASSIGNMENTS OF ERROR
In this appeal, Lewchuk assigns numerous errors from the proceedings in the district court. One of the assigned errors is that the district court erred in excluding testimony about specific instances of violent and aggressive conduct by the victim in the hours preceding the assault with which Lewchuk was charged. Because our decision regarding this error is dispositive, we will not address the remaining assigned errors. See Kelly v. Kelly, 246 Neb. 55, 516 N.W.2d 612 (1994). We also note that Lewchuk has not assigned as error that there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction. See State v. Noll, 3 Neb.App. 410, 527 N.W.2d 644 (1995).
IV. STANDARD OF REVIEW
In all proceedings where the Nebraska Evidence Rules apply, the admissibility or exclusion of evidence is controlled by the Nebraska Evidence Rules, not judicial discretion, except in those instances under the Nebraska Evidence Rules when judicial discretion is a factor involved in the admissibility of evidence. State v. Anderson, 245 Neb. 237, 512 N.W.2d 367 (1994); State v. Messersmith, 238 Neb. 924, 473 N.W.2d 83 (1991).
Error may not be predicated upon a trial court's ruling excluding testimony of a witness unless the substance of the evidence to be offered by the witness' testimony was made known to the court by offer or was apparent from the context in which the questions were asked. State v. Cortis, 237 Neb. 97, 465 N.W.2d 132 (1991); State v. Bennett, 2 Neb.App. 188, 508 N.W.2d 294 (1993).
Since under the Nebraska rules of evidence all relevant evidence is admissible except as otherwise provided in the Nebraska rules of evidence, a proponent of evidence which was excluded at trial is not limited on appellate review to reliance upon the bases *852 argued for admission of the evidence at trial. Cockrell v. Garton, 244 Neb. 359, 507 N.W.2d 38 (1993).
In a jury trial of a criminal case, whether an error in excluding evidence reaches a constitutional dimension or not, an erroneous evidential ruling results in prejudice to a defendant unless the State demonstrates that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Flores, 245 Neb. 179, 512 N.W.2d 128 (1994); State v. Toney, 243 Neb. 237, 498 N.W.2d 544 (1993).
V. ANALYSIS
1. ADMISSIBILITY OF EVIDENCE OF VICTIM'S CHARACTER
At trial, Lewchuk sought to introduce testimony of Mark Volquardson, Gary Biggerstaff, B.J. Hoile, Janell Hackler, Leonard Haines, and Richard Bear about the specific instances of Warner's violent and assaultive conduct these witnesses observed on the night in question. The district court granted the State's motion in limine, preventing any testimony as to specific instances of conduct, and limited the testimony to reputation and opinion testimony about the victim's violent character. The court ruled that specific acts could be introduced only if Lewchuk was shown to have had knowledge of them prior to the charged assault. In this appeal, Lewchuk contends that testimony about the specific acts supports his defense claim that Warner was the first aggressor, and therefore Lewchuk was justified in using the force he did to defend himself. See Neb.Rev.Stat. § 28-1409 (Reissue 1989). The same statutory provision for the use of force in self-defense was in effect at the time of Lewchuk's trial.
We note that it is not entirely clear from the record that Lewchuk offered the evidence at trial in the precise manner in which we are analyzing its admissibility. Our analysis cannot be limited to the bases argued at trial, and we must determine if the evidence should have been admitted for any purpose. See Cockrell, supra. We also note that Lewchuk properly made the substance of the evidence to be offered by the witnesses' testimony known to the court by an offer of proof. See Cortis, supra.
Evidence of a victim's violent character is probative of the victim's violent propensities, and many courts have recognized that evidence of a victim's violent character is relevant to the proof of a self-defense claim. See, e.g., State v. Sims, 213 Neb. 708, 331 N.W.2d 255 (1983) (where court found that specific examples of victim's violent conduct were relevant to who was first aggressor in homicide case); State v. Dunson, 433 N.W.2d 676 (Iowa 1988) (holding that evidence of specific acts of violence by victim, even if subsequent to assault charged, is admissible and relevant to victim's aggressive character and propensity for violence). See, also, United States v. Burks, 470 F.2d 432 (D.C.Cir.1972) (holding that in homicide case, evidence of deceased's violent character, including evidence of specific violent acts, is relevant on issue of who was first aggressor); Gonzales v. State, 838 S.W.2d 848 (Tex. App.Hous.[1st Dist.] 1992) (holding that evidence of victim's aggressive character is essential element of self-defense); Chapman v. State, 469 N.E.2d 50 (Ind.App.1984) (noting that evidence of person's character, however adduced, is admissible in homicide and battery cases where defendant raises issue of self-defense); People v. Buchanan, 91 Ill. App. 3d 13, 46 Ill. Dec. 540, 414 N.E.2d 262 (1980) (noting that a common issue in self-defense cases is use of evidence regarding reputation or character of deceased); Annot., 1 A.L.R. 3d 571 (1965). Evidence of a victim's violent characterhis propensity to engage in violent and aggressive conductcan be offered by a defendant under Neb.Evid.R. 404(1)(b), Neb.Rev.Stat. § 27-404(1)(b) (Cum.Supp.1994).
Rule 404 discusses the use of evidence of a person's character or trait of character. Rule 404(1) discusses the limited circumstances in which evidence of a trait of a person's character may be used as evidence that he or she acted in conformity with such trait on another occasion. Rule 404(2) discusses the circumstances in which evidence of a trait of a person's character may be used as evidence of some other issue aside from demonstrating that he or she acted in *853 conformity with such trait on another occasion, namely, to demonstrate motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, et cetera. Although rule 404(1) and (2) both deal with character evidence, we are here concerned with rule 404(1).
Rule 404 provides:
(1) Evidence of a person's character or a trait of his ... character is not admissible for the purpose of proving that he ... acted in conformity therewith on a particular occasion, except:
....
(b) Evidence of a pertinent trait of character of the victim of the crime offered by an accused or by the prosecution to rebut the same....
(Emphasis supplied.) This language was also in effect at the time of Lewchuk's trial. The plain language of rule 404 provides that Lewchuk may present evidence of a pertinent trait of Warner's character, such as his propensity for violence, to show that Warner acted in conformity therewith on the night in question.
Our analysis of the character evidence in this case is confined to rule 404(1). Our review of other jurisdictions which have found character evidence relevant to a self-defense claim, as well as the Nebraska Supreme Court's analysis in Sims, supra, has revealed that rule 404(1) and Neb.Evid.R. 405(2), Neb.Rev.Stat. § 27-405 (Reissue 1989), provide appropriate bases for admitting the character evidence in this case. Our analysis under rule 404(1) is not meant to foreclose or in any way imply a limitation on the possibility of this type of evidence in another case being offered pursuant to rule 404(2) to demonstrate something other than conformity. See, e.g., Annot., 121 A.L.R. 380 (1939) (noting that in homicide cases where self-defense was relied upon, courts have held admissible specific prior acts of deceased as being part of res gestae or, where sufficiently close in time and circumstances, to characterize deceased's conduct or state of mind at time and to establish deceased as initial aggressor, even where prior actions were not within defendant's knowledge).
2. DETERMINING WHAT TYPE OF CHARACTER EVIDENCE MAY BE USED
When it is determined that evidence of a trait of the victim's character is admissible, rule 405 governs what type of evidence can be used. There are three distinct types of character evidence provided for in rule 405: reputation testimony, opinion testimony, and testimony of specific instances of conduct. Rule 405 provides:
(1) In all cases in which evidence of character or a trait of character of a person is admissible, proof may be made by testimony as to reputation or by testimony in the form of an opinion. On cross-examination, inquiry is allowable into relevant specific instances of conduct.
(2) In cases in which character or a trait of character of a person is an essential element of a charge, claim, or defense, proof may also be made of specific instances of his conduct. The same language was in effect at the time of Lewchuk's trial.
(a) Reputation and Opinion Testimony
Rule 405(1) provides that in situations where testimony is allowed about a person's character trait, such as Warner's propensity for violence, that trait may be shown by reputation and opinion testimony. At trial, the district court allowed witnesses to testify about Warner's reputation or their opinion about Warner's violent character. This was appropriate.
(b) Specific Instances of Conduct
Rule 405(2) provides for proof of specific instances of conduct regarding a person's character or trait of character when the character or trait of character is an essential element of a charge, claim, or defense. Lewchuk asserted self-defense as his defense at trial, alleging that Warner was the first aggressor in the incident.
A determination of whether Warner was the first aggressor is an essential element of Lewchuk's self-defense claim. See State v. Sims, 213 Neb. 708, 331 N.W.2d 255 (1983). In Sims, the Nebraska Supreme Court noted that testimony about specific incidents of the victim's violent behavior was *854 relevant to, and probative of, the question of who was the first aggressor. The court in Sims held that the district court committed error by refusing to admit testimony of specific prior acts of violence by the victim under rule 405(2). However, the court in Sims found the excluded evidence to be merely cumulative and held the error harmless. Although we recognize that Sims was decided after Lewchuk's trial, the evidence rules upon which the Sims decision was premised were the same as those in effect at the time of Lewchuk's trial.
3. RELEVANCE OF DEFENDANT'S KNOWLEDGE OF PRIOR ACTS
The trial court herein stated that evidence of specific prior incidents of Warner's violent conduct would have been admissible only if it was first demonstrated that Lewchuk was aware of the incidents. It appears that the district court was operating under a common misconception about the use of character evidence in support of a self-defense claim. Many courts, when discussing the admissibility of testimony concerning the victim's violent and aggressive character, fail to distinguish two different and independent purposes for which the testimony may be offered. See Annot., 1 A.L.R. 3d 571 (1965), and cases cited therein. One purpose for the testimony may be to demonstrate that the defendant was in a reasonable state of mind in acting in self-defense and had a reasonable fear based upon the victim's violent and aggressive character, which was known by the defendant. The other purpose for the testimony may be to support the defendant's allegation that the victim was the first aggressor. A demonstration of the victim's violent character makes it more probable that the victim initiated the violence in this instance and was in fact the first aggressor. See, e.g., United States v. Burks, 470 F.2d 432 (D.C.Cir.1972); Gonzales v. State, 838 S.W.2d 848 (Tex.App.Hous.[1st Dist.] 1992); Chapman v. State, 469 N.E.2d 50 (Ind.App.1984); People v. Buchanan, 91 Ill. App. 3d 13, 46 Ill. Dec. 540, 414 N.E.2d 262 (1980); Annot., 1 A.L.R.3d, supra.
These two distinct purposes serve different functions and carry different requirements as to the defendant's knowledge of the victim's character. See Buchanan, supra, citing 1 John H. Wigmore, Evidence in Trials at Common Law § 63 (3d ed.1940). When the character evidence is being offered for the first purpose, to determine if the defendant's fear was reasonable, it is being used subjectively to determine the defendant's state of mind and his beliefs regarding the danger he was in. See Buchanan, supra. When the character evidence is being used for the first purpose, the defendant necessarily must have known of the incidents or reputation which makes up the character testimony at the time of the assault. See id. (noting that when character evidence is used to show defendant's state of mind, defendant must have known of information concerning victim when act of self-defense occurred).
When the character evidence is being offered for the second purpose, to establish which party was the first aggressor, it is being used objectively to determine if the victim was more probably than not the first aggressor in the incident in question. See Buchanan, supra. When the character evidence is being used for the second purpose, the defendant's knowledge of the incidents or reputation which makes up the character testimony is irrelevant. See, e.g., Burks, supra (noting that defendant's knowledge of victim's violent character, including evidence of specific acts of violence, is irrelevant when the evidence is used to show who first aggressor was); Gonzales, supra (stating defendant need not show awareness of specific acts of violence by victim when such evidence is used to show who in fact was first aggressor); Chapman, supra (holding defendant's knowledge of victim's reputation for violence is irrelevant where victim's character offered to show who was first aggressor); Buchanan, supra (holding specific acts of violence by victim are admissible to support self-defense claim even if defendant did not know of acts at time of charged assault); Annot., 1 A.L.R.3d, supra. Evidence that Warner was a violent person or committed violent acts helps to corroborate Lewchuk's allegation that Warner was the first aggressor, even if Lewchuk was unaware of the previous violent acts at the time of the assault in question.
*855 We conclude pursuant to rules 404(1)(b) and 405(2) that Lewchuk was entitled to present evidence of Warner's violent and aggressive character to support his claim of self-defense. See State v. Sims, 213 Neb. 708, 331 N.W.2d 255 (1983). Pursuant to rule 405(2), Lewchuk was entitled to present evidence of specific instances of conduct demonstrating Warner's violent, aggressive character to corroborate Lewchuk's claim that Warner was the first aggressor. See Sims, supra. It is irrelevant whether Lewchuk was aware of the prior incidents at the time of the assault, and the trial court committed error by refusing to admit the evidence because Lewchuk had not established his knowledge of the prior incidents.
4. PREJUDICIAL NATURE OF ERROR
Determining that the district court erred by excluding evidence of specific instances of Warner's violent conduct does not end our inquiry. When error has occurred, we must always determine if the error was prejudicial. See Neb.Evid.R. 103, Neb.Rev.Stat. § 27-103 (Reissue 1989), stating that error may not be predicated upon a ruling which excludes evidence unless a substantial right of a party is affected, and Neb. Rev.Stat. § 29-2308 (Cum.Supp.1994), providing that no judgment in a criminal case shall be set aside or new trial granted because of the rejection of evidence, unless a substantial miscarriage of justice has actually occurred. See, also, Sims, supra. Although rule 405(2) allows the proffered testimony in this case to be admissible, the admissibility of such evidence is always subject to the constraints of Neb.Evid.R. 403, Neb.Rev.Stat. § 27-403 (Reissue 1989).
Rule 403 provides that evidence, although relevant, may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by dangers of unfair prejudice, confusion of issues, misleading the jury, or considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence. The concept of probative value involves an assessment of the tendency of evidence to establish that the proposition for which it is offered is more probably than not as a party claims it to be. State v. Lowe, 244 Neb. 173, 505 N.W.2d 662 (1993). Probative value is measured by the degree to which the evidence persuades the fact finder that a particular fact exists and the distance of the particular fact from the ultimate issues of the case. State v. Williams, 247 Neb. 878, 530 N.W.2d 904 (1995); Lowe, supra.
We cannot say that the testimony excluded in this case is substantially more prejudicial than it is probative. The proffered testimony concerned accounts of Warner acting violently and aggressively assaulting numerous individuals in the few hours preceding his encounter with Lewchuk. The testimony concerned eyewitness accounts of Warner physically attacking numerous other individuals and acting in a manner consistent with Lewchuk's claim that Warner was the first aggressor. The similarity in circumstances and the proximity in time of the prior incidents would be highly probative of the issue of whether Warner was the first aggressor and physically attacked Lewchuk on the night in question.
We also cannot say that the testimony excluded in this case is merely cumulative. The district court did allow testimony as to Warner's reputation for violence and witnesses' opinions as to his violent character. The excluded testimony of specific acts by which Lewchuk would have demonstrated Warner's violent and aggressive propensities would have substantiated Lewchuk's claim that Warner was the first aggressor. The similarity in circumstances and the proximity in time of the prior incidents would have made the excluded testimony much more probative than the opinion and reputation testimony was, and the excluded testimony would not have been merely cumulative.
Because the rule 403 analysis does not establish that the probative value of the particular evidence in this case would have been substantially outweighed by dangers of unfair prejudice, confusion of issues, misleading the jury, or considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence, we cannot say that the error in this case was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v. Trackwell, 244 Neb. 925, 509 N.W.2d 638 (1994) (holding that only error which is not harmless beyond *856 a reasonable doubt requires a conviction to be set aside). It was prejudicial error to exclude this evidence.
VI. CONCLUSION
Finding that the district court committed prejudicial error by excluding admissible testimony regarding specific instances of prior violent conduct by the victim, we reverse the judgment and remand the cause for a new trial.
REVERSED AND REMANDED FOR A NEW TRIAL.

=== CASE 2219455 | SOURCE CourtListenerOpinion | CREATED 2013-10-30 08:39:14.411602+00 ===

539 N.W.2d 189 (1995)
STATE of Iowa ex rel. Mary K. SHOARS, Appellant,
v.
Mark Steven KELLEHER, Appellee.
No. 94-651.
Supreme Court of Iowa.
October 25, 1995.
Thomas J. Miller, Attorney General, Gordon E. Allen, Deputy Attorney General, Kay Delafield, Assistant Attorney General, and Christian Smith, Assistant County Attorney, for appellant.
Michael M. McCauley of O'Connor & Thomas, P.C., Dubuque, for appellee.
Considered by HARRIS, P.J., and CARTER, NEUMAN, SNELL, and TERNUS, JJ.
*190 HARRIS, Justice.
This appeal tests the authority of a trial court to estimate a party's income tax deductions in fixing the support due under Iowa's child support guidelines. Claiming practical necessity arising from unsupplied proof and the press of work, the court rejected a demand to calculate the exact deductions from tax tables, and instead used approximate figures. Although we are sensitive to the time demands cited by the trial court, we think the guidelines do not contemplate or allow approximation of the kind challenged here. We reverse and remand.
The State of Iowa, acting on an interstate request sent by the State of Georgia, filed an action against Mark Kelleher to establish paternity and collect for support of a minor child. Paternity was established, and the issue of child support was set for a separate hearing. The parties agreed to temporary support set at $310 per month, with a hearing on permanent support to be held at a later date. Three months prior to that hearing the court ordered Kelleher to answer the State's previously filed interrogatories within three weeks. Kelleher did not comply with this order until the very date of the support hearing.
At the hearing, Kelleher's tardy answers to the interrogatories, including his financial statement, were finally provided. These answers, along with testimony referring to W-2 forms and overtime pay, were the only evidence produced concerning Kelleher's earnings and deductions. The income figures were initially contested. The financial statement listed a gross weekly income of $450, with weekly deductions of $123 for tax withholdings, $35.62 for social security contributions, and $5.50 for union dues. Testimony revealed that Kelleher was required to work overtime hours in the winter months, and it was unclear whether this was accurately reflected in his financial statement. Kelleher estimated his annual net income, including overtime, was between $25,000 and $26,000. The State then accepted $26,000 as his approximate income.
From this bare record, the district court determined Kelleher's federal, state and social security withholdings to be approximately 38% of his gross income, leaving an approximate net income of $1350 per month. Applying the rate of 22.5% under the Iowa child support guidelines for one child, the court set support at $303 per month. The State challenged this approach, claiming that under the appropriate withholding tables the 38% figure approximated by the court overstated Kelleher's withholdings.
In rejecting the State's challenge, the court explained:
[I]n attempting to handle anywhere from ten to twenty cases in a three-hour period each Monday afternoon for child support purposes, it is necessary that some rules of thumb are used. Because normally the respondents are at or around minimum wage, the twenty percent rule of thumb has been used with general accuracy. [See Iowa Code § 252B.7A(1)(e) (1995).] Where the supporting parent's income is well above minimum wage, a higher estimate is used. If the State desires to introduce withholding tables, it may do so. However, it should then do so in all cases and the very time requirement of computations will reduce substantially the number of cases that can be heard in a given week.
The case is before us on the State's appeal from the trial court's interpretation of the guidelines. Although, under Iowa rule of appellate procedure 4, our review of the facts in this equity case is de novo, here there is no dispute concerning material facts. The challenge to the court's interpretation of the guidelines raises a legal question on which our review is on error.
I. The State's challenge is twofold. It first contends the burden of proof to show any deductions from income should rest on Kelleher. It also contends the trial court erred by in effect taking judicial notice of its 38% approximation. The State contends that only the deductions claimed on Kelleher's financial statement are to be considered in arriving at his net income, and that support should be set accordingly. This would increase Kelleher's monthly support obligation.
In arriving at a net monthly income figure, the child support guidelines permit only a specified number of deductions. Iowa Court Rules, Child Support Guidelines (3d ed. July 1995 Supp.). With regard to state and federal *191 income tax, the guidelines permit deductions only for "properly calculated withholding or estimated payments." At first glance, the term "estimated payments" may seem to permit the type of approximation used by the district court. But it is clear that the term "estimated payments" refers to the "estimated tax." Federal and state tax laws require a quarterly payment, at specified dates, of estimated taxes due from individuals (either wage or nonwage employees) with income not subject to withholding. See 26 U.S.C.A. § 6654 (1988); 47B C.J.S. Internal Revenue § 1136(1) (1990). We thus think the words "properly calculated" modify both the words "withholding" and "estimated payments," and the district court's use of approximated deductions was improper in this case.
This is not to say that the district court may never estimate the amount of deductions in arriving at a net income figure. Iowa Code section 252B.7A(1)(e) specifically provides:
When the income information obtained pursuant to this subsection does not include the information necessary to determine the net monthly income of the parent, the unit may deduct twenty percent from the parent's gross monthly income to arrive at the net monthly income figure.
The district court could have applied this provision here, but we agree with the State that a proper reading of the statute placed the burden of proof on Kelleher to establish deductions over the 20% rule mentioned in the statute. See Haynes v. Dairyland Mut. Ins. Co., 199 N.W.2d 83, 85 (Iowa 1972) (burden of proof of a factual issue, or at least the burden of going forward with the evidence on an issue should rest upon the party who has possession of the facts or information lacking to the other); Iowa R.App.P. 14(f)(5) (burden of proof ordinarily upon a party who would suffer loss if the issue were not established). The judgment of the trial court must be reversed and the case remanded for further proceedings in accordance with this opinion.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.